The Order and Solemnity of the Creation of the High and mighty Prince
HENRY, Eldest Son to our sacred Sovereign, Prince of Wales, Duke of
Cornwall, Earl of Chester, etc As it was celebrated in the Parliament House,
on Monday the fourth of Iunne last past. Together with the Ceremonies of the
Knights of the Bath, and other matters of special regard, incident to the
same. Whereunto is annexed the Royal Mask, presented by the Queen and her
Ladies, on Wednesday at night following.

Printed at Britains Bursse for John Budge, and are there to be sold. 1610.

THE ORDER AND SOLEMNITY OF THE creation of Prince HENRY, eldest son to his
sacred Majesty, Prince of Wales, as it was celebrated in the Parliament house
on Monday the fourth of June last past.
HIs Majesty as well to show the bounty of his affection toward his dearest
Son the Prince, as to settle in the hearts of his loving Subjects a lively
impression of his Royal care for continuance of the happy, and peaceful
Government of this land, in his issue and posterity; having determined to
inuest his Princely Highness, with those titles and dignities which the former
Princes of this Realm have usually been adorned: It seemed fittest, both in
regard of his Highness years, now arriving at man's estate, and showing rare
proofs of heroical virtue, and also for that it would be a matter most
grateful and acceptable to that honorable Assembly, to have the solemnities
thereof performed in this present Parliament.

Wherefore the time approaching, his Majesty's pleasure signified, and
preparation made accordingly, on Wednesday, the thirtieth of May last, his
Highness accompanied (besides the ordinary train of his household) with
diverse young Lords and Gentlemen of special mark, departed from his house of
S. James, toward Richmond, where being come toward evening, he supped and
reposed himself for that night.

Next morning, being Thursday about nine of the clock, he took water to
return again to London, attended only with some few Barges of his own
followers, and such Noblemen and others, as accompanied him thither the day
before.

Passing softly down the stream, he was severally encountered by diverse Lord,
swhich came to meet him on the way: the Thames began soon to flote with Botes
and Barges, hasting from all parts to meet him, and the shores on either side,
where conueniency of place would give way to their desires, swarmed with
multitudes of people, which stood waiting with greedy eyes to behold his
triumphant passage.

About eleven of the clock, understanding that the tide was fallen so low, as
there would not be convenient room for all the Barges in his train to go
orderly down, notwithstanding his first appointment was to have come to London
about noone, and dinner prepared for him accordingly at White Hall, he made
stay at Barne-Elmes, and there landing, refreshed himself in an Arbor by the
water side, and took a short repast of such sweet meats and other things, as
could there be provided on the sudden.

By this time the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London with the several Companies
of the City, honorably furnished and appointed, and disposed in fair order,
were ready attending with a great train and sumptuous show, to receive his
highness at Chelsey: their Barges decked with banners, streamers and ensigns,
and sundry sorts of loud-sounding Instruments, aptly placed amongst them.

There were also two artificial Sea Monsters, one in fashion of a Whale, the
other like a Dolphin, with persons richly apparrelled, sitting upon them, who
at the meeting and parting of the Lord Mayor and his company, with the Prince,
were to deliver certain speeches unto him.

In this goodly manner this well furnished Fleet of the City received his
Highness somewhat beyond Chelsey about two of the clock in the afternoon: and
after the Lord Mayor and Aldermens salutation, humbly presented and graciously
accepted by his Highness, they turned their stemmes, and so proceeded toward
London: observing this course, that whereas at their approach the Lord Mayors
Barge, came foremost, and the Companies every one in their degrees followed
after; now that order being changed, the Companies went before, the meanest in
place first, the rest according to their several ranks successively ensuing,
and lastly the Lord Mayor attended with his two Sea Monsters on either side,
going immediately before the Prince and conducting his joyful passage to the
City.

Next after the Princes Barge followed his servants, and the Barges of sundry
Noblemen, and others which had met him on the way; and on every side, such a
confused company of Botes of all sorts fraught with beholders, as it seemed
the River (though then enlarged to her utmost limits by the tides friendly
advantage) was too little to contain them: as likewise the land on either
shore, which never felt the weight of such an infinity of people upon any
former occasion.

Approaching neereto White hall, the King and Queen with the young Duke of
York and Lady Elizabeth stood in the privy Gallerie window, to see the order
of their coming, and that his Majesty might take the better view of the Lord
Mayor and Citizens show, they were appointed to pass along on London side,
whilst the Prince in the mean while fetched a Compass about by Lambeth; and
so coming to VVhite-hal bridge (where the Lord Mayor and Aldermen took leave
of his highness) there landed, his landing being congratulated with a loud
peale of Chambers from the other side of the water: which in their thundering
voices carried up to the sky, the joy of the peoples hearts conveyed in the
issue of these happy triumphs.

At his highness coming on shore his servants attended upon the bridge to
receive him, making a Guard for him to pass through to the hall, where he was
entertained by the Lord Knols, and the Lord Wotton Treasurer and Controller of
the household: likewise in the great chamber by Vicount Fenton Captain of the
Guard, in the Presence by the Earl of Suffolk, Lord Chamberlain, and lastly
by the King and Queen in the Privy chamber. After which his highness reposed
himself, and so ended that days solemnity.

On monday following the Lords and Peers of the Realm being all assembled in
Parliament, his Majesty accompanied with the Prince, who was that morning to be
invested in his Principality, took water at the privy stairs at White hal,
and landing together at Westminster bridge, his Majesty passed directly to the
Parliament House, and the Prince to the Court of Wards, from whence, after a
whiles tarryance for the disposing of things in due order, his highness
proceeded in this manner to his Creation.

First went the Heralds and Officers of Arms in their rich coats, next
followed the Knights of the Bath, being five and twenty in number, apparrelled
in long Roabes of purple Satin, lyned with white Taffata; then Garter
principal king of Arms, bearing the Letters Patents, the Earl of Sussex the
purple Robes, the train borne by the Earl of Huntingdon, the Earl of
Cumberland the sword, the Earl of Rutland the Ring, the Earl of Derby the
Rod, and the Earl of Shrewsbury the cap and Coronet. His Princely highness
supported by the Earls of Nottingham and Northamp: on came bare headed, and so
entering the Parliament chamber, where the king was set in his Throne, and the
whole state of the Realm in order (diverse strangers and foreign Ambassadors
being present) he made low obeisance to his Majesty three times, and after the
third time, when he was come near to the king, kneeled down on a rich pillow
or cushion, whilst the Earl of Salisbury read his Letters Patents. Then his
Majesty at the reading of the words of Inuestiture put the Robes upon him,
and girded on the sword, invested him with the Rod and Ring, and set the Cap
and Coronet on his head; with which ceremony the creation being accomplished,
he arose, and was by the Earls of Worcester and Suffolk brought and seated in
his place of Parliament on the left hand of his Majesty.

Having so remained a while, all ceremonies finished, his Majesty with the
whole Court of Parliament, rose up and descended into the hal, passing forth
toward the bridge in solemn and stately manner: the foremost as they
proceeded in order, were the Clerks and Masters of the Chance^ie, with the
Kings Council and other Ministers of the law: next came the officers of Arms,
and then the Knights of the Bath as before: after them the Judges, and so
successively the Barons, Vicounts, Earls, Marquesses and Dukes, according to
their degrees in the Parliament house and offices of state all in their
Parliament roabes; and lastly, the King himself, with the Prince, who took
water together, the trumpets sounding in the Row-barge all the way as they
went, and the Heralds going before them in the same. At White-hal stairs they
landed, where the knights of the Bath and Noblemen being landed before, stood
ready on the bridge in goodly and gallant order to receive them, and going all
before them, conducted them in this manner up to the great Chamber.

The king that day dined above, but the Prince dined in the hall and was served
with great state and magnificence. He was accompanied at his table with diverse
great Lords, as the Earls of Notingham, Salisbury, Worcester and Derby, and
namely all those that exercised any place or office about his creation.

At another table in the same room on the left hand of the Prince sat the
knights of the Bath, all upon one side, and had likewise great service and
attendance.

About the midst of dinner Garter principal king of Arms, with the rest of
the heralds, approached the Princes table, and with a loud and audible voice,
proclaimed the kings style, in Latin, French, and English, thrice, and the
Princes in like manner twice, then the trumpets sounding, the second course
came in, and dinner done, that days solemnity ceased.

At night a stately mask was presented before his Majesty, the invention and
manner whereof I leave to the author when he shall think good to publish.

The same day the devise of the fireworks and Seafight upon the Thames should
likewise have been showed, but for some respects were put of till the wedensday
following, and then performed to the much content and admiration of the
beholders.

The Names of such Noblemen as were employed in sever all places of Office or
attendance at the creation of the PRINCE.
The Earl of Salisbury. The Earl of Suffolk. The Earl of Notingham. The
Earl of Northampton. The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Derby. The Earl of
Shrewsbury. The Earl of Cumberland. The Earl of Huntingdon The Earl of
Sussex. The Earl of Rutland.
Other Noblemen that were present in the Parliament house at the Princes
creation, besides those which were employed in attendance about him.
EARLS.
The Earl of Arundell. The Earl of Bath. The Earl of Southampton. The Earl
of Bedford. The Earl of Penbroke. The Earl of Hertford. The Earl of
Lincoln. The Earl of Exceter. The Earl of Montgomery.
VICOVNTS.
The Lord Vicount Mountague. The Lord Vicount Bindon. The Lord Vicount Lisle.
BARONS.
The Lord Aburgauenny. The Lord Audley. The Lord Zouche. The Lord Willowby. The
Lord Barkley. The Lord Morley. The Lord S^roope. The Lord Dudley. The Lord
Herbert. The Lord Monteagle. The Lord Mordant. The Lord Eu're. The Lord Rich.
The Lord Sheffeld. The Lord Paget. The Lord Effingham. The Lord North. The Lord
Chandos. The Lord Hunsdon The Lord Saint John. The Lord Burgleigh. The Lord
Compton. The Lord Norreys. The Lord Knolles. The Lord Wotton. The Lord
Ellesmere. The Lord Russell. The Lord Gray. The Lord Peter. The Lord
Harrington. The Lord Gerrard. The Lord Spenser. The Lord Say. The Lord Denny.
The Lord Stanhope. The Lord Carew. The Lord Cauendish. The Lord Kniuet. The
Lord Clifton.
Having thus briefly described the manner of his Highness creation, I should
here set a period to my discourse, but that the knights of the Bath being a
principal part and ornament of his princely triumphs, and my self
particularly bound to many of them, I could not pass them over without some
remembrance. Therefore thus much out of the note of directions from the office
of arms, and some observation of credit, concerning the order and ceremonies
of the knighthood.

The manner of the Creation of the Knights of the Bath, and the ceremonies
observed in solemnizing the fame.
ACcording to the order given from the Commissioners appointed for the
oversight and direction of these ceremonies, the Lords and others that were to
receive the honorable order of the Bath, repaired on Saturday the second of
June to Durham house in the Strond, and there in the afternoon heard evening
prayer, observing no other ceremony at that time but only passing through the
hall, the heralds going before them with their Coats upon their arms, into
the Chapel, from whence after service ended they returned into the chamber
they were to suppe in.

Their supper was prepared all at one table, and all sat upon on side of the
same, every man having an Escutcheon of his arms placed over his head, and
certain of the kings officers being appointed to attend them. In this manner
having taken their repast, the tables were removed, and several beds made
ready for their lodging, in the same place, after the same manner, al on one
side, and each one as before, right under the scutcheon of his own arms. Their
beds were pallets with coueringstesters or Canopies of red Say, but they used
no curtains.

The knights in the mean while were withdrawn into the bathing chamber, which
was the next room to that they supped in, where for each of them was provided
a several bathing tub which was lined both within and without with white
linen, and covered with red Say. After the bath they betook themselves to
their rest.

Early the next morning they were wakened with music, and at their vprising
invested in their Hermits habits, which was a gown of gray cloth girded close,
and a hood of the same, with a linen coyfe underneath, and a handkercher
hanging at his girdle, cloth stockings soled with leather, but no shoes; and
thus apparrelled, their Esquires governors, with the heralds wearing the coats
of arms, and sundry sorts of wind instruments going before them, they
proceeded from their lodging down through the hall, the meanest in order for
most as the night before, till they came to the chapel. Where after service
ended their oath was ministered unto them by the Earl of Worcester and the
Earl of Suffolk, in a solemn and ceremonious manner, all of them standing
forth before their stalles, and at their coming out making low reverence
toward the Altar, by which the Commissioners sat; then were they brought up
by the heralds by two at once, the chiefest first, and so the rest till all
successively had received their oath: which in substance was this. That above
al things they should honor God and maintain true Religion, love their
sovereign, serve their country, help maidens, widows, and orphans, and to
the utmost of their power cause equity and justice to be observed.

This done whilst they were yet in the Chapel, wine and sweet meats were
brought the^, and then they departed to their chamber to be disrobed of their
Hermits weeds, and new reuested again in Robes of Crimson taffata lined with
white sarcenet, having white hats on their heads with white feathers, white
boots on their legs, and white gloves tied to the strings of their ma^tles. Al
which performed, they mount on horsbacke, their saddles being of black leather,
and bridles of the same, with white crosses upon their breasts and cruppers of
their horses; each Knight between his two esquires well apparrelled, his
footeman attending, and his page riding before him, carrying his sword with the
hilts upward, and his spurs hanging thereon.

In this order rankte every man according to his degree, the best or chiefest
first, they rode fair and softly toward the Court, the trumpets sounding, and
the heralds all the way riding before them. Being alighted at the Court gate,
they were conducted by the heralds and others appointed for that purpose, into
the hall, where his Majesty sitting under his Cloth of estate gave them their
knighthood in this manner.

First the principal Lord that is to receive the order comes led by his two
Esquires, and his page before him bearing his sword and spurs, and kneeleth
down before his Majesty. The Lord Chamberlain takes the sword of the page
and delivers it to the King, who puts the belt over the neck of the knight
aslope his breast, placing the sword under his left arm. Then two noble men of
the chief about the King put on his spurs, and so is the ceremony performed.
In this sort the Earl of Oxford which was the principal of this number,
being first created, the rest were al consequently knighted alike: and when
the solemnity thereof was fully finished, they all returned again in order as
they came, saving some small difference, in that the youngest or meanest knight
went now foremost, and their pages behind them.

Coming back to Durham-house, their dinner was ready prepared in the same
room, and after the same fashion as their supper was the night before, but
being set, they were not to taste of any thing that stood before them, but with
a modest carriage and graceful abstinence to refrain, diverse kinds of sweet
music being played the while, and after a convenient time of sitting, to
arise and withdraw themselves, leaving the table furnished to their Esquires
and pages.

About four of the clock in the afternoon they rode again to Court, to
hear service in the kings Chapel, keeping the same order they did at their
return from thence in the morning: every knight riding between his two
Esquires and his page following him. At their entrance into the Chapel, the
Heralds conducting them, they make a solemn reverence, the the youngest
knight, beginning the rest orderly ensuing: and so one after another take their
standing before their stalles, where all being placed, the eldest knight makes
a second reverence, which is followed to the youngest; and then all ascend into
their stalles, and take their accustomed places.

Service then begins, and is very solemnly celebrated, with singing of
diverse Antheames, and playing on the Organes. And when the time of their
offertory is come, the youngest knights are summoned forth of their stalles by
the Heralds, doing reverence first within the stalles, and again after they
are descended: which is likewise imitated by all the rest. And being al thus
come forth, standing before their stalles, as at first, the two eldest knights
with their swords in their hands, are brought up by the Heralds to the Altar,
where they offer their swords and the Deane receives them, of whom they
presently redeem them with an Angel in gold, and then come down to their
former places, whilst two other are led up in like manner: so doing
successively till the whole ceremony be performed: which done, and service
ended they depart in such order as they came, with accustomed reverence.

At the Chapel door as they came forth, they were encountered by the kings
Master Cook, who stood there with his white Apron and Sleeves, and a
Choping-knife in his hand, and challenged their spurs, which were likewise
redeemed with a noble in money, threatening them nevertheless that if they
proved not true and loyal to the King his Lord and Mast. it must be his office
to hew them from their heels.

On Monday morning they al met together again at the Court, where in a private
room, appointed for them, they were clothed in long roabes of purple satin
with hoods of the same, all lined and edged about with white taffata. And thus
apparrelled they gave their attendance upon the Prince at his creation, and
dined that day in his presence at a side-bord, as is already declared.

THE NAMES OF SVCH Lords and Gentlemen as were made Knights of the BATH, in
honor of his Highness Creation, in order as they were Knighted on Sunday the
third of June. 1610.
THe Earl of Oxford. The Lord Gourdon, son and heir of the Marquess
Huntley. The Lord Clifford, son and heir to the Earl of Cumberland. The
Lord Fitz-walter, son and heir to the Earl of Sussex. The Lord Fitzwaren,
son and heir to the Earl of Bath. The Lord Hay, son and heir to the Earl
of Arroll. The Lord Erskin, son and heir to Vicount Fenton. The Lord
Windsor. The Lord Wentworth. Master Charles Somerset, third son to the
Earl of Worcester. Master Edward Somerset, fourth son to the Earl of
Worcester. Master Francis Stuard. Master Ferdinando Dudley, son and heir to
the Lord Dudley. Master John Carry, son and heir to the Lord Hunsdon. Master
Oliver Saint John, son and heir to the Lord Saint-Iohn. Master Gilbert
Gerrard, son and heir to the Lord Gerrard. Master Charles Stanhope, son
and heir to the Lord Stanhope. Master William Stuard. Master Edward Bruise,
son and heir to the Lord Kinlosse. Master Robert Sidney, second son to
Vicount Lisle. Master William Touchet, second son to the Lord Audley. Mast.
Peregrine Berty, second brother to the Lord Willoughby. Mast. Henry Rich,
third son to the Lord Rich. Master Edward Sheffeild, second son to the Lord
Sheffeild. Master William Cauendish, son and heir to Sir Charles Cauendish.
The Lords Commissioners for ordering the Ceremonies of the Bath, were
The Earl of Worcester. The Earl of Suffolk.
TETHYS FESTIVAL: OR THE QVEENES WAKE. Celebrated at Whitehall, the fifth day
of June 1610.

Devised by SAMVEL DANIEL, one of the Grooms of her Majesty's most Honorable
privy CHAMBER.

LONDON Printed for John Budge. 1610.

THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
FOr so much as shows and spectacles of this nature, are usually registered,
among the memorable acts of the time, being Complements of state, both to show
magnificence and to celebrate the feasts to our greatest respects: it is
expected (according now fo the custom) that I, being employed in the business,
should publish a description and form of the late Mask, wherewithal it
pleased the Queens most excellent Majesty to solemnize the creation of the
high and mighty Prince Henry, Prince of Wales, in regard to preserve the
memory thereof, and to satisfy their desires, who could have no other notice,
but by others report of what was done. Which I do not, out of a desire, to be
seen in pamphlets, or of forwardnes to show my inue^tion therein: for I thank
God, I labor not with that disease of ostentation, nor affect to be known to
be the man digitoque monstrarier, hic est, having my name already wider in this
kind, then I desire, and more in the wind then I would. Neither do I seek in
the divulging hereof, to give it other colors then those it wore, or to make
an Apology of what I have done: knowing, howsoever, it must pass the way of
censure, whereunto I see all publications (of what nature soever) are liable.
And my long experience of the world has taught me this, that never
Remonstrances n^^ Apologies could ever get over the stream of opinion, to do
good on the other side, where contrary affection, and conceit had to do: but
only served to entertain their own partialnesse, who were fore-perswaded,
and so was a labor in vain. And it is oftentimes an argument of
pusilanimitie, and may make vt iud (...) nostrum, metus videatur, and render a
good cause suspected by too much laboring to defend it, which might be the
reason that some of the late greatest Princes of Christendom would never have
their undertakings made good by such courses, but with silence endured (and in
a most witty age) the greatest battery of paper that could possibly be made,
and never once recharged the least ordinance of a pen against it, counting it
their glory to do whilst other talked. And shall we who are the poor
Inginers for shadows, and frame only images of no result, think to oppress
the rough censures of those, who notwithstanding all our labor will like
according to their taste, or seek to avoid them by flying to an Army of
Authors as idle as ourselves? Seeing there is nothing done or written, but
incounters with detraction and opposition, which is an excellent argument of
all our imbecillities and might allay our presumption, when we shall see our
greatest knowledges not to be fixed, but roll according to the uncertain
motion of opinion, and controwleable by any surly show of reason, which we find
is double edged and strikes every way alike. And therefore I do not see why any
man should rate his own at that value, and set so low prises upon other men's
abilities. L' homme vaut l'homme, a man is worth a man, and none has gotten so
high a station of understanding, but he shall find others that are built on an
equal floor with him, and have as far a prospect as he, which when al is
done, is but in a region subject to al passions and imperfections.

And for these figures of mine, if they come not drawn in all proportions to
the life of antiquity (from whose tyranny, I see no reason why we may not
emancipate our inventions, and be as free as they, to use our own images) yet
I know them such as were proper to the business, and discharged those parts for
which they served, with as good correspondencie, as our appointed limitations
would permit.

But in these things wherein the only life consists in show: the art and
invention of the Architect gives the greatest grace, and is of most importance:
ours, the least part and of least note in the time of the performance thereof,
and therefore have I interserted the description of the artificial part which
only speaks M. Inago Jones.

TETHYS FESTIVAL. WHEREIN TETHYS QVEENE OF the Ocean, and wife of Neptune,
attended with thirteen Nymphs of several Rivers, is represented in this
manner: Tethys mate^ Nympharum and fluuiorum.

FIrst the Queens Majesty in the figure of Tethys. The Ladies in the shape of
Nymphs, presiding several Rivers, appropriaten, either to their dignity,
Signiories or places of birth.

1 Whereof the first was the Lady Elizabeth's grace representing the Nymph of
Thames. 2 The Lady Arbella the Nymph of Trent. 3 The Countess of Arundell the
Nymph of Arun. Arun, a River that runs by Arundell Castle.
4 The Countess of Darbie the Nymph of Darwent. Darwent, a river that runs
through Darbie.
5 The Countess of Essex the Nymph of Lee. Lee, the river that bounds Essex.
6 The Countess of Dorcet the Nymph of Air. Air a River that runs nere Skipton
where this Lady was borne.
7 The Countess of Mongommerie, the Nymph of Severn. Seuerne rises in
Mongommery shire.
8 The Vicountesse Haddington the Nymph of Rother. Rother, a river in Sussex.
Medway a River in Kent.
9 The Lady Elizabeth Gray the Nymph of Medway.
These four Rivers are in Monmouth shire.
The Lady Elizabeth Guilford, the Nymph of Dulesse. The Lady Katherine
Peeter, the Nymph of Olwy. The Lady Winter, the Nymph of wy. The Lady Winsor,
the Nymph of Vske.
The description of the first Scene.
ON the Trauers which served as a curtain for the first Scene, was figured a
dark cloud, in^erser with certain sparkling stars, which, at the sound of
a loud music, being instantly drawn, the Scene was discovered with these
adornements: First on either side stood a great statue of twelve foot high,
representing Neptune and Nereus. Neptune holding a Trident, with an Anchor made
to it, and this Mot. His artibus: that is, Regendo, and retinendo, alluding to
this verse of Virgill, H^e tibi erunt arts, etc. Nereus holding out a golden
fish in a net, with this word Industria: the reason whereof is delivered after,
in the speech uttered by Triton. These Sea-gods stood on pedestals and were al
of gold. Behind them were two pillasters, on which hung compartments with
other devises: and these bore up a rich Freeze, wherein were figures of ten
foot long, of floods, and Nymphs, with a number of naked children, dallying
with a draperie, which they seemed to hold up, that the Scene might be seen,
and the ends thereof fell down in foldes by the pillasters. In the midst was a
compartment, with this inscription, Tethyos Epinicia, TETHYS feasts of triumph.
This was supported with two winged boys, and all the work was done with that
force and boldness on the gold and silver, as the figures seemed round and not
painted.

The Scene it self was a Port or Haven with Bulworkes at the entrance, and the
figure of a Castle commanding a fortified town: within this Port were many
Ships, small and great, seeming to lie at Anchor, some nearer, and some further
off, The figure of Zephirus might aptly discharge this representation in r^^^^t
that messages are of wind, and verba dicuntur ala^a waged word^^ besides ^ is
a character of youth, and of the spring.
according to perspectiue: beyond all appeared the Horison or termination of
the Sea, which seemed to move with a gentle gale, and many Sails, lying some
to come into the Port, and others passing out. From this Scene issued Zephirus
with eight Naydes, Nymphs of fountains, and two Tritons sent from Tethys to
give notice of her intendement, which was the Ante-maske or first show. The
Duke of York presented Zephirus, in a short robe of green satin imbrodered
with golden flowers with a round wing made of lawnes on wyers, and hung down in
labels. Behind his shoulders two silver wings. On his head a Garland of flowers
consisting of all colors, and on one Arm which was out bare, he wore a
bracelet of gold set with rich stones. Eight little Ladies near of his stature
represented the Naydes, and were attired in light robes adorned with flowers,
their hair hanging down, and wauing with Garlands of water ornaments on their
heads.

The Tritons wore skin-coates of watchet Taffata (lightened with silver) to show
the Muscles of their bodies. From the waste almost to the knee were finnes of
silver in the manner of bases, a mantle of Sea-greene laced, and fringed with
gold, tied with a knot upon one shoulder, and falling down in foldes behind,
was fastened to the contrary side: on their heads garlands of Sedge, with
trumpets of writhen shells in their hand: Buskins of Sea-greene laid with silver
lace. These persons thus attired, entered with this song of four parts, and a
music of twelve Lutes.

YOuth of the spring, mild Zephirus blow fair,
And breath the joyful air,
Which Tethys wishes may attend this day,
Who comes her self to pay
The vows her heart presents,
To these fair complements.
Breath out new flowers, which yet were never known
Unto the Spring, nor blown
Before this time, to bewtifie the earth,
And as this day gives birth
Unto new types of State,
So let it bliss create.
Bear Tethys message to the Ocean King,
Say how she joys to bring
Delight unto his Islands and his Seas,
And tell Meliades
The offspring of his bood,
How she applaudes his good.
The song ended, Triton in the behalf of Zephirus delivers Tethys message with
her Presents (which was a Trident to the King, and a rich sword and skarfe to
the Prince of Wales) in these words.

FRom that intelligence which moves the Sphere
Of circling waves (the mighty Tethys, Queen
Of Nymphs and rivers, who will straight appear,
And in a humane Character be seen)
We have in charge to say, that even as Seas
And lands, are graced by men of worth and might,
So they return their favors; and in these
Exalting of the good seem to delight.
Which she, in glory, lately visiting
The sweet, and pleasant Shores of Cambria, found
By an unusual, and most forward Spring
Of comfort, wherewith all things did abound,
For joy of the Inuestiture at hand
Of their new Prince, whose Rites, with acts renownd
Were here to be solemnized on this Strand:
And therefore straight resolves t'adorne the day
With her al-gracing presence, and the train,
Of some choice Nymphs she pleased to call away
From several Rivers which they entertain.
And first the lovely Nymphe of stately Thames,
(The darling of the Ocean) summond is:
Then those of Trent and Aruns graceful streams,
Then Darwent next with cleare-wau'd worthiness.
The beauteous Nymph of Chrystall-streaming Lee
Gives next attendance: Then the Nymph of Air
With modest motion makes her sweet repair.
The Nymph of Seuerne follows in degree,
With ample streams of grace: and next to her
The cheerful Nymph of Rother does appaere
With comely Medway, th'ornament of Kent,
And then four goodly Nymphs that beutifie
Cambers fair shores, and all that Continent
The graces of clear Vske, Olwy, Dulesse, Wy^
All these within the goodly spacious Bay
Of manifold inharboring Mil^ord meet,
The happy Port of Union, which gave way
To that great Heroes HENRY, and his fleet,
To make the blessed conjunction that beg at
A greater, and more glorious far then that.
From hence she sends her dear loved Zephirus;
To breath out her affection and her zeal
To you great Monarch of Oceanus,
And to present this Trident as the seal
And ensign of her love and of your right.
And therewithal she wills him, greet the Lord
And Prince of the Isles (the hope and the delight,
Of all the Northern Nations) with this sword
Which she unto Astraea sacred found,
And not to be vnsheath'd but on just ground.
Herewith, says she, deliver him from me
This skarffe, the zone of love and Amity,
Tingird the same; wherein he may suruay,
Infigur'd all the spacious Emperie
That he is borne unto another day.
Which, tell him, will be world enough to yield
All works of glory ever can be wrought.
Let him not pass the circle of that field,
But think Alcides pillars are the knot
For there will be within the large extent
Of these my waves, and watery Government
More treasure, and more certain riches got
Then all the Indies to Iberus brought,
For Nereus will by industry unfold
A Chimicke secret, and turn fish to gold.
This charge she gave, and looks ^ith such a cheer
As did her comfort and delight bewray,
Like clear Aurora when she does appear
In brightest roabes to make a glorious day.
The Speech ended, the Naydes dance about Zephirus, and then withdraw them
aside, when suddenly at the sound of a loud and fuller music, Tethys with her
Nymphs appears, with another Scene, which I will likewise describe, in the
language of the Architector, who contrived it, and speaks in his own mestier
to such as are vndersta^ders and lovers of that design. First at the opening of
the heavens appeared 3. circles of lights and glasses, one within another, and
came down in a straight motion five foot, and then began to move circularly;
which lights and motion so occupied the eyes of the spectators, that the manner
of altering the Scene was scarcely discerned: for in a moment the whole face of
it was changed, the Port vanished, and Tethys with her Nymphs appeared in
their several Cauernes gloriously adorned. This Scene was comparted into 5.
Neeces, whereof that in the midst had some slender pillowes of whole round,
and were made of modern Architecture in regard of room: these were of
burnisht gold, and bare up the returns of an Architraue, Freeze, and Cornish
of the same work: on which, upon either side was a Plinth directly over the
pillars, and on them were placed, for finishings, two Dolphins of silver, with
their tails wreathed together, which supported ouall vases of gold.

Between the two pillars on either side were great ornaments of ^elieuo, the
Basement were two huge Whales of silver. Above in an action mounting were two
Sea-horses, and above them, on each side of Tethys seat was placed a great
Trident The seat or Throne it self was raised six steps, and all covered
with such an artificial stuff, as seemed richer by candle, then any cloth of
gold. The rests for her arms were two Cherubines of gold: over her head was a
great skallop of silver from which hung the foldes of this rich drapery.

Above the Skallop and round about the sides was a resplendent freeze of jewel
glasses or lights, which showed like Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Emralds, and
such like,

The part which returned from the two Plinthes that bare up the Dolphines, was
circular, and made a hollownesse over Tethys head, and on this circle were 4.
great C^artuses of gold, which bore up a round bowl of silver, in mannner of a
fountain, with mask-heads of gold, out of which ran an artificial water. On
the midst of this was a triangular basement formed of scrowles and leaves,
and then a rich Veil adorned with flutings, and inchased work with a freeze
of fishes, and a batta^e of Tritons, out of whose mouths, sprang water into
the Bowl underneath. On the top of this was a round globe of gold full of
holes, out of which issued abundance of water, some falling into the receipt
below, some into the Ovall vase, borne up by the Dolphines, and indeed there
was no place in this great Aquatick throne, that was not filled with the
sprinckling of these two natural seeming waters. The Neeces wherein the Ladies
sat, were four, with Pillasters of gold, mingled with rustic stones showing
like a mineral to make it more rock, and Cauern-like, varying from that of
Tethys throne. Equal with the heads of the Pillars was an Architraue of the
same work, above was a circular frontispice, which rose equal with the Bowl
of the fountain fore discribed. On the rustic frontispice lay two great
figures in Rileue, which seemed to bear up a Garland of Sea-weeds: to which
from two antic Candlestickes which stood over the Pillasters were hanging
Labells of gold. And these were the finishings of the top of the two Neeces
next to that of Tethys.

In the space between the frontispice and the Architraue stood a great Concaue
shel, wherein was the head of a Sea-god, and on either side the shell to fill
up the room, two great mask heads in perfile. The other two Neeces which were
outermost, were likewise borne up with Pillasters of gold, and for variation
had square frontispices, and against the straight Architraue of the other was
an Arch. All these were mingled with rustic, as before.

In the middle between the frontispice and the Arch, was a Bowl or fountain
made of four great skallops, borne up by a great mask head which had likewise
four aspects, and lying upon this Arch (to fill up the Concaues) were two
figures turned half into fishes, these with their heads held up the sides of
this Bowl: above this were three great Cherubines heads spouting water into
the Bowl. On the midst of the square frontispice stood a great vase adorned.

The rest of the ornaments consisted of maske-heads, spouting water, swannes,
festons of maritime weeds, great shells, and such like; and all this whole
Scene was filled with the splendour of gold and silver: only some beautiful
colors behind to distinguish them, and to set off the rest.

The whole work came into the form of a half round: there sat three Ladies
in each Niece, which made six of a side: the Queen in the midst, and the
Lady Elizabeth at her feet.

Now concerning their habit: first their head-tire was composed of shells and
corrall, and from a great Muriake shell in form of the crest of an helm, hung
a thin wauing veil. Their upper garments had the boddies of sky-colored
taffataes for lightness, all embrodered with maritime invention: then had they a
kind of half skirts of cloth of silver imbrodered with gold, all the ground
work cut out for lightness which hung down full, and cut in points: underneath
that, came bases (of the same as was their bodies) beneath their knee. The long
skirt was wrought with lace, waued round about like a River, and on the banks
sedge and Sea-weedes, all of gold. Their shoulders were all imbrodered with
the work of the short skirt of cloth of silver, and had cypress spangled,
ruffed out, and fell in a ruff above the Elbow. The under sleeves were all
imbrodered as the bodies: their shoes were of Satin, richly imbrodered, with
the work of the short skirt.

In this habit they descended out of their Cauernes one after another, and so
marched up with winding meanders like a River, till they came to the Tree of
victory, which was a Bay erected at the right side of the state, upon a little
mount there raised, where they offer their several flowers in golden vrnes
which they bare in their hands: whilst a soft music of twelve Lutes and
twelve voices, which entertained the time, expressed as a Chorus, their action in
this manner.

WAs ever hour brought more delight
To mortal sight,
Then this, wherein fair Tethys daignes to show
Her, and her Nymphs arow
In glory bright?
See how they bring their flowers,
From out their watery bowers,
To deck Apollos Tree,
The tree of victory.
About whose verdant bows,
They Sacrifice their vows,
And wish an everlasting spring
Of glory, to the Oceans King.
This song and ceremony ended they fall into their first dance, after which
Tethys with draws and reposes her upon the Mount under the tree of victory,
entertained with Musicque and this Song.

IF joy had other figure
Then soundes, and words, and motion,
To intimate the measure,
And height of our devotion:
This day it had been showed
But what it can, it does perform,
Since nature has bestowd
No other letter,
To express it better,
Then in this form;
Our motions, soundes, and words,
Tuned to accordes,
Must show the well-set parts,
Of our affections and our hearts,
After this Tethys rises, and with her Nymphs performs her second dance, and
then reposes her again upon the Mount, entertaind with another song.

ARe they shadows that we see?
And can shadows pleasure give?
Pleasures only shadows be
Cast by bodies we conceive,
And are made the things we deem,
In those figures which they seem.
But these pleasures vanish fast,
Which by shadows are expressed
Pleasures are not, if they last,
In their passing, is their best.
Glory is most bright and gay
In a flash, and so away.
Feed apace then greedy eyes
On the wonder you behold.
Take it sudden as it flies
Though you take it not to hold:
When your eyes have done their part,
Thought must length it in the heart.
After this song Tethys again arises, and with her Nymphs, takes out the
Lords to dance their Measures Corantos and Galliardes, which done they fall
into their third and retyring dance, wherewith they return again into their
several Cauernes, and suddenly vanish. When to avoid the confusion which
usually attends the desolue of these shows; and when all was thought to be
finished, followed another entertainment, and was a third show no less
delightful then the rest, whose introduction was thus.

Zephirus marching a certain space after Tethys and her Nymphs, attended with
his Tritons, a sudden flash of lightning causes them to stay, and Triton
delivers this speech.

BEhold the Post of heaven, bright Mercury
Is sent to sommon and recall again,
Imperial Tethys with her company,
Unto her watery Mansion in the maine:
And shift those firmes, wherein her power did daigne
T inuest her self and hers, and to restore
Them to themselves whose beauteous shapes they wore.
And then bowing himself to wards the State, craves their stay, and
prepares them, to the expectation of a return of the Queen and her Ladies in
their forms, with these words.

ANd now bright Star the Guidon of this state,
And you great Peers the ornaments of power
With all these glittering troops that have the fate,
To be spectators of this blessed hour.
Be pleased to sit a while, and you shall see
A transfirmation of far more delight
And apter drawn to nature, then can be
Discrib'd in an imaginary sight.
Triton having ended his speech, Mercury most artificially, and in an exquisite
posture descends, and sommons the Duke of York, and six young Noblemen to
attend him, and bring back the Queen and her Ladies in their own form,
directing him to the place where to find them; with this speech.

Fair branch of power, in whose sweet feature here
Mild Zephirus a figure did present
Of youth and of the springtime of the year
I sommon you, and six of high descent
T attend on you (a^ hopeful worthyes borne
To shield the Honor and the clear Renown
Of Ladies) that you presently return
And bring back those, in whose fair shapes were shown
The late-seene Nymphs in figures of their own
Whom you shall find hard by within a grove
And Garden of the spring addressed to Jove.
Hereupon the Duke of York with his attendants departing to perform this
service, the loud Musicque soundes, and suddenly appears the Queens Majesty
in a most pleasant and artificial Grove, which was the third Scene, and from
thence they march up to the King conducted by the Duke of York, and the
Noblemen, in very stately manner.

And in all these shows, this is to be noted, that there were none of
inferior sort, mixed amongst these great Personages of State and Honor (as
usually there have been) but all was performed by themselves with a due
reservation of their dignity. And for those two which did Personate the
Tritons, they were Gentlemen known of good worth and respect. The introducing
of Pages with torches, might have added more splendour, but yet they would have
pestred the room, which the season would not well permit.

And thus have I delivered the whole form of this show, and expose it to the
censure of those who make it their best show, to seem to know: with this
Postscript.

Pretulerim scriptor delirus inersque videri
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere and ringi.
S. D.

