The sighs of France for the death of their late King, HENRY the fourth.

The true manner of his Murder: The form of the Coronation of Prince JEWS at
S. Augustines.

With the Oration made by Mounsier Seruin, Attorney general to the King,
exhorting both the Peers and people to allegiance.

Printed in the Kings Palace. JOHN MORRIS.

depiction of a two-horse carriage, the driver holding a whip, in a mourning
procession: two gentlemen are inside the coach, attended by a footman

LONDON Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop at Britains
Bursse. 1610.

THE MVRTHER OF HENRY THE FOVRTH, THE LATE FRENCH KING.
MY Liege, I had made my self ready to write of the Pomps and Royalties at the
Coronation of the Queen, from which purpose I am so altered, that I am at this
time bound to speak of the great grief of France, and of the faithfulness
of the French Nation. But it greeues me to represent that unto you, which is
too much in your memory: yet the King your father has left such an estimation
of his life, that I cannot refuse the last duties of my pen.

It is true that there should be an Apelles to paint worthily so great and
conquering an Alexander* and therefore I bear the praises of his Palms, to
them that shall sit down to write of his victories? if there can be a pen
found to fly as far as the brute of his arms, and the renown of them does
sound. And if a tongue could have as many good sayings, as this Prince had
valor and clemency to conquer and pardon his enemies, how many tongues could
be heard of your subjects, that have felt the fruits of the peace, the which
his courage procured them, and which his grace preferred them unto? The
remembrance of which, should call them to come and water his Toombe with their
tears, and then render the testimony of their faithfulness to your Majesty,
and beginning, by their plaints for their losses, an acknowledgement of the
lawfulness of your succession.

My Liege, as the birds testify by their silence the displeasure they have, by
the loss of the sun, and how they do salute the Spring, like rejoicing
Citizens with their melodious harmony; even so your Subjects prove the just
sorrows that they apprehend by the death of his Majesty, and come at the
beginning of your Reign, crying for joy, Viue le Roy, long Live the king.

And you, Lady, if you can promise to your self, that you may give truce to
your griefs, mark the loss of your Spouse, and the zeal of the Princes of
your kingdom, that having no sooner seen the lying down of the king your
husband, but are as soon come to salute the rising up of your son, as their
Sovereign.

The Princes (I do not name them) have been the first that have offered him
their swords, so recommendable are the effects that have been seen, under
whose defense he is so strengthened, they by him so supported, and all France
defended, that not a heart that need to fear, if heaven do not fall.

The Officers of the Crown, the Peers of France, and all the noble French
(that all other Nations may take example to obey their Prince) they have
witnessed courageously, that death has had no power to shake their constancy
and fidelity.

The chief of Justice and the sovereign Senate have found and acknowledge,
that you showed them pity, when you had all might to command.

And he that has the government of policy, has put order to disorder, that
where it did appear, the whole world was resolved to weep for the dead
Prince, they are now as ready to honor the living.

And you Frenchmen, that are come from all parts, to see the Coronation of your
Queen, are the eyewitnesses of her establishment, the which you have beheld
celebrated in greater glory and pomp, then you could imagine, on Thursday the
thirteenth of May (according to the French computation) yet you have seen her
on Friday the fourteenth following, in a more violent affliction, then may be
named or expressed.

They then that had the curiosity to see her triumph on the one day, cannot
choose but have compassion, to behold her widowhood on the next.

But great calmes are ever the forerunners of great storms. The Mariners are
not proud to make their sails swell with a prosperous wind, neither loose
they their courage in the violence of tempest. So, as you have looked with
great modesty on the Coronation of your Queen, regard her loss with
constancy, and let the thought of obedience never slide from your duties;
whereby it may appear that the Union of France is a terror to all other
Nations: that you can conquer, as well as fight, and know how to give law to
your enemies with force, as you can take it from your king with humility.

And that this may serve you as a proof, that you have had the most valiant
king, the most merciful, the most wise, and the most judicious that ever was
beloved of his people, feared of his enemies, and admired of all the world: It
is your duties, and by your duty a benefit to desire, that his Son succeed
him in his perfections, as well as in his kingdoms; that the virtue of the
Queen, established as Regent in those kingdoms, do supply the youth of the
king, and he with her prudence make good to France the promises by the birth
of a Son. In the mean time we shall endour co^plaining for him, whose loss we
begin to find, and tell this history to our posterity.

In Paris the chief city of France, whom al Provinces do owe homage unto, for
the meruailes which be found in her, being more properly to be termed, and more
soon to be found, a little world, then a great City; A miserable Assasin, and
a damnable Parricide, borne at Angoulesme, named Francis Rauaillart, has
bereaved us of the Father of our Patrimony, taken away the Pearl of kings,
and undone us of the perfection of the world.

This villain, who having been prevented of the violence of this fatal blow,
and the fury of his intent in four several attempts, by the protection of the
highest and vigilance of his Guards, the Friday the fourteenth of May,
waighting his opportunity, he found him in his Caroche in the end of the
street of Ferronnerie, who seeing the Caroche stayed by the meeting of a
Caroche and a Cart, as the King should pass, he came out of a shop, where he
had kept himself against the kings coming, although somewhat distracted in
show of face before the attempt, and so came to the Caroche where his Majesty
was, and as he was then in earnest talk with other Peers, who were then
present in company with him, and himself dreadles of such an imminent danger,
leaning on the Column, he gave him two blows with a knife, with so sudden
an execution, that the murder was sooner found then the murderer: yet in the
end by diligent search he was taken, and the king carried back to the Louu're,
with the tears of the Lords, and received with plaints at his coming back.

The Counsel rose, all the City was in an uproar at this untimely accident,
while his Guards with a mournful diligence, came and yielded themselves before
the Louu're, to receive (and be ordered by) the commandments of the Counsel,
which appointed unto them this especial charge, that they should let none
pass but the Princes of the blood, and men of eminent place. Then came the
Soldiers and Court of Guard, offering voluntarily both their Arms and lives,
and to complain and mourn the most monstrous murder of their deceased king,
and for the firm establishing of the living Prince his son.

On Saturday the fifteenth of May (according to the French computation) the
young Prince Jews the thirteenth, and of the offspring of S. Jews, did
transport himself clothed in purple to S. Augustines, where the Court of
Parliament had formerly been kept, concerning the Coronation of the Queen, and
the former triumph. When being set in his Chair of Justice, he was proclaimed
king in the presence of the Queen mother, being set by his side, veiled over
in a veil of black Cypress, assisted with four Cardinals, four Peers of
the Church, sundry Bishops, Prelates, and some princes of the blood, and other
princes who were then resident in Court, the Constable of France, diverse Dukes,
the Marshall of France, officers of the crown, and governors of the
provinces, where was declared by an act, pronounced by the mouth of the Lord
chancelour, by the advice of the cardinals, the princes, peers, and Lords
hereupon named and of this Court of parliament, that the Queen received the
title of Queen mother regent of France, for the government of the king her
sons body, his kingdoms, and his needful affairs. After which, the gates
were opened, that the people might see the young king in his throne. When
Mounsiere Seruin the kings Attorney general, made an admonishing Oration to
the people upon the business in hand, and in especial of the good that France
should receive by the government of the said Queen, concluding that what was
past should be notified in the provinces, and withal requiring them ^o pray,
that God may preserve us our king Jews. And that his age may make him gather
the fruits of our obedience, we do swear him so (...) ^^^^^ulnes of
constancy and of zeal, that we find we have more pain in the speaking of it,
then we know we shall have in the executing of it.

And to begin in good time, let us in his glory pray that he may in good time
come to the protection of Christ, and in this hope we must be contributarie
with tears on the Hearce of the dead King, since the will of heaven does lead
us thither, saying, that since he has dealt with us like a father and like a
prince, we entreat of the divine Majesty, that having established him to be a
shield to his people, it would please him to receive him to his glory. And as
he forgave them that had offended him, so he will forgive him his offenses,
using his mercies sooner, then his Justice, that having had so many and so
fair victories in the world, both in foreign Countries and at home, he may
be yet victorious reigning in heaven, and having enjoyed the peace of so
flowrishing an Empire, he may enjoy the felicity of the happy.

After which, let us offer our vows and our suffrages, for the continuing
prosperity both of the king and the Queen, that it may please God so to
further and prosper the king, that he may hold his people under the yoke of
his Commandments, and so see him augment in perfection as in age, always to
be beloved of his subjects, favored of his Allies, and feared of the Nations
barbarous; that one day he may spread and hang out his ensigns in the Land of
Misbeleeuers, and that he may keep the promises of his birth in the overthrow
of the Ottomans.

That the Queen asssisted with the gravity of the Counsel, may reap the rest
of the fruits of his virtues, that she may enjoy his authority with so much
prosperity, that it may prove to the advancement of the king to the honor of
her, and to the comfort of the people. That the atchieuements the which the
dead king her husdand held from heaven, may serve her for a Model and be the
fair example for her to imitate, applying her self to the occasions of them
that have most merit, and not of them that use most importunity: that she may
hearken to all men's requests but not to all men's flatteries, whereby all may
have occasion to say, that she is capable to reign. That as the Moon holds
her light, which she has borrowed of the Sun; yet stild (...) ^^^eth her
Orb to communicate it unto us: So she has held the perfections, she has
seen practiced in the dead king, to serve herself in his ab^ace, in her
glory, to the profit of her son and his subjects. And also that as the
Touchstone that ^oueheth the gold, the silver and tries it, she may keep in
properly this prudence and this goodness which she has borrowed of his dead
majesty.

Ve^uri^ had great ^^^nour in Rome to have returned the army of his son,
which he had prepared for the ruin of his Country, and Mary of Medices, our
Queen shall receive a great praise of all the world to have governed the state
of our king her son, with so great wisdom, that there shall be no
difference found in the reign passed and the reign to come, that no sex may
hereafter speak of the reign of a woman more then of hers, seeing an others
have not preceded her by (...), and she advanced by merit, and that the fairest
actions of others (...) the predictions of the effect; of her that (...) may
see the (...) time of her reign through her sorrow and S^^^e^^e sees her (...)
through a (...) and say by Augurisme that which you shall expect and we joy in.

FINIS.

