AN APOLOGY For Actors.

Containing three brief Treatises. 1 Their Antiquity. 2 Their ancient Dignity.
3 The true use of their quality.


Written by Thomas Heywood.

Et prodesse solent and delectare --
LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks. 1612.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD, Earl of Worcester, Lord of Chep^toll,
Ragland, and Gower, Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Master of
the Horse, and one of the Kings most Honorable PRIVY COUNCEL.
KNowing all the virtues and endowments of Nobility, which flo^isht in their
height of eminence in your Ancestors, now, as by a divine legacy, and lineall
inheritance, to survive in you; and so consequently from you, to your truly
ennobled Issue. (Right Honorable) I presumed to publish this unworthy work
under your gracious patronage: first, as an acknowledgement of that duty I am
bound to you in, as a servant. Next, assured that your most judicial cen^^re
is as able to approve what therein is authentike and good, as your Noble and
accustomed modesty will charitably conniue: if there be any thing therein
unworthy your learned approbation. I have strived (my Lord) to make good a
subject, which many through envy, but most through ignorance, have sought
violently, (and beyond merit) to oppugn: in which, if they have either wandered
through spleen, or erred by non-knowledge, I have (to my power) plainly and
freely illustrated, propounding a true, direct, and faithful discourse,
touching the Antiquity, the ancient Dignity, and the true use of Act^^^, and
their quality. If my industry herein be by the common Adversary harshly
received, but by your Honor charitably censured, I have from the iniuditious
(whom I esteem not) but what I expect: but from your Lordship (whom I ever
reverence) more then I can merit.

Your Honors humbly devoted, Thomas Heywood.
To my good Friends and Fellows, the Citty-Actors.
OVt of my busiest hours, I have spared my self so much time as to touch some
particulars concerning us, to approve our Antiquity, ancient Dignity, and the
true use of our quality. That it has been ancient, we have derived it from
more then two thousand years ago, successively to this age. That it has
been esteemed by the best and greatest: to omit all the noble Patrons of the
former world, I need allege no more then the Royal and Princely services, in
which we now live. That the use thereof is authentic, I have done my
endeavor to instance by History, and approve by authority. To excuse my
ignorance in affecting no flourish of Eloquence, to set a gloss upon my
Treatise, I have nothing to say for my self but this: A good face needs no
painting, and a good cause no abetting. Some ouercurious have too liberally
taxed us* and he (in my thoughts) is held worthy reproof, whose ignorance
cannot answer for it self: I hold it more honest for the guiltless to
excuse, then the envious to exclaim. And we may as freely (out of our
plainness) answer, as they (out of their perverseness object) instancing my
self by famous Scalliger, learned Doctor Gager, Doctor Gentiles, and others,
whose opinions and appr^ued arguments on our part, I have in my brief
discourse altogether omitted; because I am loath to be taxed in borrowing from
others: and besides, their works being extant to the world, offer themselves
freely to every man's perusal. I am professed adversary to none, I rather covet
reconcilement, then opposition, nor proceeds this my labor from any envy in
me, but rather to show them wherein they err. So wishing you judicial
Audiences, honest Poets, and true gatherers, I commit you all to the fullness
of your best wishes.

Yours ever, T. H.
TO THE IVDICIALL READER.
I Have undertook a subject (courteous Reader) not of sufficient countenance to
bolster it self by his own strength; and therefore have charitably reached it
my hand to ^upport it against any succeeding Adversary. I could willingly have
committed this work to some more able then my self: for the weaker the
Combatant, he needs the stronger Arms. But in extremities, I hold it better
to wear rusty Armor, then to go naked; yet if these weak habilliments of
war^e, can but buckler it from part of the rude buffets of our Adversaries, I
shall hold my pains sufficiently guerdoned. My pen has seldom appeared in
Press till now, I have been ever too jealous of mine own weakness,
willingly to thrust into the Press: nor had I at this time, but that a kind
of necessity enjoined me to so sudden a business. I will neither show my self
ouer-presumtuous, in skorning thy favor, nor too importunate a beggar, by too
seruilly entreating it. What thou art content to bestow upon my pains, I am
content to accept: if good thoughts, they are all I desire: if good words, they
are more then I deserve: if bad opinion, I am sorry I have incurred it: if evil
language, I know not how I have merited it: if any thing, I am pleased: if
nothing, I am satisfied, contenting my self with this: I have done no more
then (had I been called to account) showed what I could say in the defense of
my own quality.

Thine T. HEYWOOD. Firm^ valent perse, nullumque Mach^^na querunt.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In laudem, nec Operis, nec Authoris.
FAllor? en h^c solis non solum grata Theatris?
(Esseputes solis quanquam diclata Theatris)
Magna sed a sacro veniet tibi gratia Templo,
Parue Liber; proles baut infitianda Parenti.
Plurimus hunc nactus Libr^m de-plebe-Sacerdos
(Copia Verborum cni sit, non copia Rerum)
Materiae tantum petet hinc; quantum nec invn^
Promere Mense potest: nec in vno forsitan Anno.
Da quemuis Textum; balba de Narelocutus,
Protinus exclamat (Nefanda piacula!) in vrbe
(Proh dolor!) Impietas nudat a front vagatur!
Eccelibrum (Fratres) Damnando Authore Poeta:
Pejorem, nec Sol vidit, nec V^rstius Ipse
Haeresiarcha valet componere: Quippe Theatri
Mentitas loquitur lauds (o Temporal laudet
Idem si potis est, Monachum, Monachi^e Cucullum.
Sacro quis Lauds vnquam Nomen-ve Theatri
Repperit in CANONE? haud vllus* Stolidissime, Dogma
Non CANONEM sapit hoc igitur, sed Apocryphon. Inde
(Lymphatum attonito pectus tundent^ Popello,
Et vacuum quassante caput moestumque t^enti)
Sic multo r^^cum crocitans sud^r^ Perorat;
Quod non dant Proceres dedit Histrio: nempe benignam
Materiam Declamandi, pleb^mque, docendi.
Quis tamen hic Mystes tragico qui Fulmina abore
Torquet? Number doctus? C^rte. Nam Metra Catonis
Quattuor edidicit, totidem quoque Commata Tull^.
Ieiunamque catechesin pistoribus aeque
Fartoribusque Pijs scripsit. Liber Vtilis his, Qui
Baptistam simulant vultu, Floralia viu^nt:
Queisque Supercilio breuior coma. Sed venerandos
Graios Hic L^tiosque patres exosus ad vnum est;
Et Canones damnans fit Apocryphus. Vritur intus.
Laudibus ACTORIS multum mordetur. Ab illo
Laud sua Fraudatur enim. Quis nescit? Iniquum'st
Praeter se Scripto laudetur Hypocrita proprie personatum histrionem denotat.
Hypocrita quisquam.
Fallor? an h^ec solis ^on solum grata Theatris?
Anonymus. Sieve Pessimus omnium Po^ta.
To them that are opposite to this work.
CEase your detracting tongues contest no more,
Leave off for shame to wound the Actors fame,
Seek rather their wronged credit to restore,
Your envy and detractions, quite disclaim:
You that have termed their sports lascivious, vile,
Wishing good Princes would them all exile;
See here this question to the full disputed:
Heywood, has you, and all your proofs confuted.
Would see an Emperor and his Counsel grave,
A noble Soldier acted to the life,
A Roman Tyrant how he does behave
Himself: at home, abroad, in peace, in strife?
Would see what is love, what is hate, what is foul ex-cesse,
Or would a Traitor in his kind express*
Our Stagerites can (by the Poets pen)
Appear to you to be the self same men.
What though a sort for spite, or want of wit,
Hate what the best allow, the most forbear,
What exercise can you desire more fit,
Then stately stratagemes to see and hear.
What profit many may attain by plays,
To the most critticke eye this book displaies, Vid. Page ^

Brave men, brave acts, being bravely acted too,
Makes, as men see things done, desire to do.
And did it nothing but in pleasing sort,
Keep gallants from mispending of their time,
It might suffice: yet here is nobler sport,
Acts well contrived, good Prose, and stately rhyme.
To call to Church, Campanus bells did make,
Plays, dice, and drink inuit men to forsake:
Their use being good then use the Actors well,
Since ours all other Nations far excel.
AR: HOPTON.
To his beloved friend Master THOMAS HEYVVOD.
Sum superbiam quaesitam meritis. I Cannot, though you write in your own
cause,
Say you deal partially; but must confess,
(What most men will) you merit due applause;
So worthily your work becomes the Press*
And well our Actors, may approve your pains,
For you give them authority to play;
Even whilst the hottest plague of envy reigns,
Nor for this warrant shall they dearly pay.
What a full state of Poets, have you cited,
To judge your cause? and to our equal veiw
Fair Monumentall Theaters recited:
Whose ruins had been ruined but for you.
Such men who can in tune, both rail and sing*
Shall veiwing this, either confess it is good,
Or let their ignorance condemn the Spring,
Because it is merry and renewes our blood.
Be therefore your own judgment your defense,
Which shall approve you better then my praise,
Whilst I in right of sacred Innocence,
Durst ore each gilded Tomb this known truth raise.
"Who dead would not be acted by their will,
"It seems such men have acted their lives ill.
By your friend JOHN WEBSTER.
To my loving Friend and Fellow, THOMAS HEYWOOD.
THou that do rail at me for seeing a play,
How would thou have me spend my idle hours?
Would have me in a Tavern drink all day?
Melt in the Suns heat? or walk out in showers?
Gape at the Lottery from morn till even,
To hear whose mottoes blankes have, and who prises?
To hazard all at dice (chance six or seven?)
To card? or bowl? My humor this dispises.
But thou will answer: None of these I need,
Yet my tired spirits must have recreation.
What shall I do that may retirement breed?
Or how refresh my self? and in what fashion?
To drabbe, to game, to drink, all these I hate:
Many enormous things depend on these,
My faculties truly to recreate
With modest mirth, and my self best to please
Give me a play; that no distaste can breed,
Prove thou a Spider, and from flowers suck gall,
I Will like a Be, take honey from a weed:
For I was never Puritannicall.
I love no public soothers, private scorners,
That rail against letchery, yet love a harlot.
When I drink, it is in sight, and not in corners:
I am no open Saint, and secret varlet.
Still when I come to plays, I love to sit,
That all may see me in a public place:
Even in the stages front, and not to git
Into a nooke, and hood-winke there my face.
"This is the d^fference, such would have men deem,
"Them what they are not: I am what I seem.
Rich. Perkins.
To my good friend and fellow, THOMAS HEYWOOD.
LEt others task things honest: and to please
Some that pretend more strictness then the rest,
Exclaim on plays: know I am none of these
That in-ly love what out-ly I detest.
Of all the modest pastimes I can find,
To content me, of plays I make best use,
As most agreeing with a generous mind.
There see I virtues crown, and sins abuse.
Two hours well spent, and all their pastimes done,
What Is good I follow, and what is bad I shun.
Christopher* Beeston.
To my good friend and fellow, THOMAS HEYWOOD.
Have I not known a man that to be hyr'd,
Would not for any treasure see a play,
Reele from a Tavern? Shall this be admired?
When as another but the the other day,
That held to wear a surplesse most unmeet,
Yet after stood at Pauls-crosse in a sheet.
Robert Pallant.
To my approved good friend M. THOMAS HEYWOOD.
OF thee, and thy Apology for plays,
I will not much speak in contempt or praise:
Yet in these following lines I Will show my mind,
Of Plays, and such as have against Plays repined.
A Play's a brief Epitome of time,
Where man my see his virtue or his crime
Laid open, either to their vices shame,
Or to their virtues memorable fame.
A Play's a true transparant Crystal mirror,
To show good minds their mirth, the bad their terror:
Where stabbing, drabbing, dicing, drinking, swearing
Are all proclaimed unto the sight and hearing,
In ugly shapes of Heauen-abhorrid sin,
Where men may see the mire they wallow in.
And well I know it makes the Devil rage,
To see his servants flouted on a stage.
A Whore, a Thief, a Pander, or a Bawd,
A Broker, or a slave that lives by fraud:
An Usurer, whose soul is in his chest,
Until in hell it comes to restless rest.
A Fly-blowne gull, that feign would be a Gallant,
A Raggamuffin that has spent his Tallant:
A selfe-wise fool, that sees his wits out-stript,
Or any vice that feels it self but nipt,
Either in Tragedy, or Comedy,
In Moral, Pastoral, or History:
But straight the poison of their envious tongues,
Breaks out in vollyes of Calumnious wrongs.
And then a Tinker, or a Dray-man swears,
I would the house were fired about their ears.
Thus when a play nips Satan by the nose,
Straight all his vassails are the Actors foes.
But fear not man, let envy swell and burst,
Proceed, and bid the Devil do his worst.
For Plays are good or bad, as they are used,
And best inventions often are abused.
Yours ever, JOHN TAILOR.
The Author to his Book.
THe world's a Theater, So compared by the Fathers.
the earth a Stage,
Which God, and nature does with Actors fill,
Kings have their entrance in due equipage,
And some there parts play well and others ill.
The best no better are (in this Theater,)
Where every humor's fitted in his kind,
This a true subjects acts, and that a Traitor,
The first applauded, and the last confined
This plays an honest man, and that a knave
A gentle person this, and he a clown
One man is ragged, and another brave.
All men have parts, and each man acts his own.
She a chaste Lady acts all her life,
A wanton Curtezan another plays.
This, couets marriage love, that, nuptial strife,
Both in continual action spend their days.
Some Citizens, some Soldiers, borne to aduenter,
Sheepheards and Seamen; then our play's begun,
When we are borne, and to the world first enter,
And all find Exits when their parts are done.
If then the world a Theater present,
As by the roundnesse it appears most fit,
Built with starre-galleries of hye ascent,
In which Ieho^e does as spectator sit.
And chief determiner to applaud the best,
And their endeavors crown with more then merit.
But by their evil actions doomes the rest,
To end disgraced whilst others praise inherit.
He that denies then Theaters should be, No Theater, ^o world.

He may as well deny a world to me.
Thomas Heywood.
An Apology for Actors, and first touching their Antiquity
MOVED by the sundry exclamations of many seditious Sectists in this age, who
in the fatnes and ranknes of a peac^able Commonwealth, grow up like unsavory
tufts of grass, which though outwardly green and fresh to the eye, yet are
they both unpleasant and unprofitable, being too sower for food, and too rank
for fodder: These men like the ancient Germans, affecting no fashion but their
own, would draw other nations to be slouens like themselves, and undertaking
to puri^ie and reform the sacred bodies of the Church and Commonweal (In the
true use of both which they are altogether Ignorant,) would but like artlesse
Physicians, for experiment sake, rather minister pills to poison the whole body
then cordials to preserve any or the least part. Amongst many other things
tolerated in this peaceable and flourishing State, it has pleased the high and
mighty Princes of this Land to limit the use of certain public Theaters,
which since many of these ouer-curious heads have lauishly (...) violently
slandered, I hold it not a miss to lay open some few Antiquities to approve
the true use of them, with arguments (not of the least moment) which according
to the weakness of my spirit and infancy of my judgment I will (by gods grace)
commit to the eyes of all favorable and judicial readers, as well to satisfy
the requests of some of our well qualified favorers, as to stop the envious
acclamations of those who challenge to themselves a privilege Inuectiue, and
against all free estates a railing liberty: Loath am I (I protest) being the
youngest and weakest of the Nest wherein I was hatched, to soar this pitch
before others of the same brood more fledge, and of better winge then my self:
but though they whom more especially this task concerns, both for their
ability in writing and sufficiency in Judgment (as their works generally
witness to the world:) are content to ouer-slip so necessary a subject, and
have left it as to me the most unworthy: I thought it better to stammer out my
mind, then not to speak at all; to scrible down a mark in the stead of
writing a name, and to stumble on the way, rather then to stand still and not
to proceed on so necessary a Journey. Nox erat, and somnus lassos submisit
ocellos.

It was about that time of the night when darkness had already ouerspread the
world, and a hushed and general silence possessed the face of the earth, and men's
bodies tired with the business of the day, betaking themselves to their best
repose, their neuer-sleeping souls labored in uncouth dreams and visions, when
suddenly appeared to me the tragic Muse Melpomene -- animosa Tragedia.
-- and mouit pictis imixa Cothurnis
Densum Cesarie, terque quaterque Caput:


Her heir rudely disheueled, her chaplet withered, her visage with tears
stained, her brow furrowed, her eyes dejected, nay her whole complexion quite
faded and altered: and perusing her habit, I might behold the color of her
fresh roabe all Crimson, breathed, and with the inuenomed juice of some
profane spilt ink in every place stained: nay more, her busken of all the
wonted Jewels and ornaments, utterly despoyled; about which in manner of a
garter I might behold these letters written in a plain and large Character.

Behold my Tragic Buskin rent and torn,
Which Kings and Emperors in their times have worn.
This I no sooner had perused, but suddenly I might perceive the enraged Muse,
cast up her skornfull head: her eyebals sparklefire, and a sudden flash of
disdain, intermixed with rage, purple her cheek. When pacing with a maiesticke
gate and rowsing up her fresh spirits with a lively and queint action, she
began in these or the like words. Grande sonant tragici, tragicos decet Ira
Cothurnos.
Am I Melpomene the buskend Muse,
That held in awe the tyrants of the world,
And playde their lives in public Theaters,
Making them fear to sin, since fearelesse I
Prepared to write their lives in Crimson Ink,
And act their shames in eye of all the world?
Have not I whipped Vice with a scourge of steel,
Unmasked stern Murder; shamed lascivious Lust.
Pluct off the visar from grimme Treasons face,
And made the Sun point at their ugly sins?
Has not this powerful hand tamed fiery Rage,
Killed poisonous Envy with her own keen darts,
Choked up the Covetous mouth with moulten gold,
Burst the vast womb of eating Gluttony,
And drowned the Drunkards gall in juice of grapes?
I have showed Pride his picture on a stage,
Laid open the ugly shapes his steele-glasse hid,
And made him pass thence meekely: In those days
When Emperors with their presence graced my scenes,
And thought none worthy to present themselves
Save Emperors: to delight Ambassadors.
Then did this garland flourish, then my Roabe
Was of the deepest Crimson, the best dye:
Cura Ducum fuerant olim regumque poetae.
Premiaque Antiqui magna tulere Chori
Who lodge then in the bosom of great Kings.
Save he that had a grave Cothurnate Muse.
A stately verse in an ^ambick style
Became a Kes^rs mouth. Oh these were times
Fit for you Bards to vent your golden Rymes.
Then did I tread on Arras, Cloth of Tissue,
Hung round the forefront of my stage: the pillars
That did support the Roof of my large frame
Double apparrel^ in pure Ophir gold*
Whilst the round Circle of my spacious orb
Was thronged with Princes, Dukes and Senators.
Nunc Hederae sine Honor iacent.
But now is the Iron age, and black-mouthed Curres,
Bark at the virtues of the former world.
Such with their breath have blasted my fresh roabe,
Plucked at my flowery Chaplet, towsd my tresses.
Nay some whom for their baseness hist and skorn'd
The Stage, as loathsome, has long-since spued^ut,
Have watched their time to cast inuenom'd ^nke
To stayne my garments with. Oh Seneca
Thou tragic Poet, had thou lived to see
This outrage done to sad Melpo^ene,
With such sharp lines thou would revenge my blot.
As Armed O^^d against Ibis wrote.
With that in rage she left the place, and I my dream, for at the instant I
awaked, when having perused this vision over and over again in my remembrance,
I suddenly bethought me, How many ancient Poets, Tragic and Comicke, dying
many ages ago live still amongst us in their works, as amongst the Greeks,
Euripide^: M^nand^r* Sophocles, Eupolis, Eschilus, Aristophanes, App^llodorus,
A^axandrides, Nichomachus, Alexis, Tereus and others, so among the Latins:
Attilius, Actius, Melithus, Pla^tus, Terens, and others whom fore breuity sake
I omit. Hos Ediscit and hos arcto stipata Theatro
Spectat Roma potens habet hos, numer atque Poetas.
These potent Rome acquires and holds dear.
And in their round Theaters flocks to hear:
These or any of these had they lived in the afternoon of the world, as they
dyed even in the morning, I assure my self would have left more memorable
tropheys of that learned Muse, whom in their golden numbers they so richly
adorned. And amongst our modern poets* who have been industrious in many an
elaborate and ingenious poem, even they whose pens have had the greatest
traffi^ke with the Stage, have been in the excuse of these Muses most
forgetful But leaving these, lest I make too large a head to a small body* and
so mishape my subject, I will begin with the antiquity of Acting Comedies,
Tragedies, and Hystories. And first in the golden world.

In the first of the Olimpiads, amongst many other active exercises in which
Hercules ever trimph^d as victor, there was in his nonage presented unto him by
his Tu^or in the fashion of a History, acted by the choice of the nobility of
Greece, the worthy and memorable acts of his father Jupiter. Which being
personated with lively and well-spirited action, wrought such impression in his
noble thoughts, that in mere emulation of his fathers valor (not at the behest
of his Stepdame Juno) he performed his twelve labors: Him valiant Theseus
followed, and Achilles, Theseus. Which bred in them such hawty and magnanimous
attempts, that every succeeding age has recorded their worths, unto fresh
admiration. Aristotle that Prince of Philosophers, whose books carry such
credit, even in these our vniuers^^ies, that to say Ipse dixit is a sufficient
Axioma, he having the tuition of young Alexander, caused the destruction of
Troy to be acted before his pupil, in which the valor of Achilles was so
naturally expressed, that it impressed the heart of Alexander, in so much that all
his succeeding actions were merely shaped after that pattern, and it may be
imagined had Achilles never lived, Alexander had never conquered the whole
world. The like assertion may be made of that euer-renowned Roman Julius
Caesar. Who after the like representation of Alexander in the Temple of
Hercules standing in Gades was never in any peace of thoughts, till by his
memorable exployts, he had purchased to himself the name of Alexander: as
Alexander till he thought himself of desert to be called Achilles: Achilles
Theseus, Theseus till he had sufficiently Imitated the acts of Hercules, and
Hercules till he held himself worthy to be called the son of Jupiter. Why
should not the lives of these worthyes, presented in these our days, effect
the like wonders in the Princes of our times, which can no way be so
exquisitly demonstrated, nor so lively portrayed as by action: Oratory is a
kind of a speaking picture, therefore may some say, is it not sufficient to
discourse to the ears of princes the fame of these conquerors: Painting
likewise, is a dumb oratory, therefore may we not as well by some curious
Pigmalion, draw their conquests to work the like love in Princes toward
these Worthyes by showing them their pictures drawn to the life, as it wrought
on the poor painter to be inamored of his own shadow* I answer this.

Non ^agis expressi vultus per ahenia signa
Quam per vatis opus, mores animique virorum
Clarorum apparent. --
The visage is no better cut in brass,
Nor can the Caruer so express the face
As does the Poets pen whose arts surpass,
To give men's lives and virtues their due grace.
A Description is only a shadow received by the ear but not perceived by the
eye: so lively portrature is merely a form seen by the eye, but can neither
show action, passion, motion, or any other gesture, to move the spirits of the
beholder to admiration: but to see a soldier shaped like a soldier, walk,
speak, act like a soldier: to see a Hector all besmered in blood, trampling
upon the bulkes of Kings. A Troylus returning from the field in the sight of
his father Priam as if man and horse even from the steeds rough fetlockes to
the plume in the champions helmet had been together plunged into a purple
Ocean: To see a Pompey ride in triumph, then a Caesar conquer that Pompey:
laboring Hanniball alive, hewing his passage through the Alps. To see as I
have seen, Hercules in his own shape hunting the Boar, knocking down the
Bull, taming the Heart, fighting with Hydra, murdering Gerion, slaughtring
Diomed, wounding the Stimphalides, killing the Centaurs, pashing the Lion,
squeezing the Dragon, dragging Cerberus in Chains, and lastly, on his high
Pyramides writing Nilvltra, Oh these were sights to make an Alexander.

To turn to our domesticke hystories, what English blood seeing the person of
any bold English man presented and does not hug his fame, and hunnye at his
valor, pursuing him in his enterprise with his best wishes, and as being wrapped
in contemplation, offers to him in his heart all prosperous performance, as if
the Personater were the man Personated, so bewitching a thing is lively and
well spirited action, that it has power to new mold the hearts of the
spectators and fashion them to the shape of any noble and notable attempt. What
coward to see his contryman valiant would not be ashamed of his own
cowardice? What English Prince should he behold the true portrature of that
amous King Edward the third, foraging France, taking so great a King captive in
his own country, qua^tering the English Lions with the French Flower-delyce,
and would not be suddenly Inflamed with so royal a spectacle, being made apt
and fit for the like atchieuement. So of Henry the fifth: but not to be tedious
in any thing. Ovid in one of his poems holds this opinion, that Romulus was the
first that brought plays into Italy, which he thus sets down*

Primus sollicitos fecisti Romule Ludos. De Art Amandi. 1.

Cum iurit viduos rapta sabina viros
Tunc neque marmoreo pendebant vela Theatro, etc.
Which we English thus.
Thou noble Romulus first plays contriues,
To get thy widdowed soldiers Sabine wives.
In those days from the marble house did wau^
No sail, no silken flagge, or ensign brave.
Then was the Tragic stage not painted red,
Or any mixed stains on pillars spread.
Then did the Scene want art, th'vnready stage
Was made of grass and earth in that rude age:
About the which were thicke-leau'd branches placed,
Nor did the Audients hold themselves disgraced
Of turfe and heathy sods to make their seats,
Fr^m'd in degrees of earth, and mossy peates.
Thus placed in order, every Roman pried
Into her face that sat next by his side;
And closing with her, severally began move,
The innocent Sab^ne women to their love:
And whilst the piper Thuscus rudely played,
And by thrice stamping with his foot had made
A sign unto the rest, there was a shout,
Whose shrill report pierst all the air about.
N^w at a sign of rape given from the King,
Round through the hou^e the lusty Romans fling,
Leaving no corner of the same unsought,
Till every one a frighted virgin caught.
Look as the trembling Dove the Eagle flies,
Or a young Lamb when he the Woolfe espyes;
Soran the poor girls, filling the air with skreekes.
Emptying of all the color their pale cheeks.
One fear possessed them all, but not one look,
This tears her hair, she; has her wits forsook.
Some sadly sit, some on their mothers call,
Some cha^e, some fly, some stay, but frighted all.
Th^^ were the ra^^sh'd Sabi^es blushing led
(Be^omming shame) unto each Romans bed.
If any strived against it, straight her man
Would ^ak^ her on (...) knee (whom fear made w^n)
And ^ay; Why weep'st thou sweet? what ailes my dear?
D^y up these drops, these clouds of sorrow clear.
I Will be to thee, if thou thy grief wilt smother,
Such as thy father was unto thy mother.
Full well could Romulus his Soldiers please,
To give them such fair mistresses as these.
If such rich wages thou will give to me,
Great Romulus, thy soldier I will ^e.
Romulus having erected the walls of Rome, and leading under him a warlike
Nation, being in continual war with the Sabines, after the choice selecting
of a place, fit (...) so famous a City, and not knowing how to people the
same, his train wholly consisting of Soldiers, who without the company of
women (they not having any in their Army) could not multiply; but so were
likely that their immortal fames should dye issulesse with their mortal
bodies. Thus therefore Romulus devised; After a parle and atonement made with
the neighbor Nations, he built a Theater, plain, according to the time; yet
large, fit for the entertainment of so great an Assembly, and these were they
whose famous issue peopled the City of Rome, which in after ages grew to such
height, that not Troy, founded by Dardanus, Carthage laid by Dido, Tyru^ built
by Agenor, Memphis made by Ogdous, Thebes seated by Cadmus, nor Babylon reared
by Semiramis, were any way equal to this situation grounded by Romulus: to
which all the discovered kingdoms of the earth after became tributaries. And
in the noone-tide of their glory, and height of all their honor, they edified
Theaters, and Amphi-theaters: for in their flourishing Commonweal, their
public Comedians and Tragedians most flourished, insomuch that the Tragic and
Comicke Poets, were all generally admired of the people, and particularly every
man of his private Mec^nas.

In the reign of Augustus Christ was borne, Imperante Augusto, natus est
Christus.
and as well in his days as before his birth, these solemnities were held in
the greatest estimation. Imperante Tiberio crucifixus.
In Julius Caesar's time, predecessor to August^^, the fam^us hony-tong'd Orator
Cicero flourished; who, amongst many other his eloquent Oratio^s, writ certain
yet extant, for the Com^dian Ros^ius (pro Roscio Comaedo) of whom we shall
speak more large hereafter. These continued in their honor till the reign of
Tiberius Caesar, and under Tiberius Christ was crucified. To this end do I use
this assertion, because in the full and perfect time our Savior soiurned on
the earth, even in those happy and peaceful days the spacious Theaters were
in the greatest opinion amongst the Romans; yet, neither Christ himself, nor
any of his san^^ified Apostles, in any of their Sermons, Acts, or Documents, so
much as named them, or upon any abusiue occasion, touched them. Therefore hence
(me thinks) a very probable and important argument may be grounded, that since
they, in their divine wisdoms, knew all the sins abounding in the world
before that time, taxt and reproved all the abuses reigning in that time, and
foresaw all the actions and inconveniences (to the Church prejudicial) in the
time to come; Since they (I say) in all their holy doctrines, books, and
principles of Divinity, were content to pass them over, as things tolerated,
and indifferent, why should any nice and ouer-scrupulous heads, since they
cannot ground their curiousness either upon the old or new Testament, take
upon them to correct, control, and carpe at that, against which they cannot
find any text in the sacred Scriptures?

In the time of Nero Caesar, the Apostle Paul was persecuted and suffered, Nero
was then Emperor, Paul writ his Epistle to the Romans, and at the same time
did the Theaters most flourish amongst the Romans; yet where can we quote any
place in his Epistles, which forbids the Church of God, then resident in Rome,
to absent themselves from any such assemblies.

To speak my opinion with all indifferency, God has not enjoined us to wear
all our apparel solely to defend the cold* Some garments we wear for warmth,
others for ornament. So did the children of Israel hang eare-rings in their
ears, not was it by the law forbidden them. That purity is not looked for at
our hands, being mortal and humane, that is required of the Angels, being
celestial and divine. God made us of earth, men; knows our natures,
dispositions and imperfections, and therefore has limited us a time to
rejoice, as he has enjoined us a time to mourn for our transgressio^s. And I
hold them more scrupulous than well advised, that go about to take from us the
use of all moderate recreations. Why has God ordained for man, va^^^tie of
meats, dainties and delicates, if not to taste thereon? why does the world
yield choice of honest pastimes, if not decently to use them? Was not the Hare
made to be hunted? the Stagge to be chaced; and so of all other beasts of game
in their several kinds? since God has provided us of these pastimes, why may
we not use them to his glory? Now if you ask me why were not the Theaters as
gorgeously built in all other Cities of Italy as Rome? And why are not
Play Houses maintained as well in other Cities of England, as London? my
answer is: It is not meet every mean Esquire should carry the part belonging
to one of the Nobility, or for a Nobleman to usurp the estate of a Prince.
Rome was a Metropolis, a place whither all the nations known under the Sun,
resorted: so is London, and being to receive all Estates, all Princes, all
Nations, therefore to afford them all choice of pastimes, sports, and
recreations: yet were there Theaters in all the greatest Cities of the world,
as we will more largely particularize hereafter.

I never yet could read any History of any Commonweal, which did not thrive
and prosper whilst these public solemnities were held in adoration. Oh but
(say some) Marcus Aurelius banished all such triuiall exercises beyond the
confines of Italy. Indeed this Emperor was a Philosopher of the sect of
Diogenes, a Cini^ke, and whether the hand of Diogenes would become a scepter,
or a root better, I leave to your judgments. This Aur^lius was a great and
sharp reprouer, who because the Matrons and Ladies of Rome, in scorn of his
person made a play of him; in his time, interdicted the use of their Theaters.
So, because his wife Fausti^e played false with him, he generally exclaimed
against all women: because hims^l^e could not touch an Instrument, he banished
all the Musicians in Rome, and being a mere coward, put all the Gladiators and
sword-players into exile. And lest his own suspected life should be again
acted by the Comedians, as it before had been by the noble Matrons, he professed
himself adversary to all of that quality, so severe a reformation of the weal
public he used, restraining the Citizens of their free liberties, which till
his days was not seen in Rome; but what profited this the weal public? do
but peruse the ancient Roman Chronicles, and you shall undoubtedly find, that
from the time of this precise Emperor, that stately City, whose lofty
buildings crowned seven high hills at once, and ouer-peered them all, straight
way began to hang the head, by degrees the foreign kingdoms revolted, and
the homage done them by strange Nations, was in a little space quite abrogated:
for they governed all the world, some under Consuls, some under P^o-consuls,
Presidents and Pretors, they divided their dominions and countries into
principalities, some into Provinces, some into Toparchyes* some into
Tetrarchyes, some into Tribes, others into Ethnarchyes: but now their homage
ceast, Marc^s Aurelius ended their mirth, which presaged that shortly after
should begin their sorrow, he banished their liberty* and immediately followed
their bondage. For Rome, which till then kept all the Nations of the world in
subiectiue awe, was in a little space awd even by the basest nations of the
world. To leave Italy, and look back into Gr^^ce, the Sages and Princes of
Grecia, who for the refinednesse of their language were in such reputation
through the world, that all other tongues were esteemed barbarous; These that
were the first understanders, trained up their youthful Nobility to be
Actors, debarring the base Mechanickes so worthy employment: for none but the
young Heroes were admitted that practice, so to embolden them in the delivery of
any foreign Embassy. These wise men of Greece (o called by the Oracle) could
by their industry, find out no nearer or directer course to plant humanity and
manners in the hearts of the multitude then to instruct them by moralized
mysteries, what vices to avoid, what virtues to embrace; what enorm^tyes to
abandon, what ordinances to ob^^^ue: whose lives (being for s^^e special
endowments in former times honored) they should admire and follow: whose
vicious actions (personated in some licentious liver) they should despise and
shun: which borne out as well by the wisdom of the Poet, as supported by
the worth of the Actors, wrought such impression in the hearts of the plebe,
that in short space they excelled in ciuility and government, insomuch that
from them all the neighbor Nations drew their patterns of Humanity, as well
in the establishing of their laws, as the reformation of their manners. These
Magi and Gymnosophistae, that lived (as I may say) in the childhood and infancy
of the world, before it knew how to speak perfectly, thought even in those
days, that Action was the nearest way to plant understanding in the hearts of
the ignorant. Yea (but say some) you ought not to confound the habits of either
sex, as to let your boys wear the attires of virgins, etc. To which I
answer: The Scriptures are not always to be expounded merely* according to
the letter: (for in such esta^e stands our may^e Sacramental Controversy) but
they ought exactly to be conferred with the purpose they handle. To do as the
Sodomites did, use preposterous lusts in preposterous habits, is in that text
flatly and severely forbidden: nor can I imagine any man, that has in him any
taste of relish of Christianity, to be guilty of so abhorred a sin. Besides,
it is not probable, that Plays were meant in that text, because we read not of
any Plays known in that time that Deutero^^^ie was writ, among the Children
of Israel, nor do I hold it lawful to beguile the eyes of the world in
confounding the shapes of either sex, as to keep any youth in the habit of a
virgin, or any virgin in the shape of a lad, to shroud them from the eyes of
their fathers, tutors, or protectors, or to any other sinister intent
whatsoever. But to see our youths attired in the habit of women, who knows not
what their intents be? who cannot distinguish them by their names, assuredly
knowing, they are but to represent such a Lady, at such a time appointed?

Do not the Universities, the fountains and well^ springs of all good Arts,
Learning and Documents, admit the like in their Colleges? and they (I assure
my self) are not ignorant of their true use. In the time of my residence in
Cambridge, I have seen Tragedyes, Comedyes, Historyes, Pastorals and Shows,
publicly acted, in which Graduates of good place and reputation, have been
specially parted: this is held necessary for the emboldening of their Junior
scholars, to arm them with audacity, against they come to be employed in any
public exercise, as in the reading of the Dialecticke, Rhetoric, Ethicke,
Mathematicke, the Physic, or Metaphysicke Lectures, It teaches audacity to
the bashful Grammarian, being newly admitted into the private College, and
after matriculated and entered as a member of the University, and makes him a
bold Sophister, to argue pro et contra, to compose his Sillogismes,
Cathegoricke, or Hypotheticke (simple or compound) to reason and frame a
sufficient argument to prove his questions, or to defend any axioma, to
distinguish of any Dilemma, and be able to moderate in any Argumentation
whatsoever.

To come to Rhetoric, it not only emboldens a scholar to speak, but
instructs him to speak well, and with judgment, to observe his comma's,
colons, and full points, his parentheses, his breathing spaces, and
distinctions, to keep a decorum in his countenance, neither to frown^ when he
should smile, nor to make unseemly and disguised faces in the delivery of his
words, not to stare with his eyes, draw awry his mouth, confou^d his voice in
the hollow of his throat, or tear his words hastily betwixt his teeth, neither
to buffet his deske like a madman, nor stand in his place like a liuelesse
Image, demurely plodding, and without any smooth and ^ormal motion. It
instructs him to fit his phrases to his action, and his action to his phrase,
and his pronuntiation to them both.

Tully in his book ad Caium Herennium, requires five things in an Orator,
Invention, Disposition, Eloquuti^n Memory, and Pronuntiation, yet all are
imperfect without the sixth, which is Action: for be his inuen^ion never so
fluent and exquisite, his disposition and order never so composed and formal,
his eloquence, and elaborate phrases never so material and pithy, his memory
never so firm and retentiue, his pronuntiation never so musical and plausiue,
yet without a comely and elegant gesture, a gracious and a bewitching kind of
action, a natural and a familiar motion of the head, the hand, the body, and a
moderate and fit countenance suitable to all the rest, I hold all the rest as
nothing. A delivery and sweet actio^ is the gloss and beauty of any discourse
that belongs to a scholar. And this is the action behoouefull in any that
profess this quality, not to use any impudent or forced motion in any part of
the body, no rough, or other violent gesture, nor on the contrary, to stand
like a stiff starcht man, but to qualify every thing according to the nature
of the person personated: for in oueracting tricks, and toyling too much in
the anticke habit of humors, men of the ripest desert, greatest opinions, and
best reputations, may break into the most violent absurdities. I take not upon
me to teach, but to advise: for it becomes my Iuniority rather to be pupild my
self, then to instruct others.

To proceed, and to look into those men that profess themselves adversaries
to this quality, they are none of the grauest, and most ancient Doctors of the
Academy, but only a sort of finde-faults, such as interest their prodigal
tongues in all men's affairs without respect. These I have heard as liberally
in their superficial censures, tax the exercises performed in their
Colleges, as these acted on our public stages, not looking into the true and
direct use of either, but ambitiously preferring their own presumptuous
humors, before the profound and authentical judgments of all the learned
Doctors of the University. Thus you see, that touching the antiquity of Actors
and Acting, they have not been new lately begot by any vpstart invention, but
I have derived them from the first Olimpiads, and I shall continue the use of
them even till this present age. And so much touching their antiquity.

Pars superest coepti: pars est exhausta laboris. The end of the first Book.
OF ACTORS, AND their ancient Dignity.
THE SECOND BOOK.
JULIUS CAESAR, the famous Conqueror, discoursing with Marcus Cicero, the as
famous Orator, amongst many other matters debated, It pleased the Emperor to
ask his opinion of the Histriones, the players of Rome, pretending some cauell
against them, as men whose employment in the Commonweal was unnecessary: to
whom Cicero answered thus: Content thee Caesar, there be many heads busied and
bewitched with these pastimes now in Rome, which otherwise would be inquisitiue
after thee and thy greatness. Which answer, how sufficiently the Emperor
approved, may be coniectured by the many gifts bestowed, and privileges and
Charters after granted to men of that quality. Such was likewise the opinion of
a great statesman of this la^d, about the time that certain books were called
in question. Doubtless there be many men of that temper, who were they not
carried away, and weaned from their own corrupt and bad disposition, and by
accidental means removed and altered from their dangerous and sullen
intendments, would be found apt and prone to many notorious and traiterous
practices. Kings and Monarchs are by God placed and inthroaned supra nos,
above us, and we are to regard them as the Sun from whom we receive the light
to live under, whose beauty and brightness we may only admire, not meddle
with: Ne ludamus cum Dijs, they that shoot at the st^^res over their heads,
their arrows ^all directly down and wound themselves. But this allusion may
be better referred to the use of action promised i^ ou^ third Treatise. Then
to their Dignity, which next and immediately (by Gods grace) our purpose is to
handle.

The word Tragedy, is derived from the Greek word (...), Caper a goat, because
the goat being a beast most iniuri^us to ^he vines, was sacrificed to Bacchus:
Here upon (...) writes, that Tragedies had their first names from the oblations
due to Bacchus; or else of (...), a kind of painting, which the Tragedians of
the old time used to stayne their faces with. By the censure of Horace, Thespis
was the first Tragic writer.

Ignotum Tragic^ genus invenisse Camenae
Dicitur, (...)
and plaustris vexisse po^mata Thespis.
The unknown T^agicke Muse Thespis first sought,
And her high Po^ms in her Chariot brought.
This Thespis was an Athenian Poet, borne in Thespina, a free town in Boetia
by Helicon, of him the nine Muses were called Thespiades. But by the censure of
Quintilian, Aeschiles was before him, but after them Sophocles and Eurip^des
clothed their Tragedies in better ornament. Poltd. Virgil.
Liuius Andronicus was the first that writ any Roman Tragedy, in which kind of
poesy A^cius, Pacuvius, Seneca, and Ouidius excelled.

Sceptra tamen sumpsi curaque Tragedia nostra,
Creuit, (...)
at huic operi quamlibet aptus eram.
The sceptred Tragedy then proou'd our wit,
And to that work we found us apt and fit.
Again, in his fifth Book de tristibus Eleg. 8.

Carmen quod vestro saltarinostra Theatro
Versibus and plaudiscribis (amice) meis.
Dear friend thou writ'st our Muse is amongst you song,
And in your Theaters with plaudits r^ng.
Likewise in his Epistle to Augustus, writ from the ponticke Island, whither he
was banished.

Et ded^mus tragicis scriptum regale Cothurnis,
Quaeque grauis debet verba Cothurnus habet.
With royal style speaks our Cothurnate Muse,
A buskind phrase in buskined plays we use.
The word Comedy is derived from the Greek word (...) a street, and (...),
Cantus, a song, a street song, as signifying there was ever mirth in those
streets where Comedies most florisht.

Haec paces habuere bonae ventique secundi. In this kind Aristophanes,
E^p^lis, Cratinus were famous^ after them Menander and Philemon: succeeding
them Cicilius, Neuius, Plautus and Terentius.

Musaque Turani tragicis in^ixa Cothurnis
Et tua cum socco, Musa, Melisse leuis.
Turanus tragic buskin graced the Play,
Melissa'es Comicke shoe made lighter way.
The ancient Histriographers write, Alex. Metapol.
that among the Greeks there were diverse places of exercises, appointed for
Poets, some at the grave of Theseus, others at Helicon, where they in Comedies
and Tragedies contended for several prises, where S^p^ocles was aiudged victor
over Aeschilus: There were others in the City of Elis, where Menander was
foiled by Philomene. In the same kind Hesiod is said to have triumphed over
Homer. So Corinna for her excellencies in these inventions, (called
Muscalyrica) excelled Pindarus the Theban Poet, for which she was five times
crowned with garlands.

The first public Theater was by Dionysius built in Athens, Theaters.
it was fashioned in the manner of a semicircle, or halfe-moone, whose
galleries and degrees were reared from the ground, their stairs high, in the
midst of which did arise the stage, beside, such a convenient distance from the
earth, that the audience assembled might easily behold the whole project
without impediment. From this the Romans had their first pattern, which at
the first not being roof't, but lying open to all weathers, Quintus Catulus was
the first that caused the outside to be covered with linen cloth, and the
inside to be hung round with Curtens of silk. But when Marcus Scaurus was
A^dilis, he repaired it, and supported it round with pillars of Marble.

Caius Curio, at the solemn obsequies of his father, erected a famous Theater
of Timber, in so strange a form, that on two several stages, two sundry
plays might be acted at once, and yet the one be no hinderance or impediment
to the other; and when he so pleased the whole frame was artificially composed
to meet in the midst, which made an Amphi-theater.

Pompey the great, after his victories against Methridates, King of Pontus, saw
in the City Mitelene a Theater of another form, and after his triumphs and
return to Rome, he raised one after the same pattern, of free stone, of that
vastness and receipt, that within his spaciousness it was able at once to
receive fourscore thousand people, every one to sit, see and hear.

In emulation of this sumptuous and gorgious building Julius Caesar, successor
to Pompeyes greatness, exceeded him in his famous Architecture, he raised an
Amphitheater, Campo Martio, in the field of Mars, which as far excelled
Pompeyes, as Pompeyes did exceed Caius Curioes, Curioes that of Marcus Scaurus,
Scaurus that of Quintus Catulus, or Catulus that which was first made in Athens
by Dionysius: for the Basses, Columns, Pillars, and Pyramides were all of
hewed Marble, the couerings of the stage, which we call the heavens (where
upon any occasion their Gods descended) were Geometrically supported by a
Giant-like Atlas, whom the Poets for his Astrology, feign to bear heaven on
his shoulders, in which an artificial Sun and Moon of extraordinary aspect
and brightness had their diurnall, and nocturnall motions; so had the stars
their true and celestial course; so had the spheres, which in their
continual motion made a most sweet and rauishing harmony: Here were the
Elements and planets in their degrees, the sky of the Moon, the sky of
Mercury, Venus, Sol, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn; the stars, both fixed and
wandering: and above all these, the first mouer, or primum mobile, there were
the 12 signs; the lines Equinoctial and Zodiacal, the Meridian circle, or
Zenith, the Orizon circle, or Emisphere, the Zones torrid and frozen, the poles
articke and antarticke, with all other tropickes, orbs, lines, circles, the
Solstitium and all other motions of the stars, signs, and planets. In brief,
in that little compass were comprehended the perfect model of the firmament,
the whole frame of the heavens, with all grounds of Astronomicall conjecture.
From the roof grew a loouer, or turret, of an exceedding altitude, from which
an ensign of silk waued continually, Pendebant vela Theatro. But lest I waste
too much of that compendiousnesse I have promised in my discourse, in idle
descriptions, I leave you to judge the proportion of the body by the making of
this one limb, every pillar, seat, foot-post, staire, gallery, and whatsoever
else belongs to the furnishing of such a place, being in cost, substance,
form, and artificial workmanship, most suitable. The floor, stage, roof,
outside, and inside, as costly as the Pantheon or ^apitols. In the principal
galleries were special remote, selected and chosen seats for the Emperor,
patres conscripti, Dictators, Consuls, Pretors, Tribunes, Triumviri, Decemviri,
Ediles, Curules, and other Noble Officers among the Senators: all other rooms
were free for the plebe, or multitude. To this purpose I introduce these famous
Edifices, as wondering at their cost and state, thus intimating, that if the
quality of Acting, were (as some propose) altogether unworthy, why for the
special practice, and memorable employment of the same, were founded so many
rare and admirable monuments: and by whom were they erected? but by the
greatest princes of their times, and the most famous and worthiest of them all,
builded by him that was the greatest Prince of the world, Julius Caesar, at
what time in his hand he grip't the universal Empire of the earth. So of
Augustus Caesar.

Inspice ludorum sumptus Auguste tuorum
Empta tibi magno --
Behold Augustus the great pomp and state
Of these thy Plays paid dear for, at hye rate.
(...) tu sp^ctasti spectandaque sepe d^disti.
And could any inferior quality be more worthily esteemed or noblier graced,
then to have Princes of such magnificence and state to bestow on them places of
such port and countenance, had they been never well regarded, they had been
never so sufficiently provided for, nor would such worthy princes have striued
who should (by their greatest expense and provision) have done them the amplest
dignity, had they not with incredible favor regarded the quality. I will not
trauerse this too far, least I incur some suspicion of self-love, I rather
leave it to the favorable consideration of the wise, though to the
perverseness of the ignorant, who had they any taste either of Poe^ie,
Philosophy, or Historical Antiquity, would rather stand mated at their own
impudent ignorance, then against such noble, and notable examples stand in
public defiance.

I read of a Theater built in the midst of the river Tyber, standing on pillars
and arches, the foundation wrought under water like London Bridge, the Nobles
and Ladies in their Barges and Gondelayes, landed at the very stayres of the
galleryes. After these they composed others, but differing in form from the
Theater, or Amphi-theater, and every such was called Circus, the frame
Globe-like, and merely round. Circus in ha^c exit ^lamataque palma Theatris.

And the year from the first building of Rome, five hundred threescore and
seven, what time Spurius Posthumus Albinus, and Quintus Martius Philippus, were
Consuls, Nero made one, and the noble Flaminius another; but the greatest was
founded by Tarquinius Priscus, and was called Circus maximus: In this the
Gladiators practiced, the wideness and spaciousness was such, that in it they
fought at Barriers, and many times ran at tilt. Dion records eighteen
Elephants slain at once in one Theater. More particularly to survey the rarer
Monuments of Rome, near to the Pantheon (the Temple of the Roman Gods) at the
descent from the hill Capitolinus, lies the great Forum, by which is situate
the great Amphi-theater of Tytus, first erected by Vespatian, but after (almost
ruined by fire) by the Roman Tytus rarely reedified. It is called Colliseus,
also a Cauea, which signifies a scaffold, Ammianus, lib. 29.
also Arena* a place of combat, by Siluianus and Prudentius, which name
Tertullian, Pliny, Ovid, Firmicus, and Apuleins likewise give it. It had the
title of Circus, Caula and stadium, by Suetonius, C^pitolinus and Arcadius.
Cassianus affirms these Theaters consecrated to Diana Taurica, Tertullian, to
Mars and Diana, Martial to Jupiter Latiaris, and to Stigian Pluto, whose
opinion Minutius, and Prudentius approve. The first structures were by the
Tribune Curio, Pliny. lib. 36.
which Dio, lib. 37. affirms. Vitruvius lib. 5. says, Multa Theatra, Rome
structa quotannis. Of Julius Caesar's Amphi-theater Camp^ Martio, Dio Cassius
records, Dio Cassius lib. 43.
which Augustus after patronizied, as Vi^tor remembers of them, whose charge
Sta^ilius Taurus assisted, of whom Dio speaks thus (...) etc. anno vrbis,
Dio. lib. 51
DCCXXV. Pub. Victor forgets not Circus Flaminij, Su^tonius cap 21.
and Suetonius remembers one builded by Caligul^, at Septa, whose building
Claudius at first interdicted. Ta^itus lib. 13. A mal^um.
Nero erected a magnificent Theater in the field of Mars. Suetonius lib. Ner.
12.

Publius Victor speaks further of a Castrense Theatrum, a Theater belonging to
the Camp in the Country of the Aesquiles, built by Tiberius Caesar, Pliny,
lib. 36. cap. 15.
and of Pompies Theater Pliny witnesses. The great Theater of Statilius being
in greatest use, was burnt in the time of Nero, which Xiphilinus thus speaks
of, (...). This was built in the midst of the old City, and after the
combustion repaired by Vespatian, Consulatu suo 8. whose coin of one side,
bears the express figure of his Theater, yet was it only begun by him, but
perfected by his son Tytus: Eutropius and Cassiodorus, attribute this place
soly to Titus, but Aurelius Victor gives him only the honor of the perfecting
a place so exquisitely begun: this after was repaired by Marcus Anthonius Pius,
by whose cost says Capitolinus, the Temple of Hadri^nus was repaired, and the
great The^^er reedified, which Heliogabalus, by the testimony of Lampridius,
patronized, and after the Senate of Rome, took to their protection, under the
Gordians.

Touching Theaters without Rome, Lypsius records Theatra circa Romani, extructa
passim, even in Jerusalem, Herodes magnifi^us and illustris rex non vno loco
Iudeae Amphi-theatra aedificauit, extruxit in ips^ vrbe sacra, (...) (as
Josephus says) (...). Herod a magnificent and illustrious King, not in one
place of Judea, erected Amphitheaters, but even in the holy City he built one
of greatest receipt. Also in Greece, Asia, Affricke, Spain, France: nor is
there any province in which their ancient structures do not yet remain, or
their perishing ruins are not still remembered. In Italy, ad Lyrim campaniae
Fluvium iuxta Minturnas, remains part of an ample Amphi-theater.

At Puteolis, a City by the seaside in Campania, 8 miles from Naples, one.

At Capua, a magnificent one of sollid Marble.

At Alba in Italy, one.

At O^riculum in Vmbria one.

At Verona, one most beautiful.

At Florens, one whose compass yet remains.

At Athens in Greece, one of Marble.

At Pola in Istria, by the H^driaticke sea, one described by Sebastian Serlius.

At Hyspalis in Spain, one built without the walls of the

In (...) at (...) one of squared stone, the length 3^. perches, or poles, the
breadth 2^.

At Arelate one.

At Burdegall one.

At Nemaus one, remembered by Eusebius. in Ecclesias^ica Historia.

At Lygeris one.

Another among the Heluetians.

The Ver^ne^se Theatrum Marmoreum, erected before the time of Augustus, as
Torellus Se^ayna in his description of Ver^na, records: but Cyrnicus
An^onitanus reports it built in the nine and thirtieth year of Octauian.
Carolus Sigonius re^erres it to the reign of Maximinian, Sicon. (...). Hist.
Occide^.
who says, Maximinian built Theaters in Medi^lanum Aquilea, and Brixium. The
like Cornelius Tacitus 2. Hist. remembers in Placentia, but the description of
the Verona Theater Leuinus Kersmakerus sets down. This the great King Francis
anno 1539 gave to certain Actors, who thirty days space together, represented
in the same the Acts of the Apostles, nor was i^ lawful by the Edi^t of the
King for any man to remove any stone within thirty poles of his situation,
lest they should endanger the foundation of the Theater.

The like have been in Venice, Millan, Padua. In Paris ther^ are diverse now in
use by the French Kings Comedians, as the Burgonian, and others. Others in
Massilia, in Treuers, in Magontia, in Agripina, and infinite Cities of Greece,
Thebes, Carthage, Delphos, Creet, Paph^s, Epyrus, also in the City Tydena, so
at Civil in Spain, and at Madrill, with others.

At the entertainment of the Cardinal Alphonsus, Archduke Alphonsus.
and the Infant of Spain into the Low-countryes, they were presented at
Antwerpe, with sundry pageants and plays: the King of Denmark^, father to him
that now reigns, entertained into his service, a company of English
Comedians, commended unto him by the honorable the Earl of Lei^ester: the
Duke of Brounswicke, and the Landsgraue of Hesse^ retain in their Courts
certain of ours, of the same quality. But among the Romans they were in
highest reputation: for in comparison of their plays, they never regarded any
of their solemnities, there ludifunebres, there Floralia, Cerealia, Fugalia,
Bachinalia* or Lup^rcalia.

And amongst us, Stowe.
one of our best English Chroniclers records, that when Edward the fourth would
show himself in public state to the view of the people, he repaired to his
Palace at S. Iohnes, where he accustomed to see the City Actors. And since
then, that house by the Princes free gift, has belong^d to the office of the
Revels, where our Court plays have been in late days yearly rehearsed,
perfected, and corrected before they come to the public view of the Prince and
the Nobility. Ovid speaking of the Tragic Muse, thus writes.

Venit and ingenti violenta tragedia passu,
Front com^ tor^a palla iacebat humi
Laeua manus sceptrum late regale tenebat,
Lydius apta pedum vin^ta cothurnus habet.
Then came the Tragic Muse with a proud pace,
Measuring her ^low strides with maiesticke grace.
Her long train sweepes the earth, and she does stand,
With b^skin'd leg, rough brow, and sceptred hand.
Well knew the poet what estimation she was in with Augustus, when he describes
her holding in her left hand a scepter. Now to recite some famous Actors that
lived in the preceding ages: the first Comedia^s were Cincius and Falis^us,
Cincius, Faliscus, Minutius. Prothonius. L. Attilius. Latinus. Prenestinu^.
Lucius. Ambiuius Turpi^.
the first Tragedians were Minutius, and Prothonius. Elius Donatus in his
preface to Terence his Andrea, says that in that Comedy Lucius Attilius,
Latinus Prenestinus, and Lucius Ambiuius Turpi^ were Actors: this Comedy was
dedicated to Cibil, and such were called ludi Megalenses, acted in the year
that M. Fuluius was Edilis, and Quintus Minutius Valerius, and M. Glabrio were
Curules, which were Cou^sellers and chief officers in Rom^, so called because
they customably sat in chayres of Iuory. The songs that were sung in this
Comedy were set by Fl^ccus, Flaccus.
the son of Clodius. Terence his Eunuchus or second Comedy was acted in the
year L. Posthumus, and L. Cornelius were Edil. Curules, Marcus Valerius, and
Caius Fannius Consuls. Protinus. L. Seruius.
The year from the building of Rome 291. in his Adelphi one Protinus acted,
and was highly applauded, in his H^^yra Julius Seruius. Offic. 1.
Cicero commends one Rupilius a rare Tragedian: Rupilius. Arossus. Theocrines.
I read of another called Arossus, another called Theocrines, who purchased him
a great applause in the plays called Terentini. There were other plays in
Rome, called Actia and Pythia, made in the honor of Apollo, for killing the
Dragon Python. In those one Aesopus AEsopus.
bare the praise, a man generally esteemed, who left behind him much substance,
which Clodius his son after possessed. Quae grauis Aesopus, quae doctus Rossius
egit.

Labericus Labericus.
was an excellent Poet, and a rare Actor, who writ a book of the gesture and
action to be used by the Tragedians and Comedians in performance of every part
in his native humor. Plautus himself was so inamored of the Actors in his
days, that he published many excellent and exquisite Comedies, yet extant.
Aristotle commends one Theodoretes Theodorete^.
to be the best Tragedian in his time. This in the presence of Alexander
personated Achilles, which so delighted the Emperor, that he bestowed on him
a pension of quinque mill Drachmae, five thousand Drachmaes, and every
thousand Drachmaes are twenty nine pounds, three shillings, four pence
sterling.

Rossius, whom the eloquent Orator, and excellent statesman of Rome, Marcus
Cicero, for his elegant pronuntiatio^ and formal gesture called his jewel,
had from the common Tresury of the Roman Exchequer, a daily pention allowed him
of so many Sestertij as in our coin amount to 16 pound and a mark, or
thereabouts, which yearly did arise to any noble man's revenues. So great was
the fame of this Roscius, and so good his estimation, that learned Cato made a
question whether Cicero could write better then Roscius could speak and act,
or Rosoius speak and act better then Cicero write. Many times when they had
any important orations, to be with an audible and loud voice delivered to the
people, they employed the tongue and memory of this excellent Actor, to whom
for his worth, the Senate granted such large exhibition.

-- quae peruincere voces,
Eualuere sonum referunt quem nostra Theatra,
Gorganum mugire putes n^mus aut mare Thuscum,
Tanto cum strepitu ludi spect^atur and arts.
What voice can be compared with the sound,
Our Theaters from their deep concaues send,
For their reuerberate murmures seem to drowned
The Gorgan wood when the proud winds contend.
Or when rough storms the Thuscan billows raise,
With such loud ^oy they ring our Arts and Plays.
To omit all the Doctors, Zawnyes, Pantaloones, Harlakeenes, in which the
French, but especially the Italians, have been excellent, and according to the
occasion offered to do some right to our English Actors, as Knell, Bently,
Mils, Wilson, Cross, Lanam, and others: these, since I never saw them, as
being before my time, I cannot (as an eyewitness of their desert) give them
that applause, which no doubt, they worthily merit, yet by the report of many
iuditial auditors, their performance of many parts have been so absolute, that
it were a kind of sin to drown their worths in Lethe, and not commit their
(almost forgotten) names to eternity. Here I must needs remember Tarleton, in
his time gracious with the Queen his sovereign, and in the peoples general
applause, whom succeeded VVil. Kemp, as well in the favor of her Majesty, as in
the opinion and good thoughts of the general audience. Gabriel, Singer, Pope,
Phillips, Sly, all the right I can do them, is but this, that though they be
dead, their deserts yet live in the remembrance of many. Among so many dead let
me not forget one yet alive in his time the most worthy famous, Maist^r Edward
Allen. To omit these, as also such as for diverse imperfections, may be thought
insufficient for the quality. Actors should be men picked out personable,
according to the parts they present, they should be rather scholars, that
though they cannot speak well, know how to speak, or else to have that
volubility* that they can speak well, though they understand not what, and so
both imperfections may by instructions be helped and amended: but where a good
tongue and a good conceit both fail, there can never be good actor. I also
could wish, that such as are condemned for their licentioufnesse, might by a
general consent be quite excluded our society: for as we are men that stand
in the broad eye of the world, so should our manners, gestures, and behauiours,
savor of such government and modesty, to deserve the good thoughts and reports
of all men, and to abide the sharpest censures even of those that are the
greatest opposites to the quality. Many amongst us, I know, to be of substance,
of government, of sober lives, and temperate carriages, housekeepers, and
contributary to all duties enjoined them, equally with them that are rank't
with the most bountiful; and if amongst so many of sort, there be any few
degenerate from the rest in that good demeanor, which is both requisite and
expected at their hands, let me entreat you not to censure hardly of all for
the misdeeds of some, but rather to excuse us, as Ovid does the generality of
women.

Parcite paucarum diffundere crimen in omnes,
Spectetur meritis quaeque puella suis.
For some offenders (that perhaps are few)
Spare in your thoughts to censure all the crew,
Since every breast contains a sundry spirit,
Let every one be censured as they merit.
Others there are of whom should you ask my opinion, I must refer you to this,
Consule Theatrum. Here I might take fit opportunity to reckon up all our
English writers, and compare them with the Greek, French, Italian, and Latin
Poets, not only in their Pastoral, Historical, Elegeicall, and Heroical^
Po^ms, but in their Tragical, and Comical subjects, but it was my chance to
happen on the like learnedly done by an approved good scholar, in a book
called Wits Comon-wealth, to which treatise I wholly refer you, returning to
our present subject. Julius Caesar himself for his pleasure became an Actor,
being in shape, state, voice, judgment, and all other occurrents, exterior and
interior excellent. Amongst many other parts acted by him in person, it is
recorded of him, that with general applause in his own Theater he played
Hercules Fure^s, and amongst many other arguments of his compleatnesse,
excellence, and extraordinary care in his action, it is thus reported of him:
Being in the depth of a passion, one of his servants (as his part then fell
out) presenting Lychas, who before had from Deianeira brought him the poisoned
shirt, dipped in the blood of the Centaure Nessus: he in the midst of his
torture and fury, finding this Lychas hid in a remote corner (appointed him to
creep into of purpose) although he was, as our Tragedians use, but seemingly to
kill him by some false imagined wound, yet was Caesar so extremely carried away
with the violence of his practiced fury, and by the perfect shape of the
madness of Hercules, to which he had fashioned all his active spirits, that he
slew him dead at his foot, and after swoong him terque quaterque (as the Poet
says) about his head. It was the manner of their Emperors, in those days, in
their public Tragedies to choose out the fittest amongst such, as for capital
offenses were condemned to dye, and employ them in such parts as were to be
killed in the Tragedy, wh^^ of themselves would make suit rather so to dye with
resolution, and by the hands of such princely Actors, then otherwise to suffer
a shameful and most detestable end. And these were Tragedies naturally
performed. And such Caius Caligula, Claudius Nero, Vitellius, Domitianus,
Co^modus, and other Emperors of Rome, upon their festiuals and holy days of
greatest consecration, used to act. Therefore M. Kid in the Spanish Tragedy,
upon occasion presenting it self, thus writes.

Why Nero thought it no disparagement,
And Kings and Emperors have taken delight,
To make experience of their wits in plays.
These exercises, as traditions* have been since (though in better manner)
continued through all ages, amongst all the noblest Nations of the earth. But I
have promised to be altogether compendious, presuming that what before is
discourst, may for the practice of plays, their Antiquity, and Dignity be
altogether sufficient. I omit the shows and ceremonies even in these times
generally used amongst the Catholics, in which by the Churchmen and (...)
religious, diverse pageants, as of the Nativity, Passion, and Ascension, with
other Historical places of the Bible, are at diverse times and seasons of the
year usually celebrated; sed haec pre^er me. In the year of the world 4207.
of Christ 246. Origin writ certain godly Epistles to Philip* then Emperor of
Rome, who was the first Christian Emperor, and in his life I read, that in
the fourth year of his reign, which was the 1000. year after the building of
Rome, he solemnized that year, as a Iubilee with sumptuous pageants and
plays. Homer, the most excellent of all Poets, composed his Illiads in the
shape of a Tragedy, his Odisseas like a Comedy. Virgil in the first of his
Aeneiads, in his description of Didoes Carthage.

-- hic alta Theatris
Fundamenta locant alij immanesque Columnas,
Rup^bus excidunt scenis decora alta futuris.
Which proves, that in those days immediately after the ruin of Troy, when
Carthage had her first foundation, they built Theaters with stately columns of
stone, as in his description may appear. I have sufficiently discourst of the
first Theaters, and in whose times they were erected, even till the reign of
Julius Caesar, the first Emperor, and how they continued in their glory from
him till the reign of Marcus Aurelius the 23 Emperor, and from him even to
these times. Now to prove they were in as high estimation at La^edemo^, and
Athens two the most famous Cities of Greece. Cicero in his book Cato mayor,
seu de (...). Cum Athenis ludis quidam grandis natu in Theat^^m venisset, etc.
An ancient Citizen coming into one of the Athenian Theaters to see the
pastimes there solemnized (which shows that the most ancient and grave
frequented them) by reason of the throng, no man gave him place or reverence:
but the same Citizen being implyo'd in an Embassy to Lacedemon, and coming like
a private man into the Theater, the general multitude arose at once, and with
great ceremonious reverence gave his age place. This Cicero alleges to prove
the reverence due to age, and this I may ^itly introduce to the approbation of
my present subject. Moreover, this great Statesman of Rome, at whose exile
twenty thousand of the chiefest Roman Citizens wore mourning apparel,
oftentimes commends Plautus, calling him Plautus noster, and Atticorum antiqua
Comedia, where he proceeds further to extol. Aesopus, for personating Ajax,
and the famous Actor Rupilius, in Epigonus, Med^a, Menalip, Clytemnestra and
A^tiopa, proceeding in the same place with this worthy and grave sentence, Ergo
Histrio hoc videbi^ in scena, quod non videbit sapiens in vita? shall a
Tragedian see that in his Scen^ which a wise man cannot see in the course of
his life? So in another of his works, amongst many instructions to his son
Marcus, he applauds Turpio Ambinius for his action, Statius, Neuius, and
Plautus for their writing. Ovid in Augustum.

Luminibusque tuis totus quibus vtitur orbis,
Scenica vidisti lusus adulteria.
Those eyes with which you all the world suruay,
See in your Theaters our Actors play.
Augustus Caesar, because he would have some memory of his love to those places
of pastime, reared in Rome two stately Obelisci, or Pyramides, one in Julius
Caesar's Temple in the field of Mars, another in the great Theater, called
C^^cus Maximus, built by Flaminius: these were in height an hundred cubits a
piece, in breadth four cubits, they were first raised by King Pheron in the
Temple of the Sun, and after removed to Rome by Augustus: the occasion of
their first composu^e was this: Pheron for some great crime, committed by him
in his youth against the Gods, was by them struck blind, and so continued the
space of ten years: but after by a revelation in the City Bucis, it was told,
that if he washed his eyes in the water of a woman that was chaste, and never
adulterately touched with any save her husband, he should again recover his
sight: the King first tried his wife, then many other of the most grave and
best reputed matrons, but continued still in despair, till at length he met
with one virtuous Lady, by whose chastity his ^ight was restored; whom (having
first commanded his Queen and the rest to be consumed with fire) he after
married. Pheron in memory of this, builded his two Pyramides, after removed to
Rome by AUGUSTUS.

Sanctaque maiestas and erat venerabile nomen*
Vatibus --
The end of the second Book.
OF ACTORS, AND the true use of their quality.
THE THIRD BOOK.
TRagedies and Comedies, says Donatus, ^ad their beginning a rebus diuinis,
from divine sacrifices, they differ thus: In Comedies, turbulenta prima,
tranquilla vltima, In Tragedyes, tranquilla prima, turbulenta vltima, Comedies
begin in trouble, and end in peace; Tragedies begin in calmes, and and in
tempest. Of Comedies there be three kinds, moving Comedies, called Mot^riae,
standing Comedies, called Statariae, or mixed betwixt both, called Mistae: they
are distributed into four parts, the Prologue, that is, the preface; the
Protasis, that is, the proposition, which includes the first Act, and presents
the Actors; the Epitasis, which is the business and body of the Comedy; the
last the Catastrophe, and conclusion: the deffinition of the Comedy, according
to the Latins: a dicourse consisting of diverse institutions, comprehending
civil and domesticke things, in which is taught, what in our lives and manners
is to be followed, what to be avoided, the Greeks define it thus: (...).
Cicer^ says, a Comedy is the imitation of life, the glass of custom, and the
image of truth, in Athens they had their first original. The ancient Comedians
used to attire their actors thus: the old men in white, as the most ancient of
all, the young men in party-colored garments, to note their diversity of
thoughts, their slaves and servants in thin and bare vesture, either to note
their poverty, or that they might run the more lighter about their affairs:
their Parrasites wore robes that were turned in, and intricately wrapped about
them; the fortunate in white, the discontented in decayed vesture, or garments,
grown out of fashion; the rich in purple, the poor in crimson, soldiers wore
purple iackets, handmaids the habits of strange virgins, bawds, pide coats,
and Curtezans, garments of the color of mud, to denote their covetousness:
the stages were hung with rich Arras, which was first brought from King Attalus
into Rome: his state-hangings were so costly, that from him all Tapestries, and
rich Arras were called Attalia. This being a thing ancient as I have proved it,
next of dignity, as many arguments have confirmed it, and now even in these
days by the best, without exception, favorably tolerated, why should I yield
my censure, grounded on such firm and established sufficiency, to any Tower,
founded on sand, any castle built in the air, or any triuiall vpstart, and
mere imaginary opinion.

Oderunt Hilarem tristes tristemque iocosi. I hope there is no man of so
insensible a spirit, that can inueigh against the true and direct use of this
quality: Oh but say they, the Romans in their time, and some in these days
have abused it, and therefore we volly out our exclamations against the use. Oh
shallow! Because such a man had his house burnt, we shall quite condemn the
use of fire, because one man quaft poison, we must so* bear to drink, because
some have been shipwrak't, no man shall hereafter traffic by sea. Then I may
as well argue thus: he cut his finger, therefore must I wear no knife, vond
man fell from his horse, therefore must I travel a foot; that man surfeited,
therefore dare not I eat. What can appear more absurd then such a gross and
senseless assertion? I could turn this vnpoynted weapon against his breast
that aims it at mine, and reason thus: Roscius had a large pension allowed him
by the ^enate of Rome, why should not an Actor of the like desert, have the
like allowance now? or this, the most famous City and Nation in the world h^ld
plays in great admiration: Ergo, but it is a rule in Logic, Exparticu^aribus
nih^l fit. These are not the Basses we must build upon, nor the columns that
must support our architecture.

Et l^tro, and cautus, precingitur ense viator.
Ille sed insid^ (...), ^ic ^ibi portat opem.
Both thieves and true-men, weapons wear alike*
The One to defend, the other comes to strike.
Let us use fire to warm us, not to scortch us, to make ready our necessaries,
not to burn our houses: let us drink to quench our thirst, not to surfeit; and
eat to satisfy nature, not to gormondize.

-- Comediarecta si mente legatur,
Constabit null^ posse nocere --
Plays are in use as they are understood,
Spectators eyes may make them bad or good.
Shall we condemn a generallity for any one particular misconstruction? give
me then leave to argue thus: Amongst Kings have there not been some tyrants?
yet the office of a King is the image of the Majesty of God. Amongst true
subjects have there not crept in some false traitors? even amongst the twelve
there was one ^udas, but shall we for his fault, censure worse of the eleven?
God forbid: art thou Prince or Peasant? art thou of the Nobility, or
Commonalty? Art thou merchant or Soldier? of the City or Country? Art thou
Preacher or Auditor? Art thou Tutor or Pupil? There have been of thy function
bad and good, profane and holy. I induce these instances to confirm this
common argument, that the use of any general thing is not for any one
particular abuse to be condemned: for if that assertion stood firm, we should
run into many notable inconveniences.

Qui locus est templi^ angustior hau^ quoque vitet,
In culpam si qua est ingeniosa sua^.
To proceed to the matter: First, playing is an ornament to the City, which
strangers of all Nations, repairing hither, report of in their Countries,
beholding them here with some admiration: for what variety of entertainment can
there be in any City of Christendom, more then in London? But some will say,
this dish might be very well spared out of the banquet: to him I answer,
Diogenes* that used too seed on roots, cannot relish a March-pane. Secondly,
our English tongue, which has been the most harsh, uneven, and broken language
of the world, part Dutch, part Irish, Saxon, Scotch, Welsh, and indeed a
gallimaffry of many, but perfect in none, is now by this secondary means of
playing, continually refined, every writer striving in himself to add a new
flourish unto it; so that in process, from the most rude and unpolished tongue,
it is grown to a most perfect and composed language, and many excellent
workers, and elaborate Poems writ in the same, that many Nations grow inamored
of our tongue (before despised.) Neither Saphicke, Ionicke, Iambicke,
Phaleuticke, Adonicke, Gliconicke, Hexamiter, T^tramitrer, Pentamiter,
Asclepediacke, Choriambicke, nor any other measured verse used amongst the
Greeks, Latins, Italians* French, Dutch, or Spanish writers, but may be
expressed in English, be it in blanke verse, or meeter, in Distichon, or
Hexastichon, or in what form or feet, or what number you can desire. Thus you
see to what excellency our refined English is brought, that in these days we
are ashamed of that Euphony and eloquence which within these 60 years, the
best tongues in the land were proud to pronounce. Thirdly, plays have made the
ignorant more apprehensiue, taught the unlearned the knowledge of many famous
histories, instructed such as cannot read in the discovery of all our English
Chronicles: and what man have you now of that weak capacity, that cannot
discourse of any notable thing recorded even from William the Conqueror, nay
from the landing of Brute, until this day, being possessed of their true use,
For, or because Plays are writ with this aim, and carried with this method,
to teach the subjects obedience to their King, to show the people the untimely
ends of such as have moved tumults, commotions, and insurrections, to present
the^ with the flourishing estate of such as live in obedience, Use of Tragedies.
exhorting them to allegiance, dehorting them from all traiterous and
fellonious stratagems.

Omne genus scripti grauitate Tragedia vin^it. If we present a Tragedy, we
include the fatal and abortiue ends of such as commit notorious murders, Use
of Historical plays.
which is aggrauated and acted with all the Art that may be, to terrify men
from the like abhorred practices. If we present a foreign History, the
subject is so intended, that in the lives of Romans, Grecians, or others,
either the virtues of our Countrymen are extolled, or their vices reproved, as
thus, by the example of Caesar to stir soldiers to valor, and magnanimity: by
the fall of Pompey, that no man trust in his own strength: we present
Alexander, killing his friend in his rage, to reprove rashness: Mydas, choked
with his gold, to tax covetousness: Nero against tyranny: Sardanapalus,
against luxury: Nynus, against ambition, with infinite others, by sundry
instances, either animating men to noble attempts, Use of Morals.
or attaching the consciences of the spectators, finding themselves touched in
presenting the vices of others. If a moral, it is to persuade men to humanity
and good life, to instruct them in ciuility and good manners, showing them the
fruits of honesty, Use of Comedyes.
and the end of villainy.

Versibus exponi Tragicis res Comica non vult.
Again, Horace, Art Poetica.
Et nostri proavi Plautinos and numeros et
Laudavere sales --
If a Comedy, it is pleasantly contrived with merry accidents, and intermixed
with apt and witty jests, to present before the Prince at certain times of
solemnity, or else merrily fitted to the stage. And what is then the subject of
this harmless mirth? either in the shape of a Clown, to show others their
slouenly and unhandsome behavior, that they may reform that simplicity in
themselves, which others make their sport, lest they happen to become the like
subject of general scorn to an auditory, else it intreates of love, deriding
foolish inamorates, who spend their ages, their spirits, nay themselves, in the
servile and ridiculous employments of their Mistresses: and these are mingled
with sportfull accidents, to recreate such as of themselves are wholly devoted
to Melancholy, which corrupts the blood: or to refresh such weary spirits as
are tired with labor, or study, to moderate the cares and heaviness of the
mind, that they may return to their trades and faculties with more zeal and
earnestness, after some small soft and pleasant retirement. Sometimes they
discourse of Pantaloones, Usurers that have unthrifty sons, which both the
fathers and sons may behold to their instructions: sometimes of Curtesans, to
diuulge their subtelties and snares, in which young men may be entangled,
showing them the means to avoid them. If we present a Pastoral, Use of
Pastorals.
we show the harmless love of Sheepheards diversely moralized, distinguishing
betwixt the craft of the City, and the innocence of the sheep-coat. Briefly,
there is neither Tragedy, History, Comedy, Morral or Pastoral, from which an
infinite use cannot be gathered. I speak not in the defense of any lascivious
shows, scurrelous ieasts, or scandalous inuectiues: If there be any such, I
banish them quite from my patronage; yet Horace, Sermon 1. Satyr 4. thus writes.

Eupolis atque Cratinus Aristophanesque Poetae,
Atque alij quorum Comaedia prisca virorum est:
Si quis erat dignus describi, quod malus, aut fur,
Quod Maechus foret, aut sicarius, aut alioqui,
Famosus, multa cum liberate notabunt.
Eupolis, Cratinus, Aristophanes, and other Comike Poets in ^he time of Horace,
with large scope, and unbridled liberty boldly and plainly scourged all such
abuses as in their ages were generally practiced, to the staining and
blemishing of a fair and beautiful Commonweal. Likewise, a learned
Gentleman in his Apology for Poetry, speaks thus: Tragedies well handled be a
most w^rthy kind of Poesy. Comedies make men see and shame at their faults,
and proceeding further amongst other Vniuersity-playes, he remembers the
Tragedy of Richard the third, acted in Saint John's in Cambridge, so
essentially, that had the tyrant Phaleris ^eheld his bloody proceedings, it had
mollified his heart, and made him relent at sight of his inhumane massacres.
Further, he commends of Comedies, the Cambridge Pedantius, and the Oxford
Bellum Grammaticale; and leaving them passes on to our public plays,
speaking liberally in their praise, and what commendable use may be gathered
of them. If you peruse Margarita Poetica, you may see what excellent uses and
sentences he has gathered out of T^rence his Andrea, Euenuchus, and the rest.
Likewise out of Pl^utus his Amphi^rio, Asinaria, and moreover, Ex Comaedijs
Philodoxis, Caroli Acret^ni: Defalsa Hip^^rita, and tristi Mer^urij, Ronsij
versellensis: Ex Comaedia Philanira Vgolini parmensis, all reverend scholars,
and Comicke Poets, read el^e the 4 Tragedies, Philunica, Petrus, Aman,
Katherina, Cla^dij R^iletti Beluensis: But I should tire my self to reckon the
names of all French, Roman, German, Spanish, Italian, and English Poets, being
in number infinite, and their labors extant to approve their worthiness.

Is thy mind Noble? and would thou be further stirred up to magnanimity?
Behold, upon the stage thou may see Hercules, Achilles, Alexander, Caesar,
Alcib^ades, Lys^nder, Sertorius, Haniball, Antigonus, Phillip of Ma^ed (...),
Methridates of Pontus, Pyrrhus of Epir^, Age^laus among the Lacedaemonians,
Epaminond^s, amongst the Th^hans: Sceuola alone entering the armed tents of
Porsenna: Horatius Cho^^es alone withstanding the whole army of the He^rurian*
Leonides of Sparta, choosing a Lion to lead a band of Dee^^, rather then one
Dear to conduct an army of Lions, with infinite others in their own persons
qualities, and shapes, animating thee with courage, deterring thee from
cowardice. Have thou of thy Country well deserved? and art thou of thy labor
evil requited? to associate thee thou may see the valiant Roman Marcellus
pursue Hannibal at Nola, conquering Syracusa, vanquishing the Gauls, all Padua,
and presently (for his reward) banished his Country into Greece. There thou
may see Scipio Affricanus, now triumphing for the conquest of all Africa,
and immediately exiled the confines of Romania. Art thou inclined to lust?
behold the falls of the Tarquins, in the rape of Lucrece: the guerdon of
luxury in the death of Sardanapalus: Appius destroyed in the rauishing of
Virginia, and the destruction of Troy in the lust of Helena. Art thou proud?
our Scene presents thee with the fall of Phaeton, Narcissus pining in the love
of his shadow, ambitious Hamon, now calling himself a God, and by and by
thrust headlong among the Devils. We present men with the ugliness of their
vices, to make them the more to abhor them, as the Persians use, who above
all sins, loathing drunkenness, accustomed in their solemn feasts, to make
their servants and captives extremely overcome with wine, and then call their
children to view their nasty and loathsome behavior, making them hate that sin
in themselves, which showed so gross and abominable in others. The like use
may be gathered of the drunkards so naturally imitated in our plays, to the
applause of the Actor, content of the auditory, and reproving of the vice. Art
thou covetous? go no further then Plautus his Comedy called Euclio.

Dum fallax servus, durus pater, improba lena
Vixerit, and meretrixblanda, Menandros erit.
While there is false servant, or obdurate sire,
Sly baud, smooth whore, Menandros we will admire.
To end in a word. Art thou addicted to prodigallity? envy? cruelty? perjury?
flattery? or rage? our Scenes afford thee store of men to shape your lives by,
who be frugall, loving, gentle, trusty, without soothing, and in all things
temperate. Would thou be honorable? just, friendly, moderate, devout,
merciful, and loving concord? thou may see many of their fates and ruins,
who have been dishonorable, iniust, ^alse, gluttenous, sacrilegious,
bloudy-minded, and brochers of dissension. Women likewise that are chaste, are
by us extolled, and encouraged in their virtues, being instanced by Diana,
Belphebe, Matilda, Lucrece and the Countess of Salisbury. The unchaste are by
us showed their errors, in the persons of Phrin^, Lais, ^hais, Flora: and
amongst us, Rosamond, and Mistress Shore. What can sooner print modesty in the
souls of the wanton, then by discovering unto them the monstrousness of their
sin? It follows that we prove these exercises to have bee^e the discouerers of
many notorious murders, long concealed from the eyes of the world. To omit all
farre-fetcht instances, we will prove it by a domestike, and home-borne truth,
which within these few years happened. A strange accident happening at a play.
At Lin in Norfolk, the then Earl of Sussex players acting the old History of
Friar Francis, and presenting a woman, who insatiately doting on a young
gentleman, had (the more securely to enjoy his affection) mischieuously and
seceretly murdered her husband, whose ghost haunted her, and at diverse times in
her most solitary and private contemplations, in most horrid and fearful
shapes, appeared, and stood before her. As this was acted, a townes-woman (till
then of good estimation and report) finding her conscience (at this presenment)
extremely troubled, suddenly skritched and cried out Oh my husband, my husband!
I see the ghost of my husband fiercely threatening and menacing me. At which
shrill and vexpected outcry, the people about her, moved to a strange
amazement, inquired the reason of her clamor, when presently vn-urged, she
told them, that seven years ago, she, to be possessed of such a Gentleman
(meaning him) had poisoned her husband, whose fearful image personated it
self in the shape of that ghost: whereupon the murdresse was apprehended,
before the Justices further examined, and by her voluntary confession after
condemned. That this is true, as well by the report of the Actors as the
records of the Town, there are many eyewitnesses of this accident yet living,
vocally to confirm it.

As strange an accident happened to a company of the same quality some 12
years ago* or not so much, A strange accident happening at a play.
who playing late in the night at a place called Perin in Cornwall, certain
Spaniards were landed the same night unsuspected, and undiscovered, with intent
to take in the town, spoil and burn it, when suddenly, even upon their
entrance, the players (ignorant as the townes-men of any such attempt)
presenting a battle on the stage with their drum and trumpets struck up a loud
alarm: which the enemy hearing, and fearing they were discovered, amazedly
retired, made some few idle shot in a brauado, and so in a hurly-burly fled
disorderly to their boats. At the report of this tumult, the townes-men were
immediately armed, and pursued them to the sea, praising God for their happy
deliverance from so great a danger, who by his providence made these strangers
the instrument and secondary means of their escape from such imminent
mischife, and the tyranny of so remorcelesse an enemy.

Another of the like wonder happened at Amsterdam in Holland, A strange
accident happening at a play.
a company of our English Comedians (well known) traveling those Countries,
as they were before the Burgers and other the chief inhabitants, acting the
last part of the 4 sons of Aymon, toward the last act of the history, where
penitent R^naldo* like a common labourer, lived in disguise, vowing as his last
penance, to labor and carry burdens to the structure of a goodly Church there
to be erected: whose diligence the laborers envying, since by-reason of his
stature and strength, he did usually perfect more work in a day, then a dozen
of the best, (he working for his conscience, they for their lucres.) Whereupon
by reason his industry had so much disparaged their living, conspired amongst
themselves to kill him, waiting some opportunity to find him asleep, which
they might easily do, since the forest laborers are the soundest sleepers,
and industry is the best preparatiue to rest. Having spied their opportunity,
they drove a nail into his temples, of which wou^d immediately he dyed. As the
Actors handled this, the audience might on a sudden understand an outcry, and
loud shrike in a remote gallery, and pressing about the place, they might
perceive a woman of great gravity, strangely amazed, who with a distracted and
troubled brain often sighed out these words: Oh my husband, my husband! The
play, without further interruption, proceeded; the woman was to her own house
conducted, without any apparent suspicion, every one coniecturing as their
fancies led them. In this agony she some few days languished, and on a time,
as certain of her well disposed neighbors came to comfort her, one amongst
the rest being Churchwarden, to him the Sexton posts, to tell him of a strange
thing happening him in the ripping up of a grave: see here (quoth he) what I
have found, and shows them a fair skull, with a great nail pierst quite
through the braine-pan, but we cannot conjecture to whom it should belong, nor
how long it has lain in the earth, the grave being confused, and the flesh
consumed. At the report of this accident, the woman, out of the trouble of her
afflicted conscience, discovered a former murder. For 12 years ago, by driving
that nail into that skull, being the head of her husband, she had trecherously
slain him. This being publicly confessed, she was arraigned, condemned,
adjudged, and burned. But I draw my subject to greater length then I purposed:
these therefore out of other infinites, I have collected, both for their
familiarnesse and latenesse of memory.

Thus our Antiquity we have brought from the Gr^cian^ in the time of Hercules:
from the Maced^nians in the age of Alexand^r: from the Romans long before
Julius Caesar, and since him, through the reigns of 23 Emperors succeeding,
even to Marcus Aurelius: after him they were supported by the Mantuans,
Venetians, Val^ncians, Neopolitans, the Florentines, and others: since, by the
German Princes, the Palsgraue, the Landsgraue, the Dukes of Saxony, of
Brounswicke, etc. Cardinal Al^onsus.
The Cardinal at Bruxels, has at this time in pay, a company of our English
Comedians. The French King allows certain companies in Paris, Orleans,
besides other Cities: so does the King of Spain, in Civil, Madrill, and other
provinces. But in no Country they are of that eminence that ours are: so our
most royal, and ever renouned sovereign, has licenced us in London: so did
his predecessor, the thrice virtuous virgin, Queen Elizabeth, and before her,
her sister, Queen Mary, Edward the sixth, and their father, Henry the eighth:
and before these in the tenth year of the reign of Edward the fourth, Anno
1490. John Stowe, an ancient and grave Chronicler, records (amongst other
varieties tending to the like effect) that a play was acted at a place called
Skinners well, fast by Clerken-well, which continued eight days, and was of
matter from Adam and Eve, (the first creation of the world.) The spectators
were no worse then the Royalty of England. And amongst other commendable
exercises in this place, the Company of the Skinners of London held c^^taine
yearly solemn plays. In place whereof, now in these latter days, the
wrestling, Times kept tide.
and such other pastimes have been kept, and is still held about
Bartholmew-tide. Also in the year 1390. the 14 year of the reign of Richard
the second, the 18. of July, were the like Enterludes recorded of at the same
place, which continued 3 days together, the King and Queen, and Nobility
being there present. Moreover, to this day, in diverse places of England, there
be towns that hold the privilege of their Faires, and other Charters by
yearly stageplayes, as at Manni^gtree in Suffolk, Kendall in the North, and
others. To let these pass, as things familiarly known to all men. Now to
speak of some abuse lately crept into the quality, as an inueighing against
the State, the Court, the Law, the City, and their gouernements, with the
particularizing of private men's humors (yet alive) Noblemen, and others. I
know it distastes many; neither do I any way approve it, nor dare I by any
means excuse it. The liberty which some arrogate to themselves, committing
their bitterness, and liberal inuectiues against all estates, to the mouths
of Children, supposing their iuniority to be a privilege for any railing, be
it never so violent, I could advise all such, to curb and limit this presumed
liberty within the bands of discretion and government. But wise and iuditial
Censurers, before whom such complaints shall at any time hereafter come, will
not (I hope) impute these abuses to any transgression in us, who have ever been
careful and provident to shun the like. I surcease to prosecute this any
further, lest my good meaning be (by some) misconstrued: and fearing likewise,
lest with tediousness I tire the patience of the favorable Reader, here
(though abruptly) I conclude my third and last TREATISE.

(...) To my approved good Friend, Mr. Nicholas Oaks.
THE infinite faults escaped in my book of Britains Troy, by the negligence
of the Printer, as the misquotations, mistaking of sillables, misplacing half
lines, coining of strange and never heard of words. These being without number,
when I would have taken a particular account of the Errata, the Printer
answered me, he would not publish his own disworkemanship, but rather let his
own fault lie upon the neck of the Author: and being fearful that others of
his quality, had been of the same nature, and condition, and finding you on
the contrary, so careful, and industrious, so serious and laborious to do the
Author all the rights of the press, I could not choose but gratulate your
honest endeavors with this short remembrance. Here likewise, I must
necessarily insert a manifest injury done me in that work, by taking the two
Epistles of Paris to Helen, and Helen to Paris, and printing them in a less
volume, under the name of another, which may put the world in opinion I might
steal them from him; and he to do himself right, has since published them
in his own name: but as I must acknowledge my lines not worthy his patronage,
under whom he has published them, so the Author I know much offended with M.
Iaggard (that altogether unknown to him) presumed to make so bold with his
name. These, and the like dishonesties I know you to be clear of; and I could
wish but to be the happy Author of so worthy a work as I could willingly
commit to your care and workmanship.

Yours ever THOMAS HEYWOOD.

