THE ENGLISH TRAVELLER. AS IT HAS BEEN Publicly acted at the COCKPIT In
Drury Lane: By Her Majesty's servants.

Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.

Aut prodesse solent, aut delectare --

LONDON, Printed by Robert Raworth: dwelling in Old Fish-street, near Saint
Mary Maudlins Church. 1633.

Dramatis Personae.
Geraldine. Dalauill. Two young Gentlemen. Old Wincott The husband. His Wife A
young Gentlewoman. Prudentilla Sister to the wife. Reignald A parasiticall
seruing-man. Robin A country seruing-man. Lionell A riotous Citizen. Blanda A
Whore. Scapha A Bawd. Rioter A Spend-thrift Two Gallants His Companions. Roger
the Clown Servant to Old Wincott. Two prostitutes Companions with Blanda.
Old Lionell A Merchant father to young Lionell. A Servant To Old Lionell. Old
Mr. Geraldine Father to young Geraldine. An Usurer and his man. A Gentleman
Companion with Dalauill. Besse Chambermaid to Mistress Wincott. A Tavern
Drawer. Master Ricott A Merchant. The Owner of the house, supposed to be
possessed.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL Sir HENRY APPLETON, Knight Barronet, etc.
NOBLE SIR,
FOr many reason I am induced, to present this Poem, to your favorable
acceptance; and not the least of them that alternate Love, and those frequent
courtesies which interchangably past, betwixt your self and that good old
Gentleman, mine uncle (Master Edmund Heywood) whom you pleased to grace by the
Title of Father: I must confess, I had altogether slept (my weaklines and
bashfullnesse discouraging me) had they not bin wakened and animated, by that
worthy Gentleman your friend, and my countreyman, Sir William Eluish, whom (for
his vnmerited love many ways extended toward me,) I much honor; Neither Sir,
need you to think it any vnderualuing of your worth, to undertake the
patronage of a Poem in this nature, since the like has been done by Roman
Laelius, Scipio, Mecaenas, and many other mighty Princes and Captains, Nay,
even by Augustus Caesar himself, concerning whom Ovid is thus read, Detristi:
lib. 2.

Inspice ludorum sumptus Auguste tuorum
Empta tibimagno, talia multa leges.
Haec tu spectasti, spectandaque saepe de desti
Maiestas adeo comis vbique tua est.
So highly were they respected in the most flourishing estate of the Roman
Empire; and if they have been vilefied of late by any Separisticall humorist,
(as in the now questioned Histrio-mastix) I hope by the next Term, ( Minerua
assistente) to give such satisfaction to the world, by vindicating many
particulars in that work maliciously exploded and condemned, as that no
Gentleman of quality and judgment, but shall therein receive a reasonable
satisfaction; I am loath by tediousness to grow troublesome, therefore conclude
with a grateful remembrance of my service intermixed with Miriads of zealous
wishes for your health of body, and peace of mind, with superabundance of
Earths blessings, and Heavens graces, ever remaining;

Yours most obseruant, Thomas Heywood.

To the Reader.
IF Reader thou have of this Play been an auditour? there is less apology to
be used by entreating thy patience. This Tragi-Comedy (being one reserved
amongst two hundred and twenty, in which I have had either an entire hand, or
at the least a maine finger, coming accidentally to the Press, and I having
Intelligence thereof, thought it not fit that it should pass as filius populi,
a Bastard without a Father to acknowledge it: True it is, that my Plays are
not exposed unto the world in Volumes, to bear the title of Works, (as
others) one reason is, That many of them by shifting and change of Companies,
have been negligently lost, Others of them are still retained in the hands of
some Actors, who think it against their peculiar profit to have them come in
Print, and a third, That it never was any great ambition in me, to be in this
kind Volumniously read. All that I have further to say at this time is only
this: Censure I entreat as favorably, as it is exposed to thy view freely. ever

Studious of thy Pleasure and Profit, Thomas Heywood.
The Prologue.
A Strange Play you are like to have, for know,
We use no Drum, nor Trumpet, nor Dumb show;
No Combat, Marriage, not so much to day,
As Song, Dance, Masque, to bumbaste out a Play;
Yet these all good, and still in frequent use
With our best Poets; nor is this excuse
Made by our Author, as if want of skill
Caused this defect; it is rather his self will:
Will you the reason know? There have so many
Been in that kind, that He desires not any
At this time in His Scene, no help, no strain,
Or flash that is borrowed from an others brain;
Nor speaks He this that He would have you fear it,
He only tries if once bare Lines will bear it;
Yet may't afford, so please you silent sit,
Some Mirth, some Matter, and perhaps some Wit.
THE ENGLISH TRAVELLER.
Actus primus.
Scena prima.
Enter young Geraldine and master Dalauill. Dal. OH friend, that I to mine own
Notion
Had joined but your experience; I have the
Theoricke, But you the Practicke.

Y. Ger. I perhaps, have seen what you have only read of.

Dal. There Is your happiness.
A Scholar in his study knows the stars,
Their motion and their influence, which are fixed,
And which are wandering, can decipher Seas,
And give each several Land his proper bounds;
But set him to the Compass, he is to secke,
When a plain Pilot can, direct his course
From hence unto both th'Indies; can bring back
His ship and charge, with profits quintuple.
I have read Jerusalem, and studied Rome,
Can tell in what degree each City stands,
Describe the distance of this place from that,
All this the Scale in every Map can teach,
Nay, for a need could punctually recite
The Monuments in either; but what I
Have by relation only, knowledge by travel
Which still makes up a complete Gentleman,
Proves eminent in you.

Y. Ger. I must confess,
I have seen Jerusalem and Rome, have brought
Mark from the one, from the other Testimony,
Know Spain, and France, and from their airs have snckt
A breath of every language: but no more
Of this discourse since we draw near the place
Of them we go to visit.

Enter Clown. Clo. Noble master Geraldine, worshipful master Dalauill.

Dal. I see thou still remember'st us.

Clo. Remember you, I have had so many memorandomes from the multiplicities of
your bounties, that not to remember you were to forget my self, you are both
most ingeniously and nobly welcome.


Y. Ger. And why ingeniously and nobly?


Clo. Because had I given your welcomes other attributes then I have done, the
one being a Soldier, and the other seeming a Scholar, I should have lied in
the first, and showed my self a kind of blockhead in the last.


Y. Ger. I see your wit is nimble as your tongue,
But how does all at home?

Clo. Small doings at home sir, in regard that the age of my Master corresponds
not with the youth of my Mistress, and you know cold January and lusty May
seldom meet in conjunction.


Dal. I do not think but this fellow in time may for his wit and
understanding make Almanackes?


Clo. Not so sir, you being more judicious then I, i will give you the preeminence
in that, because I see by proof you have such judgment in times and seasons.


Dal. And why in times and seasons?


Clo. Because you have so seasonably made choice, to come so just at dinner
time; you are welcome Gentlemen, i will go tell my Master of your coming.

Exit Clown.
Dal. A pleasant knave.

Y. Ger. This fellow I perceive
Is well acquainted with his Masters mind,
Oh it is a good old man.

Dal. And she a Lady.
For Beauty and for Virtue vnparraleld,
Nor can you name that thing to grace a woman
She has not in a full perfection,
Though in their years might seem disparity.
And therefore at the first, a match unfit;
Imagine but his age and government,
Withal, her modesty, and chaste respect;
Betwixt them, there is so sweet a simpathie,
As crowns a noble marriage.

Y. Ger. It Is acknowledged,
But to the worthy gentleman himself,
I am so bound in many courtesies,
That not the least, by all the expression
My Labor, or my Industry can show,
I will know how to cancel.

Dal. Oh you are modest.

Y. Ger. He studies to engrosse me to himself,
And is so wedded to my company,
He makes me stranger to my Fathers house,
Although so near a neighbor.

Dal. This approues you,
To be most nobly propertied, that from one
So exquisite in Judgment, can Attract
So affectionate an eye.

Y. Ger. Your Carracter,
I must bestow on his vnmerrited Jove,
As one that know I have it, and yet ignorant
Which way I should deserve it: Here both come.

Enter old Mr. Wincott, Wife, Prudentilla the sister, and the Clown. Winc.
Gentlemen, welcome, but what need I use
A word so common, unto such to whom
My house was never private; I expect
You should not look for such a needles phrase,
Especially you Master Geraldine,
Your Father is my neighbor, and I know you,
Even from the Cradle, then I loved your Infancy,
And since your riper growth bettered by travel;
My wife and you, in youth were play-fellowes,
And nor now be strangers; as I take it,
Not above two years different in your Age.

Wife. So much he has out stripped me.

Winc. I would have you
Think this your home, free as your Fathers house,
And to command it, as the Master on 't;
Call bouldly here, and entertain your friends,
As in your own possessions, when I see it,
I Will say you love me truly, not till then;
Oh what a happiness your Father has,
Far above me, one to inherit after him,
Where I (Heaven knows) am childlesse.

Y. Ger. That defect
Heaven has supplied in this your virtuous Wife,
Both fair, and full of all accomplishments.
My Father is a Widower, and herein
Your happiness transcends him.

Wife. Oh Master Geraldine,
Flattery in Men's an adiunct of their sex,
This Country breeds it, and for that, so far
You needed not to have trauell'd.

Y. Ger. Trueth's a word,
That should in every language relish well,
Nor have I that exceeded.

Wife. Sir, my Husband
Has took much pleasure in your strange discourse
About Jerusalem and the Holy Land;
How the new City differs from the old,
What ruins of the Temple yet remain,
And whether Sion, and those hills about,
With these Adjacent Towns and Villages,
Keep that proportioned distance as we read;
And then in Rome, of that great Piramis
Reared in the Front, on four Lions Mounted,
How many of those Idol Temples stand,
First dedicated to their Heathen gods,
Which ruined, which to better use repaired,
Of their Panthaeon, and their Capitol,
What Structures are demolish't, what remain.

Winc. And what more pleasure to an old man's ear,
That never drew, save his own Countries air,
Then hear such things related. I do exceed him
In years, I must confess, Yet he much older
Then I in his experience.

Prud. Master Geraldine,
May I be bold to ask you but one question.
The which I Would be resolved in.

Y. Ger. Any thing, that lies within my knowledge.

Winc. Put him to it,
Do Sister, you shall find him (make no doubt)
Most pregnant in his answer.

Prud. In your trauells
Through France, through Sauoye, and through Italy,
Spain, and the Empire, Greece and Palestine,
Which breeds the choycest beauties.

Y. Ger. Introath Lady^
I never cast on any in those parts
A curious eye of censure, since my Travel
Was only aimed at Language, and to know;
These past me but as common objects did,
Seen, but not much regarded.

Prud. Oh you strive
To express a most unheard of modesty,
And seldom found in any Traveler,
Especially of our Courtrey, thereby seeking
To make your self peculiar.

Y. Ger. I should be loath
Profess in outward show to be one Man,
And prove my self another.

Prud. One thing more,
Were you to marry, You that know these clymes,
Their states and their conditions, out of which
Of all these countries would you choose your wife.

Y. Ger. I Will answer you in brief, (as I observe)
Each several clime for object, fare, or use,
Affords within it self, for all of these
What is most pleasing to the man there borne;
Spain, that yields scant of food, affords the Nation
A parsimonious stomach, where our appetites
Are not content but with the large excess
Of a full table; where the pleasing'st fruits
Are found most frequent, there they best content;
Where plenty flows, it asks abundant Feasts;
For so has prou^dent Nature dealt with all;
So in the choice of Women, the Greek wantons
Comple'd beneath the Turkish slavery,
Vassaile themselves to all men, and such best
Please the voluptious, that delight in change;
The French is of one humor, Spain another,
The hot Italian he is a strain from both,
All pleased with their own nations even the Moore,
He thinks the blackest the most beautiful;
And Lady, since you so far tax my choice,
I Will thus resolve you; Being an English man,
Mong'st all these Nations I have seen or tried,
To please me best, here would I choose my bride.

Pru. And happy were that Lady, in my thoughts,
Whom you ^^^id deine that grace too.

Wife. How now Sister,
This is a fashion that is but late come up,
For maids to court their husbands.

Winc. I would wife
It were no worse, upon condition,
They had my helping hand and purse to boot,
With both in ample measure; oh this Gentleman,
I love, nay almost doat on.

Wife. Ya'ue my leave,
To give it full expression.

Winc. In these arms then,
Oh had my youth bin blessed with such a son,
To have made my estate to my name hereditary,
I should have gone contented to my grave,
As to my bed; to death, as to my sleep;
But Heaven has will in all things, once more welcome,
And you sir, for your friends sake.

Dal. Would I had in me,
That which he has, to have clam^d it for mine own,
How ever, I much thank you.

Enter Clown. Winc. Now sir, the news with you.

Clo. Dancing news sir,
For the meat stands piping hot upon the dresser,
The kitchin's in a heat and the Cook has so bestir'd himself,
That he is in a sweat. The Jack plays Music, and the Spits
Turn round to it.

Winc. This fellows my best clock,
He still strikes true to dinner.

Clo. And to supper too sir, I know not how the day goes with you, but my
stomach has struck twelve, I can assure you that.


Winc. You take us unprovided Gentlemen,
Yet something you shall find and we would rather
Give you the entertain of household guests,
Then complement of strangers, I pray enter.

Exeunt. Manet Clo. Clo. I Will stand to it, that in good hospitality, there can
be nothing found that is ill, he that is a good housekeeper, keeps a good
table, a good table, is never without good stools, good stools, seldom
without good guests, good guests, never without good cheer, good cheer,
cannot be without good stomachs, good sfomackes, without good digestion, good
digestion, keeps men in good health, and therefore all good people, that bear
good minds, as you love goodness, be sure to keep good meat and drink in
your houses, and so you shall be called good men, and nothing can come on it but
good, I warrant you.

Exit.
Actus Primus. Scena Secundus.
Enter two seruing-men Reignald and Robin. Reig. Away you Corridon.

Rob. Shall I be beat out of my Masters hou^e thus?

Reig. Thy Master, we are Lords amongst our selves,
And here we Live and Reign, Two years already
Are past of our great Empire, and we now
Write, Anno Tertio.

Rob. But the old man lives,
That shortly will depose you.

Reig. In The mean time,
I, as the mighty Lord and Seneshcall
Of this great house and castle, banish thee,
The very smell ath' kitchen, be it death,
To appear before the dresser,

Rob. And why so?

Reig. Because thou stink'st of garlike, is that breath
Agreeing with our Palace, where each Room,
Smells with Musk, Ciuit, and rich Ambergris,
Alloes, Cassia, Aromaticke-gummes,
Perfumes, and Pouders, one whose very garments
Scent of the fowlds and stables, oh fie, fie,
What a base nastie rogue it is.

Rob. Yet your fellow.

Reig. Then let us put a Cart-Horse in rich trappings.
And bring him to the Tilt-yard.

Rob. Prancke it, do,
Waste, Riot, and Consume, Mispend your Hours
In drunken Surfets, lose your days in sleep,
And burn the nights in Reuells, Drink and Drab,
Keep Christmasse all year long, and blot lean Lent
Out of the Calender; all that mass of wealth
Got by my Masters sweat and thristy care,
Havoc in prodigal uses; Make all fly,
Powr't down your oily throats, or send it smoking
Out at the tops of chimnies: At his departure,
Was it the old man's charge to have his windows
Glister all night with Stars? his modest House
Turned to a common Stews? his Beds to pallats
Of Lusts and Prostitutions? his Buttrey hatch
Now made more common then a Tauernes bar,
His Stools that welcomed none but civil guests,
Now only free for Pandars, Whores and Bawdes,
Strumpets, and such.

Reig. I suffer thee too long,
What is to me thy country, or to thee
The pleasure of our City? thou have Cowes,
Cattle, and Beeues to feed, Oues and Boues,
These that I keep, and in this pasture graze,
Are dainty Damosellaes, bonny Girls;
If thou be'st borne to Hedge, Ditch, Thrash and Plough
And I to Revel, Banquet and Carrow^e;
Thou Pessant, to the Spade and Pickaxe, I
The Battoone and Steeletto think it only
Thy ill, my good, our several lots are cast,
And both must be contented.

Rob. But when both our services are questioned.

Reig. Look thou to one,
My answer is provided.

Enter Y. Lionell. Rob. Farewell Musk-Cat.
Exit.
Reig. Adue good Cheese and Oynons, stuff thy guts
With Specke and Barley-pudding for disgestion,
Drink Whig and sour Milk, whilst I rince my Throat,
With Bordeaux and Ca^arie.

Y. Lio. What was he?

Reig. A Spy Sir,
One of their Hindes oth' country, that came prying
To see what dainty fare our kitchen yields,
What Guests we harbor, and what rule we keep,
And threats to tell the old man when he comes;
I think I sent him packing.

Y. Lio. It was well done.

Reig. A whoreson-Iack-an-apes, a base Baboone,
To insinuate in our secrets.

Y. Lio. Let such keep, the Country where their charge is.

Reig. So I said Sir.

Y. Lio. And visit us when we command them thence,
Not search into our counsels.

Reig. 'Twere not fit.

Y. Lio. Who in my fathers absence should command,
Save I his only son?

Reig. It is but justice.

Y. Lio. For am not I now Lord?

Reig. Dominus fac totum.
And am not I your Steward?

Y. Lio. Well remembered,
This night I have a purpose to be Merry,
Iouiall and Frollicke, how does our cash hold out?

Reig. The bag's still heavy.

Y. Lio. Then my heart's still light.

Reig. I can assure you, yet it is pretty deep,
Tho scarce a mile to the bottom.

Y. Lio. Let me have
to Supper, Let me see, a Ducke --

Reig. Sweet Rogue.

Y. Lio. A Capon --

Reig. Geld the Rascal.

Y Lio. Then a Turkey --

Reig. Now spit him for an Infidel.

Y. Lio. Green Plouer, Snite,
Partridge, Lark, Cock, and Phessant.

Reig. Nere a Widgin?

Y. Lio. Yes, wait thy self at Table.

Reig. Where I hope your self will not be absent.

Y. Lio. Nor my friends.

Reig. We Will have them then in plenty.

Y. Lio. Cauiare, Sturgeon, Anchoues, pickle Oysters: Yes,
And a Potato Pie; besides all these,
What thou think rare and costly.

Reig. Sir, I know
What Is to be done; the stock that must be spent,
Is in my hands, and what I have to do,
I will do suddenly.

Y. Lio. No Butchers meat,
Of that, beware in any case.

Reig. I still remember,
Your father was no Grasier, if he were,
This were a way to eat up all his Fields,
Hedges and all.

Y. Lio. You will be gone sir.

Reig. Yes, and you are in the way going.
Exit.
Y. Lio. To what may young men best compare themselves?
Better to what, then to a house new built?
The Fabric strong, the Chambers well contrived,
Polisht within, without, well beautified;
When all that gaze upon the Edifice,
Do not alone commend the workemans craft,
But either make it their fair president
By which to build another, or at least,
Wish there to inhabit: Being set to sale,
In comes a slothful Tenant, with a Family
As lasie and debosht; Rough tempests rise,
Until the roof, which by their idleness,
Left vnrepaired, the stormy showers beat in,
Rot the maine Posts and Rafters, spoil the Rooms,
Deface the Seelings, and in little space,
Bring it to utter Ruin, yet the fault,
Not in the Architector that first reared it,
But him that should repair it: So it fares
With us young men; We are those houses made,
Our Parents raise these Structures, the foundation
Laid in our Infancy; and as we grow
In years, they strive to build us by degrees,
Story on story higher; up at height,
They cover us with Council, to defend us
From storms without: they polish us within,
With Learnings, Knowledge, Arts and Diseiplines;
All that is naught and vicious, they sweep from us,
Like Dust and Cobwebs, and our Rooms concealed,
Hang with the costliest hangings; Bout the Walls,
Emblemes and beauteous Symbols pictured round;
But when that lasie Tenant, Love, steps in,
And in his Train, brings Sloth and Negligence,
Lust, Disobedience, and profuse Excess;
The Thrist with which our fathers tiled our Roofes,
Submits to every storm and Winters blast,
Enter Blanda a Whore, and Scapha a Bawd. And yielding place to every riotous
sin,
Gives way without, to ruin what is within:
Such is the state I stand in.

Blan. And how does this Tire become me?

Sca. Rather ask, how your sweet carriage,
And Court behavior, does best grace you, for Loucrs regard,
Not so much the outward habit, as that which the garment couers.

Y. Lio. Oh here is that Hail, Shower, Tempest, Storm, and Gust,
That shattered has this building; Let in Lust,
Intemperance appetite to Vice; withal,
Neglect of every Goodness; Thus I see,
How I am sincking in mine own disease,
Yet can I not abide it.

Bla. And how this Gown? I prithee view me well,
And speak with thy best Judgment.

Sca. What do you talk of Gowns, and Ornaments;
That have a Beauty, precious in it self,
And becomes any thing.

Y. Lio. Let me not live, but she speaks naught but truth,
And i will for that reward her.

Bla. All Is one to me, become they me, or not,
Or be I fair, or foul, in others eyes,
So I appear so to my Lionell,
He is the glass, in whom I judge my face,
By whom in order, I will dress these curles,
And place these Jewels, only to please him,
Why do smile.

Sca. To here a Woman, that thinks her self so wise, speak so foolishlie,
that knows well, and does ill.


Bla. Teach me wherein I err.


Sca. I Will tell thee Daughter; In that thou know thy self to be beloved of
so many, and setlest thy affection, only upon one; Does the Mill grind only,
when the Wind sits in one corner? Or Shippsonely Sail, when it is in this, or
that quarter? Is he a cunning Fencer, that lies but at one Guard? Or he a
Skillful Musician, that plays but on one String? Is there but one way to the
Wood? And but one Bucket that belongs to the Well? To affect one, and despise
all other, becomes the precise Matron, not the Prostitute; the loyal Wife, not
the loose Wanton: Such have I been, as you are now, and should learn, to
Sail with all Winds, defend all Blows, make Music with all Strings, know
all the ways, to the Wood, and like a good traveling Hackney, learn to
drink of all Waters.


Y. Lio. May I miscarry in my Blandaes love;
If I that old damnation, do not send
To Hell, before her time.

Bla. I would not have you Mother, teach me ought,
That tends to iniure him.

Sca. Well look to it when it is late, and then repent at leisure, as I have
done; Thou see, heeres nothing but Prodigallity and Pride, Wantoning, and
Wasting, Rioting, and Reuelling, Spoiling, and Spending, Gluttony, and
Gormondising, all goes to Havoc, and can this hold out? When he has nothing
left, to help himself, how can he Harbor thee? Look at length, to Drink
from a dry Bottle, and feed from an empty Knap-sacke, look too 't, 'twill
come to that.


Y. Lio. My parsemony shall begin in thee,
And instantly, for from this hour, I vow,
That thou no more shall Drink upon my cost,
Nor taste the smallest Fragment from my Board;
I Will see thee starve in the street first.

Sca. Live to one man? a jest, thou may as well, tie thy self to one Gown;
and what Fool, but will change with the Fashion, Yes, do, Confine thy self
to one Garment, and use no Variety, and see how foone it will Rot, and turn
to Rags.


Y. Lio. Those Rags, be thy Reward; Oh my sweet Blanda,
Only for Thee, I wish my Father dead,
And near to Rouse us from our Sweet delight;
But for this Hag, this Beldam, she whose back,
Has made her Items, in my Mercers Books,
Whose raucnous Guts, I have Stuffed with Delicates,
Nay even to Surfit; And whose frozen Blood,
I have Warmed with Aquauitae; Be this day
My last of Bounty, to a Wretch Ingrate,
But unto Thee, a new Indenture Scaled,
Of an affection fixed, and Permanent,
I Will love thee still, be 't but to give the lie,
To this old Cancker'd Worm.

Bla. Nay, be not angry.

Y. Lio. With thee, my Soul shall ever be at peace,
But with this love seducer, still at War.

Enter Rioter and two Gallants. Sca. Here me but speak.

Y. Lio. Open but thy lips again, it makes a way,
To have thy Tongue plucked out.

Rio. What all in Tempest?

Y. Lio. Yes, and the Storm, raised by that Witches Spells.
Oh it is a Damned Inchantresse.

Rio. What Is the business?

Bla. Only some few words, slipped her unawares,
For my Sake, make her peace.

Rio. You charge me deeply,
Come Friend, will you be Moved at women's Words,
A man of your known judgment?

Y. Lio. Had you but heard,
The damned Erroneous Doctrine that she taught,
You would have judged her to the Stake.

Bla. But Sweet heart,
She now Recants those Errors, once more Number her
Amongst your Household servants.

Rio. Shall she beg, and be denied ought from you?

Bla. Come this Kiss, Shall end all former quarells.

Rio. It Is not possible,
Those Lips should move in vain, that two ways plead;
Both in their Speech, and Silence.

Y. Lio. You have prevailed,
But upon this Condition, no way else,
I Will Sensure her, as she has Sentenced thee;
But with some small Inuersion,

Rio. Speak, how is that?

Bla. Not too severe, I prithee see poor wretch,
She at the bar, stands quaking.

Y. Lio. Now, hold up?

Rio. How man, how?

Y. Lio. Her hand, I mean; And now ^^'e (...) thee,
According to thy Council given to her:
Sail by one Wind; Thou shall, to one tune Sing,
Lie at one Guard, and Play but on one String,
Henceforth, I will Confine thee to one Garment,
And that shall be a cast one, Like thy self
Just, past all Wearing, as thou past all Use,
And not to be renewed, til't be as Ragged,
As thou art Rotten.

Bla. Nay sweet.

Y. Lio. That for her Habbit.

Sca. A cold Suit, I have on 't,

Y. Lio. To prevent Sursit,
They Diet, sha I be to one Dish confined,
And that too Rifled, with as unclean hands,
As ere were laid on thee.

Sca. What he scants me in Victuals, would he but allow once in Drink.

Y. Lio. That shall be the refuse of the Flagons, Iaoks,
And Snuffes, such as the naftieft Breathes shall leave;
Of Wine, and Strong-water, never hope,
Henceforth to Smell.

Sca. Oh me, I (...) already.

Y. Lio. If I sinc^e in my State, of all the rest,
Be thou excused, what thou proposed to her,
Beldam, is now against thy self decreed,
Drink from dry springs, from empty, Knap-sacks fe^de.

Sca. No burnt Wine, nor Hot-waters.

She Swon^ds. Y. Lio. Take her hence.

Bla. Indeed you are too cruel.

Y. Lio. Yes to her,
Only of purpose, to be kind to thee;
Are any of my Guests come?

Rio. Fear not Sir,
You will have a fill Table.

Y. Lio. What, and Music?

Rio. Best Consort in the City, for fix parts.

Y. Lio. We shall have Songs then?

Rio. Bith' ear.

Whispers. Y. Lio. And Wenches?

Rio. Yes bith' eyc.

Bla. Ha, what was that you said?

Rio. We shall have such to bear you company,
As will no doubt content you.

Y. Lio. Enter then:
In Youth there is a Fate, that swayes us still.
To know what is Good, and yet pursue what is Ill.

Exeunt ow^es. Actus Secundus.
Scena Prima.
Enter old Master Wincott, and his Wife. Winc. And what is this Dalauill?

Wife. My apprehension,
Can give him no more true expression,
Then that he first appears, a Gentleman,
And well conditioned.

Wino. That for outward show;
But what in him have you observed else,
To make him better known?

Wife. I have nor Eyes,
To search into the inward Thoughrs of Men,
Nor ever was studied in that 'Art,
To judge of Meus affection by the face;
But that which makes me best opinion'd of him,
Is, That he is Companion, and the Friend
Beloved of him, whom you so much commend,
The Noble Master Geraldine,

Winc. Thou have spoke,
That which not only crowns his true desert,
But now instates him, in my better thoughts,
Making his Worth, unquestioned.

Wife. He pretends
Love to my sister Pru. I have observed him,
Single her out, to private conference.

Winc. But I could rather, for her own sake, wish
Young Geraldine would fix his thoughts that way,
And she toward him; In such Affinity,
Trust me, I would not use a sparing hand.

Wife. But Love in these kinds, should not be compelled,
Forced, nor Persuaded; When it freely Springs,
And of it self, takes voluntary Root,
It Grows, it Spreads, it Ripens, and brings soorth,
Such an Usurious Crop of timely Fruit,
As crowns a plentious Autumn.

Enter Clown. Winc. Such a Harvest,
I should not be the vngladdest man to see,
Of all thy sisters friends: Now, whence come you?

Clo. Who, I Sir, From a Lodging of Lardgesse, a House of Hospitality, and a
Palace of Plenty; Where there is Feeding like Horses, and Drinking like Fishes;
Where for Pints, we are served in Pottles; and in stead of Pottle-pots, in
Pailes; in stead of Siluer-tanckards, we drink out of Water-tanckards; Clarret
runs as freely, as the Cocks; and Canarie, like the Conduits of a Coronation
day; Where there is nothing but Feeding and Frollicking; Caruing in Kissing;
Drinking, and Dancing; Music and Madding; Fidsing and Feasting.


Winc. And where, I pray thee, are all these Revels kept?


Clo. They may be rather called Reakes then Reuells; As I came along by the
door, I was called up amongst them; Hee-Gallants, and Shee-Gallants, I no
sooner looked out; but saw them out with their Knives, Slashing of Shoulders,
Mangling of Legs, and Lanching of Loins, till there was scarce a whole Limb
lest amongst them.


Winc. A fearful Massacre.


Clo. One was Hacking to cut off a Neck, this was Mangling a Breast, his Knife
slip from the Shoulder, and only cut of a Wing, one was picking the Brains
out of a Head, another was Knuckle deep in a Belly, one was Groping for a
Liver, another Searching for the Kidneyes; I saw one pluck the Sole from the
Body (Goose that she was to suffer't) another pricked into the Breast with his
one Bill, Woodcocke to endure it.


Wife. How fell they out at first?


Clo. I know not that, but it seems, one had a Stomach, and another had a
Stomach; But there was such biting and tearing with their teeths, that I am
sure, I saw some of their poor Carcasses pay for it.


Winc. Did they not send for Surgeons?


Clo. Alas no, Surgeons help was too late; There was no stitching up of those
Wounds, where Limb was plucked from Limb; Nor any Salve for those Scarrs,
which all the Plaster of Paris cannot Cure.


Winc. Where grew the quarrel first?


Clo. It seems it was first Broacht in the Kitchen; Certain creatures being
brought in thither, by some of the House; The Cook being a Colloricke fellow,
did so Towse them and Toss them, so Pluck them and Pull them, till he left
them as naked as my Nail, Pinioned some of them like Fellons; Cut the Spurs
from others of their Heels; Then down went his Spits, Some of them he ran
in at the Throat, and out at the Backside; About went his Basting-Ladle, where
he did so besawce them, that many a shrode turn they had amongst them.


Wife. But in all this, How did the Women escape?


Clo. They fared best, and did the least hurt that I saw; But for quietness
sake, were forced to swallow what is not yet digested, yet every one had their
share, and she that had least, I am sure by this time, has her belly full.


Winc. And where was all this havoc kept?


Clo. Marry Sir, at your next neighbors, Young Master Lionell, Where there is
nothing but Drinking out of Dry-Fats, and Healthing in Halfe-Tubs, his Guests
are fed by the Belly, and Beggars served at his Gate in Baskets; He Is the
Adamant of this Age, the Daffadill of these days, the Prince of Prodigallity,
and the very Caesar of all young Citizens.


Winc. Belike then, 'twas a Massacre of meat, not as I apprehended?


Clo. Your gravity has gest aright; The chiefest that fell in this Battle,
were wild Foul and tame Foul; Phessants were wounded in stead of Alfaresse,
and Capons for Captains, Anchoues stood for Antiants, and Cauiare for
Corporals, Dishes were assaulted in stead of Ditches, and Rabbets were cut to
pieces upon the rebellings, some lost their Legs, whilst other of their wings
were forced to fly; The Pioner vndermind nothing but Pie-crust; And --


Winc. Enough, enough, your wit has played too long upon our patience;
Wife, it grieves me much both for the young and old man, the one,
Graces his head with care, endures the parching heat and biting cold,
The terrors of the Lands, and fears at Sea in travel, only to gain
Some competent estate to leave his son;
Whiles all that Merchandise, through Gulfes, Crosse-Tides,
Pitats and Storms, he brings so far; The other
Here Shipwrackes in the Harbor.

Wife. It Is the care of Fathers; and the weakness
Incident to youth, that wants experience.

Enter Y. Geraldine, Dallauill, Prudentilla, langhing. Clo. I was at the
beginning of the Battle,
But here comes some, that it seems
Were at the rifling of the dead Carcasses;
For by their mirth, they have had part of the Spoil.

Winc. Youare pleasant, Oendemen, what (...)
Might be the Subject of your pleasant sport,
It promises some pleasure?

Prud. If their recreation
Be, as I make no question, on truth grounded,
'twill beger sudden laughter.

Wife. What Is the Project?

Dal. Who shall relate it.

Winc. Master Geraldine, if there be any thing can please my Ear,
With pleasant soundes, your Tongue must be the Instrument,
On which the Sring must strike.

Dal. Be It his then.

Prud. Nay hear it, it is a good one.

Wife We entreat you, Possess us oth' Novel,

Winc. Speak, good Sir.

Y. Ger. I shall then, with a kind of Barbarism,
Shadow a Jest, that asks a smoother Tongue,
For in my poor discourse, I doeprotest,
'twill but loose his luster.

Wife You are Modest.

Winc Howeuer speak, I pray; For my sake do it?

Clo. This is like a hasty Pudding, longer in eating then it was in making.


Y. Ger. Then thus it was, this Gentleman and I,
Past but just now, by your next Neighbors house,
Where as they say, dwells one Young Lionell.

Clo. Where I was to night at Supper.

Winc. An vnthrist Youth, his Father now at Sea.

Y. Ger. Why that is they very Subject, upon which
It seems, this Jest is grounded, there this Night,
Was a great feast.

Clo. Why so I told you, Sir.

Winc. Be thou still dumb, 'tis-hee that I would hear.

Y. Ger. In the height of their Carowsing, all their brains,
Warmed with the heat of Wine; Discourse was offered,
Of Ships, and Storms at Sea; when suddenly,
Out of his giddy wildness, one conceiues
The Room wherein they quafft, to be a Pinnace,
Moouning and Floating; and the confused Noise,
To be the murmuring Winds, Gusts, Mariners;
That their unsteadfast Footing, did proced
From rocking of the Vessel: This conceived,
Each one begins to apprehend the danger,
And to look out for safety, fly says one
Up to the Manne-top, and discourer; He
Climbes by the bed post, to the Teaster, there
Reports a Turbulent Sea and Tempest toward;
And wills them if they will save their Ship and lines,
To cast their Lading ouer-board; At this
All fall to Work, and Hoyste into the Street,
As to the Sea, What next come to their hand,
Stools, Tables, Tressels, Trenchers, Bed-steds, Cups,
Pots, Plate, and Glasses; Here a fellow Whistles,
They take him for the Boat-swaine, one lies struggling
Upon the floor, as if he swome for life,
A third, takes the Base-violl for the Cock-boate,
Sits in the belly on it, labors and Rows;
His Oar, the Stick with which the Fiddler played;
A fourth, bestrides his Fellows, thinking to escape
As did Arion, on the Dolphins back,
Still fumbling on a gitterne.

Clo. Excellent Sport.

Winc. But what was the conclusion?

Y. Ger. The rude multiude,
Watching without, and gaping for the spoil
Cast from the windows, went bith' ears about it;
The Constable is called to Atone the broyle,
Which done, and hearing such a noise within,
Of eminent Ship-racke; enters the house, and finds them
In this confusion, They Adore his staff,
And think it Neptunes Trident, and that he
Comes with his Tritons, (so they called his watch)
To calm the Tempest, and appease the Waves;
And at this point, we left them.

Clo. Come what will, i will steal out of Doors,
And see the end of it, that 'scertaine.
Exit.
Winc. Thanks Master Geraldine, for this discourse,
Introath it has much pleased me, but the night
Begins to grow fast on us, for your parts,
You are all young, and you may sit up late,
My eyes begin to summon m^e to sleep,
And nothing's more offensive unto Age,
Then to watch long and late.

Y. Ger. Now good Rest with you.

Dal. What says fair Prudentilla? Maids and Widows,
And we young Batchelors, such as indeed
Are fore'd to lie in Solitary beds,
And sleep without disturbance; we methinks,
Should desire later hours; when Married Wines,
That in their amorus arms, hug their delights;
To often wakings subject; their more have,
May better be excused.

Prud. How can you,
That are as you confess, a single man,
Enter so far into these Mystical secrets
Of Marriage, which as yet you never proved.

Dal. There Is Lady, an instinct innate in man,
Which prompts us to the apprehensions
Of th 'vses we were borne to; Such we are
Aptest to learn; Ambitious most to know,
Of which our chief is Marriage.

Prud. What you Men
Most meditate, we Women seldom dream of.

Dal. When dream Maids most?

Prud. When think you?

Dal. When you lie upon your Backs, come come, your Ear.

Exit Dal. and Prud. Y. Ger. We now are left alone.

Wife. Why say we be who should be jealous of us?
This is not first of many hundred Nights,
That we two have been private, from the first
Of our acquaintance, when our Tongues but clipped
Our Mothers-tongue, and could not speak it plain,
We knew each other; As in slatnre, so
Increast our sweet Society; Since your travel,
And my late Marriage, Through my Husbands lone,
Midnight has been as Midday, and my Bedchamber,
As free to you, as your own Fathers house,
And you as welcome too 't.

Y. Ger. I must confess,
It is in you, your Noble Courtesy,
In him, a more then common considence,
And in this Age, canscarce find president.

Wife. Most true, it is withal an Argument,
That both our virtues are so deep impressed
In his good thoughts, he knows we cannot err.

Y. Ger. A villain were he, to deceive such trust,
Or (were there one) a much worse Carracter.

Wife. And she no less, whom either Beauty, Youth,
Time, Place, or opportunity could tempt,
To iniure such a Husband.

Y. Ger. You deserve, even for his sake, to be for ever young;
And he for yours, to have his Youth reuew'd;
So mutual is your true conjugal Love; Yet had the Fates so pleased

Wife. I know your meaning,
It was once voyc'd, that we two should have Matched,
The World so thought, and many Tongues so spoke,
But Heaven has now disposed us otherwise;
And being as it is, (a thing in me,
Which I protest, was never wished, nor sought)
Now done, I not repent it.

Y. Ger. In those times,
Of all the Treasures of my Hopes and Love,
You were the Exchequer, they were Stored in you;
And had not my unfortunate Travel crossed them,
They had bin here reserved still.

Wife. Troath they had,
I should have been your trusty Treasurer.

Y. Ger. Howeuer let us Love still, I entreat:
That, Neighborhood and breeding will allow;
So much the Laws Divine and Human both,
Twixt Brother and a Sister will approve;
Heaven then forbid, that they should limit us
Wish well to one another.

Wife. If they should not,
We might proclaim, they were not Charitable,
Which were a deadly fin but to conceive.

Y. Ger. Will you resolve me one thing?

Wife. As to one, that in my Bosom has a second place, next my dear Husband.


Y. Ger. That Is the thing I crave,
And only that, to have a place next him.

Wife. Presume on that already, but perhaps,
You mean to stretch it further.

Y. Ger. Only thus far,
Your Husbands old, to whom my Soul does wish,
A Nesters age, So much he merits from me;
Yet if (as proof and Nature daily teach)
Men cannot always live, especially
Such as are old and Crazed; He be called hence,
Fairly, in full maturity of time,
And we two be reserved to after life,
Will you confer your Widow-hood on me?

Wife. You ask the thing, I was about to beg;
Your tongue has spoke mine own thoughts.

Y. Ger. Vow to that.

Wife. As I hope Mercy.

Y. Ger. It Is enough, that word
Alone, instates me happy; Now so please you,
We will divide, you to your private Chamber,
I to find out my friend.

Wife. Nay Master Geraldine, one Ceremony rests yet vnperform'd,
My Vow is past, your oath must next proceed,
And as you covet to be sure of me,
Of you I would be certain.

Y. Ger. Make ye doubt?

Wife. No doubt; but Lone's still Jealous, and in that
To be excused; You then shall swear by Heaven,
And as in all your future Acts, you hope
To thrive and prosper; As the Day may yield
Comfort, or the Night rest, as you would keep
Entire, the Honor of your Fathers house,
And free your Name from Scandal and Reproach,
By all the Goodness that you hope to enjoy,
Or ill to shun --

Y. Ger. You charge me deeply Lady.

Wife. Till that day come, you shall reserve your self
A single man; Converse nor company
With any Woman, Contract nor Combine,
With Maid, or Widow; which expected hour,
As I do wish not haste, so when it happens,
It shall not come unwelcome; You here all, Vow this.

Y. Ger. By all that you have said, I swear, and by this Kiss Confirm.


Wife. You Are now my Brother,
But then, my second Husband.

Exeunt. Enter Y. Lionell, Rioter, Blanda, Scapha, two Gallants, and two
Wenches, as newly waked from sleep. Y. Lio. We had a stormy night on it.

Bla. The Wine still works,
And with the little rest they have took to night,
They are scarce come to themselves.

Y. Lio. Now it is a Calm,
Thanks to those gentle Sea-gods, that have brought us
To this safe Harbor; Can you tell their names?

Sca. He with the Painted-staffe, I heard you call Neptune.

Y. Lio. The dreadful god of Seas,
Upon whose back near stuck March flees.

1. Gall. One with the Bill, keeps Neptunes Porposes,
So Ovid says in's Metamorphosis.

2. Gall. A third the learned Poets write on,
And as they say, His name is Triton.

Y. Lio. These are the Marine gods, to whom my father
In his long voyage prays too; Cannot they
That brought us to our Haven, bury him
In their Abisse? For if he safe ariue,
I with these Sailors, Sirens, and what not,
Am sure here to be shipwrackt.

1. Wen. Stand up stiff.

Rio. But that the ship so totters: I shall fall.

1. Wen. If thou fall, I Will fall with thee.

Rio. Now I sincke,
And as I diue and drown, Thus by degrees,
I Will pluck thee to the bottom.

They fall. Y. Lio. A maine for England, See, see,
Enter Reignald. The Spaniard now strikes Sail.

Reig. So must you all.

1. Gall. Whence is your ship, from the Bermoothes?

Reig. Worse, I think from Hell:
We are all Lost, Split, Shipwrackt, and undone,
This place is a mere quicksands.

2. Gall. So we feared.

Reig. Where Is my young Master?

Y. Lio. Here man, speak, the News?

Reig. The News is, I, and you --

Y. Lio. What?

Reig. She, and all these --

Bla. I?

Reig. We, and all ours, are in one turbulent Sea
Of Fear, Despair, Disaster and mischance swallowed:
Your father, Sir --

Y. Lio. Why, what of him?

Reig. He is, Oh I want breath.

Y. Lio. Where?

Reig. Landed, and at hand.

Y. Lio. Upon what coast? Who saw him?

Reig. I, these eyes.

Y. Lio. Oh Heaven, what shall I do then?

Reig. Ask ye me what shall become of you, that have not yet
Had time of studdy to dispose my self;
I say again, I was upon the Key,
I saw him land, and this way bend his course;
What drunkard's this, that can out sleep a storm
Which threatens all our ruins? Wake him.

Ela. Ho, Rioter, awake.

Rio. Yes, I am wake;
How dry has this Salt Water made me; Boy,
Give me the other Glass.

Y. Lio. Arise, I say,
My Fathers come from Sea.

Rio. If he be come, Bid him be gone again.

Reig. Can you trifle at such a time, when your Inventions.
Brains, Wits, Plots, Devices, Stratagems, and all
Should be at one in action? each of you
That love your safeties, lend your helping hands,
Women and all, to take this drunkard hence,
And to bestow him else where.

Bla. Lift for Heavens sake.

They carry him in. Reig. But what am I the nearer, were all these
Conuey'd to sundry places and unseen;
The stain of our disorders still remain,
Of which, the house will wirnesse, and the old man
Must find when he enters; And for these
Enter again. I am here left to answer: What is he gone?

Y. Lio. But whither? But into the self same house
That harbors him; my Fathers, where we all
Attend from him surpriseall.

Reig. I will make
That Prison of your fears, your Sanctuary;
Go get you in together.

Y. Lio. To this house?

Reig. Your Fathers, with your Sweetheart, these and all;
Nay, no more words but do it,

Bla. That were to betray us to his fury.

Reig. I haue't here,
To Bail you hence at pleasure; and in the interim,
I Will make this supposed Goal, to you, as safe
From the injured old man's just incensed spleen,
As were you now together in the Low-Countreyes,
Viriginia, or in the Indies.

Bla. Present fear,
Bids us to yield unto the faint belief
Of the least hoped safety.

Reig. Will you in?

Omn. By thee we will be counseled.

Reig. Shut them fast.

Y. Lio. And thou and I to leave them?

Reig. No such thing, for you shall bear your Sweetheart company, And help
to cheer the rest.


Y. Lio. And so thou
Meanest to escape alone?

Reig. Rather without,
I Will stand a Champion for you all within;
Will you be swai'd? One thing in any case
I must advise; The gates boulted and locked,
See that amongst you no living voice be heard;
No not so much as a Dog to howl,
Or Cat to mewe, all silence, that I charge;
As if this were a mere forsaken house,
And none did there inhabit.

Y. Lio. Nothing else?

Reig. And though the old man thunder at the gates
As if he meant to ruin what he had reared,
None on their lives to answer.

Y. Lio. It Is my charge;
Remains there nothing else?

Reig. Only the Key; for I must play the jailer for your durance, To be the
Mercury in your release.


Y. Lio. Me and my hope, I in this Key deliver
To thy safe trust.

Reig. When you are fast you are safe,
And with this turn it is done: What fools are these,
To trust their ruined fortunes to his hands
That has betrayed his own; And make themselves
Prisoner to one deserves to lie for all,
As being cause of all; And yet something prompts me,
I Will stand it at all dangers; And to recompense
The many wrongs unto the young man done:
Now, if I can doubly delude the old,
My brain, about it then; All Is hushed within,
The noise that shall be, I must make without;
And he that part for gain, and part for wit,
So far has trauell'd, strive to fool at home:
Which to effect, Art must with Knavery join,
And smooth Dissembling meet with Impudence;
He do my best, and howsoere it prove,
My praise or shame, it is but a servants love.

Enter old Lionell like a civil Merchant, with Watermen, and two servants
with Burdens and Caskets. Old Lio. Discharge these honest Sailors that have
brought
Our Chests a shore, and pray them have a care,
Those merchandise be safe we left aboard:
As Heaven has blessed us with a fortunate Voyage,
In which we bring home riches with our healthes,
So let not us prove niggards in our store;
See them paid well, and to their full content.

1. Ser. I shall Sir.

Old Lio. Then return: These special things,
And of most value, we will not trust aboard;
Meethinkes they are not safe till they see home,
And there repose, where we will rest our selves,
And bid farewell to Travel; for I vow,
After this hour, no more to trust the Seas,
Nor throw me to such danger.

Reig. I could wish
You had took your leave oth' Land too.

Old Lio. And now it much rejoices me, to think
What a most sudden welcome I shall bring,
both to my Friends and private Family.

Reig. Oh, but how much more welcome had he been,
That had brought certain tidings of thy death.

Old Lio. But soft, what is this? my own gates shut upon me,
And bar their Master entrance? Whose within there?
How, no man speak, are all asleep or dead,
Knocks aloud. That no soul stirs to open?

Reig. What mad man's that, who weary of his life,
Dares once lay hand on these accursed gates?

Old Lio. Whose that? my servant Reignald.

Reig. My old Master,
Most glad I am to see you; Are you well Sir?

Old Lio. Thou see I am.

Reig. But are you sure you are?
Feel you no change about you? Pray you stand off.

Old Lio. What strange and unexpected greetings this,
That thus a man may knock at his own gates,
Beat with his hands and feet, and call thus loud,
And no man give him entrance?

Reig. Said you Sir;
Did your hand touch that hammer?

Old Lio. Why, whose else?

Reig. But are you sure you touched it?

Old Lio. How else, I prithee, could I have made this noise?

Reig. You touched it then?

Old Lio. I tell thee yet I did.

Reig. Oh for the love I bear you,
Oh me most miserable, you, for you own sake,
Of all alive most wretched; Did you touch it?

Old Lio. Why, say I did?

Reig. You have then a sin committed,
No sacrifice can expiate to the Dead;
But yet I hope you did not.

Old Lio. It Is past hope,
The deed is done, and I repent it not.

Reig. You and all yours will do it. In this one rashness,
You have undone us all; Pray be not desperate,
But first thank Heaven that you have escapt thus well;
Come from the gate, yet further, further yet,
And tempt your fate no more; Command your servants
Give off and come no nearer, they are ignorant,
And do not know the danger, therefore pity
That they should perish in 't; It Is full seven months,
Since any of your house durst o^ce set foot
Over that threshold.

Old Lio. Prithee speak the cause?

Reig. First look about, beware that no man hear,
Command these to remove.

Old Lio. Be gone. Exit Servants. Now speak.

Reig. Oh Sir, This house is grown Prodigious,
Fatal, Disasterous unto you and yours.

Old. Lio. What Fatal? what Disasterous?

Reig. Some Host that has been owner of this house,
In it his Guest has slain; And we suspect
'Twas he of whom you bought it.

Old Lio. How came this
Discovered to you first?

Reig. I Will tell you Sir,
But further from the gate: Your son one night
Suppt late abroad, I within; Oh that night,
I never shall forget; Being safe got home,
I saw him in his chamber laid to rest;
And after went to mine, and being drowsy,
Forgot by chance, to put the Candle out;
Being dead asleep; Your son affrighted, calls
So loud, that I soon wakened; Brought in light,
And found him almost drowned in fearful sweat;
Amazed to see it, I did demand the cause:
Who told me, that this murdered Ghost appeared,
His body gasht, and all ore-stucke with wounds;
And spoke to him as follows.

Old Lio. Oh proceed, it is that I long to hear.

Reig. I am, quoth he,
A Trans-marine by birth, who came well stored
With Gold and Jewels, to this fatal house;
Where seeking safety, I encountered death:
The covetous Merchant, Landlord of this rent,
To whom I gave my life and wealth in charge;
Freely to enjoy the one, robbed me of both:
Here was my body buried, here my Ghost
Must ever walk, till that have Christian right;
Till when, my habitation must be here:
Then fly young man, Remove thy family,
And secke some safer dwelling: For my death,
This mansion is accursed; It Is my possession,
Bought at the dear rate of my life and blood,
None enter here, that aims at his own good.
And with this charge he vanished.

Old Lio. Oh my fear,
Whither will thou transport me?

Reig. I Entreat keep further from the gate, and fly.

Old Lio. Fly whither? Why do not thou fly too?

Reig. What need I fear, the Ghost and I am friends.

Old Lio. But Reignald.

Reig. Tush, I nothing have deserved,
Nor ought transgrest: I came not near the gate.

Old Lio. To whom was that thou spakest?

Reig. Was It you Sir named me?
Now as I live, I thought the dead man called,
To enquire for him that thundered at the gate
Which he so dearly pai'd for: Are you madd,
To stand a foreseen danger?

Old Lio. What shall I do?

Reig. Cover you head and fly; Lest looking back,
You spy your own confusion.

Old Lio. Why do not thou fly too?

Reig. I tell you Sir,
The Ghost and I am friends.

Old Lio. Why did thou quake then?

Reig. In fear lest some mischance may fall on you,
That have the dead offended, For my part,
The Ghost and I am friends: Why fly you not,
Since here you are not safe?

Old Lio. Some blessed powers guard me.

Reig. Nay Sir, i will not forsake you: I have got the start;
But ete the goal, 'twill ask both Brain and Art.

Exeunt. Actus Tertius.
Seena Prima.
Enter old Master Geraldine, Y. Geraldine, Master Wincott, and Wife, Dalauill,
Prudentilla. Winc. We are bound to you, kind Master Geraldine,
For this great entertainment; Troath your cost
Has much exceeded common neighborhood:
You have feasted us like Princes.

Old Ger. This, and more
Many degrees, can never counteruaile
The often and frequent welcomes given my son:
You have took him from me quite, and have I think,
Adopted him into your family,
He stays with me so seldom.

Win. And in this,
By trusting him to me, of whom your self
May have both use and pleasure, you are as kind
As moneyed men, that might make benefit
Of what they are possessed, yet to their friends
In need, will lend it gratis.

Wife. And like such,
As are indebted more then they can pay;
We more and more confess our selves engaged
To you, for your forbearance.

Prud. Yet you see,
Like Debtors, such as would not break their day;
The Treasure late received, we tender back,
The which, the longer you can spare, you still
The more shall bind us to you.

Old Ger. Most kind Ladies,
Worthy you are to borrow, that return
The Principal, with such large use of thanks.

Dal. What strange felicity these Rich men take,
To talk of borrowing, lending, and of use;
The usurers language right.

Winc. You Have Master Geraldine,
Fair walks and gardens, I have praised them,
Both to my Wife and Sister.

Old Ger. You would see them,
There Is no pleasure that the House can yield,
That can be debarred from you; prithee Son,
Be thou the Usher to those Mounts and Prospects
May one day call thee Master.

Y. Ger. Sir I shall; Please you to walk.

Prud. What Master Dalauill,
Will you not bear us company.

Dal. It Is not fit
That we should leave our Noble host alone,
Be you my Friends charge, and this old man mine.

Prud. Well, be it then at your pleasure.

Exeunt. Manet Dalannll and Old Geraldine. Dal. You to your Prospects, b^t
there is project here
That Is of another Nature; Worthy Sir,
I cannot but approve your happiness,
To be the Father of so brave a Son,
So every way accomplished and made up,
In which my voice is least; For I alas,
Bear but a mean part in the common quier,
When with much louder accents of his praise,
So all the world reports him.

Old Ger. Thank my Stars,
They have lent me one, who as he always was,
And is my present joy; If their aspect
Be no ways to our goods Maleuolent,
May be my Future comfort.

Dal. Yet must I hold him happy above others,
As one that Solie to himself inioyes
What many others aim at; But in vain.

Old Ger. How mean you that?

Dal. So Beautiful a Mistress.

Old Ger. A Mistress, said you?

Dal. Yes Sir, or a Friend,
Whether you please to style her.

Old Ger. Mistress? Friend?
Pray be more open languag'd.

Dal. And indeed,
Who can blame him to absent himself from home,
And make his Fathers house but as a grange,
For a Beauty so Attractiue? Or blame her,
Huging so weak an old Man in her arms,
To make a new choice, of an equal youth,
Being in him so Perfect? yet introath,
I think they both are honest.

Old Ger. You have Sir,
Possessed me with such strange sancies.

Dal. For my part,
How can I love the person of your Son,
And not his reputation? His repair
So often to the House, is voyct by all,
And frequent in the mouths of the whole Country,
Some equally addicted, praise his happiness;
But others, more Censorious and Austere,
Blame and reprove a course so disolute;
Each one in general, pity the good man,
As one unfriendly dealt with, yet in my conscience,
I think them truly Honest.

Old Ger. It Is suspicious.

Dal. True Sir, at best; But what when scandalons tongues
Will make the worst? and what good in it self,
Sullie and stain by fabulous mis-report;
For let men live as charie as they can,
Their lives are often questioned, Then no wonder,
If such as give occasion of suspicion,
Be subject to this scandal: What I speak,
Is as a Noble Friend unto your Son;
And therefore, as I glory in his Fame,
I suffer in his wrong; for as I live,
I think, they both are honest.

Old Ger. Howsoever, I wish them so.

Dal. Some course might be devised,
To stop this clamor ere it grow too wrancke;
Lest that which yet but inconvenience seems,
May turn to greater mischief; This I speak
In Zeal to both, in sovereign care of him
As of a Friend; And tender of her Honor,
As one to whom I hope to be allied,
By Marriage with her Sister.

Old Ger. I much thank you,
For you have clearly given me light of that,
Till now I never dreamt on.

Dal. It Is my Love,
And therefore I entreat you, make not me
To be the first reporter.

Old Ger. You have done
The office of a Noble Gentleman,
And shall not be so injured.

Enter again as from Walking Winc. Wife, Y. Ger. Prud. Winc. See Master
Geraldine,
How bold we are, especially these Ladies
Play little better then the thieves with you,
For they have robbed your Garden.

Wife. You might Sir,
Better have termed it saucenes, then theft;
You see we blush not, what we took in private,
To wear in public view.

Prud. Besides, these cannot
Be mist out of so many; In full fields,
The gleanings are allowed.

Old Ger. These and the rest,
Are Ladies, at your service.

Winc. Now to horse,
But one thing ere we part, I must entreat;
In which my Wife will be joint suter with me,
My Sister too.

Old Ger. In what I pray.

Winc. That he
Which brought us hither, may but bring us home;
Your much respected Son.

Old Ger. How men are borne,
To woe their own disasters?

Wife But to see us
From whence he brought us Sir, that is all.

Old Ger. This second motion makes it Palpable:
To note a Woman's cunning; Make her husband
Bawd to her own laciuious appetite,
And to Solicit his own shame.

Prud. Nay Sir,
When all of us join in so small a suit,
It were some injury to be denied.

Old Ger. And work her Sister too; What will not woman
To accomplish her own ends: But this disease,
I Will seek to Physic ere it grow too far:
I am most sorry to be urged sweet Friends,
In what at this time I can no ways grant;
Most, that these Ladies should be ought denied,
To whom I owe all Service, but occasions
Of weighty and important conscequence,
Such as concern the best of my Estate,
Call him aside; excuse us both this once,
Presume this business is no sooner over,
But he is at his own freedom.

Winc. 'Twere no manners
In us to urge it further, we will leave you,
With promise Sir, that he shall in my will,
Not be the last remembered.

Old. Ger. We are bound to you;
See them to Horse, and instantly return,
We have Employments for you.

Y. Ger. Sir I shall,

Dal. Remember your last promise,

Old Ger. Not to do it, I should forget my self:
If I find him false
To such a friend, be sure he forfeits me;
In which to be more punctually resolved,
I have a project how to fifth his foul,
How it is inclined; whether to yonder place,
Enter Y. Geraldine. The clear bright Palace, or black Dungeon: See,
They are onward on the way, and he returned.

Y. Ger. I now attend your pleasure.

Old Ger. You are grown perfect man, and now you float
Like to a well built Vessel; 'Tweene two Currents,
Virtue and Vice; Take this, you steer to harbor;
Take that, to eminent shipwreck.

Y. Ger. Pray your meaning.

Old Ger. What fathers cares are, you shall never know,
Till you your self have children; Now my studdy,
Is how to make you such, that you in them
May have a feeling of my love to you.

Y. Ger. Pray Sir expound your self, for I protest
Of all the Languages I yet have learth'd,
This is to me most foreign.

Old Ger. Then I shall;
I have lived to see you in your prime of youth
And height of Fortune, so you will but take
Occasion by the forehead; to be brief,
And cut off all superfluous circumstance,
All the ambition that I aim at now,
Is but to see you married.

Y. Ger. Married Sir.

Old. Ger. And to that purpose, I have found out one,
Whose Youth and Beauty may not only please
A curious eye; But her immediate means,
Able to strengthen a state competent,
Or raise a ruined Fortune.

Y. Ger. Of all which,
I have believe me, neither need nor use;
My competence best pleasing as it is;
And this my singularity of life,
Most to my mind contenting.

Od Ger. I suspect, but yet must prove him further;
Say to my care I add a Fathers charge,
And couple with my counsel my command:
To that how can you answer?

Y. Ger. That I hope:
My duty and obedience still vnblam'd,
Did never merit such austerity;
And from a father never yet displeased.

Old Ger. Nay, then to come more near unto the point,
Either you must resolve for present marriage,
Or forfeit all your interest in my love.

Y. Ger. Vn-say that language, I entreat you Sir,
And do not so oppress me; Or if needs
Your heavy imposition stand in force,
Resolve me by your counsel; With more safety
May I infringe a sacred vow to heaven,
Or to oppose me to your strict command?
Since one of these I must.

Old Ger. Now Dalauill,
I find thy words too true.

Y. Ger. For marry, Sir, I neither may, nor can.

Old Ger. Yet whore you may;
And that is no brech of any vow to Heaven:
Pollute the Nuptial bed with Michall sin;
Asperse the honor of a noble friend;
Forfeit thy reputation, here below.
And the interest that thy Soul might claim above,
In you blessed City: These you may, and can,
With untouched conscience: Oh, that I should live
to see the hopes that I have stored so long;
Thus in a moment ruined: And the staff,
On which my old decrepite age should lean;
Before my face thus broken: On which trusting,
I thus abortiuely, before my time,
Fall headlong to my Grave.

Falls on the earth. Y. Ger. It yet stands strong;
Both to support you unto future life,
And fairer comfort.

Old Ger. Never, never son:
For till thou can acquit thy self of scandal,
And me of my suspicion; Here, even here,
Where I have measured out my length of earth;
I shall expire my last.

Y. Ger. Both these I can:
Then rise Sir, I entreat you; And that innocence,
Which poisoned by the breath of Calumny, cast you thus low,
Shall, these few stains wipt off, with better thoughts erect you.

Old Ger. Well, Say on.

Y. Ger. There Is but one fire from which this smoke may grow;
Namely, the unmatched yoke of youth; And
In which, If ever I occasion was,
Of the sma^lest breach; The greatest implacable mischief
Adultery can threaten, fall on me;
Of you may I be disauow'd a son;
And unto Heaven a servant: For that Lady,
As she is Beauties mirror, so I hold her
For Chastities examples: From her tongue,
Never came language, that arrived my ear,
That even censurious Cato, lived he now,
Could mis-interpret; Never from her lips,
Came unchaste kiss; Or from her constant eye,
Look sauouring of the least immodesty: Further --

Old Ger. Enough; One only thing remains, which on thy part performed,
Assures firm credit to these thy protestations.


Y. Ger. Name it then.

Old Ger. Take hence the occasion of this common fame;
Which has already spread it self so far,
To her dishonor and thy prejudice, From this day forward,
To forbear the house: This do upon my blessing.

Y. Ger. As I hope it, I will not fail your charge.

Old. Ger. I am satisfied.

Exeunt. Enter at one door an Usurer and his Man, at the other, Old Lionell
with his servant: In the midst Reignald. Reig. To which hand shall I turn me;
Here Is my Master
Has bin to enquire of him that sold the house,
Touching the murder; Here Is an Vsuring-Rascall,
Of whom we have borrowed money to supply
Our prodigal expenses; Broke our day,
And owe him still the Principal and Use:
Were I to meet them single, I have brain
To oppose both, and to come off vnscarr'd;
But if they do assault me, and at once.
Not Hercules himself could stand that odds:
Therefore I must encounter them by turns;
And to my Master first: Oh Sir, well met.

Old Lio. What Reignald; I but now met with the man,
Of whom I bought you house.

Reig. What, did you Sir?
But did you speak of ought concerning that
Which I last told you?

Old Lio. Yes, I told him all.

Reig. Then am I cast: But I pray tell me Sir,
Did he confess the murder?

Old Lio. No such thing; Most stiffely he denies it.

Reig. Impudent wretch; Then serve him with a warrant, let the Officer
Bring him before a Justice, you shall hear
What I can say against him; Sfoot deni't:
But I pray Sir excuse me, yonder is one
With whom I have some business; Stay you here,
And but determine what is best course to take,
And note how I will follow't.

Old Lio. Be brief then.

Reg. Now, If I can as well put off my Vse-man,
This day, I shall be master of the field.

Vsu. That should be Lionells man.

Man The ^ame, I know him.

Vsu. After so many fri^olous delays,
There Is now some hope. He that was wont to shun us,
And to absent himself, accoasts us freely;
And with a pleasant countenance: Well met Reignald,
What Is this money ready?

Reig. Never could you
Have come in better time.

Vsu. Where Is your master, young Lionell, it something troubles me, That he
should break his day.


Reig. A word in private,

Vsu. Tush, Private me no priuates, in a word,
Speak, are my moneys ready?

Reig. Not so loud.

Vsu. I will be louder yet; Give me my moneys,
Come, tender me my moneys.

Reig. We know you have a throat, wide as your cons^ience; You need not use it
now -- Come, get you home.


Vsu. Home?

Reig. Yes, home I say, return by three a Clock,
And I will see all cancelled.

Vsu. It Is no^ past two, and I can stay till three,
I Will make that now my business, otherwise,
With these loud clamors, I will haunt thee still;
Give me my Use, give me my Principal.

Reig. This burre will still cleave to me; what, no means
To shake him off; I near was caught till now.
Come come, you are trouble (...).

Vsu. Prevent that trouble,
And without trifling, pay me down my cash;
I will be fooled no longer.

Reig. So so so.

Vsu. I have been still put off, from time to time,
And day to day; these are but cheating tricks,
And this is the last minute i will forbear
Thee, or thy Master: Once again, I say,
Give me my Use, give me my Principal.

Reig. Pox a this use, that has and one so many:
And now will confound me.

Old Lio. Have thou heard this?

Ser. Yes Sir, and to my grief.

Old Lio. Come hither Reignald.

Reig. Here Sir; Nay, now I am gone.

Old Lio. What use is this?
What Principal he talks of? in which language
He names my Son; And thus vpbraideth thee,
What is it you owe this man?

Reig. A trifle Sir,
Pray stop his mouth; And pay't him.

Old Lio. I pay, what?

Reig. If I say pay't him; Pay't him.

Old Lio. What Is the Sum?

Reig. A toy, the maine about five hundred pounds;
And the use fifty.

Old Lio. Call you that a toy?
To what use was it borrowed? At my departure,
I left my Son sufficient in his charge,
With surplus, to de^^^y a la^ge expense,
Without this need of borrowing.

Reig. It Is confessed,
Yet stop his clamorous mouth; And only say,
That you will pay't to morrow.

Old Lio. I pass my word.

Reig. Sir, if I bid you do it; Nay, no more words,
But say you will pay't tomorrow.

Old Lio. Jest indeed, but tell me how these moneys were bestowed?

Reig. Safe Sir, I warrant you.

Old Lio. The Sum still safe,
Why do you not then tender it your selves?

Reig. Your ear sir; This sum joined to the rest,
Your Son has purchased Land and Houses.

Old Lio. Land, do thou say?

Reig. A goodly House, and Gardens.

Old Lio. Now joy on him,
That whilst his Father Merchandis'd abroad,
Had care to add to his estate at home:
But Reignald, wherefore Houses?

Reig. Now Lord Sir,
How dull you are; This house possessed with spirits,
And there no longer stay; Would you have had
Him, us, and all your other family,
To live, and lie in the streets; It had not Sir,
Been for your reputation.

Old Lio. Blessing on him,
That he is grown so thiftie.

Vsu. It Is struck three,
My money's not yet tendered.

Reig. Pox upon him,
See him discharged, I pray Sir.

Old Lio. Call upon me
To morrow Friend, as early as thou will;
I Will see thy debt defraid.

Vsu. It is enough, I have a true man's word.

Exit. Usurer and man Old Lio. Now tell me Reignald,
For thou have made me proud of my Sons thrift;
Where, in what Country, does this fair House stand.

Reig. Never in all my time, so much to seek;
I know not what to answer.

Old Lio. Wherefore studdiest thou?
Use men to purchase Lands at a dear rate,
And know not where they lie?

Reig. It Is not for that,
I only had forgot his name that sold them,
'Twas let me see, see.

Old Lio. Call thy self to mind.

Reig. Non-plust or never now; Where art thou brain?
O Sir, where was my memory; It Is this house
That next adioynes to yours,

Old Lio. My Neighbor Ricots.

Reig. The same, the same Sir; We had peniworths in it;
And I can tell you, have been offered well
Since, to forsake our bargain.

Old Lio. As I live,
I much commend your choice.

Reig. Nay, it is well seated,
Rough-cast without, but bravely lined within;
You have met with few such bargains.

Old Lio. Prithee knock,
And call the Master, or the servant on it;
To let me take free view on it.

Reig. Puzzle again on Puzzle; One word Sir,
The House is full of Women, no man knows,
How on the instant, they may be employed;
The Rooms may lie unhandsome; and Maids stand
Much on their cleanliness and huswiferie;
To take them unprovided, were disgrace,
'Twere fit they had some warning; Now, do you
Fetch but a warrant, from the Justice Sir;
You understand me.

Old Lio. Yes, I do.

Reig. To attach him of suspected murder; I Will see it scru'd;
Did he deny't? And in the intrim, I
Will give them notice, you are now ariu'd,
And long to see your purchase.

Old Lio. Counseled well; And meet some half hour hence.

Reig. This plunge well past,
All things fall even, to Crown my Brain at last.

Exeunt. Enter Dalauill and a Gentleman. Gent. Where shall we dine to day?

Dal At the Ordinary.
I see Sir, you are but a stranger here;
This Barnet, is a place of great resort;
And commonly upon the Market days,
Here all the Country Gentlemen Appoint,
A friendly meeting; Some about affairs
Of Consequence and Profit; Bargain, Sale,
And to confer with Chap-men, some for pleasure,
To match their Horses; Wager in their Dogs,
Or try their Hawks; Some to no other end,
But only meet good Company, discourse,
Dine, drink, and spend their Money.

Enter Old Geraldine and Young Geraldine. Gent. That Is the Market, We have to
make this day.

Dal. It Is a Commodity, that will be easily vented:
What my worthy Friend,
You are happily encountered; Oh, you are grown strange,
To one that much respects you; Troath the House
Has all this time seemed naked without you;
The good Old Man does never sit to meat,
But next his giving Thanks, he speaks of you;
There Is scarce a bit, that he at Table tastes,
That can digest without a Geraldine,
You are in his mouth so frequent: He and She
Both wondering, what distaste from one, or either,
So suddenly, should alianate a Guest,
To them, so dearly welcome.

Old Ger. Master Dalauill,
Thus much let me for him Apoligie;
Diverse designs have thronged upon us late,
My weakness was not able to support
Without his help; He has bin much abroad,
At London, or else where; Besides it is Term;
And Lawyers must be followed, seldom at home,
And scarcely then at leisure.

Dal. I am satisfied,
And I would they were so too, but I hope Sir,
In this restraint, you have not used my name^

Old Ger. Not, as I live.

Dal. You Are Noble -- Who had thought
To have met with such good Company; You Are it seem
But new alighted; Father and Son, ere part,
I vow we will drink a cup of Sack together:
Phisicians say, It does prepare the appetite
And stomach against dinner.

Old Ger. We old men,
Are apt to take these courtesies.

Dal. What say you Friend?

Y. Ger. lie but enquire for one, at the next Inn,
And instantly return.

Dal. It Is enough.
Exit.
Enter Besse meeting Y. Geraldine. Y. Ger. Besse: How do thou Gitle?

Bess. Faith we may do how we list for you, you are grown so Great a
stranger: We are more beholding

To Master Dalauill, He Is a constant Guest:
And howsoe^e to some, that shall be namelesse,
His presence may be graceful; Yet to others --
I could say somewhat.

Y. Ger. He Is a noble fellow,
And my choice friend.

Bess. Come come, he is, what he is; and that the end will prove.

Y. Ger. And how is all at home?
Nay, we will not part without a glass of wine,
And meet so seldom: Boy,
Enter Drawer. Drawer Anon, anon Sir.

Y. Ger. A Pint of Clarret, quickly.
Exit Drawer. Nay, sit down: The news, the news, I pray thee;
I am sure, I have been much inquired of
Thy old Master, and thy young Mistress too.

Bess. Ever your name is in my Masters mouth, and sometimes too In hers, when
she has nothing else to think of:

Well well, I could say somewhat.

Enter Drawer. Drawer Heerc's your wine Sir.
Exit.
Y. Ger. Fill Boy: Here Besse, this glass to both their healths; Why do
weep my wench?


Bess. Nay, nothing Sir.

Y. Ger. Come, I must know.

Bess. Introath I love you Sir,
And ever wished you well; You are a Gentleman,
Whom always I respected; Know the passages
And private whisperings, of the secret love
Betwixt you and my Mistress; I dare swear,
On your part well intended: But --

Y. Ger. But what?

Bess. You bear the name of Landlord, but another
Inioyes the rent; You doat upon the shadow,
But another he bears away the substance.

Y. Ger. Be more plain.

Bess. You hope to enjoy a virtuous widdow-hood;
But Dalauill, whom you esteem you friend,
He keeps the wife in common.

Y. Ger. Y' are too blame,
And Besse, you make me angry; He Is my friend,
And she my second self; In all their meetings,
I never saw so much as cast of eye
Once entertained betwixt them.

Bess. That Is their cunning.

Y. Ger. For her; I have been with her at all hours,
Both late and early; In her bedchamber.
And often singly vsher'd her abroad:
Now, would she have bin any man's alive,
She had bin mine; You wrong a worthy Friend,
And a chaste Mistress, you are not a good Girl;
Drink that speak better of her, I could chide you,
But I Will forbear; What you have rashly spoke,
Shall ever here be buried.

Bess. I am sorry my freeness should offend you,
But yet know, I am her Chambermaid.

Y. Ger. Play now the Market-maid.
And prithee bout thy business.

Bess. Well, I shall -- that man should be so fooled.
Exit.
Y. Ger. She a Prostitute?
Nay, and to him my troath plight, and my Friend;
As possible it is, that Heaven and Earth
Should be in love together, meet and kiss,
And so cut off all distance: What strange frenzy
Came in this wenches brain, so to surmise?
Were she so base? his nobleness is such,
He would not entertain it for my sake:
Or he so bent? His hot and lust burnt appetite
Would be soon quenched, at the mere contemplation
Of her most Pious and Religious life.
The Girl was much too blame; Perhaps her Mistress
Has stirred her anger, by some word or blow,
Which she would thus revenge; Not apprehending
At what a high price Honor's to be rated;
Or else some one that enuies her rare virtue,
Might hire her thus to brand it; Or, who knows
But the young wench may fix a thought on me;
And to divert me from her Mistress love,
May raise this false aspersion? howsoever,
Enter Clo, with a letter. My thoughts on these two columns fixed are,
She Is good as fresh, and purely chaste as fair.

Clo. Oh Sir, you are the Needle, and if the whole County of Middlesex had bin
turned to a mere Bottle of Hay, I had bin inioyn'd to have found you out, or
never more returned back to my old Master: There Is a Letter Sir.


Y. Ger. I know the hand that superscrib'd it well;
Stay but till I peruse it, and from me
Thou shall return an answer.

Clo. I shall Sir: This is Market Day, and here acquaintance commonly meet;
and whom have I encountered my gossip Pint-pot, and brim full; nay, I mean to
drink with you before I part, and how does all your worshipful kindred? your
sister Quart, your pater-Pottle, (who was ever a Gentleman's fellow) and your
old grandsier Gallon; they cannot choose but be all in health, since so many
healthes have been drunk out of them: I could wish them all here, and in no
worse state then I see you are in at this present; howsoever gossip, since I
have met you hand to hand, I Will make bold to drink to you -- Nay, either you
must pledge me, or get one to do it for you; Do you open your mouth toward
me? well, I know what you would say; Here Roger, to your Master and Mistress,
and all our good friends at home; gramercy gossip, if I should not pledge thee,
I were worthy to be turned out to Grass, and stand no more at Livery: And now
in requital of this courtesy I Will begin one health to you and all your
society in the Oeller, to Peter Pipe, Harry Hogshead, Bartholomew Butt, and
little master Randall Rundlet, to Timothy Taster, and all your other great and
small friends.


Y. Ger. He writes me heete,
That at my discontinuance he is much grieved,
Desiring me, as I have cuer rendered
Or him or his, to give him satisfaction
Touching my discontent; and that in person,
By any private meeting.

Clo. I Sir, it is very true, The Letter Speaks no more
Then he wished me to tell you by word of mouth.

Y. Ger. Thou art then of his council?

Clo. His Privy and please you.

Y. Ger. Though near so strict has bin my fathers charge,
A little I Will dispense with it, for his love;
Commend me to thy Master, tell him from me,
On Monday night (then will my leisure serve)
I will by Heavens assistance visit him.

Clo. On Monday Sir:
That Is as I remember, just the day before Tuesday.

Y. Ger. But 't will be midnight first, at which late hour,
Please him to let the Garden door stand open,
At that I Will enter; But conditionally,
That neither Wife, Friend, Servant, no third soul
Save him, and thee to whom he trusts this message,
Know of my coming in, or passing out:
When, tell him, I will fully satisfy him
Concerning my forct absence.

Clo. I am something obliuious; Your message would be the truelier delivered
if it were set down in black and white.


Y. Ger. I Will call for Pen and Incke,
And instantly dispatch it.

Exeunt. Actus Quartus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Reignald. Reig. Now impudence, but steel my face this once,
Although I near blush after; Here Is the house,
Ho, whose within? What, no man to desend
Enter Mr. Ricot. These innocent gates from knocking?

Ric. Whose without there?

Reig. One Sir that ever wished your worships health;
And those few hours I can find time to pray in,
I still remember it.

Ric. Gramercy Reignald,
I love all those that wish it: You are the men
Lead merry lives, Feast, Revel, and Carowse;
You seele no tedious hours; Time plays with you,
This is your golden age.

Reig. It was, but now Sir,
That Gold is turned to worse then Alcamy,
It will not stand the test; Those days are past,
And now our nights come on.

Ric. Tell me Reignald, is he returned from Sea?

Reig. Yes, to our grief already, but we fear
Hereafter, it may prove to all our cost's.

Ric. Suspects thy Master any thing?

Reig. Not yet Sir;
Now my request is, that your worship being
So near a Neighbor, therefore most disturbed,
Would not be first to peach us.

Ric. Take my word;
With other Neighbors make what peace you can,
I Will not be your accuser.

Reig. Worshipful Sir;
I shall be still your Beads-man; Now the business
That I was sent about, the Old Man my Master
Claiming some interest in acquaintance past,
Desires (might it be no way trouble some)
To take free view of all your House within.

Ric. View of my House? Why it is not set to Sale,
Nor bill upon the door; Look well upon it:
View of my House?

Reig. Nay, be not angry Sir,
He no way does disable your estate;
As far to buy, as you are loath to sell;
Some alterations in his own^ he would make.
And hearing yours by worke-men much commended,
He would make that his President.

Ric. What fancies
Should at this age possess him; Knowing the cost,
That he should dr^^^^ of Building.

Reig. It Is supposed,
He has late found a Wife out for his Son;
Now Sir, to have him near him, and that necrenesse
Too, without trouble, though beneath one roof,
Yet parted in two Families; He would build
And make what is picked, a persit quadrangle,
Proportioned just with yours, were you so pleased,
To make it his example.

Ric. Willingly; I will but order some few things within,
And then attend his coming.
Exit.
Reig. Most kind cox-combe,
Great Alexander, and Agathocles,
Caesar, and others, have bin Famed, they say.
And magnified for high Facinerous deeds;
Why claim not I, an equal place with them?
Or rather a presedent: These commanded
Their Subjects, and their servants; I my Master,
And every way his equals, where I please,
Lead by the nose along; They placed their burdens
On Horses, Mules, and Camels; I, old Men
Of strength and wit, load with my knauerie,
Enter Old Lionell. Till both their backs and brains ache; Yet poor animalls,
They near complain of weight; Oh are you come Sir?

Old Lio. I made what haste I could.

Reig. And brought the warrant?

Old Lio. See here, I hau't.

Reig. It Is well done, but speak, runs it
Both without Bail and Maineprize?

Old Lio. Nay, it carries both form and power.

Reig. Then I shall warrant him;
I have bin yonder Sir,

Old Lio. And what says he?

Reig. Like one that offers you
Free ingresse, view and regresse, at your pleasure;
As to his worthy Landlord.

Old Lio. Was that all?

Reig. He spoke to me, that I would speak to you,
To speak unto your Son; And then again,
To speak to him, that he would speak to you;
You would release his Bargain.

Old Lio. By no means,
Men must advise before they part with Land,
Not after to repent it; It Is most just,
That such as hazard, and disburse their Stocks,
Should take all gains and profits that accrue,
Enter Mr. Ricot again walking before the gate. As well in Sale of Houses, as
in Barter,
And Traficke of all other Merchandise.

Reig. See in acknowledgement of a Tenants duty,
He attends you at the gate; Salute him Sir.

Old Lio. My worthy Friend.

Ric. Now as I live, all my best thoughts and wishes
Impart with yours, in your so safe return;
Your servant tells me, you have great desire
To take suruiew of this my house within.

Old Lio. Be It Sir, no trouble to you.

Ric. None, enter bouldly;
With as much freedom, as it were your own.

Old Lio. As it were mine; Why Reignald, is it not?

Reig. Lord Sir, that in extremity of grief,
You Will add unto vexation; See you not
How sad he is on the sudden,

Old Lio. I observe it.

Reig. To part with that which he has kept so long;
Especially his Inheritance: Now as you love
Goodness, and Honesty, torment him not
With the least word of Purchase.

Old Lio. Counseled well;
Thou teach me Humanity.

Ric. Will you enter?
Or shall I call a servant, to conduct you
Through every Room and Chamber?

Old Lio. By no means;
I fear we are too much troublesome of our selves.

Reig. See what a goodly Gate?

Old Lio. It likes me well.

Reig. What brave carved poasts; Who knows but here,
In time Sir, you may keep your Shreualtie;
And I be one oth' Seriants.

Old Lio. They are well Carved.

Ric. And cost me a good price Sir, Take your pleasure,
I have business in the Town.
Exit.
Reig. Poor man, I pity him;
H'ath not the heart to stay and see you come,
As 'twere, to take Possession; Look that way Sir,
What goodly fair Baye windows?

Bays. Old Lio. Wondrous stately.

Reig. And what a Galleric, How costly Seeled;
What painting round about?

Old Lio. Every fresh object to good, adds betternesse.

Reig. Tarrast above, and how below supported; do they please you?

Old Lio. All things beyond opinion; Trust me Reignald,
I Will not forgo the Bargain, for more gain
Then half the price it cost me.

Reig. If you would? I should not suffer you; Was not the
Money due to the Usurer, took upon good ground,
That proved well built upon? We were no fools
That knew not what we did.

Old Lio. It shall be satisfied.

Reig. Please you to trust me with it, I Will see it discharged.

Old Lio. He has my promise, and I Will do it my self:
Never could Son have better pleased a Father,
Then in this Purchase: Hie thee instantly
Unto my house in the Country, give him notice
Of my arrive, and bid him with all speed
Poaste hither.

Reig. Ere I see the warrant served?

Old Lio. It shall be thy first business; For my Soul
Is not at peace, till face to face, I approve
His Husbandry, and much commend his Thrift;
Nay, without pause, be gone.

Reig. But a short journey;
For he is not far, that I am sent to seek:
I have got the start, the best part of the Race
is run already, what remains, is small,
And tire now, I should but forfeit all.

Old Lio. Make haste, I do entreat thee.

Ex^unt. Enter the Clown. Clo. This is the Garden gate; And here am I set to
stand Centinell, and to attend the coming of Young Master Geraldine: Master
Dalauill's gone to his Chamber; My Mistress to hers; It Is now about Midnight;
A Banquet prepared, bottles of Wine in readiness, all the whole Household at
their rest; And no creature by this, honestly stirring, saving I and my Old
Master; He in a bye Chamber, prepared of purpose for their private Meeting;
And I here to play the Watch Enter Young Geraldine. man, against my will;
Chauelah, Stand; Who goes there?


Y. Ger. A Friend.


Clo. The Word?


Y. Ger. Honest Roger.


Clo. That Is the Word indeed; You have lea^e to pass freely Without calling my
Corporal.


Y. Ger. How go the affairs within?


Clo. According to promise, the business is composed, and the ser^ants
disposed, my young Mistress reposed, my old Master according as you proposed,
attends you if you be exposed to give him meeting; Nothing in the way being
interposed, to transpose you to the least danger: And this I dare be deposed,
if you will not take my word, as I am honest Roger.


Y. Ger. Thy word shall be my warrant, but secured
Most in thy Masters promise, on which building;
By this known way I enter.

Clo. Nay, by your leave, I that was late but a plain Centinell,
Will now be your Captain conducter: Follow me.

Exeunt. Table and Stools set out; Lights: a Banquet, Wine. Enter Master
Wincott. Winc. I wonder whence this strangeness should proceed,
Or wherein I, or any of my house,
Should be the occasion of the least distaste;
Now, as I wish him well, it troubles me;
Enter Clow. and Y. Ger. But now the time grows on, from his own mouth
To be resolved; And I hope satisfied:
Sir, as I live, of all my friends to me
Most wishedly, you are welcome: Take that Chair,
I this: Nay, I int^eat no complement;
Attend -- Fill wine.

Clo. Till the mouths of the bottles yawn^ directly upon the floor, and the
bottomes turn their rayl^s up to the seeling; Whilst there is any blood in
their bellies, I Will not leave them.


Winc. I first salute you thus.

Y. Ger. It could not come
From one whom I more honor; Sir, I thank you.

Clo. Nay, since my Master begun it, I Will see it go round
To all three.

Winc. Now give us leave.

Clo. Talk you by your selves, whilst I find something to say to this: I have
a tale no tell him shall make his stony heart relent.

Exit.
Y. Ger. Now, first Sir your attention I entreat;
Next, your belief that what I speak is just,
Maugre all contradiction.

Winc. Both are granted.

Y. Ger. Then I (...); With due acknowledgement
Of all your more then many courtesies:
You Have bin my second father, and your wife,
My noble and chaste Mistress; All your seruanes
At my command; And this your bounteous Table,
As free and common as my Fathers house;
Neither against any, or the least of these,
Can I commence just quarrel.

Winc. What might then be
The cause of this constraint, in thus absenting
Your self from such as love you?

Y. Ger. Out of many,
I will propose some few: The care I have
Of your (as yet unblemisht) renown;
The untouched honor of your virtuous wife;
And (which I value least, yet dearly too)
My own fair reputation.

Winc. How can these, in any way be questioned?

Y. Ger. Oh dear Sir,
Bad tongues have bin too busy with us all;
Of which I never yet had time to think,
But with sad thoughts and griefs unspeakable:
It has bin whispered by some wicked ones,
But loudly thundered in my fathers ears,
By some that have malign'd our happiness;
(Heaunen, if it can brook slander, pardon them)
That this my customary coming hither,
Has bin to base and sorded purposes:
To wrong your bed; Iniure her chastity;
And be mine own vndoer: Which, how false?

Winc. As Heaven is true, I know it.

Y. Ger. Now this Calumny
Ariuing first unto my fathers ears,
His easy nature was induced to think,
That these things might perhaps be possible:
I answered him, as I would do to Heaven:
And cleared my self in his suspicious thoughts,
As truly, as the high all-knowing Judge
Shall of these stains acquit me; which are merely
Aspersions and untruths: The good old man
Possessed with my sincerity, and yet careful
Of your renown, her honor, and my fame;
To stop the-worst that scandal could inflict;
And to prevent false rumors charges me,
The cause remoou'd, to take away the effect;
Which only could be, to forbear your house;
And this upon his blessing: You hear all.

Winc. And I of all acquit you: This your absence,
With which my love most caucll'd; Orators
In your behalf. Had such things past betwixt you,
Not threats nor chidings could have driven you hence:
It pleads in your behalf, and speaks in hers;
And arms me with a double confidence,
Both of your friendship, and her loyalty:
I am happy in you both, and only doubtful
Which of you two does most impart my love:
You shall not hence to night.

Y. Ger. Pray pardon Sir.

Winc. You are in your lodging.

Y. Ger. But my fathers charge.

Winc. My coniuration shall dispense with that;
You may be up as early as you please;
But hence to night you shall not.

Y. Ger. You are powerful.

Winc. This night, of purpose, I have parted beds,
Faining my self not well, to give you meeting;
Nor can be ought suspected by my Wife,
I have kept all so private: Now it is late,
I Will steal up to my rest, But howsoever,
Let Us not be strange in our writing, that way daily
We may confer without the least suspect,
In spite of all such base calumnious tongues;
So, Now goodnight sweet friend
Exit.
Y. Ger. May he that made you
So just and good, still guard you. Not to bed,
So I perhaps might ouer-sleepe my self,
And then my tardy wakeing might be^^ay me
To the more early household; Thus as I am,
I Will rest me on this Pallar; But in vain,
I find no sleep can fasten on mine eyes,
There are in this disturbed brain of mine
So many mutinous fancies: This, to me,
Will be a tedious night; How shall I spend it?
No Book that I can spy? no company?
A little let me recollect my self;
Oh, what more wished company can I find,
Suiting the apt occasion, time and place;
Then the sweet contemplation of her Beauty;
And the fruition too, time may produce,
Of what is yet lent out? It Is a sweet Lady,
And every way accomplished: Has mere accident
Brought me thus near, and I not visit her?
Should it ariue here are, perhaps might breed
Our lasting separation; For 'twixt Lovers,
No quarrell's to unkindness; Sweet opportunity
Offers prevention, and inuites me to it:
The house is known to me, the stairs and rooms;
The way unto her chamber frequently
Trodden by me at midnight, and all hours:
How joyful to her would a meeting be,
So strange and unexpected; Shadowed too
Beneath the veil of night; I am resolved
To give her visitation, in that place
Where we have past deep vows, her bedchamber:
My fiery love this darkness makes seem bright,
And and this the path that leads to my delight.
He goes in at one door, and comes out at another. And this the gate vntoo't;
I Will listen first,
Before too rudely I disturb her rest:
And gentle breathing; Ha? she is sure awake,
For in the bed two whisper, and their voices
Appear to me unequal; -- One a woman's --
And hers; -- The other should be no maids tongue,
It bears too big a tone; And hark, they laugh;
(Damnation) But list further; 'Tother sounds --
Like -- It Is the same false perjured traitor, Dalauill,
To friend and goodness: Unchaste impious woman,
False to all faith, and true conjugal love;
There Is met, a Serpent and a Crockadell;
A Synon and a Circe: Oh, to what
May I Compare you? -- But my Sword,
I Will act a nobel execution,
On two unmatcht for sorded vilianie: --
I left it in my Chamber, And thanks (...)
That I did to; It has prevented me
From playing a base Hangman: Since securely^
Whilst I, although for many, yet less faults,
Strive hourly to repent me; I once loved her,
And was to him intir'd; Although I pardon,
Heaven will find time to punish, I Will not stretch
My just revenge so far, as once by (...)
To make your brazen Impudence to (...);
Damn on, revenge too great; And to suppress
Your Souls yet lower, without hope to (...)
Heap Ossa upon Pelion: You have made me
To hate my very Country, because here bred:
Near two such monsters; First I Will leave this House,
And then my Fathers; Next I Will take my leave,
Both of this Clime and Nation, Travel till
Age snow upon this Head: My passions now,
Are inexpressible, I Will end the^ thus:
Ill man, bad Woman, your unheard of (...),
This unjust censure, on a Just man give,
To seek out place, where no two (...) live.
Exit.
Enter Dalanill as a Night-(...): Wift in a Nighttyre, (...) from (...). Dal. A
happy Morning now (...) your Lady,
To equal the content of a sweet Night.

Wife. It has bin to my wish, (...) your desire:
And this your coming by (...)
Unto my Sister Pru. cuts of suspicion
Of any such converse 'twi^^ you and (...).

Dal. It has bin wisely carried.

Wife. One thing troubles me.

Dal. What Is that my Dearest?

Wife. Why your Friend Geraldine,
Should on the sudden (...) absent himself?
Has he had think you no intelligence.
Of these our private meetings.

Dal. No, on my Soul,
For therein has my brain (...) yours;
I studdying to engrosse you to my self,
Of his continued absence have bin (...)
Yet he of your affection no way jealous,
Or of my Friendship -- How the plot was cast,
You at our better leisure shall partake;
The air grows cold, have care unto your health,
Suspicious eyes are ore us, that yet sleep,
But with the dawne, will open; Sweet (...) you
To your warm Sheets; I now to fill my own,
That have this Night bin empty.

Wife. You advise well;
Oh might this Kiss dwell ever on thy Lips,
In my remembrance.

Dal. Doubt it not I pray,
Whilst Day frights Night, and Night pursues the day:
Good morrow.

Exeunt. Enter Reignald, Y. Lionell, Blanda, Scapha, Riote^. and two Gallants,
Reig. with a Key in his hand. Reig. Now is the Goal delivery; Through this
back gate
Shift for your selves, I here vnprison all.

Y. Lio. But tell me, how shall we dispose our selves?
We are as far to seek now, as the first;
What is it to repreeue us for few hours,
And now to suffer, better had it bin
At first, to have stood the trial, so by this,
We might have past our (...).

Bla. Sweet Reignald.

Y. Lio. Honest rog^e.

Rio. If now thou failest us, then we are lost for ever,

Reig. This same sweet Reignald, and this honest rogue,
Has bin the Burgess, under whose protection
You all this while have lived, free from Arrests,
But now, the Sessions of my power's broake up,
And you exposed to Actions, Warrants, Writs;
For all the hellish rabble are broke loose,
Of Seriants, Sheriffs, and Baliffes,

O^^. Guard us Heaven,

Reig. I tell you as it is; Nay, I my self
That have bin your Protector, now as subject
To every varlets Pestle, for you know
How I am engaged with you -- At whose suit sir.

Omn. Why did thou Start.

All Start. Reig. I was afraid some Catchpole stood behind (...),
To clap me on the Shoulder.

Rio. No such thing; Yet I protest
Thy fear did fright us all.

Reig. I knew your guilty conciences.

Y. Lio. No Brain left?

Ela. No crotchet for my sake?

Reig. One kiss then Sweet,
Thus shall my crotchets, and your kisses meet.

Y. Lio. Nay, tell us what to trust too.

Reig. Lodge your selves
In the next Tavern, there is the Cash that is left,
Go, health it freely for my good success;
Nay, Drown it all, let not a Teaster escape
To be consumed in rot-gut; I have begun,
And I will stand the period.

Y. Lio. Bravely spoke.

Reig. Or perisn in the conflict.

Rio. Worthy Reignald.

Reig. Well, if he now come off well, Fox you all;
Go, call for Wine; For sing^e of my self
I will oppose all danger; But I charge you,
When I shall faint or find my self disttest;
If I like brave Orlands, wind my Horn,
Make haste unto my rescew.

Y. Lio. And die in it.

Reig. Well have thou spoke my noble Charlemaine,
With these thy Peers about thee.

Y. Lio. May good Speed
Attend thee still.

Reig. The end still crowns the deed.

Exeunt. Enter Old Lionell, and the first Owner of the House. Own. Sir sir,
your threats nor warrants, can fright me;
My honesty and innocency's known
Always to have bin unblemished; Would you could
As well approve your own Integrity,
As I shall doubtless acquit my self
Of this surmised murder.

Old Lio. Rather Surrender
The price I paid, and take into thy hands
This haunted mansion, or I Will prosecute
My wrongs, even to the utmost of the Law,
Which is no less then death.

Own. I Will answer all
Old Lionell, both to thy shame and scorn;
This for thy Menaces.

Enter the Clown. Clo. This is the House, but where is the noise that was wont
to be in it? I am sent hither, to deliver a Noate, to two young Gentlemen that
here keep Reuell-rout; I remember it, since the last Massacre of Meat that
was made in it; But it seems, That the great Storm that was raised then, is
chaste now; I have other Noates to deliver, one to Master Rycott -- and -- I
shall think on them all in order; My Old Master makes a great Feast, for the
parting of young Master Geraldine, who is presently upon his departure for
Travel, and the better to grace it, has invited many of his Neighbors and
Friends; Where will be Old Master Geraldine -- his Son, and I cannot tell how
many; But this is strange, the Gates shut up at this time a day, belike they
are all Drunk and laid to sleep, if they be, I Will wake them, with a Murraine.


Knockes. Old Lio. What desperate fellowe's this, that ignorant
Of his own danger, thunders at these Gates?

Clo. Ho, Reignald, Riotous Reignald, Reuelling Reignald.

Old. Lio. What madness does possess thee, honest Friend,
To touch that Hammers handle?

Clo. What madness does possess thee, honest Friend,
To ask me such a question?

Old Lio. Nay, stir not yo^?

Own. Not I; The game begins.

Old Lio. How do thou, art thou well?

Clo. Yes very well, I thank you, how do you Sir?

Old Lio. No alteration; What change about thee?

Clo. Not so much change about me at this time,
As to change you a Shilling into two Teasters.

Old Lio. Yet I advise thee Fellow, for thy good,
Stand further from the Gate.

Clo. And I advise thee Friend, for thine own good, stand not betwixt me and
the Gate, but give me leave to deliver my er^ant; Hoe, Reignald, you mad
Rascal.


Old Lio. In vain thou thunder'st at these silent Doors,
Where no man dwells to answer, saving Ghosts,
Furies, and Sprights.

Clo. Ghosts; Indeed there has bin much walking, in and about the House after
Midnight.


Old Lio. Strange noise often heard.


Clo. Yes, terrible noise, that none of the neighbors could take any rest for
it, I have heard it my self.


Old Lio. You hear this; Here Is more witness.

Own. Very well Sir.

Old Lio. Which you shall dearly answer -- whooping.

Clo. And hollowing.

Old. Lio. And shouting.

Clo. And crying out, till the whole house rung again.

Old Lio. Which thou have heard?

Clo. Oftener then I have toes and singers.

Old Lio. Thou will be deposed of this?

Clo. I Will be sworn to it, and that is as good.

Old Lio. Very good still; Yet you are innocent:
Shall I entreat thee friend, to avouch as much
Here by, to the next Justice.

Clo. I Will take my soldiers oath on it.

Old Lio. A soldiers oath, What Is that?

Clo. My corporal oath; And you know Sir, a Corporal is an office belonging
to a soldier.


Old Lio. Yet you are clear?
Murder will come to light.

Enter Robin the old seruing-man. Own. So will your gullery too.

Rob. They say my old Master's come home; I Will see if he will turn me out of
doors, as the young man has done: I have laid rods in piss for somebody,
escape Reignald as he can, and with more freedom then I dust late, I bouldly
now dare knock.


Robin knocks. Old Lio. More madmen yet; I think since my last voyage,
Half of the world's turned frantic: What do mean,
Or long'st thou to be blasted?

Rob. Oh Sir, you are welcome home; 'Twas time to come
Ere all was gone to havoc.

Old Lio. My old servant? before I shall demand of further busin^^. Resolve me
why thou thunder'st at these doors,

Where thou know none inhabits?

Rob. Are they gone Sir?
'Twas well yet they have left the house behind;
For all the furniture, to a bare bench,
I am sure is spent and wasted.

Old Lio. Where Is my son,
That Reignald p^asting for him with such speed,
Brings him not from the Country?

Rob. Country Sir?
It Is a thing they know not; Here they Feast,
Dice, Drink, and Drab; The company they keep,
Cheaters and Roaring-Ladds, and these attended
By Bawdes and Queanes: Your son has got a Strumpet,
On whom he spends all that your sparing left,
And here they keep court; To whose damned abuses,
Reignald gives all encouragement.

Old Lio. But stay stay;
No living soul has for these six months space
Here entered, but the house stood desolate.

Rob. Last week I am sure, so late, and the other day,
Such Reuells were here kept.

Old Lio. And by my son?

Rob. Yes, and his servant Reignald.

Old Lio. And this house at all not haunted?

Rob. Save Sir with such Sprights.

Enter Master Ricott. Own. This Murder will come out.

Old Lio. But see, in happy time here comes my
Neighbor of whom he bought this mansion; He I am sure
More amply can resolve me: I pray Sir,
What sums of moneys have you late received
Of my young son?

Ric. Of him? None I assure you.

Old Lio. What of my servant Reignald?

Ric. But devise
What to call less then nothing, and that sum
I will confess received.

Old Lio. Pray Sir, be serious;
I do confess my self indebted to you,
A hundred pound.

Ric. You may do well to pay't then, for here is witness Sufficient of your
words.


Old Lio. I speak no more then what I purpose; lust so much I owe you, And ere
I sleep will tender.


Ric. I shall be as ready to receive it, and as willing,
As you can be to pay't.

Old Lio. But provided,
You will confess seven hundred pounds received
Before hand of (...) ^o^^?

Ric. But by your favor;
Why should I yield seven hundred received
Of them I never dealt with? Why? For what?
What reason? What condition? Where or when
Should such a sum be paid me?

Old Lio. Why? For this bargain: And for what? This house,
Reason? Because you sold it: The conditions? Such
As were agreed between you: Where and When?
That only has escapt me.

Ric. Madness all.

Old Lio. Was I not brought to take free view thereof,
As of mine own possession?

Ric. I confess;
Your servant told me you had found out a wife
Fit for your son, and that you meant to build;
Desired to take a friendly view of mine,
To make it your example: But for selling,
I tell you Sir, my wants be not so great,
To change my house to Coin.

Old Lio. Spare Sir your anger,
And turn it into pity; Neighbors and friends,
I am quite lost, was never man so so^^'d,
And by a wicked servant; Shame and blushing
Will not permit to tell the manner how,
Lest I be made ridiculous to all:
My fears are to inherit what is yet left;
He has made my son away.

Rob. That Is my fear too.

Old Lio. Friends, as you would (...) a m^n
Deprived at once, both of his wealth and son;
And in his age, by one I ever tendered
More like a son then servant: By imagining
My case were yours, have feeling of my griefs
And help to apprehend him;
Furnish me with Cords and Fetters,
I will lay him safe in Prison within Prison.

Ric. We Will assist you.

Rob. And I.

Clo. And all;
But not to do the least hurt to my old friend Reig^^d.

Old Lio. His Legs will be as nimble as his Brain,
And 'twill be difficult to seize the slave,
Enter Reignald with a Horn in his pocket: they withdraw behind the Arras. Yet
your endeauours, pray peace, here hoe comes.

Reig. My heart mis-giues, for it is not possible
But that in all these windings and indents
I shall be found at last: I Will take that course
That men both troubled and affrighted do,
Heap doubt on doubt, and as combustions rise,
Try if from many I can make my peace,
And work mine own atonement.

Old Lio. Stand you close,
Be not yet seen, but at your best advantage
Hand him, and bind him fast: Whilst I dissemble
As if I yet knew nothing.

Reig. I suspect
And find there is trouble in my Masters looks;
Therefore I must not trust my self too far
Within his fingers.

Old Lio. Reignald?

Reig. Worshipful Sir.

Old Lio. What says my son in the Country?

Reig. That tomorrow,
Early in the morning, heel attend your pleasure,
And do as all such dutious children ought;
Demand your blessing Sir.

Old Lio. Well, it is well.

Reig. I do not like his countenance.

Old Lio. But Reignald? I suspect the honesty
And the good meaning of my neighbor here,
Old master Ricott; Meeting him but now,
And having some discourse about the house,
He makes all strange, and tells me in plain terms,
He knows of no such matter.

Reig. Tell me that Sir?

Old Lio. I tell thee as it is:
Nor that such moneys, took up at use, were ever tendered him
On any such conditions.

Reig. I cannot blame your worship to be pleasant,
Knowing at what an vnder-rate we bought it, but you ever
Were a most merry Gentleman.

Y. Lio. (Impudent (...))
But Reignald, he not only does demie it,
But offers to depose Himself and Servants,
No such thing ever was.

Reig. Now Heaven, to see to what this world's gro^^e too.
I will make him --

Old Lio. Nay more, this m^n will not confess the Murder.

Reig. Which both shall dearly answer; You have warrant
For him already; But for the other Sir,
If he deny it, he had better --

Old Lio. Appear Gentlemen,
Softly. It Is a fit time to take him.

Reig. I discover the Ambush that is laid for me.

Old Lio. Come nearer Reignald.

Reig. First sir resolve me one thing, amongst other Merchandise
Bought in your absence by your Son and me,
We ingrost a great comoditie of Combs,
And how many sorts think you?

Old Lio. You might buy
Some of the bones of Fishes, some of Beasts,
Box-combes, and Iuery (...).

Reig. But besides these, we have for Horses Si^,
Mayne-combes, and Curry-combes; Now Sir for men,
We have Head-oombes, (...)-combs, I and Cox-combes too;
Take view of them at your pleasure, whil'it for my part,
I thus bestow my self.

They all appear (...) and Shacke^s, Whilst he goes up. Clo. Well said
Reignald, nobly put off Reignald,
Look to thy self Reignald.

Old Lio. Why do thou cli^^bo thus?

Reig. Only to practice
The nimblenesse of my Arms and Legs,
Ere they prove your Cords and Fetters.

Old Lio. Why to that place?

Reig. (...) Harbor long, and now it must be my Sanctuary; Dispute now, and
I Will answer.


Own. (...)
To challenge me of Murder?

Reig. Oh sir, the man you killed is alive at this present to iustisie it: I am,
quoth he, a Trans-marine by birth --


Ric. Why, challenge me receipt of Moneys, and to give abroad, That I had sold
my House?


Reig. Why? because sir,
Could I have purchased Houses at that rate,
I had meant to have bought all London.

Clo. Yes, and Middlesex too, and I would have bin thy half Reignald.

Old Lio. Yours are great,
My wrongs insufferable; As first, to fright me
From mine own dwelling, till they had consumed
The whole remainder of the little left;
Besides, out of my late stock got at Sea,
Discharge the clamorous Usurer; Make me accuse
This man of Murder; Be at charge of warrants;
And challenging this my worthy Neighbor of
Forswearing Sums he never yet received;
Fool me, to think my Son that had spent all,
Had by his thrift bought Land; I and him too,
To open all the secrets of his House
To me, a Stranger, On thou insolent villain,
What to all these can answer?

Reig. Guilty, guilty.

Old Lio. But to my Sons death, what thou slave?

Reig. Not Guilty.

Old Lio. Produce him then; In The mean time, and --
Honest Friends, get Ladders.

Reig. Yes, and come down in your own Ropes.

Own. I Will fetch a Piece and shoot him.

Reig. So the warrant in my Masters pocket, will serve for my Murder; And ever
after shall my Ghost haunt this House.


Clo. And I will say like Reignald,
This Ghost and I am Friends.

Old Lio. Bring faggots, I Will set fire upon the House,
Rather then this endure.

Reig. To burn Houses is Felony, and I Will not out
Till be fired out; But since I am Besieged thus,
I Will summon supplies unto my Rescue.

He winds a Horn. Enter Young Lionell, Rioter, two Gallants Blanda, etc. Y.
Lie. Before you chide, first here me, next your Blessing,
That on my knees I beg; I have but done,
Like misspent youth, which after wit dear bought,
Turns his Eyes inward, sorry and ashamed;
These things in which I have offended most,
Had I not proved, I should have thought them still
Essential things, delights perdureable;
Which now I find mere Shadows, Toys and Dreams,
Now hated more then erst I doated on;
Best Natures, are soonest wrought on; Such was mine;
As I the offenses, So the offenders throw
Here at your feet, to punish as you please;
You have but paid so much as I have wasted,
To purchase to your self a thrifty Son;
Which I from henceforth, Vow.

Old Lio. See what Fathers are,
That can three years offenses, foul ones too,
Thus in a Minute pardon; And thy faults
Upon my self chastise, in these my Tears;
Ere this Submission, I had cast thee off;
Rise in my new Adoption: But for these --

Clo. The one you have nothing to do withal, here is his Ticket for his
discharge; Another for you Sir, to Summon you to my Masters Feast, For you, and
you, where I charge you all to appear, upon his displeasure, and your own
apperils.


Y. Lio. This is my Friends (...) one I loved,
Only because they have bin dear to him
That now will strive to be more dear to you;
Vouchsafe their pardon.

Old Lio. All dear, to me indeed, for I have paid for it soundly,
Yet for the sake, I am atton'd with all; Only that wanton.
Her, and her Company, abandon quite;
So doing, we are friends.

Y. Lie. A just Condition, and willingly subscribed to.

Old Lio. But for that Villain; I am now devising
What shame, what punishment remarkable,
To inflict on him.

Reig. Why Master? Have I labored;
Plotted, Contrived, and all this while for you,
And will you leave me to the Whip and Stocks;
Not mediate my peace.

Old Lio. (...) come down.

Reig. Not till my Pardon's sealed, I Will rather stand here
Like a Statue, in the Forefront of your house
For ever; Like the picture of Dame Fortune
Before the Fortune Playhouse.

Y. Lio. If I have here
But any Friend amongst you, join with me
In this petition.

Clo. Good Sir, for my sake, I resolved you truly
Concerning Whooping, the Noise, the Walking; and the Sprights,
And for a need, can show you a Ticket for him too.

Own. I impute my wrongs rather to knauish Cunning,
Then least pretended Malice.

Ric. What he did,
Was but for his Young Master, I allow it
Rather as sports of Wit, then injuries;
No other pray esteem them.

Old Lio. Even as freely,
As you forget my quarells made with you;
Raised from the Errors first begot by him;
I here remit all free; I now am Calm,
But had I seaz'd upon him in my Spleen --

Reig. I knew that, therefore this was my Invention,
For Pollicie's the art still of Prevention.

Clo. Come down then Reignald, first on your hands and feet, and then on your
knees to your Master; Now gentlemen, what do you say to your inuiting to my
Masters Feast.


Ric. We will attend him.

Old Lio. Nor do I love to break good company;
For Master Wincott is my worthy Friend,
Enter Reighnald. And old acquaintance; Oh thou crafty Wag-string,
And could thou thus delude me? But we are Friends;
Nor Gentlemen, let not what is here to past,
In your least thoughts disable my Estate;
This my last Voyage has made all things good,
With surplus too; Be that your comfort Son:
Well Reignald -- But no more.

Reig. I was the Fox,
But I from henceforth, will no more the Cox --
Comb, put upon your pate.

Old Lio. Let Us walk Gentlemen

Exeunt Omnes. Actus Quintus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Old Geraldine, and Young Geraldine. Old Ger. Son, let me tell you, you
are ill advised;
And doubly to be blamed, by undertaking
Unnecessary travel; Grounding no reason
For such a rash and giddy enterprise:
What profit aim you at, you have not reapt;
What Nouelty affords the Christian world,
Of which your view has not participated
In a full measure; Can you either better
Your language or experience? Your self-will
Has only purpose to deprive a father
Of a loved son, and many noble friends,
Of your much wished a^quaintance.

Y. Ger. Oh, dear Sir,
Do not, I do entreat you, repent you
Of your free grant; Which with such care and studdy.
I have so long, so often labored for.

Old Ger. Say that may be dispensed with, show me reason
Why you desire to (...) out of your Country,
Like some Malefactor that had forfeited
His life and freedom; Here Is a worthy Gentleman
Has for your sake invited many guests,
To his great charge, only to take of you
A parting leave; You send him word you cannot,
After, you may not come: Had not my vrgence,
Almost compulsion, driven you to his house,
The unkindness might have forfeited your love,
And raced you from his will; In which he has given you,
A fair and large estate; Yet you of all this stangenesse,
Show no sufficient ground.

Y. Ger. Then understand;
The ground thereof took his first birth from you;
'Twas you first charged me to forbear the house,
And that upon your blessing: Let it not then
Offend you Sir, if I so great a charge
Have strived to keep so strictly.

Old Ger. Me perhaps,
You may appease, and with small difficulty.
Because a Father; But how satisfy
Their dear, and on your part, vnmerited love?
But this your last obedience may salve all:
We now grow near the house.

Y. Ger. Whose doors, to me,
Appear as horried as the gates of Hell:
Where shall I borrow patience, or from whence?
Enter Wincott, Wife, Ricott, the two Lionells, Owner, Dalauill, Prudentilla,
Reignald, Rioter. To give a meeting to this viperous brood,
Of Friend and Mistress.

Winc. You Have entertained me with a strange discourse
Of your man's knauish wit, but I rejoice,
That in your safe return, all ends so well:
Most welcome you, and you, and indeed all;
To whom I am bound, that at so short a warning,
Thus friendly, you will deigne to visit me.

Old Lio. It seems my absence has begot some sport,
Thank my kind servant here.

Reig. Not so much worth Sir.

Old Lio. But though their riots tript at my estate,
They have not quite ore-throwne it.

Winc. But see Gentlemen, these whom we most expected, come at length; This I
proclaim the master of the Feast,

In which to express the bounty of my love,
I Will show my self no niggard.

Y. Ger. Your choice favors,
I still taste in abundance.

Wife Methinks it would not mis-become me Sir,
To chide your absence; That have made your self,
To us, so long a stranger.

He turns away sad, as not being minded. Y. Ger. Pardon me Sir,
That have not yet, since your return from Sea,
Voted the least fit opportunity,
To entertain you with a kind salute.

Old Lio. Most kindly Sir I thank you.

Dal. Methinks friend,
You should expect green rushes to be strow'd,
After such discontinuance.

Y. Ger. Mistress Pru,
I have not seen you long, but greet you thus,
May you be Lady of a better husband
Then I expect a wife.

Winc. I like that greeting:
Nay, enter Gentlemen; Dinner perhaps
Is not yet ready, but the time we stay,
We Will find some fresh discourse to spend away.

Exeunt. Manet Dal^^ill. Dal. Not speak to me? nor once vouchsafe an answer,
But slight me with a poor and base neglect?
No, nor so much as cast an eye on her,
Or least regard, though in a seeming show
She courted a reply? 'twixt him and her,
Nay him and me, this was not wont to be;
If she have brain to apprehend as much
Enter Young Geraldire and Wife. As I have done, she will quickly find it out:
Now as I live, as our affections meet,
So our conceits, and she has singled him
To some such purpose: I Will retire my self.
Not interrupt their conference.
Exit.
Wife. You are sad Sir.

Y. Ger. I know no cause.

Wife Then can I show you some;
Who could be otherwise, to leave a Father
So careful, and each way so provident?
To leave so many, and such worthy Friends?
To abandon your own country? These are some,
Nor do I think you can be much the merrier
For my sake?

Y. Ger. Now your tongue speaks Oracles;
For all the rest are nothing, it is for you,
Only for you I cannot.

Wife So I thought;
Why then have you bin all this while so strange?
Why will you travel? suing a divorce
Betwixt us, of a love inseparable;
For here shall I be left as desolate
Unto a frozen, almost widdowed bed;
Warmed only in that future, stored in you;
For who can in your absence comfort me?

Y. Ger. Shall my oppressed sufferance yet break forth
Into impatience, or endure her more?

Wife But since by no persuasion, no entreats,
Your settled obstinacy can be swal'd,
Though you seem desperate of your own dear life^
Have care of mine, for it exists in you.
Oh Sir, should you miscarry I were lost,
Lost and forsaken; Then by our past vows,
And by this hand once given me, by these reares,
Which are but springs begetting greater floods,
I do beseech thce, my dear Geraldine,
Look to thy safety, and preserve thy health;
Have care into what company you fall;
Travel not late, and cross no dangerous Seas;
For till Heavens bless me in thy safe return,
How will this poor heart suffer?

Y. Ger. I had thought
Long since the Sirens had bin all destroyed;
But one of them I find suruiues in her;
She almost makes me question what I know,
An Heretic unto my own belief:
Oh thou mankinds seducer.

Wife What? no answer?

Y. Ger. Yes, thou have spoke to me in Showers,
I will reply in Thunder; Thou Adultresse,
That have more poison in thee then the Serpent,
Who was the first that did corrupt thy sex,
The Devil.

Wife To whom speaks the man?

Y. Ger. To thee, falsest of all that ever man termed fair;
Has Impudence so stool'd thy smooth soft skin,
It cannot blush? Or sin so obdur'd thy heart,
It does not quake and tremble? Search thy conscience,
There thou shall find a thousand clamorous tongues
To speak as loud as mine does.

Wife. Save from yours,
I hear no noise at all.

Y. Ger. I Will play the Doctor
To open thy deaf ears; Monday the Ninth
Of the last Month; Can thou remember that?
That Night more black in thy abhorred sin,
Then in the gloomie darkness; That the time.

Wife. Monday?

Y. Ger. Would thou the place know? Thy polluted Chamber,
So often, witness of my sin-lesse vows;
Would thou the Person? One not worthy Name,
Yet to torment thy guilty Soul the more,
I Will tell him thee, That Monster Dalauill;
Would thou your Bawd know? Midnight, that the hour;
The very words thou spa^e? Now what would Geraldine
Say, if he saw us here? To which was answered,
Tush he is a Cox-combe, fit to be so fooled:
No blush? What, no faint Fever on thee yet?
How has thy black sins changed thee? Thou Medusa,
Those Hairs that late appeared li^^ golden Wyers,
Now crawle with Snakes and Adders; Thou art ugly.

Wife. And yet my glass, till now, near told me so;
Who gave you this intelligence?

Y. Ger. Only he,
That pitying such an Innocenti^^s mine,
Should by two such delinquents be be^ray'd,
He brought me to that place by mirracle;
And made mean ear witness of all this.

Wife. I am undone.

Y. Ger. But think wharthou have lost
To forfeit me; I not withstanding these,
(So fixed was my love and v^^^erable)
I kept this from thy Husband, nay all ears,
With thy transgressions smothering mine own wrongs,
In hope of thy (...)

Wife. Which begin^ thus low upon my knees.

Y. Ger. Tush, bow in (...),
Which thou have most offended; alas,
Save in such (Sca^ce unheard of) Treachery,
Most sinful like thy self;
Wherein, Oh wherein, has my unspotted and unbounded Love
deserved the least of these? Sworn to be made a ^^ale
For term of life; And all this for my goodness;
Die, and die soon, acquit me of my Oath,
But prithee die repentant; Farewell ever,
It Is thou, and only thou have Banished me,
Both from my Frinds and Country.

Wife. Oh, I am lost.

Sinkes down. Enter Dalauill meeting Young Geraldine going out. Dal. Why how
now, what is the business?

Y. Ger. Go take her Up, whom thou have often thrown Down, Villain.


Dal. That was no language from a Friend,
It had too harsh an accent; But how is this?
My Mistress thus low cast upon the earth
Grauelling and breathless, Mistress, Lady, Sweet --

Wife. Oh tell me if thy name be Geraldine,
Thy very looks will kill me?

Dal. View me well,
I am no such man; See, I am Dalauill.

Wife. Thou Art then a Devil, that presents before me
My horrid sins; persuades me to despair;
When he like a good Angel sent from Heaven,
Besought me of repentance; Swell sick Heart,
Even till thou burst the ribs that bound thee in;
So, there is one string cracked, flow, and flow high,
Even till thy blood distill out of mine eyes,
To witness my great sorrow.

Dal. Faint again,
Some help within there, no attendant near?
Thus to expire, in this I am more wretched,
Then all the sweet fruition of her love
Before could make me happy.

Enter Wincott Old Geraldine, Young Geraldine, the two Lionells, Ricott, Owner,
Prudentilla, Reignald, Clown. Winc. What was he clamor'd so loud,
To mingle with our mirth this terror
And affright?

Dal. See Sir, your Wife in these my arms expiring.

Winc. How?

Prud. My sister?

Winc. Support her, and by all means possible
Provide for her dear safety.

Old Ger. See, she recouers.

Winc. Woman, look up.

Wife. Oh Sir, your pardon;
Convey me to my Chamber, I am sick,
Sick even to death, away thou Sycophant,
Out of my sight, I have besides thy self,
Too many sins about me.

Clo. My sweet Mistress.

Dal. The storme's coming, I must provide for harbor.
Exit.
Old Lio. What strange and sudden alteration's this,
How quickly is this clear day ouercast,
But such and so uncertain are all things,
That dwell beneath the Moon.

Y. Lio. A Woman's qualme,
Frailties that are inherent to her sex,
Soon sick, and soon recouer'd.

Winc. If she misfare,
I am a man more wretched in her loss,
Then had I forfeited life and estate;
She was so good a creature.

Old Ger. I the like
Suffered, when I my Wife brought unto her gra^e;
So you, when you were first a widower,
Come arm your self with patience.

Ric. These are casualties
That are not new, but common.

Reig. Burying of Wives,
As stale as shifting shifts, or for some servants,
To flout and gull their Masters.

Own. Best to send
And see how her fit holds her.

Enter Prudencilla and Clown. Prud. Sir, my (...)
In these few Lines commends her last to you,
For she is now no more; What Is therein writ,
Save Heaven and you, none knows, This she desired
You would take view of; and with these words expired.

Winc. Dead?

Y. Ger. She has made one then a free release,
Of all the debts I owed her.

Winc. My fear is beyond pardon, Dalauill
Has played the villain, but for Geraldine,
He has bin each way Noble -- Love him still,
My peace already I have made with Heaven;
Oh be not you at war with me; My Honor
Is in your hands to punish, or preserve;
I am now Confessed, and only Geraldine
Has wrought on me this unexpected good;
The Ink I write with, I wish had bin my blood,
To witness me Repentance -- Dalauill?
Where Is he? Go seek him out.

Clo. I shall, I shall Sir.
Exit.
Winc. The Wills of Dead folk should be still obeyed;
How ever false to me, I Will not reueale't;
Where Heaven forgiues, I pardon Gentlemen,
I know you all commiserate my loss;
I little thought this Feast should have bin turned
Enter Clown. Into a Funeral; What Is the news of him?

Clo. He went presently to the Stable, put the Sadle upon his Horse, put his
Foot into the Stirrup, clapped his Spurs into his sides, and away he is
Gallopt, as if he were to ride a Race for a Wager.


Winc. All our ill lucks go with him, farewell he;
But all my best of wishes wait on you,
As my chief Friend; This meeting that was made
Only to take of you a parting leave,
Shall now be made a Marriage of our Love,
Which none save only Death shall separate.

Y. Ger. It calls me from all Travel, and from henceforth,
With my Country I am Friends.

Winc. The Lands that I have left,
You lend me for the short space of my life;
As soon as Heaven calls me, they call you Lord;
First feast, and after Mourn; We Will like some Gallants
That Bury thrifty Fathers, think it no sin,
To wear Blacks without, but other Thoughts within.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

