Est mihi supp^icij causa fuisse piam.

Many daughters have don well but thou surpass est them all.

I S. Inu^nt.



ENGLANDS ELIZABETH HER LIFE AND TROUBLES, During Her Minority, from the
Cradle to the CROWN. Historically laid open and interwouen with such eminent
Passages of STATE, as happened under the Reign of HENRY the Eight, EDWARD the
Sixth, Q. MARY; all of them aptly introducing to the present Relation. By THO:
HEYWOO^

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE, for PHILIP WATERHOVSE; and are to be sold at
his Shop at St. Paul's head, near London-stone. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE the Lord HENRY Earl of Dover, Viscount ROCHFORD, L.
Hunsdon, etc.
Right Honorable,
WHen I had finished this short Tractate, (which may be rather styled a
superficial remembrance then an essential expression of the of the passages
of Queen Elizabeth's Life in her minority:) I could not apprehend unto whom
the Patronage thereof might more justly belong, then to your Honor, whose
noble Grandfather, Henry Lord Hunsdon, after Lord Chamberlain to her Majesty
(her near and dear Kinsman:) was the most constant Friend and faithful
Assistant in all her troubles and dangers, who not only employed his whole
industry, and made use of his best Friends: but liberally expended his means,
and hazarded his own person as an Interposer betwixt her safety, and the
malice of her potent adversaries, which makes me something to wonder, that so
great and remarkable a zeal expressed in a time of such inevitable danger, when
all Her friends were held the Queen her Sisters enemies; and her enemies, the
Queens friends; when nothing but Examinations, sentences of Imprisonment, and
terrors of Death were thundered against her; that her (I say) whom neither
promises of favor could dissuade from her Love, nor threatenings of death,
deter from her Service, should not be so much as once remembered by the
Collectors of Her History: Be this therefore (Right Honorable) a lasting
Testimony of his unchanged affection to her and her Innocence from the
beginning, as likewise, a long-liu'd Monument* of her Royal gratitude toward
him, extended even unto his end, and to his noble Issue after him: what great
confidence she had in his loyalty appeared, at the Camp of Tilbury in the
year 1588. where he solely commanded the Guard for her Majesty's own Person,
which consisted of Lances, Light Horse, and Foot, to the number of 34050* It
has pleased your Lordship to censure favorably of some of my weak Labors not
long since presented before you, which the rather encouraged me, to make a
free tender of this small piece of service. In which if my boldness should
beget the least distaste from you, I must fly for refuge, to that of the Poet
Claudian. -- Leones,
Quae str auisse valent, ea mox prostrata relinquunt.


Thus wishing to you and to all your Noble Family, not only the long fruition
of the blessings of this life present; but the eternal possession of the loyes
future, I remain your Lordships,

In all obseruances; THO: HEYWOOD.

TO THE GENEROUS READER.
WEre I able to write this little Historical Tractate with the Pen of Tacitus,
the Ink of Curtius, and set down every line and letter by Epictetus his
Candle; yet can I see no possibility to avoid the Critics of this age, who
with their frivolous cauils and unnecessary exceptions, ambush the commendable
labors of others, when they themselves will not or dare not either through
idleness or ignorance, adventure the expense of one serious hour in any
laborious work intended for the benefit of either Church or Commonweal; and
such Polupragmatists this age is full of; -- Sed meliora spero,

I doubt not but that they will spare this Argument for the worth thereof, and
though their carping may correct my Poem, yet they will have a reverend
respect of the Person here drawn out, whose neuer-dying fame even in this our
age is so sacred amongst all good men, that it is scarce remembered, at the
least uttered without a devout thanksgiving.

The prosperous and successful Reign of this Royal Queen and Virgin has
been largely delivered in the Latin Tongue whereby all foreign Nations have
been made partakers of her admirable virtues and religious Government; but for
that part of her Life, during her tender and sappy Age, all our domesticke
remembrancers have been ^paring to speak.

As they have showed you a Queen, I expose to your view a Princess; they in
her Ma^estie, I in her Minority; they the passages of her incomparable Life
from the Scepter to the Sepulcher, as she was a Sovereign; I the process of
her time from the Cradle to the Crown, as she was a sad and sorrowful
Subject; in the discovery whereof, I have not fallen so pat as to make the
relation of her Minority the whole scope of my intentions; but have for the
better enlightening thereof, made use of all such eminent occurrences of State,
as may aptly introduce thereunto, as for those passages in the Characterizing
of King Edward the sixth, and the Lady Jane Gray, and others; -- Vix ea nostra
voco,

I have borrowed them from my good friend Mr. H. H. Stationer, who has not
only conuersed with the titles of Books, but has looked into them, and from
thence drawn out that industrious Collection, Entitled Herologia Anglicana.
Not to hold thee any longer in that to which all this but introduces. If the
Book please thee, I am satisfied, and shall rest still,

Thine; N. R.

HEN. 8.
Anno 1501.
ENGLANDS ELIZABETH.
Her LIFE, and TROUBLES.
The better to il^ustrate this history, needful it is that we speak something
of the Mother, before we proceed to the Daughter.

A match was concluded betwixt Prince Arthur the eldest Son and Heir
apparent to Henry the 7th. King of England, and the Infant Katharine daughtter
to the King of Spain, she landed at Plymouth Anno 1501. and was married to
Prince Arthur; Prince Arthur marries Infant Katharine of Spain.
in April next following he expired at Ludlow, in that Castle, which has
been an ancient Seat belonging to the Princes of Wales. (Death having thus
made a Divorce betwixt these two Princes) The two mighty and Potent Kings (by
their grave and politic governments known to be as eminent in wisdom as
greatness) for the more assured continuance of league and amity betwixt them,
treated of a second match betwixt Henry the second son (but then the Sole
Heir and hope of England) and the late Dowager, Princess of Spain. The
contract by a dispensation solicited, and after granted by the pope then
reigning was accordingly performed; Prince Henry marries his Brothers wife.
The marriage countenanced by their known wisdoms on the one side, and
authorized by his Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction on the other side, was held not
only tolerable but irreuocable.

Notwithstanding, the Father dying, and the Sovereign Son inaugurated by the
name of Henry the eight, for many years together enioyning a peaceable and
quiet reign, whether distasting his Queen, by reason that by this time she
was grown somewhat in years, or that he had cast an affectionate eye upon a
more choice beauty, The ^^tiues persuading a Divorce.
or that through scruple of Conscience (which for his honors sake is most
received) I am not able to censure. But sure it is, that he began deeply to
consider with himself, that notwithstanding the usurped liberty of the Pope
(whose Prerogatives till then was never thought disputable) that his marriage
was not only unlawful, but incestuous: some are of opinion that he was
hereunto moved by the Nobility; others, that he was instigated by the Clergy,
but if we may give credit to his own Protestation in open Court, the first
original^ of this touch in Conscience, was, because the Bishop of Bayon being
sent Ambassador from the French King to debate a Marriage betwixt the Duke of
Orleance his second son, and the Lady Mary, the sole suruiuing Issue of him
and his Queen Katharine, but as the match was upon the point to be concluded,
the Bishop began to demurre and desired respit, till he were fully resolved
whether the Lady Mary (by reason of the Kings Marriage with his brothers wife)
were legitimate or not. The cause is doubtful, but the effect I am sure is
unquestionable.

Although the King received from this Spanish Lady a Prince called Edward,
Prince Henry borne.
borne at Richmond on Newyeeres day in the second year of his reign, for whose
Nativity great Triumphs were kept at Westminster, yet breathed his last upon
Saint Mathews day following. Besides he had by her a second issue, the Lady
Mary before-named, so that neither sterility and barrenness could be aspersed
upon her, nor any known disobedience or disloyalty objected against her, but
that (as the King himself often protested) she was a wife no way refractory,
but in all things corresponding to his desires and pleasures: These things
notwithstanding, the pretended divorce The Diuouorce disputed of.
was to the Kings great cost and charge, so effectually negotiated, that after
they had lived together by the space of 22 years and upwards in unquestioned
Matrimony, it was made the public Argument in Schools, debated by the
Italian, French, German, and our own modern Doctors, both Ecclesiastical and
Civil, by an unanimous consent determined, and for the better confirmation
thereof, by the Seals of diverse Academies signed, that the Marriage betwixt
the King and Queen (never till now called his Sister, or Brothers wife) was a
mere nullity, absolutely unlawful, and that his sacred Majesty had liberty
and license (howsoever the Pope sought by all means to antipose their
opinions) warra^table from them, after a legal divorce sued out from the Court,
to make choice of any other lady to his wife where he himself best liked.

Cardinal Campeius Cardinal Campeius sent from Rome.
was sent from his Holiness and Cardinal Wolsey was joined with him in
commission, to determine of this difficult point: the King and Queen were
conuened in open Court, then held in Black Friars; the Resolution of the
weighty Argument then in hand, was so abstruse, that it puzzled all; though many
seemed confident, yet not a few of the best Orthodoxall divines then staggered
in their opinions, in so much that the Legate departed the land before he would
give up a definitive sentence in the cause, the reason was because he desired
further Order and Instruction from his Holiness.

In the Interim the good Princess, greatly beloved, was much pitied, and the
King much honored was greatly feared. (For now most men's thoughts were in their
hearts, a time better to think then speak) but before the Divorce was
publikly denounced, the Lady Anne Bullein The Lady Anne Bullein daughter to the
Earl of Wil^shi^re and Ormond created Marchioness of Pembrooke.
on the first of S^pt. An. 1532. was at Windsor created Marchiones of
Pembrooke, and one thousand pound per annum conferred upon her by the King,
which news no sooner arrived to the dejected Princess ear, but she began
to consider with her self, the fickleness and instability of greatness; and
seeing that Sun to set in a cloud on her, which was beginning to rise
serenely on another, who was now maiestically ascending those steps, by which
she was miserably descending, expressed a woman's wondrous modesty, and without
speaking any distasteful or irreuerent word against the King, said: Great men
enterprizing great things, ought neither by the Laws of God, nor man to employ
their power, as their own mind will leth; but as Justice and Reason teaches:
but fearing lest in speaking so little she had spoken too much, shut up the
rest, of what she thought to utter in a modest and welbeseeming silence.

Upon the 25. of January An. 1533. the King was married in his Closset at
Whitehall, to the Marchioness of Pembrooke, the Lady, Anne Bullein; Henry the
eight married to the Lady Anne Bullein.
but very privately, few were present at the ceremonies, then celebrated by Dr.
Rowland Lee, not long after consecrated Bishop of Chester.

In this concealed So^emnity, one Mistress Anne Savage, much trusted ^y them
both, bore up the Queens train, this Lady was within few months after
espoused to the Lord Berkely.

In Easter Eve being the 12 of April, the Queen being known to the King to
be young with child, went to the Chapel o^enly as a Queen, and was
proclaimed publikly the same day Queen of England and upon Whitsunday
following crowned at Westminster, Queen Anne crowned.
with all the ^ompe, state and magnificence thereto belonging. Queen Katharine
who for many years had been their Sovereign Lady, is now quite forgotten, and
Queen Anne being to the people scarcely known, is soly honored: The rising
Sun is only adored their joyful acclamations* readier for the coronation of
the one, then their unjust exclamations to forward the deposing of the other.

Upon the 7th of Sep^tember, being Sunday, be^twixt the hours of 3^ and 4^ in
the Afternoon Queen Anne was deli^uered of a fair daughte^ at Greenewich,
The birth of the Lady Elizabeth.
who (...) the great unspeakable ioy^ both of Prince and people, Not kept a
fortnight or a month in state, as it is now usual with ordinary people.
was christened on the third day following be^ing Wednesday; the May^^ of
London and his bre^hren, Lady Elizabeth borne on the Eve of the virgins
Nativity, and died on the Eve of the Virgins Annuntiation 1603 Even that she is
now in heaven with all these blessed virgins that had oil in their lamps.
with more then for^y other of the grauest Ci^izens, being commanded ^o attend
upon the solem^ities. It was performed ^n the Friars Church in Greenewich, the
Font was of silver, placed in the middle of the church with ^n ascent of three
steps ^igh; the old Duchess of Norfolk bore the Babe wrapped in a Mantle of
purple velvet. The Consponsors or witnesses, were, Thomas Cranmer, Archbishop
of Canterbury, Lady Elizabeth's godfather are godmothers.
the Duchess of Norfolk, and ^he Marchioness of Dorset, both widows.

Not long after the birth of the Lady Elizabeth, a general oath of allegianc^
past through the kingdom* to bind al such as by their^ years were capable
thereof, An oath taken to the successors of Q. Anne.
to maintain and uphold the successiue heyre^ descending from the bodies of
the King and Queen Anne, lawfully begotten i^ the true and legal possession of
the Throne, Crown* Sword and Scepter, with all the royalties and impe^riall
honors thereunto be^longing.

The coniecturall of the^ administration of thi^ oath, together with the
suddenesse of the Queene^ coronation, The Reason of Qu. Annes so sudden
coronation.
was to stre^^ then the match, and mak^ the legitimation of her i^^sue (which
by the King^ former match was amongst many yet made questionable) of more
va^^idity: for (as one obser^eth, Anna coronatur, quod ^ulli nisi regni
haeredibus co^^ingere solet: Qu. Anne was therefore crowned, because it is an
honor so^y conferred upon such whose issue are capable of ^^ccessio^, whereby
it is pro^able that the Kings pur^ose was to adnihilate and ^^tinguish the
Title of his ^aughter Mary, and to ^aue the Crown and dig^^ty Royal, to the
sole ^eires of Q. Anne: For this ^use were the two young ^adies brought up
apart, which may be a reason why ^ey were after so different in their
dispositions* and so opposite in their Religions: The different dispositions of
Elizabeth and Mary.
both of them* though not sucking the milk, yet as well imita^ting the minds
as following the steps of their mo^thers; Queen Katharin^ living and dying a
con^stant Roman Catholic Queen Anne, both in he^ life and death, resolute
(...) the defense of the Refor^med Religion, which ((...) the most probable
conie^ctures have left to us vp^on file) was by the instiga^tion of some
Romists the^ powerful with the King^ who was not then fully se^^led in those
tenants which he after made his maxim^ the prologue to her fall an^ ^^ues
Catastrophe which (...) long after happened.

On May day, Ano 1536. ^as a great iusting held at ^^eenewich, The preparation
to Queen Annes fa^ll.
in the which ^^e chief challenger was ^^e Lord Rochford, brother (...) the
Queen, and the de^^ndants were one Henry ^orrice of the Kings Bed^amber, with
others, they ^a^naged their arms with ^eat dexterity, and every ^urse which
they ran, ^me off with the loud ap^^^ause of the people, inso^uch that the
King at first ^^ght seemed in outward ^ewe to be wonderously ^lighted: but
about the ^iddle of the triumph, ^e a storm in the midst ^a quiet Sea, the
King arose suddenly from h^^ seat, and attended with (...) persons only, took
Barg^^ and was rowed to Westmi^^^ leaving no small amaz^^ment behind him,
eu^^ry one wondering and co^^iecturing as their affect^^ons led them, what mig^^
be the occasion thereon All things were with (...) night hushed up and in
q^^^et; The Qu. Brothers, with other sent to the Tower.
no appearance of d^^content either in King (...) Courtier perceived, b^ no
sooner did the day pe^^^ out, but the King's disco^^tent appeared with it. Geo^^
Bulleine, Lod Rochford (...) Queens brother, and He^^ry Norrice, the defenda^^
were saluted with a co^ breakfast next their hea^^ (...) their beds, and both
con^eyed to the Tower; the ^ewes being brought to ^he Queen, struck as cold ^o
her heart, and having ^ast over dinner with dif^ontent, because the King, (...)
his custom was, had ^ent none of his waiters to ^id Much good do it her,
(...) the Table, but percei^ing her servants about ^er, some with their eyes
glazed in tears, but all with looks dejected on the earth, it bred strange
con^ep^ions in her, yet being ^onfident in her own inno^^ency, bred in her
rather ^mazement then fear.

The same day entered in^o her chamber; Sr Thomas ^udley, L. Chancellor, the
Duke of Norfolk, Thomas Cromwell, Secretary, and ^ d^^^^^ce after them, Si^
William Kinsman, Constab^e of the Tower, at their first apppearance, her
apprehension was, that they were sent from the King to comfort her about the
imprisonment of her brother; but observing them to look more austerely upon
her, then usually they were accustomed, she be^gan to mistrust their message,
but casting her eye beyond them, and espying the Constable of the Tower to
accompany them in their unwelcome visit, she grew then confident, that her
death was now approaching, and that these were the Heralds to pre^are it, so
expressing more ^odesty then Majesty, Queen Anne commanded to the tower.
^oth in her behavior, and ^ountenance, she prepared ^er self to attend their
^essage, which the Chan^ellor delivered unto her in ^ew words, telling her,
that it was his Majesty's ^o^mand, that she must in^antly be conveyed from
^hence to the Tower, there ^o remain, during his ^ighnes pleasure, to which
^he answered, that her in^ocence and patience had ^^med her against all
ad^ersities what soever, and (...) such were his Majesty's ^ommand and
pleasure, ^hey both should with all ^umility be obeyed: so without change of
habit, or any thing necessary for her remove, she put her^ self into their
safe custody, and by them was conveyed into her Barge.

Just upon the stroke o^fiue, Qu. Anne enters ^he^owuer
she entered the Tower^ the Lords with the Luie^tenant, brought her to he^
Chamber, to whom, a^ their departure, she spok^ these few words following
(falling upon her knees. I beseech God Almighty to (...) my assistance and
help, only so far forth as I am n^^guiltie of any just crime, that may be
laid against me: the^ turning to the Lords, I in^treat you, to beseech the King
in my ^ehalfe, that it will please him to be a good Lord unto me, which word^
were no sooner uttered, but they departed.

The fifteenth of the same month, the Lords of the Council met at the Tower;
the Queen was called to^ to the Bar, and arraigned before the Duke of
Norfolk, Qu. Anne arra^gned.
who sat as Lord high Steward, the Lord Chancellor on the right hand, and the
Duke of Suffolk on the left hand, with diverse others Marquesses, Earls, and
Barons; the Earl of Surrey, son to the Duke of Norfolk, sat directly
before his father, a degree ^ower, as Earl* Marshall of England, the Queen^
sit^ing in a chair, diverse accusations, especially touching inconstancy, were
objected against her, to all which she answered punctually with such gravity
and discretion, that it appeared to her Auditory she could not be found guilty
of any aspersion whatsoever: But when in their favorable censures they were
ready (not without great applause) to acquit her; Q. Anne quit in the opinion
of the Lords, but found guilty by the Jury.
The Jury brought in a contrary verdict, by which she was convicted,
condemned, and had her judgment to be burned, or else her head to be cut off
at the Kings pleasure; The Sentence being denounced, the Court arose, and she
wa^ conveyed back again to her Chamber, the La^ Bullein her Aunt, and the
Lady Kinsman, wife to the Constable of the Tower, only attending her.

Two days after were brought unto the Tower Hill George Lord Rochford, Henry
Norris, Mark Smeton, The Queens Brother with others beheaded.
Medlin Brierton, Francis Weston, all of them of the Kings Privy Chamber, who
severally suffered and had their heads stricken off, no other account of their
sufferings being given out abroad, but that they deservedly dyed for matters
concerning the convicted Queen.

Two days after the Queen was brought to the green within the Tower, and
there mounted on a Scaffold where were present most part of the Nobility,
Queen Annes death.
(...) Lord Mayor of London with certain Aldermen and many other Spectators,
her last words were these, Her Speech at her death.
My honorable Lords, and the rest here assembled, I beseech you all to bear
witness with me that I humbly submit my self to undergo the penalty to which
the Law has sentenced me; as touching my offenses, I am sparing to speak, they
are best known to God, and I neither blame nor accuse any man, but commit them
wholly to him, beseeching God that knows the^ secrets of all hearts to have
mercy on my Soul; next I beseech the Lord Jesus to bless and save my
Sovereign and Master the King, the noblest and mercifullest Prince that lives;
whom I wish long to reign over you. He has made me Marchioness of Pembrooke,
vouchsafed me to lodge in his own bosom, higher on earth he could not raise
me, and has done therefor well to lift me up to those blessed Innocents in
Heaven. Which having uttered with a smiling and cheerful countenance, as no
way frighted with the Terror of Death, She gently submitted her self to her
fate, and kneeling down on both her knees, with this short eiaculation in her
mouth, Lord Jesus Christ, into thy hands I commend my Soul, with the close of
the last syllable the Hangman of Callis at one blow struck off her head.

Phoenix Iana iacet, nato Phoenice, dolendum,
Saecula Phoenices nulla tulisse duos.
The King loath to show himself too sad a widdower for so good a wife, the very
next ensuing day was married to the Lady Jane Seymor, daughter to Sir John
Seymor Knight, Sister to Edward Seymor Earl of Hertford, and Duke of Somerset.

Queen Anne was no sooner frowned on by the King, but she was abandoned by her
late friends and servants, the young Lady her Daughter lost a Mother before she
could do any more but smile upon her; She dyed the Phoenix of her Sex, but
left a daughter behind who proved the Phoenix of her time, the true Daughter of
so rare a Mother Phoenix. Queen Jane is now the sole object of all the Peoples
joy, but within little more then the Revolution of one year all their hopes
are crossed, death nip't the bud but preserved the blossom for a while after.

On the 12. day of October in the year 1537. The Birth of P^i^ce Edward^
the Queen was delivered both of a Son and her own life together at Hampton
Court about two of the clock in the afternoon. It is said, that news being
brought to the King in the time of her travel, that her throws were very
violent, insomuch that her life was in great peril by reason of the
extremities of her hard labor, nay that the issue was driven to so strait an
exigent, that either the mother or the infant must nccessarily perish; humbly
desiring his Highness in so great extremity; his answer was that the Mother
then should die, for certain he was that he could have more wives, but
uncertain whether to ^aue more children; heerevpon preparation was made to
save both, if possible, The death of Qu. Jane in Childbed.
but her body was ripped up to give way to her Child in the conclusion, and two
days after her delivery her Soul expired.

The Queen dyed much pittyed, and the young Prince called Edward was the
eighteenth of the same month created Prince of Wales, Young Edward Prince of
Wales, etc
Duke of Cornwall and Chester.

The Father was so joyful of his Son that he seemed to cast a neglect upon
his two daughters, yet of them both, the Lady Elizabeth was in most favor and
grace, for when Mary was separated from the Court, and not so much as suffered
to come within a certain distance there of limited, the Lady Elizabeth was then
admitted to keep the young Prince company in his infancy, who in the time of
his minority was committed to the tuition of Doctor Coxe, Dr. Coxe and Sr. John
Cheek Tutors to P. Edward and L. Elizabeth.
and Sir John Cheek, as they were guardians and Schoolmasters to the Prince,
so were they the daily Instructors of the sweet young Lady, She was 3. years
elder then her Brother, and therefore able in her pretty language to teach and
direct him (even from the first of his speech and understanding) in the
principles of Religion and other Documents; the Archbishop Cranmer her
Godfather was ever chary and tender over her, as one that at the Font had
took charge upon him to see her educated in all virtue and piety. Cordial and
entire grew the affection betwixt this brother and Sister, insomuch that he no
sooner began to know her, but he seemed to acknowledge her, and she being of
more maturity as deeply loved him. Both coming out of one loins, their
affection was no less then if they had issued likewise from one womb, they
were indeed one way equally fortunate and unfortunate, having one Father, and
either of them deprived of a Mother, and even in their several deaths there
was a kind of correspondencie, the one dyed by the sword, the other in
Childbed, both of them violent and enforced deaths.

So pregnant and ingenious were either, that they desired to look upon books
as soon as the day began to break, their horae matutinae were so welcome,
that they seemed to prevent the nights sleeping for the entertainment of the
morrows schooling, besides, such were the hopeful inclinations of this
Princely youth and pious Virgin, The Industry of the Prince and L. Eliz.
that their first hours were spent in Prayers and other Religious exercises,
as either reading some History or other in the Old Testament, or else attending
the exposition of some Text or other in the New; the rest of the sore-noone
(Breakfasttime excepted) they were doctrinated and instructed either in
language, or some of the liberal Sciences, one morrall learning or other
collected out of such Authors as did best conduce to the Instruction of
Princes; And when he was called out to any youthful exercise becoming a Child
of his age (for study without action breeds dullness) she in her private
Chamber betook her self to her Lute or violl, and (wearyed with that) to
practice her needle; This was the circular course of their employment, God was
the Center of all their actions, Ab Jove Principium, they began with God, and
he went along still with them, insomuch that in a short time they were as well
entered into language, as Arts, most of the frequent tongues of Christendom
they now made theirs, Greek, Latin, French, Italian, Spanish, Dutch were no
strangers, no foreign Idiomes, but now made familiar with their native
English, -- Merito vt puer vnicus orbis
Iure vocaretur Phoenix: virgo al^era Pallas.


These concurrences met in such a Concordancie that the Scholars (though
Princes) for their good instructions were in a kind of duty obliged to their
Tutors; and their Tutors (for their willingness, and Industry) as much graced
and honored by their Scholars. Alexander the great confessed himself more
obliged to Aristotle his Schoolmasters for his learning, then to his Father
King Philip for his life, by the one he became a Man, by the other an
understanding Man. This Princely cou^le cannot be taxed of ^ngratitude; if all
the malice in the world were ^nfused into one eye, it shall never be able to
de^ract either of them: how forward was the one during his time to promote
Doctor Coxe his Tutor, The Prince and La. Elizabeth not ungrateful to their
Tutors.
and the life that Marian persecution being drawn to the last breath, the other
recald him from beyond the Seas, whither he was fled, restored him to many
Church dignities and graced him so far as that by her appointment he made a
learned Sermon that day when she went to her first Parliament.

These tender young Plants being past their sappy age, and now beginning to
flourish, the old stock begins to wither, the King feeling himself dangerously
sick, many infirmities growing more and more upon him, called his Council about
him, made his last will and Testament, part of which, so much as concerns this
present Discourse, shall be delivered as it has been extracted out of the
original Coppie, still reserved in the Treasury of the Exchequer, Dated the
Thirtieth day of December 1546. Item, I give and bequeath unto our two
Daughters, Mary and Eli^abeth^, if they shall be mar^^ed to any outward
Poten^^tes, The last Will and Testament of K. Henry the eighth.
the Sum of tenn^ ^housand pounds a peecee, and that to be paid them by ^he
consent of our Council, (...) Money, Plate, Jewels and Household Stuff, if we
be^^ow them not in our life ^ime, or a larger, Sum ^t the discretion of our
Ex^cutors, or the most part of them; And both of them upon our blessing to be
orde^ed as well in marriage, as ^ll other lawful things, by ^he advice of our
fore said Council, and in case they will* not, that then those Sums are to
be dimini^hed at our Councels pleasure: Further, our will is, that from the
first hour of our death, until such time as they can provide either of them,
or both of an honorable Marriage, they shall have either of them, or both of
them, three Thousand pounds vltra Reprisas to live upon. I have known many a
Noble Man's Daughter left as great a Legacy, nay a larger Dower, who never had
any claim or alliance to a Crown; but so it pleased the King at that time.

Upon the nineteenth day of January following the King lying upon his
deathbed, K. Henry dies.
even when he was ready to give an account to God for the abundance of blood
already spilt, when he knew himself was no longer able to live, he
^imprisoned the Duke of Norfolk the Father, signed a warrant for the execution
of the Earl of Surrey, the Son, within nine days after he himself expired
and on the eighteenth of February following, K. Henry buried at Windsor.
was with great State and magnificence interred at Windsore.

On the same day wherein the Father deceased was the Son inaugura^ed King of
England by the name of E^ward the ^^xth being of the age of 9. years, Edward
the 6. crowned.
on the nineteenth of February following he rode with his Uncle the Lord
Protector, Duke of Sommerset, through the City of London, and the next day
ensuing was anointed King at West-minster by Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of
Canterbury who^ that day administered the holy Eucharist together with sundry
other Ceremonies appropriated for such Solemnities.

Great is the person o^ a King, reigning heere^ upon earth amongst men* he is
a lively Emblem of the high and glorious Majesty of God in heaven. The King
was no ^ooner crowned, but the Lady Elizabeth gave ^ay to his State, L.
Elizabeth's observance to the King her brother.
there ^as now a discontinu^nce of that frequent and private familiarity ^suall
betwixt them, ^ormerly she loved him ^s a Brother, now she ho^ours him as her
Soue^aigne; Honor and Royalty make difference ^etwixt the Son and ^he
Father, the degrees ^f State distinguish be^wixt brother and Sister, ^hey which
lived socia^ly in all familiarity together, now do not so ^uch as talk but at
a distance. The death of ^he Father which raised him to the Crown, removed her
from the Court, set him in the Throne, sent her down^ into the Country, L.
Elizabeth goes into the country.
i^ which retirement being nobly attended as wel^ by diverse voluntary Ladies
and Gentle-wome^ as her own train an^ household Servants, she led there,
though a more solitary yet a much more contented life, as hauin^ now more
leisure hour to contemplate and ruminate on those Rudiments and Exercise^
wherein she had for merly been conversant. Diligence is the bree^e^^ and
productor of Arts* but practice and exercis^ does nourish and cherish them, She
in her great discretion made gainful use of t^is Soli^ude, as is apparent by
^he future.

Being settled in the Country to add unto her Revenue, she had many gifts and
visits ^ent her from the King, who was very careful ^oth of her honor and
^ealth, she lived under ^he charge of a noble and virtuous Lady, who ^as
styled her Gouer^esse: scarce was she yet ^ull fourteen years of ^ge, when
one of her Uncles, then in great office and place about the King, brought unto
her (...) Princely Suitor, A Princely Husband offered to the L. Elizabeth.
as great in means as come^^y in Person. A stranger richly habited and nobly
attended, (whose name my Author gives not^) he after much importunity both
from himself and friends, yet at last crossed in his purpose by modest repulses,
and cold answers, L. Elizabeth will not by any means marry.
and finding her immutable disposition solely addicted to a single life, as not
enduring the name of a husband, settled in his mind (though not satisfied in her
denial) retired into his Country; for though it may be said of women in
general, that they are spare in their answers, and pe^^remptory in their
demands and purposes, tha^ their affections are still in ^e extremes, either so
^assionate as by no coun^ell to be redressed, or so counterfeit, to be by no
man believed, and again, ^f they are beautiful they are to be won with pray^es,
if coy with prayers, if ^roud with gifts, and if co^etous with promises; yet
^his sweet L. tho her beau^y were attractiue, yet by ^o flattery could be
re^oued from her settled re^olution, and being concious neither of Pride,
^oyness, or covetousness, ^ould not be easily drawn ^ithin the compass of any
^^btile temptation. This ^^rst unwelcome motion ^f Marriage, was a (...) why
she lived afterward more solitary and retired; If at any time the King her
Brother upon any weighty or important occasion had sent to enjoy her company at
Court, she made no longer Residence, then to know his highness pleasure and to
make humble tender of her duty and allegiance. That done, with all convenient
returned back into the Country, where she spent the entire season of her
Brothers Reign.

The King had 3 Uncles left him by the Mothers side, The Kings 3. Uncles.
Edward, Thomas and Henry Seymour* Edward was Lord Pro-Protector, and Thomas
high Admiral of England; These two Brothers being knit and joined together in
amity, were like a Bunch of Arrows not easily broke asunder, but once
dispersed, distracted betwixt themselves, they made but way for their
Adversaries how to assail them with little disadvantage.

The two great Dukes of Northumberland and Suffolk, Northumberland and
Suffolk work a d^uision betwixt the two B^rothers.
Dudley and Gray murmuring that his Majesty's two Uncles should bear such
great sway in the Kingdom (by which their glory seemed to be eclipsed and
darkened) sought all means how to oppose this great united strength of
Fraternall love, but finding that there was no other way le^t to cast this
yoke from off their necks (which their Ambition held to be intolerable) but
only by making a disjunction of that brotherly love which had so long
continued, and doubting how to work it by their Servants, took a nearer
course to effect it, by their wives, and so to draw their ruins out of their
own bosoms; and most successively to their own purposes thus it happened:
Sir Thomas Seymour Admiral and the younger Brother, married the Queen Dowager
(whose hap it was of all the rest to survive her husband) she contested with
her Sister in Law for precedence and pri^ority of place, both were privately
encouraged, both swelled alike with spleen, neither would give way to other,
the one claimed it as she had been once Queen, the other challenged it as she
was the present wife of the Protector, the two Dukes were as suell to ^his fire
new kindled be^^^wixt the women, Dud^ey incenseth the one pri^tely, Gray
encourages the other secretly; The wives set their husbands at odds by taking
their parts, the Gordian knot of brotherly love is thereupon dissolved.
Northumberland and Suffolk take hold of this aduantagious occasion, insomuch
that within a short time after, the Admiral was questioned for Treason, by
consent of his brother condemned in Parliament, The. L. Admiral beheaded.
and his head struck off at the Tower Hill March 20. 1549, his Brother the
Protector with his own hand signing the warrant for his death. The one being
thus removed, there was now less difficulty to supplant the other: in the same
month of Febr. in which his brother lost his head, The Protector questioned.
was the Protector committed to the Tower by the Lords of the Council, many
Articles especially touching the government of the State were commenced against
him, but the year after, upon his submission to the Lords, and intercession
made for him by the King, The Protector quit of treason.
he was released, this proved but a Lightning before death; his great and
potent Adversaries still prosecute their malice against him, insomuch that not
long after, calling him to a second account, when he had acquit himself of all
such Articles of Treason as could be inferred against him, The Protector found
guilty of Felony, and beheaded.
he was in a trial at Guild Hall convicted of Felony, and on the 22. of
January was beheaded on the Tower Hill.

These two next Kinsmen to the King, the proppes and stays on which the safety
of his minority leaned, the hinges on which the whole State turned, being thus
cut off, it was a common fear and general presage through the whole Kingdom
that the two Vnc^es being dead, the Nephew would not survive long after, and so
accordingly it happened; for now all such Gentlemen and Officers as the
Protector had preferred for the Kings attendance, were suddenly removed, and
all such as were the Favorites of the two Dukes, only suffered to come near
his person.

In the Interim was the Match concluded betwixt the Lord Guilford Dudley, A
Match betwixt Northumberlands Son and Suffo^k^ Daughter.
Son to the Duke of Northumberland and the Lady Jane Gray daughter to the Duke
of Suffolk: The King dyet^.
Not long after the King fell sick and dyed the 6. of July in the 7th year of
his Pri^cely government, and o^ the tenth of the same month was proclaimed
Queen the Lady Jane; La. Jane proclaimed Qu.
It is to this day a question both how he dyed and where he was buried, yet
others say he lies buried at Westminster, he was a Prince of that hope, that
it would seem improper thus to leave his honor in the dust vncharacterized.

He was studious for the propagation of the Gospel, the refining and
establishing of true Religion, the foundation whereof his Father had proiected;
Images he caused to be demolished and as Idolatrous, to be taken out of all
Churches within his Domininions; the learned men of his time he encouraged and
commanded them to open and expound the Scriptures, caused the Lords Supper to
be administered in both kinds unto his people: In the third year of his
Reign, by Parliamentall Decree he abolished the Mass, commanded the Liturgy
to be made, and our Common prayer and Service to be read in the English tongue:
he was acute in wit, A true Character of K. Edward the 6.
grave in censure, mature in Judgment, all which concurring in such tender
years, were beyond admiration; In the liberal Arts so frequent, that he
appeared rather innate and borne with them, then either acquired by teaching or
study; All the Port-Townes and Havens in England, Scotland and France he had
ad^ vnguem, not the least punctilio of any State affairs past beyond his
observation, nor did he commit such observations to memory, but had a chest
every year for the reservation of such Acts as past the council board,
himself keeping the key; he would appoint certain hours to sit with the Master
of Requests, only to ^ispatch the cause of the Poor, he was the Inchoation
and Instauration of a glorious Church and Commonweal; he was perfect in the
Latin, Greek, Italian, French and Spanish tongues, and (as Cardanus reports)
was well seen in Logic, and the Principles of natural Philosophy, no
stranger to Music singing at first sight; in Melancthon's common-places he
was c^^uersant, and all Cicero's works, with a great part of Titus Liuius; two
of Isocrates Orations he translated out of the Original into Latin; he was
facetious and witty, as may appear in the fourth year of his reign, and
thirteenth of his age, being at Greenewich on S. Georges day, coming from the
Sermon with all the Nobility in State correspondent for: the day, said, My
Lords, I pray you what Saint is S. George, that w^e so much honor him here
this day? The Lord Treasurer made answer, He that shal^but peruse the History
of S George now written by M. Heylin, may soon go beyond the L. Treasurers
answer to the King.
If it please your Majesty, I did never in any History read of S. George, but
only in Legenda aurea, where it is thus set down, that S. George out with his
sword and ran the Dragon through with his spear; The King having something
vented himself with laughing, replied, I pray you my Lord, and what did he
with his sword the while? That I cannot tell your Majesty, said he. To
conclude, he was so well qualified, that he was not only the forwardest
Prince of all his Ancestors, but the sole Phoenix of his time. Dic mihi musa
virum, show me such another. As he began and continued hopefully, so he ended
Religiously, being fallen sick of a Plurisie, some say consu^ption of the
lungs, hau^ng made his peace with God and the world, he lifted up his eyes and
hands to heaven, prayed to himself, thinking none to have heard him, after
this manner.

Lord deliver me out of this miserable life, The Kings Prayer at his death.
and take me among thy chosen: howbeit, not my will, but thy will be done:
Lord, I commit my Spirit to thee. O Lord, thou know how happy it were for
me to be with thee: yet for thy chosens sake send me life and health, that I
may truly serve thee. Oh my Lord God, bless thy people, and save thine
inheritance; Oh Lord God save thy chosen people of England, defend this Land
from Papistry, and maintain thy true Religion, that I and thy People may
praise thy holy name, for thy Son Jesus Christ's sake: to which he added;
Oh, I faint, have mercy on me O Lord, and receive my Spirit. With which
eiaculation his life ended, not without suspicion of poison delivered him in a
Nose-gay: but the diuilish Treason not being enquired after, never came to
light.

The Lady Mary being at the time of the Kings death at Hunsdon in
Hertfordshire, L. Mary vexed at the Proclamation of Q. Jane.
was much perplexed with the news of the Proclamation of the Lady Jane, as
Queen of England; but more especially understanding that it was done by the
consent of the whole Nobility; hereupon the Suffolk men assemble themselves
about her, Suffolk men aid the Lady Mary.
not liking such shuffling in State, profer'd their free and voluntary service
toward the attaining of her lawful inheritance: this being bruited at Court,
the great Duke of Northumberland having a large Commission granted,
Northumberland opposes the L. Mary.
and sig^ed with the great Seal of England, by the virtue thereof raised an
Army with purpose to suppress and surprise the Lady Mary: the design was no
sooner advanced and on foot, but the Lords in general, repenting them of so
great an injury done to the Kings Sister, and the immediate Inheritrix, sent a
Countermand after him, the Nobility forsook him, the Commons abandoned him, so
that being come to Cambridge, he with his Sons and some few servants were left
alone, where notwithstanding he and his associates proclaimed the Lady Mary
Queen of England in the Marketplace, yet for all this he was arrested of
high treason in the Kings College; Lady Mary proclaimed Queen.
from thence brought to the Tower, and on a Scaffold on the Hill the 12. day of
August lost his head; This was the end of the great Duke of Northumberland: Now
those, two great opposing Dukes, Somerset and Northumb* whose unlimited
Ambitions England and the government thereof could not satiate, one piece of
ground contains them: They lie quietly together in one small bed of earth
before the Altar in St. Peter's Church in the Tower, betwixt two Queens, wives
of K. Henry the 8th. Queen Anne and Queen Katherine, all four beheaded. All
their greatness and magnificence is covered over with these two narrow words,
Hic iacet. Northumberland o^erthrew Somerset and ^aised himself upon his
Ruins, Mary who was friend to neither, but indifferent to both, easily
dispensed with the cut^ing off Northumberland, thinking her self to stand more
firm by his fall and ruin.

The Lady Elizabeth residing at her Manor in ^he Country, L. Elizabeth
lamenteth her Brothers death.
much lamented the death of her Brother, being strange^y perplexed in her mind
as not knowing by any probable conjecture what these strange passages of State
might come to: but considering that amongst these tempestuous storms, her
Sister Marie's and her own were now at an Adventure in one bottom, she
resolutely first aided her Sister with 500. men, her self the foremost, Prima
ibi ante omnes, then the storm being over, she attended her Majesty in her
Barge to the Tower, The L. Eliz. in policy graced by the Queen.
where was released the Duke of Norfolk, the Lord Courtney, and Dr. Gardener;
soon after diverse Bishops suspended in the days of her Brother Edward,
Protestant Bishops put off, Popi^h restored.
were restored: viz. Dr. Gardener to Winchester, and John Poynet put out, Dr.
Bonner to London, and Nicholas Ridley confind', ^ohn Day to Chichester, and
John Scory excluded, Dr. Tonstall to Duresme, Dr. Heath to Worcester, ^ohn
Hooper excluded, and committed to the Fleet, Dr. Vesey to Exe^er; and Miles
Couerdale ^ashier'd; The misera^le face of a wretched Kingdom began now ^o
appear. They that ^^oul^ dissemble their Religion, took no great are how
things went; ^ut such whose consci^nces were joined to ^uth, perceiving that ^e
Lamps of the Sanctu^y began to shine dim, ^eing those bright Ta^ers pulled out
of their ^ckets and extingui^shed, concluded that coals were now kindled which
would prove the destruction of many a good Christian, which accordingly
happened.

From the Tower of London the Queen rode through the City toward her Palace
at West-minster; The Lady Elizabeth to whom all this while she showed a
pleasant and gracious outside, rode in a Chariot next after her drawn with
six Horses trapt in cloth of silver, the Chariot being covered with the same,
wherein sat only to accompany her, the Lady Anne of Cleue.

The fifth day of October she was crowned at West-minster by Stephen Gardener
Bishop of Winchester, Q Mary crowned.
(Dr. Thomas Cranmer being at that time in the Tower) The Lady Elizabeth was
most Princely attended at her Sisters Coronation; five days after began the
Parliament, wherein besides the supplantation of the reformed Religion,
Guilford Dudley and L. Jane convicted of treason.
Guilford Dudley and the Lady Jane his wife lately proclaimed Queen, were both
arraigned and convicted of treason. As for the Lady Ia^e, how unwilling she
was to take the imperial dignity upon her, does appear by this letter
following sent to her Father a little before her death.

FAther, althoug it has pleased God to hasten my death by you, by whom my life
should rather have been lengthened, yet can I so patien^ly take it, that I
yield God more hearty thanks for shortning my woeful days, than if all the
world had been given into my possessions with life lengthened at my own will:
And albeit I am very well assured of your impatient dolours, redoubled many
ways, both ^^bewa^ling our own woe, and esp^cially (as I am informed) my
woeful estate: yet my dear father (if I may without ^ffence rejoice in my own
mishaps) herein I may account my self blessed, that washing my hands with the
innocence of my fact, my guiltless blood may cry before the Lord, mercy to the
innocent: And yet though I must needs acknowledge that being constrained, and
(as you know) well enough continually assayed; yet in taking upon me, I seemed
to consent, and therein grievously offended the Queen and her Laws: yet do I
assuredly trust that this my offense toward God is so much the less, in that
being in so Royal estate as I was, my enforced honor ne^uer mingled with mine
innocent heart: And thus good father, I have opened unto you the state wherein
I presently stand, my death at hand, althought to you perhaps it may seem
woeful, yet to me there is nothing that can be more welcome than from this
vale of misery to aspire to that h^^uenly thr^ne of all joy and pleasure, with
Christ my Savior, in whose steadfast faith (if it may be lawful for the
daughter so to write to the father) the Lord that has hitherto strengthened
you, so continue to keep you, that at the last we may meet in heaven with the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost. I am

Your obedient Daughter till death. JANE DVDLEY.

She was no way conscious of those illegal proceedings practiced against the
Queen by her own and her husbands father; The Q. pittieth the Lady Jane.
much grief there was for the Lady Jane, the Queen her self took the
sadness of her estate into consideration, gave her leave to walk in the
Queens Garden, not debarring her of any pleasant prospect belonging to the
Tower, and had not her father after first offense remitted, ran headlong into a
second, it is generally conceived she would have pardoned her life; his
mis-councelled rashness hastened the deaths of these 2 Innocents, Guilford and
Jane: No Prote^tant thought fit to live.
The Statists of that time, especially such as were addicted to the Romish
faction, held it not policy to suffer any that were addicted to the contrary
faction to live, especially if they could entrap them, being fallen into any
lapse of the law; therefore upon the twelfth of February 1554. being the first
day of the week, Guilford Dudley was brought to the Scaffold on the
Tower Hill, where having with great penitence reconciled himself to God, with a
settled and and unmoved constancy patiently subjected himself to the stroke
of death: The head with the body still bleeding, were both laid together in a
Cart; and brought into the Chapel within the Tower, even in the sight of this
sad and sorrowful Lady, the object striking more terror, then the sight of
that fatal Axe, by which her self was presently to suffer death; being
instantly led to the Green within the Tower, where being mounted on a Scaffold
with a cheerful and undaunted countenance she spoke as follows.

GOod People, The La. Jane her speech at her death.
I am come hither to dye, and by a Law I am condemned to the same; my offense
against the Queen was only in consent to the device of others, which now is
deemed treason; yet it was never of my seeking, but by counsel of those, who
should seem to have further understanding o^ things then I, which knew little
of the Law, and much less of titles to the Crown, but touching the
procurement thereof by me, or on my behalf, I do wash my hands in Innocence
thereof, before God and the face of you all; this day: And therewithal she
moved her hands, wherein she had a Book and then proceeded thus, I pray you
all good Christian People bear me witness that I dye a true Christian Woman,
and that I look to be saved by no other means then by the mercy of God in the
blood of his only Son Jesus Christ; I confess that when I did know the word
of God, I neglecIed it, and loved my self and the world, and therefore this
plague and punishment is justly and worth^ly happened upon me for my sins,
yet I thank God of his goodness that he has given me a time and respite to
repent, and now good people whilst I am alive, I pray you assist me with your
Prayers.

As soon as she had thus spoken, she humbly kneeled down and rehearsed the
one and fiftieth Psalm in English, then she raised her self upon her feet,
and delivered her Book to Mr. Bridges, who was then Liefienant of the Tower;
beginning to untie her gown to prepare her self for death, the Ex^cutioner
offered to help her* but she turning her self to the two Gentlewomen that then
attended her, was by them disroabed both of her gown and other attires* Then
the Heads-man kneeled down to ask her forgiveness, to whom she replied, The
Lord for give thee, and I do, and I entreat thee to dispatch me as soon as
thou can; then kneeling again, she locked suddenly back and said, will you
take it besore I lie down? he answered, No, Madame; then she tied her
handkercher before her eyes, and being blindfold, she felt about for the
Block, and said twice, Where is it? then laying her neck upon it, she
stretched forth her body, and said, Lord Jesus into thy hands I commend my
spirit, Lady Ianes death.
the Axe met with the last word, and she expired. Never was a Ladies fall more
deplored, and herein it was remarkable: Judge Morgan, A memorable note of Judge
Morgan.
who gave the sentence of her death presently fell mad, and in all his
distracted fitts cried out continually, take away the Lady Jane, take away the
Lady Jane from me, and in that extreme distemperature of passion, ended his
life Some report that the Lady Jane was young with Child at the time of her
departure, Lady Jane thought to be with child at her death.
but though her Romish opposites were many, and the times bloody, Christian
Charity may persuade us that they would not use such inhumanity against so
great a person: She was indeed a Royal Lady, A true Character of the L. Jane.
endued with more virtues, then are frequently found in her Sex; in Religion
and Piety praecellent, her devout Prayer to God, and Oration to the People,
demonstrated no less at the time of her Execution, she was but 16. years of
age, of enforced honors so vnambitious, that she never attired her self in
Regal Ornaments, but constrainedly and with tears; whilst she was Prisoner
in the Tower these subsequent verses were found written on the wall with a
Pin.

Non aliena putes, homines quae obtingere possint,
Sors hodierna mihi, cras erit illa tibi.
Think nothing strange that does on man incline,
This day my lot is drawn, Tomorrow thine.
And thus.

Deo iuuante, nil nocet liuor malus.
Et non iuuante, nil iuuat labor grauis,
Post ten^bras spero lucem.
God on our side, vain is all strifes intention,
And God opposed, bootlesse is all prevention.
After night, my hope is light.
There be extant of her works in the English tongue, a learned Epistle to M.
Harding, Chaplain to the Duke of Suffolk her Father, formerly a stout
Champion in K. Edwards days, but now a Renegado from the Faith.

A Colloquy with one Fecknam a Priest, The L. Ianes Works.
two nights before her death, about Faith and the Sacraments.

An Epistle to her Sister written in the end of the New Testament in Greek,
sent the night before she dyed.

As for the Duke of Suffolk her Father, I can parallel his betraying to none
so properly as to the Duke of Buckingham in the Reign of Richard the Third; as
the one had a Banister, Suffolk betrayed by his Se^uant.
the other had an Underwood, a man raised by him only to a competent estate,
unto whose trust and guard he committed his Person, was by him conveyed into a
hollow tree, morning and evening relieved with sustenance by him, every time of
his appearance renewed his confidence unto him, and engaged himself with
millions of oaths for the performance of his truth and fidelity, yet easily
corrupted with some small quantity of gold, and many large promises, Iudas-like
betrayed his Master, discovered him, and delivered him up to the Earl of
Huntington, under whose conduct he was with a strong guard conveyed through
London, to the Tower, arraig^ed and convicted of Treason in the great Hall at
Westminster, and upon the 12. of the month of Feb. wherein the Daugh^er
expired, was the Father beheaded on the Tower Hill, The Duke of Suffolk
beheaded.
Tower Hill,

Northumberland and ^is Son Guilford, Suffolk with his Daughter ^ane being
thus cut off, ^aries nunc proximus ardet, (...) was generally feared that the
Lady Elizabeth's ^rne would be next: ^he Queen was no sooner Crowned, but
she slighted her, and removed her into the Country; The beginning of Qu.
Elizabeth's Troubles.
the good Lady was in the mean time much troubled to see how Bethel lay in the
dust unregarded, and Babel only exalted, true Religion dejected, and
Superstition advanced, but more especially understanding, that her self (...)
the sword was turned into their own bosoms* she passed the storm and at last
arrived safely to the joy of all true hearted Christians.

This Birth of Ours, is but an entrance into this Life, where in the sight of
Heaven we must endure for a trial of our valor, the furious shocks of many
fierce encounters; he that soiournes in the Camp of this life, must not hope
for Holidays, his traualie can have no rest, his labor can have no end; no
Country but can yield a Pharoh to destroy him, no Clime but can afford a Herod
to pursue him; The allusion needs no further illustration; The Troubles of the
Lady Elizabeth will make a perfect Comment; She swamme to the Crown through a
Sea of Sorrow, and having obtained it, how dangerously was her life insidiated
by Popish Assassines? there wanted not a Jesuitical Mariana to persuade
treason, nor a bloody Rauiliacke to perform it: then the Pope menaced her with
his Bulls abroad; now the Bishop of Winchester the Popes Agent endeauours to
supplant he^ with Warrants at home now she lives captiuated to an incensed
Sisters indignation, hurryed from one place to another from post to pillar.
Quocunque aspicio nihil ^nisi pontus and a^r. The Sea of her Sorrow is so broad
and spacious, I can see no shore, discry no land at all.

She was greatly stomack't by Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Gardener
a bitter enemy to the L. Eliza^eth.
and other Romists as well of the Laity as the Clergy, who studied by all
means po^sible, not only to supplant her from the Queens love, but to
deprive her of her life, the first being the way to the second; for the better
effecting whereof with the more speed and safety, Fortune seemed thus to smile
upon their enterprise (Sir Thomas Wiat's insurrection and suppressio^ both
^apning within some few weeks, but being over, and many having suffered for the
same) others were likewise had in suspicion by the Clergy, especially those
whom they termed of the new Religion, here the train is laid ^or the Lady, the
net is spread, they think now all sure, but the Phoenix they aimed at, was
delivered from the hands of the fowler.

This which at the first was in the Queen but mere suspicion, by Bi^shop
Gardiners aggrauation grew after into her high indignation, insomuch that a
strict Commission was sent down to Ashridge, The Lady Elizabeth sent for out
of the Country.
where she then soiourned to have her with all speed remove from thence, and
brought up to London, there to answer all such criminal Articles as could be
objected against her.

The Charge was committed to Sir John Wil^iams Lord of Tame, Lo. of Tame, Sir
Edward Hastings, Sir Thomas Cornewallis sent for the La. Eliza^eth.
Edward Hastings, and Sir Thomas Cornewallis, all ^hree Co^nce^lors of ^ate,
and for the better ^ccomplishment of the ^eruice, a guard of two undred and
fifty horse ^^en were attendant on ^em.

The Princess was at the same time dangerously sick and even almost to death,
L. Eliz. very sick.
the day was quite spent, and the evening come on, news being brought unto her
by her servants (much affrighted) that so great a strength had begirt he^
house, and in such a time when her innocence could not so much as dream of any
thing dangerou^ that might be suggeste^ against her, it bred in he howsoever no
small a mazement; but ere she could well recollect he self, a great rapping
wa^ heard at the Gate; she sending to demand the cause thereof, in stead^
returning an answer, the Lords stepped into the House, without demanding so much
as leave of the Porter, and coming into the hall where ^hey met Mistress Ashley
a Gentlewoman that at^ended her, they willed ^her to inform her Lady that they
had a message (...) deliver her from the Queen: the Gentlewoman went up and
told her that they had said, who ^ent them word back by ^er again, that it
being then an unseasonable ^ime of the night, she in ^er bed and dangerously
^^cke, to entreat them, (...) not in courtesy, yet ^or modesties sake to
de^^r the delivery of their Message till morning, but they without further
reply, as she was returning to the Princesses Chamber, followed her up the
stairs, Uncivil intrusion.
and pressed in after her, presenting themselves at her bedside, at which sight
she was suddenly moved, and told them that she was not well pleased with
their uncivil intrusion; they by her low and fain^ speech, perceiving he^
debilitie and weakness^ of body, desired her gra^^ces pardon (The Lord o^ Tame
speaking in excu^^ of all the rest) and tol^ her they were sorry (...) find such
infirmity upon her, especially, since was the Queens express pleasure that the
seventh of that present month she must appear before her Majesty at her
Court near Westminster; to whom she answered, that the Queen had not a
Subject in the whole Kingdom more ready or willing to tender their service and
loyalty to her Highness, La. Elizabeth's loyalty.
then her self; yet ho^ed with all, in regard of her present disa^ility, they
who were eye witnesses of her weak estate, might in their own charity and
goodness dispense wit^ their extremity of have, but the have was such and the
extremity so great, that their Commission was to bring her either alive or
dead. A sore Commission it is, said she, hereupon they consulted with her
Physicians, charging them on their allegiance to resolve them, whether she
might be removed thence without imminent peril o^ her life; upon conference
together they returned answer, that she might undergo that journey without
death, the not without great danger, her infirmity being hazardfull, but not
mortal: their opinions thus delivered, they told her Grace that she must of
necessity prepare her self for the morrow's journey, and withal, that the
Queen, out of her great favor and care, had sent her own Litt^r; at which
words she raised her self upon her pillow, thanking the Queen for such grace
and favor extended toward her, telling them that she would contend with death
to tender her life before her Majesty, and with that small strength she had,
be ready for them in the morning, entreating the^ to take such slender
provision as her house a^ such time could afford, and afterward to repose
themselves in such Lodgings as were provided for them, and so gave them the
goodnight; they took their leave with great respect, and ^euerence to her
person, and after they had set a strong watch upon the House, first, went to
supper, and after that to ^ed.

Early the next morning, by the Rising of the Sun, she was mounted into her
Litter, and set onwards toward London, L. Eliz^beth remoueth toward London.
the people as they past the way, wondering at so great a guard, especially set
upon one they (...) dearly affected, fearing the more, the less they knew,
and because they saw her conducted as a Prisoner, The Peoples love to the L.
Elizabeth.
generally commiserated her case; some smothering their griefs in silence, and
shaking the head, some expressing it in tears, others in loud acclamations,
that the Lord God Almighty would safeguard and protect her from all her
enemies, in this manner she past onward on her way to Red-burne, where she was
guarded that night, her sickness and infirmity had been guard enough, being
able to ride but 3. miles the next day, tarrying that night in Sr. Ralph
Rowlets house at St. Albones; from thence she passed to South-Mymms, resting
her weary body at Mr. Dods house there, and so the next day to Hie^gate, where
being very weak in body and much dejected in mind, she stayed that night, and
the next day following; thus was she brought to the Court, L. Elizabeth kept
close at Court.
and for full fourteen days after remained in a private Chamber altogether
solitary and comfortless, not so much as suffered to see, much less to speak
with any friend, only the L. Chamberlain, and Sr. John Gage who atended at
the door of her Lodging; she had no comforter but her innocence, no companion
but her Book; she was armed with Patience to undergo the heat of the day, to
endure all opposition.

-- Quo fata trahunt, retrahuntque sequemur,
Quicquid erit, superanda omnis fortuna ferendo est.
None can be brought to so wretched a Condition, but they may have hope of
better fortune; she knew that the clouds being over; the day would become
clear, the Sun but once appearing, those thick mists would be soon expelled,
thus she remained a sorrowful and dejected Prisoner in the hands of spleenfull
and potent adversaries, brought into so straight an exigent, either to forsake
her faith, or else to fall under the merciles cruelty of such as sought her
innocent life.

Upon the Friday before Palme-Sunday the Bish. of Winchester with nine more of
the Council La. Elizabeth brought before the Cou^ce^l.
conuented her; being come before them and offering to kneel, the Earl of
Sussex would by no means suffer her, but commanded a Chair to be brougt in
for her to fit on: Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, and then Lord Chancellor,
taking upon him to be the mouth of the rest, began very sharply to reprove her*
(as if she had been already convicted) for having a hand in Wiat's Rebellion,
to whom she mildly answered La. Elizabeth answers all objections.
with a modest protestation, that she never had the least knowledge of his
practice and proceedings; for proof whereof, said she, when Wyat at his death
was by some malicious enemies of mine demanded whether I was any way knowing,
or accessory to his insurrection, even at the parting of life and body, having
prepared his soul for heaven, when no dissimulation can be so much as
suspected, even then he pronounced me guiltless; besides the like question
being demanded of Nicholas Throckmorton and James Crofts at their Arraignment,
I was likewise cleared by them, and being acquitted of all others (my Lords)
would you have me to accuse my self, after this she was questioned about a
stirring in the West, raised by Sr. Peter Carew, but answered to every
particular so distinctly, that they could not take hold of the least
circumstance, whereby they might any way strengthen their accusation; which
Gardener perceiving, told her that it would be her safest course to submit her
self to the Queen, and to crave pardon of her gracious Majesty: whereunto she
answered, that submission co^fest a crime and pardon belonged to a delinquent,
either of which being proved by her, she would then and not till then make use
of his Graces council; Gardener told her she should hear more anon, retiring
with the re^t of the Lords to know the Queens further pleasure; they being
gone, she left alone, The La. Eliz. left alone at the Councel-board.
without either servant to attend her, or friend to cheer her, began to think
with her self, that beauty was but a flower soon faded, health a blessing
soon altered, favor a Sunshine often clouded, riches and glory no better then
broken pillars, but innocence and truth unmoved Columns; In the midst of these
conceptions Gardener and the rest entered the Chamber and told her that it was
her Majesty's pleasure she must instantly be conveyed to the Tower, La.
Elizabeth commanded to the Tower.
that her household was dissolved, and all her servants discharged, except her
Gentleman. Usher, three Gentle-women, and two Grooms, and that for her guard
two hundred Northern white Coats were appointed that night to watch about her
lodging, and early in the morning to see her safely delivered into the custody
of the Lieftenant of the Tower, La. Elizabeth afraid of the Tower.
the very name of Tower, struck a deep horror into her, insomuch that the
cheerful blood forsaking her fresh cheeks, left nothing but ashy palenesse in
her visage, she spoke these words. La. Eliazbeth her Speech to the Council.
Allasse, my Lords, how comes it that I have so incensed my Sister, and
Sovereign? if it be held to be either Criminal or Capital to be Daughter to
King Henry, Sister to King Edward of Sacred memory, or to be the next in blood
to the Queen, I may then perhaps incur as well the severity of censure, as
the rigor of Sentence; but otherwise, I here protest, before heaven and you, I
never either in act or thought have as yet trespassed against her Majesty,
whose pleasure if it be so, that I must be confined, and my liberty restrained,
my humble suite is unto you, to be Petitioners on my behalf unto her Majesty,
that I may be sent unto some other place less notorious, that being a Prison
for Traitors and Malefactors in the highest degree. The Earl of Sussex
presently replied, The Earl of Sussex a fast fri^nd to the L. Eliz.
that her request was both just and reasonable, desiring the rest of the Lords
to join with him on her behalf, whereupon the Bishop of Winchester cut him
off, and told him that it was the Queens absolute command, and her pleasure
was unalterable, when after a little pause; well said she, Flebile principium
melior fortuna sequatur.

Injury is but the trial of our patience, troubles are only instructions to
teach us wisdom, by the one falsehood from faith may be perceived, by the
other true friends from Traitors may be easily discerned. Guttacauat lapidem --
hard things may be mollified, crooked things straightned, a Rock will in time
relent, and Troy, though it stands out long, it yeeld^ at last, whilst there is
a Sun to set, I will not despair of a good issue, Non omni^m dierum Sol
occidit* shall be still my Com^orter* and with ^hese words they all left her.

That night being spent in pious devotion, the next day following two Lords
brought word that she must instantly to the Tower, and that the Barge was ready
at the stairs to convey her thither; for says one of them, (whose name I
purpose^y omit) The tide will ^^ry for no body, La. Elizabeth commanded to the
Tower.
upon which she humbly besought them that she might only have the freedom
of one tide more, and that they would solicit the Queen ^or so small a favor,
whereunto he very churlishly replied, that it was a thing by no possible means
to be gran^ted* then she desire^ that she might write unto the Queen, which
he would not admit: but the Earl of Sussex, being the other that was sent from
the Queen, kneeled unto her, Earl of Sussex continues a fast friend to the L.
Eliz.
kissed her hand, and said, that upon his own apperill she should not only
have the liberty to write, but as he was a true man unto God and his Prince, he
would deliver her Letter to the Queens own hands, and bring an Answer of the
same, whatsoever came thereof.

Whilst she was writing, La. Elizabeth writes to the Queen.
(for a small piece of paper could not make sufficient report of her Sorrows,
being so great in quantity, so extraordinary in quality) the tide was spent,
then they whispered together to take advantage of the next, but that course was
held to be inconvenient, in regard that it fell out just about midnight, the
difficulty alleged, was lest that being in the dark, she might perhaps be
rescued, therefore the next day being Palme-Sunday, they repaired unto her
Lodging again, and desired her to prepare her self, for that was the latest
hour of her liberty; and she must to the Barge presently, whereunto she
answered, The Lords will be done, since it is her Highness pleasure, I am
therewith very well contented; passing through the Garden and the guard to take
water, she looked back to every window, and seeing none whose looks might
seem to co^passionate her afflictions, La. Elizabeth's speech at her departure
out of the Court.
said thus, I wonder whither the Nobility intends to lead me, being a
Princess, and of the Royal blood of England: Alas, why being an harmeles
innocent woman, am I thus hurryed to captivity? the Lord of Heaven knows
whither, for I my self do not. Great have was made to see her safe in the
Barge, and much care to have her pass by London unseen, which was the
occasion that both she and they were engaged to remarkable danger, the Tide
being young, La. Elizabeth's danger in shooting London Bridge.
the Barge-men feared to shoot the Bridge but being forced to it against their
wills, the stern struck against one of the Arches, and wanting water, grated
against the Channel, with great hazard to be overwhelmed; but God in his mercy
preserved her to a fairer fortune. L. Eliz. landed at the Traitors stairs.
She was landed at the Tower-stayres, the same intended for Traitors; loath
she was to have gone ashore there, laying open her innocent and loyal
behavior both toward the Queen and present State: but being cut short by the
churlish reply of one who was her conuoy; she went ashore, and stepped short
into the water, uttering these words. La Elizabeth^ ^peec^ at her and (...) in
(...) Tower.
I speak it before thee, O God; having no friend but thee in whom to put my
confidence, here landeth as true a subject, being Prisoner, as ever landed at
these stayres, since Julius Caesar laid the first foundation of this structure.
Well if it prove so (said one of the Lords) it will be the better for you; as
she passed along, the warders then attending, bade God bless her Grace; for
which some were rebuked in words, others by a mulct in the purse.

She was then delivered to the charge of the Constable of the Tower, La.
Elizabeth delivered up to the Constable of the Tower.
who received her as his Prisoner, and told her, that he would show her to her
Lodgings; but she being faint, began to complain: the good Earl of Sussex,
seeing her color began to fail, and she ready to sink under his arms, The
inhumanity of the Constable toward the L. Elizabeth.
called for a Chair; but the Constable would not suffer it to be brought; ^en
she sat down upon a fair stone, at which time there fell a great shower of
rain, the Heavens themselves did seem to weep at such inhumane usage; Sussex
offered to cast his Cloak about her, The Earl of Sussex love to the L. Eliz.
but she by no means would admit it: Then the Lieftenant, The Lieftenants
courtesy to the La. Eliz.
M. Bridges entreated her to withdraw her self from the violence of the storm
into some shelter, to whom she answered, I had better to sit here then in a
^orser place, for God knows, not I, whither you intend to lead me. At which
words, looking upon he^ Gentleman-usher, and seeing his eyes full o^ tears,
she told him he did not well to discon^o^^ late her with his sorrow who had so
much grief^ of her own, that she^ doubted whether she^ had strength enough
(...) support it.

Being locked and bolted in her Lodgings with some of her servants, La.
Elizabeth locked up close in the Tower.
she was much daunted and perplexed; but called to her Gentlewoman for her
book, desiring God not to suffer her to lay her foundation upon the sands, but
upon the Rock, whereby all blasts of blustering weather might not prevail
against her, whereunto she added, The La. Eliz. speech being locked in her
Chamber.
The skill of a Pilot is unknown but in a tempest, the valor of a Captain is
unseen but in a battle, and the worth of a Christian is unknown, but in
trial and temptation: this earthly Globe, O Lord, is but a Theater on which
thou have placed us, to get some proof from hence of our sufficiency, death
will assail us, the world will entice us, the flesh will seek to betray us,
and the Devil ready to devour us; but all this and much more shall never
deiect my spirits; for thou, O King of Kings, art my Spectator, and thy Son
Christ, my Savior Jesus, has already undergone these trials for my
encouragement; I will therefore come boldly to the throne of Grace, there it
is, I am sure, that I shall find comfort in this time of need, though an Host
should encampe against me, my heart shall not fear; though war should rise
against me, in this will I be confident, Thou Lord art my light and my
salvation, whom shall I fear? thou Lord art the strength of my life, of whom
shall I be afraid? In this Interim the Lords took advice about a more strict
watch and ward to be set upon her, The Lords take advice about a watch to keep
the L. Eliz. safe.
all agreeing that it should be exactly performed; but the good Earl of Sussex
was very passionate to hear all this, and said, My Lords, my Lords, let us
take heed, and do no more then our Commission will well bear, consider that
^he was the King our Ma^ters Daughter, and therefore let us use such dealing,
(...) may hereafter prove answerable: the other Lord agreed to his words,
saying, it was well spoke of him, and so for that time departed.

Two days after, Gardener making use of the Queens name and authority, Mass
said and ^ung in the La. Elizabeth's Chamber.
caused Mass to be inforcedly said and sung before her, which seemed to be
the greatest trial she had till that time endured, but necessity having no
law, she was forced to give way to it, and not unadvisedly; that spirit is
prodigious, which rather than shake hands with inconueniencie would cast it
self into the iawe^ of danger, she with (...) settled countenance swallowed
down upon extremity, the bitter potion of indignity, she would rather bow
then break; rather strike sail, then perish in the storm; the greatness of
her mind gave place to the weakness of her means, because she could not
harbor where she would, she anchored where she might with best security.

Philip of Spain being interressed in this Story as one whom God used for an
instrument to preserve the Lady Elizabeth: All those that interposed his
coming into the Kingdom being cut off, namely, the Duke of Suffolk, Sir
Thomas What, with all his consederacie, and the much suspected Lady Elizabeth
being under safe custody, in the Tower, I hope it will not be impertinent to
impart somewhat of his landing, Marriage and Coronation.

On the twentieth day of July, Phi^* of Spain landeth.
Anno 1554. he arrived at South-hampton, and was there honorably met and
received by the Queens Counsel, and the greatest part of the Nobility: at his
first setting foot on Land, the Gar^er was presented to him, and fastened about
his Leg; before he would enter into any house, The devotion of K. Phil.
he went first to the Church of Holy-Rood, there to give thanks for his
prosperous and successful Voyage: having spent about half an hour in
devotion, he mounted on a goodly Iennet, richly Caparison'd, sent to him that
morning from the Queen, and rod back again to his Lodging, near adjoining to
the Watergate.

The Monday following, he left South-hampton, and being most honorably
attended by the Nobility and Gentry of England, he rode toward Winchester; but
by reason of much rain that fell that day, the journey seemed less pleasant.

The next day, Philip comes to Winchester.
betwixt six and seven in the Evening, he was there received* magnificently,
and rode to Church before he saw his Lodgings; loud Music sounded at his
alighting; The Bishop of that Sea, with four others, met him at the
Church-dore, with Priests, Singing-men, and Choristers, attired in rich Copes,
with three fair Crosses borne before them. At his first entrance into the
Church, he kneeled down to pray; which done, he arose and went under a
Canopye from the West door up to the Quire, perceiving the Sacrament, he put
off his hat to do it reverence, then entered into a goodly trauerse hung with
rich Arras and there kneeled again, till the Chancellor began Te Deum, and
all the Quire seconded, that done, he was brought thence by Torch-light, going
on foot to his Lodgings, where the Queens guard attended on him; all the way
as he passed along he turned himself to the people on both sides, with a
pleasant countenance.

After Supper certain of the Council brought him to the Queen by a private
way, Phil. brought into the presence privately.
she received him both graciously and lovingly, they had conference together
about half an hour in the Spanish tongue, which ended, he took his leave and
was conducted back to his Lodging.

Upon Tuesday following about three in the afternoon, he came from his Lodging
on foot, accompanied by the Lord Steward, the Earls of Derby and Pembrooke,
with other Lords and Gentlemen* as well strangers as English: he was all in
black Cloth, he showed himself freely and openly to all men; The courteous
behavior of Philip to the people.
at his entrance into the Court, loud Music played; the Queen met him in the
great Hall, Q. Maryes entertainment ^o Philip.
and kissed him in the presence of all the people, and taking him by the right
hand, they went up together into the great Chamber of Presence, and talked
together about a quarter of an hour, he then took his leave of her Majesty,
^ent to the Cathedral to hear Euen-song, from thence was conveyed to his
Lodgings with torch-light.

On St. James, day being the Tutelary Saint of Spain, July 25. the King and
Queen came from their Lodgings toward the Church, all on foot, richly
attired in gowns of Cloth of gold, set with Stones and Iemms, he with his
Guard, and she with hers, each of them having a sword borne before them, that
of hers by the Earl of Derby, the other of his by the Earl of Pembrooke;
being come into the Church, he went to one Altar, and she to another, both
hanged with Curtains of Cloth of gold, which being after drawn it was thought,
that they were there shriuen; then they resumed their places, and being met,
courteously saluted each other, he being at that time bare-headed. Six
Bishops went to the place prepared for the Ceremony; The Marriage solemnized
between Philip and Q. Mary.
the King was on the left hand, and she on the right. Winchester celebrated
the Nuptials first in Latin, then in English, the marriage Ring was a plain
hoop Ring of gold without any Stone: the Ceremonies being consummate, they both
went hand in hand together, coming to the Altar, they both kneeld a while with
each of them a lighted Taper in their hand. After the Mass was ended, the King
of Heralds openly in the Church proclaimed their Majesty's King and Queen,
with their Styles and Titles, as follows.

PHilip and Mary, Philip and Q. Mary proclaimed King and Qu. of England, etc.
by the Grace of God, King and Queen of England, France, Naples, Jerusalem,
and Ireland, De^fendors of the Faith, King and Queen of Spain, Sicilia, Leon,
and Arragon, Archdukes of Austria, Dukes of Millaine, Burgundy, and Brabant,
Countees of Hasborough, Flanders and ^irroll: Lords of the Islands of Sardinia,
Maiorca, Minorca, of the Firme-land, and the great Ocean Sea, Palatines of
Henault, and the holy Empire, Lords of Freezeland and Ireland, Governors of
all Asia and Africa.

The Trumpets ceasing, Philip and Q M^ry dine together at one Tab^e.
the King and Queen ^ame forth, hand in hand royally attended, and dy^ed
together openly in the Hall at one Table.

On the eighteenth of August they came to Suffolk place in Southwarke, there
they dined, after dinner road over the Bridge, and so through London to
W^st-minster; Philip and Q. Mary pass through London in State.
great Triumphs met them by the way, with the presentation of diverse Pageants
and Shows, having reference to their Persons, and the great joy conce^ued of
their Royal Marriage.

Here is one Sister in her Majesty, the other i^ misery; the one upon her
Throne, the other i^ the Tower; every day expecting some newe^ or other of her
death^ it would make a pittiful^ and strange Story, to relate what examinations
and rackings of poor men there was to find but out that knife which might cut
her throat: Gardener, Gardener examineth the L. Eliz. in the Tower.
with diverse others of the Council came to have a second examination of her,
demanding what conference she had with Sr. James Acrofts, being then a
Prisoner in the Tower, and brought into her presence on set purpose to confront
her, alleging that the speech which they had privately, was about her
remouall from Abridge to Dunnington Castle At the first she was somewhat
amazed, not remembering that she had any such House; but having recollected her
self, I do remember, La. Elizabeth's answer to the objections of Gardener.
my honorable Lords, that I have such a House: but me thinks you do me great
injury, thus to press, examine, and produce every petty mean Prisoner against
me; if they have been Delinquents and done ill, let them at their own peril
answer it, but neither number me nor join me with such malefactors and
offenders: as touching my Remove to Dunnington, my officers, and you Sir Ia.
Crofts being then present, can well testify whether any rash or unbeseeming
word did at that time pass my lips, which might not have well become a
faithful and loyal Subject; but what is all this to the purpose (my Lords)
might I not without offense go to my House at all times when I best pleased?
At which words the E. of Arundell kneeling down, Ar^^dels kind reply to the L.
Eliz.
said, Your Grace says truth, and for mine own part I am much grieved that
you should be thus troubled, about mat^ers of no greater moment; ^ell my good
Lords (said ^he) you sift me very nar^owly, but you can do no ^ore unto me,
then God in ^is divine providence has ^ppointed, and to him one^^ will I
direct my prayers (...) forgive you all. Sr. James Crofts kneeled unto her,
being heartily sorry that ever he should see that day to be a witness against
her, taking God to witness that he never knew any thing by her, worthy of the
least suspicion; yet notwithstanding there appeared no^ the least probability
o^ any fault, nothing bu^ mere suspicions and sug^gestions could be
obie^cted; she was still kep^ close Prisoner, The severity of the Constable of
the ^ower to the L. Elizabeth.
the Con^stable of the Tower the^ L. Chamberlain, would not suffer her own
ser^uants to carry up h^ yet, but put it into the ^ands of rude and vn^mannerly
Soldiers, which she complaining to her Gentleman-usher to have that abuse
better ordered; the Lieftenant not only denied to see it remedied, but
threatened him with imprisonment, if he again did but urge such a motion;
neither would he suffer her own Cooks to dress her diet, but mingled his own
servants with hers; violent he was in the persecution of her innocence, his
malice was sharp and keen against her, insomuch that she was ready to sink
under the heavy and insupportable burden of his cruelty, but that God who
still protected her, raised up an instrument to take off the edge of his so
violent oppression. Lo. Shandois moves the Lords of the Council on the
behalf of the L. Eliz.
The Lord Shandoys, then one of her Keepers, moved the Lords of the Council on
her behalf, and by his only intercession she had the freedom of the Queens
Lodgings, La. Elizabeth suffered to have a Cazement open in her Chamber.
and liberty to open her Casement to take in the Air, which before that time
could by no means be possibly granted.

In the interim a Warrant came down under Seal for her execution; A Warrant
for the Lady Elizabeth's death.
Gardener was the o^nely Daedalus and inuentor o^ the engine; Mr. Bridges made
a happy instrument to preserve the L. Elizabeth.
but Master Bridges had the honor of her delivery; for he no sooner received
the Warrant, but mistrusting* false play, presently made have to the Queen,
she was no sooner informed, but renounced the least knowledge thereof, called
Gardener and others, whom she suspected, before her, blamed them for their
inhumane usage of her, and took advice for her better security; and thus was
Achitophels bloody device prevented.

Soon after on the fifth of May the Constable of the Tower was discharged, and
one Sir Henry Benningfield succeeded in his place, a man altogether unknown to
her Grace, The Constable of the Tower discharged, Sir Henry Benningfield put in
trust with the La. Elizabeth.
and therefore the more to be feared. The sodainnes of the change did at that
time somewhat daunt her; but the same power which removed the one out of his
Lieftenantship, at the very same time released her out of her close and strict
imprisonment in the Tower, and from thence conveyed her to Woodstock, La.
Elizabeth removed to Woostock^.
under the conduct and charge of Sr. Henry Benningfield, with whom was joined
in Commission Sr. John Williams, the Lord of Tame, and a hundred Northren
Blew-Coates to attend them; these presenting themselves before her, she
instantly apprehended them to be her new guardians; but at the sight of Sir
Henry, La. Elizabeth afraid of Sir Henry Benningfield.
whom she had never till that time seen; she suddenly started back, and
called to one of the Lords, privately demanding of him, whether the Scaffold
were yet standing whereon the innoce^^ Lady Jane had not long before suffered?
he resolved her, that upon his honor it was quite taken down, and tha^ no
memorial thereof was now remaining: then she beckoned another Nobleman unto
her, and asked of him what Sr. Henry was? if he knew him? or if a private
murder were committed to his charge, whether he had not the conscience to
perform it? answer was made that, he was a man, whom the Queen respected,
and the Chancellor much favored, and that she should without doubt find him
a man better qualified then she supposed, both of a stricter Conscience, and
more Christian-like condition. It is well (said she) if it prove so. She
seemed herein something satisfied, and the rather, because from the mild aspect
of the Lord of Tame, she expected some comfort, she perceived compassion in
his eye, to defend her from the countenance of the other, which prefigured unto
her nothing but oppression.

The nineteenth of May she removed from the Tower toward Woodstocke, being
that night appointed to lie at Richmond, whither they were no sooner come, and
she entered into her Lodgings; (...). ^liazbeth fears to be murdered at
Richmond.
but the Soldiers* were placed about her, and all her servants billited in by
and outhouses, which she perceiving called her Gentleman Usher fearfully unto
her, bad him and all the rest of here is to pray for her, for she doubted that
night to be there murdered, and that she had no hope to survive that morning;
wherewith he being struck to the heart, said, La. Elizabeth r^ceiueth comfort
from her Gen^leman Usher.
God forbid that any such wickedness should be intended against your grace,
if it were so, that God who has thus favorably supported you hitherto, will
defend you still, he is God omnipotent, God all^sufficient, God that has
relieved, God that can help, God that never will forsake all such as put their
trust in him; be of good courage, let not your Grace be dejected, though
sorrow be here in the evening, yet joy will be in the morning; she thanked
him for his comfortable advice, and ^dded; Be merciful unto me, La.
Elizabeth's meditations.
O God, be merciful unto me, for my soul trusts in thee, yea in the shadow
of thy wings will I make my refuge, until these calamities be ouerpast:
hereupon he departed with tears in his eyes, leaving her to God, and her
self; but could not rest, till he had acquainted the Lord of Tame with all
such fears as her Grace had conceived; coming down into the Hall, he found
Sr. Henry Benningfield and the Lord of Tame walking together, and having
singled out the L. of Tame, told him, that the cause of his coming was to be
resolved, whether there were any secret plot intended against her Grace that
night or no, and if there were, that he and his fellows might know it, for
they should account themselves happy to lose their lives in her rescue: The
Lord of Tame nobly replied, The noble resolution of the Lord of Tame.
that all such fears were needless, for if any such thing were attempted, he
and all his followers would spend their bloods in her defense: so praise be to
God they passed that night in safety, though with no little grief of heart.

The next morning the Country people understanding which way she was to take
her journey, The Countries love to the L. Eliz. in her passage to Woodstocke.
had assembled themselves in diverse places, some praying for her preservation
and liberty, others presented her with Nose-gayes and such expression of their
loves as the Country afforded, the inhabitants of neighbor Villages commanded
the Bells to be rung, so that what with the loud acclamations of People, and the
sound of Bells, the very Air did Echo with the preservation of Elizabeth,
which being perceived by Sr. Henry Benning-field, he called them Rebels and
Traitors beating them back with his Truncheon; as for the Ringers he made
their pates ring noone, before they were releast out of the stocks; the
Princess entreated him in their behalf, and desired that he would desist
from the rigor used to the people. I cannot by any means suffer (says he)
their clamorous outcries, they grate my ears with their bablings, besides it
is not tolerable, by virtue of my Commission; and at every word he spoke he
still had up his Commission, which the Princess taking notice of, told him that
he was no better then her Jailer; La. Elizabeth ca^leth Sir Hen: Benningfield
her Ga^ler.
the very name of Jailer moved his patience; but but knowing not how to mend
himself, he humbly entreated her Grace not to use that name, it being a name
of dishonor, a scandal to his Gentry. It is no matter (said she) Sir Henry,
me thinks, that name and your nature agree well together; let me not hear of
that word Commission, as often as you but nominate your Commission, so often will
^cal^ you Jailer.

As she passed along toward Windsor, diverse of her servants seeing her pass
so sadly by the way, being such as had been formerly discharged at the
dissolution of her Household, requested her Grace, that she would vouchsafe to
resolve the^ whither she was carried, to whom she sent back an answer in
these two narrow words, Tanquam ouis, As a sheep to the slaughter.
Tanquam Ouis.

She lodged that night at the Deane of Windsors house, and passed the next day
to M. Dormers house; by the way, there was great concourse of People to see her
Grace; the next night she came to the Lord of (...) his house, L. Elizabeth
lodges at the Lord of Tames house.
where she was most nobly entertained by all the Gentry of the Country,
coming to congratulate her safety, to condole her misery, whereat S. Henry
Benningfield was highly displeased, and told them, that they could not tell
what they did, and were not able to answer the least part of their actions,
informing them that she was the Queens Prisoner, and no otherwise, aduising
them withal, to take heed what they did, and beware of after-clappes:
whereunto the Lord of Tame made answer, that he was well advised of his
doings, being joined in Commission as well as he, and that he would warrant
both her Graces mirth and entertainment in his house: Sir Henry being thus
opposed, went up into a Chamber, The saucy rude behavior of Sir Hen. Benning.
where was prepared a Chair, two Cushions, and a rich Carpet for her Grace to
sit in; but he impatient to see such Princely furniture for her entertainment,
rather then he should not be taken notice of, like Softratus that set the
Temple of Diana on fire only to get him a name, he presumptuously sat in the
Chair, and called one Barwicke his man to pull off his Boots; which being
known over the house, he was well de^ided for his uncivil behavior; that
night she passed as a welcome guest to the Lord of Tame; but Sir Henry being
formerly ^alled what with the Royal entertainment of her Grace, and partly by
the ieering speeches lately put upon him; he would not suffer her to sleep
under the sole custody of the L. of Tame, being in mistrust of his own shadow,
and therefore set a strong watch upon the house.

The next day they came to Woodstock, where she was no sooner entered, L. Eliz.
locked and boked up in Woodstock^
but locked and bolted up as formerly in the Tower, here her fears grew
greater, and her liberty less, her Lodgings the meanest and coursest about the
house, night and day guarded with rude and uncivil Soldiers, besides the
Keeper of the house was reputed a notorious Ruffian, The Keeper of Woodstocke
attempted to kill the La. Elizabeth.
of an evil conditioned life, one that waited his opportunity to deprive her
of hers, and being encouraged by some great ones then at Court, made diverse
attempts, but by the immediate hand of God was still prevented; and for S.
Henry Benningfield, he was still the same, omitting not the least occasion to
set his Commission on the Tenterhooks of severity, in this only she espied
some small glimpse of comfort, that by the means of a worthy Knight of
Oxfordshire, joined in Commission with Sir Henry, La. Elizabeth's liberty to
walk in the Gardens.
she had at last the liberty of the Gardens to walk in, but S. Henry locked
and unlocked the doors himself, not daring to trust any with the keys,
whereupon she said unto him; Why; are not you now my Jailer? I beseech your
Grace (said he) do but forbear that word: I am not your Jailer, but an
Officer appointed by her Majesty to keep you safe. God bless her Majesty
(said she) and from such officers good Lord deliver me. Being in the Garden,
she was always employed in Devotion, La. Elizabeth's medita^ious as she walked
in the Garden.
taken up with one meditation or other, not the least pile of grass she trod
on but afforded instruction, humus aut humirepens, grass or grasshopper she
acknowledged her self; then ca^sting her eyes upon those goodly Parkes,
furnished with tall and stately Oaks, whose erected tops and large-spreading
branches ouer-looked the underwoods and lesser Plants, not so much as
admitting any Sunbeame to reflect upon their Boughs, but such faint
chequer-spotted light as shined through the sufferance of their leaves* nor
allowing the Rain of Heaven to fall upon them, only such as from superfluity
and a^oundance dropped from their branches, to these straight and extending
trees, she compared the Nobility; to the Arbusculae or smaller Plants, the
Commons; but to the Tamarix, the bryer and bush, the poorest and meanest of the
People; then conferring the estate of the Honorable with the condition of the
humble, the tempests that shake the mighty and blow over the mean, as being
situate in the less eminent place, that it is the longest Roab which
contracts the greatest soil, they that walk on the tops of Pinnacles are
only in the danger, whilst those which are upon the ground march more securely.

Many were the Troubles of this good Lady, her dangers more, she had very
near been burned in her bed one night had there not been prevention; she was
in medio ignis, in the midst o^ a fire kindled, as it is re^ported, on set
purpose t^ have consumed her; bu^ being espied by a wor^thy Knight in
Oxfordshire to flame through the boords of her Chamber, La. Elizabeth almost
burned in her bed.
was presently extinguished; she was in medio ignis, in the midst of that
fiery trial; the whole Kingdom was then enflamed with Bonefires of Gods
Saints, there was Fire in the Center, Fire all about the Circu^ference, Fire at
home, Fire abroad, Fire in her private Chamber, Fire all over the whole
Kingdom; what a dangerous exigent must she needs come to, whose life was thus
assaulted?

Tu quibus ista legas, incertum est lector, ocellis,
Ipse equidem siccis scribere non potui.
Reader, with what eye can thou this peruse,
Since writing them, I wept, and could not choose.
God, whose breath is as a flaming fire, blasted all her fiery Adversaries,
suspended the violent rage of all this Fire, and snatched her as a brand out of
the midst thereof, not so much as a hair of her head being sindged: Being thus
deli^ered out of the hands of her enemies, she perseuered in the service of God
all the days of her life; and for the present having well weighed the danger
lately escaped, she said, La. Elizabeth thankful to God for her delivery out
of the fire.
Quid tibi retribuam Domine? What shall I render unto the Lord for all these
blessngs so favorably from time to time bestowed upon me? then retyring into
her private Chamber, she thus began to pray.

O Gracious Lord God, La. Elizabeth's prayer in the midst of her sorrow.
I humbly prostrate my self upon the bended knees of my Heart before thee,
entreating thee (for thy Sons sake) to be now and ever merciful unto me; I
am thy work, the work of thine own hands, even of those hands which were
nailed to the Cross for my sins; look upon the wounds of thy hands, and
despise not the work of thy hands; thou have written me down in thy Book of
preservation, with thine own hand, Oh read thine own hand writing, and save
me, spare me that speak unto thee; pardon me that pray unto thee; the
Griefs I endure, enforce me to speak, the calamities I suffer impells me to
complain; if my hopes were in this Life only, then were I of all people most
miserable; it must needs be so, that there is a^nother Life, for here they
live many times the longest lives who are not worthy to ^iue at all: Here the
Israelites make the Brickes, and the Egyptians dwell in the houses; David is
in want, and Nabal abounds; Syon is Bab^lons, Captive; have thou nothing in
store for Joseph, but the Stocks? for Esaias, but a Saw? will not Elias adorn
the Chariot better then the Iuniper-tree? will not John Baptists head become a
Crown as well as a Platter? Surely there is great Retribution for the just,
there is fruit for the Righteous; thou have Palms for their hands Coronets for
their heads, white Robes for their Bodies; thou will wipe all tears from their
eyes, and show them thy goodness in the land of the living. Oh good and
desirable is the shadow of thy wings (Lord Jesus) there is the safe Sanctuary
to fly unto, the comfortable refreshing of all sin and sorrow; whatsoever
Cups of affliction this Life propines unto me, is nothing to those bitter
draughts thou have already drunk unto me; help me, O thou my strength, by
which I shall be raised, come thou my light, by which I shall be illuminated
appear thou glory, to which I shall be exalted, hasten thou life through
which I shall be hereafter glorified. Amen, Amen.

Thus did she both devoutly and religio^sly make use of all afflictions
imposed upon her, she ever laid her Foundation upon that Primum quaerite,
which is the chief Cornerstone both of Divinity and Philosophy; but being
ouer-whelmed with an inundation of Sorrow and Fear, she humbly petitioned the
Council that they would admit her to write to the Queen, La. El^zabeth
desires to write to the Queen
which at first was prohibited, but afterward most lovingly permitted; Sir
Henry Benningfield brought her Pen, Paper and Ink, and would not so much as
depart the Room whilst she had Pen to Paper; and ever when she was weary of
writing, he carried her Lette^s away and brought them again at his pleasure;
but having finished her Letters, he said, that he would carry them to Court:
No (said she) one of my own shall carry them, S. Henry Benningfield will not
suffer any one but himself to convey the La. Elizabeth's Letter to the Qu.
I will trust neither your self, nor any that belongs to you therein: whereunto
he replied, You are a Prisoner to the Queen, I hope there is none of your
Servants dares be so bold as to deliver any Letters of yours to her Majesty,
you being in that case. Yes (quoth she) I have none that are so dishonest, but
will be as willing to do for me in that behalf, as ever they were, That Is
true (said he) but my Commission is to the contrary, I can by no means suffer
it; her Grace replying again, said, You charge me very often with your
Commission, I pray God you may hereafer answer the cruel dealing used toward
me: then he kneeling down desired her Grace to conside^^ that he was but a
Servant put only in trust by her Majesty to keep her safe, protesting that if
the Case were hers, he would as willingly observe her Grace, as now he did
the Queens Highness: For his answer she returned him thanks, beseeching God
that she might never stand in need of such servants as he was; giving him
further to understand that his actions toward her were neither good nor
answerable; nay such, as the bent friends he had could never maintain; I doubt
not (said he) but to make good account of my Actions; there is no remedy but
that I must answer them, and so I will well enough, I Will warrant you: being
angered and vexed with her Graces speeches, Sir He^. Benningfield keeps L.
Eliz. Letters four days after they were dated.
he kept the Letters four days after they were dated; but in conclusion, he
was feign to send for her Gentleman-usher from the Town of Woodstocke, and
asked him whether he durst deliver his Mistress Letters to the Queen; Yes
(said he) that I dare and will withal my heart; then Sir Henry half against
his stomach delivered them unto him.

Not long after, La. Elizabeth sick.
her Grace fell sick, which the Queen no sooner heard of, The Qu* sends two
physicians to the La. Elizabeth.
but she sent D. Owen and D. W^ndye to visit her: being come to Woodstocke,
they carefully administered unto her, let her blood, and in six days set her
on foot again, and so taking their leave of her Grace, The Physicians return
a good report of the L. Eliz. to the Qu.
returned to Court and made a large report both to the Queen and Council of
her humble behavior and allegiance toward them. The Queen no sooner heard
it, but rejoiced at it; her adversaries looked black in the mouth, not knowing
how to mend themselves, but only by ininciting the Queen against her, telling
her, that they much wondered that she did not submit her self, having offended
her Highness.

In the Interim, Diverse tamper with the L. Elizabeth to have her to submit her
self to the Queen.
her Grace was much solicited by diverse pretended friends, to submit her self
to the Qu. informing her that it would be well taken, and be very conducible
to her benefit and further enlargement; the words were no sooner uttered, but
she most resolutely made answer in this manner, La. Elizabeth's answer
concerning her submission.
I will never submit to any one whom I never offended in all my life; If I am a
delinquent, and have offended, Currat Lex, let the Law take course, I crave no
mercy at all, the law is just and will not condemn me; my Keeper that locketh
me up day and night; does continually molest me; if I were but as free from
the one, as I am from the other, I should think my self most happy, howsoever
God in his good time, will either mollify his heart, or move some other to
procure my further enlargement.

The Counsel board, especially the adverse party were no sooner possessed with
the constancy of her resolution, but they sent up for Sir Henry Benning field
her Keeper; no way was unattempted, Sir Hen^ Benningfield sent for to the
Councellboard.
which might make for their ends; great Consultation was held about a Marriage
for her, Consu^tation what to do with the La. Elizabeth.
the Spaniards thought it most convenient to be with some Stranger, that she
might have her Portion and so depart the Land; some thought that not to be the
safest course to send her abroad, but one Lord and Gardener resolved upon a
more speedy one, One of the Lords and Gardiners sudden advice.
the one said that the King would never have any quiet Commonwealth in England
till her head were struck off from her shoulders: the other, My Lords, we have
but all this while been stripping off the leaves, and now and then lopped a
branch; but till such time as we strike at the Root of Heresy (meaning the
Lady Elizabeth) nothing to purpose can be effected. God forbid, The Spaniards
love to the L. Eliazbeth.
replied the Spaniards, that our K. and Mr. should once conceive a thought to
consent unto such a mischief; and from that day forward they did not let slip
the least opportunity to solicit the King on her behalf, informing him that
the like honor he could never obtain, as he should have by delivering her out
of Prison, which was not long after effected; Sir Henry Benning-field staying
long at Court, made her jealous that his business was not greatly for her
good, during his residence there one Basset, a Gentleman and great Fauonrite to
the Bish. of Winchester, came to Blanden-bridge, a mile distant from
Wood-stocke, A great danger escaped.
where met him twenty men well appointed and secretly armed in privy Coats.
From thence they came to the house, ernestly desiring to speak with the
Princess about serious and important affairs; but by Gods great providence,
Sir Henry her Keeper had left so strict a charge behind him, A great
conspiracy against the L. Elizabeth.
that no living Soul might have access unto her upon what occasion soever,
till his return, no not though a messenger were dispatched from the Council,
or the Queeene her self, he should not be admitted: by which extraordinary
Providence of God, drawing the means of her safety even from the malice of her
adversaries, their bloody enterprise was utterly disappointed: these things
with other of the like nature being delivered unto her, her doubts and fears
daily more and more increasing; it is constantly reported that hearing the
Milke-maids morning and evening singing so sweetly, considering their hearts to
be so light and hers so heavy; their freedom, her bondage; their delights
abroad, her dangers within, she wished even from her soul, La. Elizabeth
wishes her self a Milkemaide.
both for safety of her person, and security of her Conscience, that no Royal
blood at at all ran in her veins, but that she had been descended from some
mean and humble Parentage.

Queen Mary was bruited to be with Child, Queen Mary bruited to be with
Child.
great thanksgiving was made, and prayers for that purpose were appointed to
be read in Churches; King Philip was chosen by a decree in Parliament,
Protector of the Infant, Male or Female, yet notwithstanding he greatly
favored the Lady Elizabeth, K. Philip favors the La. Elizabeth.
her adversity made him very jealous of the English Nation, apprehending that
if they aimed at the life of a Naturalist, being their Queen and Soueraigns
Sister, they would then make it a small scruple of Conscience, to assault him
and his Followers, being mere Aliens and strangers; he did therefore hasten
her enlargement, which happly was granted within few days after; but before
her departure from Woodstocke, having private notice that one M. Edmond
Tremaine and M. Smithweeke were on the Rack, and strictly urged to have
accused her innocence, at her remove from thence she wrote these two Verses
with her Diamond in a glass window. La. Elizabeth's farewell written in the
glass window at Woodstocke.


Much suspected by me,
Nothing proved can be.
Quoth Elizabeth Prisoner. Immediately after order came down to bring her up to
Court, The La. Eliz. commanded up to Court.
whereupon all things were prepared for the journey. Sir Hen: Benningfield with
his soldiers, the Lord of Tame and Sir Henry Chamberlain were her guardians
on the way; as she came to Ricot the wind was so high, that her servants had
much ado to keep her clothes about her, her hood was blown from her head
twice or thrice, whereupon she desired to retire her self to a Gentleman's
house near adjoining, to dress up her head, which by the vio^lence of the
wind was all unready, the request was reasonable and modest, but S. Henry
would not by any means permit it, Sir Hen Benningfield. c^uelty to the L. Eliz.
insomuch as she was feign alight under a hedge, and there to trim her self
as well as she could, that night she lay at Ricot, the next day they
iourneyed to M. Dormers, and the third to Colebrooke, lying at the sign of the
George, diverse of her Gentlemen came thither to see her: but by the Queens
command were immediately sent out of the town, to both their and her Graces no
small heaviness, being not so much as suffered to speak to each other; the
next day following her Grace entered Hampton Court on the Backside, the doors
being shut upon her, the Soldiers in their ancient posture of watch and ward,
she lay there fourteen days before any man had admittance unto her: many were
her fears, her cares doubled, but at length a Son of Consolation appeared,
the Lord William Howard came unto her, The L. Will. Howard comfort the La.
Eliz.
used her very honorably, condol'd with her, and raised her dejected Spirits
with comfortable speeches, wherein she conceived much joy, and requested his
Favorable encouragement, that she might speak with some of the Council,
which he most lovingly effected, for not long after came her fast friend the
Bishop of Winchester accompanied with the Lords of Arondell and Shrewsbury,
Gardener, Arondell, Shrewsbury, Peter present themselves lovingly to the Lady
Elizabeth.
and Secretary Peter, who with great humility humbled themselves to her grace,
she was not behind in courtesy, but lovingly resaluted them again, and said:
My ho^ourable Lords, I am glad with all my heart to see your faces, L.
Elizabeth. speech to the Lords
for me thinks I have been kept a great while from you, desolately alone;
committed to the hands of a strict keeper, my humble Request is to all your
Lordships, that you would be the happy instru^ments of my further inlarg^ment:
it is not unknown unto you what I have suf^fered now a long time, I beseech
you therefore to take me into your loving Consideration; the Bishop of
Winchester kneeling down replied thus: Gardiners answer to the L. Elizabeth
Let me request your grace but to submit your self to the Queen, and then I
doubt not but that you shall presently enjoy an happy issue of your desires. No
(said she) rather then I will so do, L. Elizabeth's ^^solute answer to Gardener.
I will lie in prison all the days of my life; if ever I have offended her
majesty in thought, word, or deed, then not mercy, but the law is that which I
desire, if I yield, I should then speak against my self, confess a fault which
was never on my part intended, by occasion whereof the K. and Q may then justly
conceive an evil opinion of me; no, no, my Ls. it were much better for me to
lie in prison for the truth, then to be at liberty suspected by my Prince; she
had no sooner uttered the words, but they al departed, promising to declare her
mind to the Qu.

On the next day the B. of Winch. Gardener with other Lords repair to her
lodging the next day.
came unto her again, and kneeling on his knees, declared, that the Qu.
wondered that she should so stoutly stand out, not confessing to have offended,
so that it should seem, the Q. Majesty had wrongfully imprisoned her; no (said
she) I ner'ehad any such thought, it may please her Majesty to punish me, as
she thinks good; well (quoth he) her Majesty willed me to tell you, that you
must tell another tale before you are set at Liberty; Alas, (said she) I had
rather be here in custody with honesty and truth, then abroad at Liberty
suspected by my Prince, and this that I have said, I will stand to; for I will
never belie my self; why then (said he) your grace has the advantage of of
me and the rest of the Lords, for your long and wrong imprisonment; what
advantage I have (said she) God and your own conscience can best tell, and here
before him I speak it, for that dealing which I have had amongst you, I seek
no remedy, but pray that God may forgive you all: Amen, Amen, La Elizabeth
locked up seven days in Court before she spoke with the Qu.
(said he) and so departed seven days and nights she continued locked up in her
lodgings, not so much as having seen the Queen, though both under one Roof,
yet at last after many Letters written, long Suite, and great friends made, she
was admitted to the presence of the Queen, whose face in two years and more
she had not seen; K. Philips ^riendship to the L. Elizabeth.
King Philip having before mediated for her, and placed himself unknown to
the Queen behind the ha^gings of Arras on purpose to hear the discourse, her
grace about ten of the clock at night was sent for into the presence; L.
Elizabeth comes before the Qu.
the suddenness of the message did somewhat daunt her, especially being at that
time of the night, whereupon she entreated those that were about her, to pray
for her, and then with the constancy of her former resolution, she went
toward the presence, where being entered, finding her Majesty sitting in her
Chair of State, after three conges, she humbly fell down upon her knees,
praying for the health, long life and preservation of her Majesty, L.
Elizabeth protests loyalty to the Queen,
protesting her truth, and loyalty toward her person, notwithstanding
whatsoever had been maliciously suggested to the contrary; ^he Queen sharply
answers the L. Elizabeth.
whereunto the Q. very sharply answered; Then you will not confess your self
to be a delinquent I see, but stand per^mptorily upon your truth and innocence,
I pray God they may so fall out; If not (replied the Princess) I neither
require favor nor pardon at your Majesty's hands; Well (said the Queen) then
you stand so stiffly upon your faith and loyalty, that you suppose your self
to have been wrongfully punished and imprisoned: I cannot (said she) nor must
not say so to you, why then belike (said the Queen) you will report it to
others; Not so (replied the good Lady) I have borne and must bear the burden
my self, and if I may but enjoy your Majesty's good opinion of me, I shall be
the better enabled to bear it still, and I pray God that when I shall cease to
be one of your Majesty's truest and loyal subjects, that then I may cease to
be at all; The Queen only replied in Spanish, Dios lo sabe, that is, God
knows it, and so turning aside, left her to be conveyed to her former
custody.

King Philip having privately ouer-heard the Conference, was now fully settled
in a good opinion of her loyalty; he well perceived the inueterate malice of
her Adversaries, and her extraordinary patience in such a trial, did forthwith
take order for her deliverance, she in the interim remained very solitary, not
knowing what the event wo^ld be, not one word of comfort could she imagine to
have proceeded from her Sister, yet, after long expectation in this deluge of
sorrows, a dove appeared with an olive bra^ch in her mouth, within seven days
after by the intercession of some eminent friends, she was discharged of her
keeper Sir Henry Beningfield, yet so that, Sir Thomas Pope one of her Majesty's
privy Council and Master Gage her Gentleman usher were made superintendents
over her, the change was howsoever most happy, L. Elizabeth committed to her
loving friends.
she was now in liber a custodia, under the hands of her loving friends with
whom she went down into the Country, and there spent the Remaynder of her
Sisters reign.

The bishop of Winchester and others of his faction looked black in the mouth,
Gardiners pur^suit in mischei^e.
to see all their plots discovered, all their devices frustrate, yet rather
then they would give off, they would play at small game; because they could not
touch the Lady Elizabeth, they would have a fling at her household, and at
those who were nearest unto her person. A warrant was sent down for no less
then four of her Gentlewomen at one time (which the Lady no sooner heard of,
Four Gentlwomen of the L. Elizabeth committed to prison at once.
but said) they will fetch away all in time; but not long after, it so pleased
God, that Gar. himself was fetched away to give account for his actions,
howsoever his death was the cause why she lived in less fear and more
quietness.

Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester has had a long and tedious part in the
troubles of the Lady Elizabeth, Fox. acts and Monuments.
not one Scene of all her Tragical Story but he has had a share in it, it
will not I hope be therefore impertinent to write a line or two of his Exit,
wherein I will wade no further then the warrant of sufficient Authority shall
direct me: The same day that those two bright shining lamps, Bishop Ridley and
Master Latimer were extinguished at Oxford, Gardener had invited the Duke of
Norfolk and others to dinner, but caused the good old Duke to stay for it,
till about 3 or 4 a clock in the afternoon, being, as it should seem, not
disposed to dine, till he had heard that fire was put to the two good Martyrs:
A just judgment upon Gardener.
he would not feed his own body, till theirs were quit consumed, at length
came in a servant betwixt 3 and 4 and informed him of the certainty thereof, he
no sooner understood it, but came out with great joy to the Duke, and said;
Come now lets us go to dinner, the meat was served in, he fell merrily aboard;
but before the second mess came in, he fell sick at the table and was
immediately removed thence to bed, where he remained full 15. days in such
anguish and torments that he could not void, what he had received, either by
urine or otherwise, lyin in this extremity, Doctor Day Bishop of Winchester
came to visit and comfort him with words of Gods promise, and free
Justification in the blood of Christ Jesus; which he no sooner heard, but he
answered thus: What my Lord, will you open that gap now, then farewell all
together; to me and such other in my case, you may speak it, but open that
Cazement once to the people, then farewell all together: more he would have
spoke, Gardener had enflamed many Martyrs, and has now his body enflamed.
but his tongue being so swelled with the inflammation of his body he became
speechless and soon after died.

After the death of Gardener, one or other of the good Ladies Adversaries dropped
away, Diverse of the Ladies, Adversary drop away.
insomuch, that by little and little her dangers decreased, fears diminished,
and hope of comfort as out of a thick cloud began to appear, she spent the
remaynder of her Sisters reign in thanksgiving, and praises unto Gods who
had thus mercifully preserved her.

The time of Queen Mari^s reckoning being come, rumors were spread abroad,
that she was already delivered of a son, yea and such a one, as it was then
suspected, was readily prepared, whereof King Philip being informed, and
^corning that by any such Impostory a counterfeit brood should be the heir of
all his Kingdoms, would not depart the Chamber all the time of her travel, by
which means the Plot took no effect; Reports spread abroad that Queen Mary
was delivered of a Son, but afterward proved false.
howsoever the rumor of this young Heir, made the Bells ring merrily in
London, and spread it self as far as Antwerpe, where it was entertained with
great triumphs both on Land and Sea, toward which charge an hundred Pistolets
were conferred on the Officers by the Lady Regent; but the news on their side
was too good to be true, their joyful acclamations too extreme to continue,
their Haleluiahs were instantly turned to Lachrymae, the report proved but
poin'd, and turned the Vane presently into another point; it was after known
to all their greefes, that she never had conceived, or ever was likely so to
do; some gave out that she was with Child, but miscarried; some, that she had
a Timpany; others, that such a thing was rumored only for policy, but the
truth is, King Philip seeing himself frustrate of his expected Is^ue, and
perceiving such shuffling and cutting amongst them, K. Philip resolves for the
low-Countreis.
not long after took his leave of the Queen, to visit his Father the
Emperor, and take possession of the Low Countries; his departure was very
grievous unto her, but (as most are of opinion) he did but little affect her.

King Philip st^yed beyond Seas a full year and six months, K. Philips stay,
the P^pists opportunity.
during his abode there, the Statists of that time lost not the least
opportunity to extinguish, if it might be possible, that Cause of God, that
heretical faction, as they termed it, how many dear Saint^ of God (during the
Kings absence in the space of 18. months) mounted up with Elias in a fiery
Chariot to Heaven? the fire was then at the hottest, the flames were then at
the highest, and the Lady Elizabeth, though peaceably seated in the Country
with her loving friends, yet was much daunted with the fearful apprehension
of such extremities, she feared the more, because she knew that such as were
adverse unto her, would, like the Devil, work upon the weakness of her
Sisters frailety; they would leap over the hedge where it is the lowest, and
that now the absence of King Philip beyond the seas was the only opportunity
for the advancement of their intended designs, but King Philips return into
England, not long after, proved the happy resolution of all her fearful
apprehensions, her life was a continual warfare, like a ship in the middst of
an Irish Sea, where nothing can be expected but troublesome storms and
tempestuous waves, and certainly it will appear, that those peillous
occurences she met withal in the four years of her Ante-Regnum during the
principality of her Sister, will way down the balance, being poys'd with
those several Treasons which threatened her Majesty, being an absoulte
Princess; Then her opposites were aliens, L. Elizabeth troubles compared with
those of her reign.
now natives; It was thou o my friend, etc: then foreign Kings sought to
invade her, now a modern Qu. strives to entrap her; they strangers, this a
Sister; she lived then at liberty without their jurisdiction, now a prisoner
captiuated to an incensed Sisters indignation; she was then attended by her
Nobility, and grave Counselors, she has now not any to converse with, but
keepers and Goalers; but that God wherein she still trusted, first, let her see
her desire upon her Adversaries, then in a good old age gathered her to
himself, freed her from the opposition of the one, and the decease of Queen
Mary her Sister, set a period to the malice of the other.

Cardinal Poole with the rest of that suruiuing faction, The malice of
Cardinal Poole, Bonner, another.
seeing things thus retrograde to their desires, perceiving the discontents of
the Queen, and that but a few sands were left in the glass of her time, they,
Nebuchadnezzar-like, heated the oven of their persecution^ seven times hotter
then before; 2^^ put to death in Qu. Mari^s reign
for having already burned five Bishops, twenty one Doctors, eight Gentlemen,
eighty four Artificers, an hundredth Husbandmen, Servants, and laborers,
twenty six wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two boys, two Infants, the one
whipped to death, tho other sprange out of it is Mothers womb being at the
stake, and was cruelly cast into fire again; Sixty four persecuted, whereof
seven whipped to death, 16. dyed in prison and were buried in Dung-hils, many
in Captivity abroad, leaving all they had, only for conscience sake.

Quis talia fando, tempreet a lachrimis? Yet did not their fury cease here, The
bones of Martin Bu^er and Paulus Phagius burnt
they filled the cup up to the brim, perceiving the heat of those fires begin
to slake and wanting fuel to increase the flames, they consulted to burn the
bones of those which had been long since expired, they dug up the bones of
Martyn Bucer and Paulus Phagius long since buried at Saint Mary's in Cambridge,
and with great Pontifical State first degraded them, then committed them to
the secular power, afterward to the fire; and lest the one University should
mock the other, they took up the bones of Peter Martirs wife formerly interred
at Oxford, and buried them in a stinking dunghill; nay, in this fury, the bones
of K. Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth, hardly escaped free, now they
thought all sure, that the heretical faction (as they termed it) were with
these bones utterly extinguished, but whilst they thus solace themselves in the
supposed victory of Gods Saints, even then did the handwriting appear upon the
wall against them, news came over, that Calice in France, a town of great
import, was recovered by the French, having belonged to the Crown of England
two hundred and eleven years, and herin the loss of Calice was most
memorable; It was first won by Edward the third, being the eleventh King from
William the Conqueror, and lost again by Mary, being the eleventh from
Edward, in 8 days; The cause of Qu Mary's death
The Queen took the loss to heart, the people began to murmr, some
imputing the loss unto the neglect of the Clergy, who then sat at the helm
of state, others whispered that it was a just Judgment of God for the
abundance of blood already spilt and broyled in the land; In the interim, those
of the faction strive to allay the heat of this distemperature both in Prince
and People, by extenuation of the loss, saying, that it was a Town of none
such consequence, but rather of greater inconvenience then they were aware of,
that it was only a refuge for runnagate heretics, and consequently, that no
true Roman Catholic ought to deplore, but rather rejoice at the damage.

At Regina graui iam dudum saucia cura
Vulnus alit venis. --
How soever the Queen being struck to the heart, the wound became incurable,
then they called a Parliament, many large profers were made for the recovery of
Calice wherein the clergy did exceed, yet all this would not do, Calice still
stuck in the Qu. stomach, she went up and down mourning and sighing all the
day long, which being asked her by some, what was the reason thereof; whether
K. Philips departure were the occasion? No said she, The loss of Calice is
written in my heart, and there may be read the occasion of my grief, when
after death my body shall be opened; her conceptions at length failing, great
dearth in the land reigning, much harm done by thunders on shore, and by fire
on her Royal Fleet at Sea, home troubles, foreign losses, K. Philips
unkindness, there with others discontentments brought her to a burning fever,
of which ^he died at Saint James nere Westminster, on the 17th of February
being Thursday, On a Thursday died King Henry the eight an^ (...) the sixth,
Q^. Mary etc.
An. 1558. and lies buried in a chapel in Saint Peter's Westminster, without
any monument or remembrance at all.

Queen Mary was well inclined of her self, (...)
had not the blind zeal of her Religion, and authority of the clergy ouerswayd
her, the flames of their consuming fire had not mounted so high as heaven,
there to solicit for vengeance, it is observed that her reign was the
shortest of all Kings since the conquest (Richard the third only excepted) and
that more christian blood M^n of blood sha^^ not live hal^e their days, Psalm,
55.
was spilt in her short time, then had been in case of Religion in any Kings
reign whatsoever, since K. Lucius, the first establisher of Christianity in
England, and God grant the like may never be seen again, Amen.

The Cloud thus set, that wished Sun appeared in our horizon like a fresh
spring after a stormy winter: The Parliament then sitting at Westminst. news
was brought that the Queen was deceased; the soddainnesse of the news struck
the house into amazment.

Some looked backward to the dead Queen, La. Elizabeth proclaimed Queen of
England.
others looked forward to the suruiuing Princess, but at last they pitched
upon the proclamation of the L. Elizabeth, which was accordingly performed the
same day, in the 24th year, 2. month and 10 day of her age, at what time she
removed from Hatfield, to the Charterhouse, from thence she was royally
attended to the Tower of London, and the 24 of the same month passed with great
state through the City to Westminster.

On the four and twentieth of November, Queen Elizab. Q. Elizabeth passes
through London.
set forward from the Tower, to pass through the City to Westminster, but
considering that after so long restraint she was now exalted from misery to
Majesty, from a Prisoner to a Princess, before she would suffer herself to
bemou^ted in her Chariot, she very deuoutely lifted up Her Hands and Eyes to
Heaven, v^^ering these words.

O Lord Almighty and everliving God, Q. Elizabeth's p^ayer coming out of the
Tower.
I give thee most humble and hearty thanks, that thou have been so merciful
unto me, as to spare me to see this joyful and blessed Day; and I acknowlede
that thou have dealt as graciously and wonderfully with me, as thou did with
thy true and faithful Servant, Daniel thy Prophet, whom thou deliuered'st out
of the Lions Den, from the cruelty of the greedy and raging Lions, even so
was I ouer-whelmed, and by thee delivered; to thee therefore only be thanks
and honor and praise for evermore. Amen.

Having made an end of her thanksgiving to God, she put onwards through the
City, where diverse magnificent Pageants presented themselves to her view, the
throng of people was extraordinary, their acclamations loud as thunder, many
were the expressions of love tendered unto her, and by her as gratefully
entertained, as they were lovingly presented. To make a particular relation of
the several occurrences in that one days entertainment would require above a
days expression. I will only but point at some more remarkable passages,
wherein she showed her self extraordinarily affected to her People.

She would many times cause her Chariot to stand, that the people might have
their full sight of her; amongst the several speeches that were addressed unto
her from the Pageants, if at any time any word did reflect upon her, a change
of countenance was observed in her; but a settled constancy to hear it out;
then her love and courtesy in giving the people thanks: In Cornehill a
Pageant presented it self, called the Scate of worthy Government, intimating
their dutiful allegiance to her, with the general conceived hopes of her
Princely Government; the Speech was no sooner delivered, but she immediately
answered.

I have taken notice of your good meaning toward me, and will endeavor to
Answer Qu. Elizabeth's answer to the Speaker.
your several expectations.

Passing forward, another Pageant appeared, representing the eight Beatitudes,
every one applied to her in particular by the Speaker: the multitude crying
out, Amen, Amen. But being come to the little Conduit in Cheap, she perceived
an offer of Love, and demanded what it might signify? one told her Grace that
there was placed Time; Time! (said she) and Time I praise my God has brought
me hither; but what is that other with the Book? she was resolved that it was
Truth the Daughter of Time, presenting the Bible in English, Qu. Elizabeth
receives the Bible lovingly.
whereunto she answered; I thank the City for this gift above all the rest;
it is a Book which I will often and often read over; then she commanded Sir
John Perrot, one of the Knights that held up the Canopie, to go and receive
the Bible; but being informed that it was to be let down unto her by a silken
string she commanded him to stay; in the Interim a Purse of gold was presented
by the Recorder in the behalf of the City, which she received with her own
hands, and afterward gave attention to a speech delivered, making reply in the
conclusion:

I thank my Lord Mayor, Q. Elizabeth's speech to the City.
his brethren the Aldermen, and all of you, and whereas your request is, that I
should continue your good Lady and Queen, Q. Elizabeth's grandfathers fathers
was a Lord Mayor of London.
be you assured that I will be as good unto you as ever Queen was yet unto her
people; no will in me is wanting, neither do I hope can there want any power;
As for the privileges and Charters of your City, I will in discharge of my
oath and affection, see them safely, and exactly maintained, and persuade your
selves that for the safety and quietness of you all, I will not spare, if need
be, to spend my blood in your behalf, God bless you all good people.

As she went along in Fleete-streete at St. Dunstans Church, the children of
Christ's Hospital, Q. Elizabeth pleased with the sight of the Children of
Christ's Hospital.
sat there with the governors, she took great delight in the object, and
calling to mind that it was her brothers foundation, she expressed her self
very thankful for the presentation of such a charitable sight, saying; We
are Orphans all, let me enjoy your Prayers, and you shall be sure of my
assistance.

As she went through Temple-Barre, the Ordinance and Chambers of the Tower
went off, the report whereof gave much content: thus passed She along to
Westminster, royally attended with the Nobility of the Kingdom, and was there
Crowned, to the joy of all true-hearted Christians.

Est et quod Regnat causa fuisse piam. FINIS.

