THE EXEMPLARY LIVES AND MEMORABLE ACTS OF NINE THE MOST WORTHY WOMEN OF THE
WORLD: Three Jews. Three Gentiles. Three Christians.


Written by the Author of the History of Women.

August. Lib de singul. Cleric. Man was created out of Paradise, but Women in
Paradise

London Printed by Tho. Cotes, for Richard Royston, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Angel in Ivy Lane, 1640.

TO THE HONORABLE AND EMINENTLY VIRTUOUS, THE EXcellent Lady THEOPHILA, the
Learned Consort of the right worthy Sir ROBERT COOK, Knight, etc.
Excellent Madam,
SHould I present you with your merited praise,
What Muse should I invoke? what rapture raise?
For my minerva, it is too high a strain,
As far surpassing both my pen and brain.
When I shall say, the Lilly does excel
For whiteness, or the Violet for the smell;
Or for a modest blush, the Garden Rose;
What speak I more in this then each man knows?
Or if I shall proclaim the Turtle chaste;
Or praise the ripe fruits for their pleasing taste,
The Nightingale commend for many a tune,
And say she far excells the Bird of June.
If in their grace I strive to do my best,
What write I more, then is by all confessed?
If I shall say you are beautiful and fair,
Matchless, unparalleld, in all parts rare;
And to those outward should I then annex
The inward virtues, that most grace your Sex!
To name which, would exceed number, or to tell
The several tongues, in which you so excel,
Greek, Roman, French, Castillian, and with those,
Tuscan, Teutonick, in all which you pose
The foreign Linguist: in the most select
Both native Ideom, and choice dalect.
Or, for all learning Morrall or Divine,
To list you a tenth Muse amongst the nine?
When to the height of all these I am grown,
I shall add nothing to you save your own.
Nor can my praise the least advantage win you
Since all that know you know these to be in you.
If to your honors, both of Birth and Book,
You shall but daine an animating look,
To' inlifen these dull papers; they shall strive,
Alternatly to make your name survive.
Acknowledging, in a submisse surrender
They had died blind, not lightened by your splendour.
Your Honors absequiously devoted. THO. Heywood*

TO THE EXCELLENTLY DISPOSED MISTRESS ELIZABETH THE VIRTUOUS CONSORT OF CLOVILL
TANFIELD OF COPT-FOLD HALL, IN ESSEX (Esquire.) The memorable Acts of these
nine most worthy Ladies are humbly presented by T. H.
Excellent Creature,
THat I presume to approach so fair a shrine with so mean an offering, accept
not (I pray) my unworthiness but your own worthy deservings; borrowing your
unspotted name to usher in these nine most incomparable Ladies; neither is it
improper, but rather material, for modesty and chastity best accommodates
magnanimity and courage; all vertuall decorements consists not in masculine
spirited Viragoes, some of your sex being for their beauty beloved, some again
more for their inward virtues, then outward features affected; as virgins for
their chaste and modest indowments; wives for the love and care they have to
preserve their conjugall tie untainted, some widows for their wisdom, and
grave matrons for their gravitie; now in this misselany of your so much
magnified sex, where you shall find one excellently pollisht; it is in your
choice to make her your president; or if any for too much boldness branded,
you may use her as a veil to make your own virtues show the more conspicuous,
for contrarieties in colors best sets off each others luster; thus after a
particular acknowledgment of my duty and service, with pardon craved for my
too much boldness I remain yours.

In all observance obliged, Tho. Haywood.

TO ALL NOBLE AND BRAVE SPIRITED GENTLEMEN, WITH THE EXCELLENT AND VERTVOVSLY
DISPOSED GENTLEWOMEN in general.
TO the most generous of both Sexes, I commend these few lines, devoted to the
honor of all worthy women, of what quality or condition soever: come to their
first creation; Adam was created from the dust of the earth, she from the
ribbe of man, Adam without she, within Paradise, and whether we take them
national or singular, we shall find them to parallel men, as well in the
liberal Arts, as in high Facinorous Acts: For the national or provincial,
what braver resolutions then in the Troades, the Phecides, the Chiae, the
A^giuae, the Persides, the Salmanicae the Milasiae, the Celticae, the Melicae,
the Tyrhenae, the Liciae, the C^ae, or Cianae, etc. Of all whose magnanimities
there are l^st to us memorable Histories. Come to particulars, Valeria and
Cloelia, Micca and Megisto, Pieria, and Policrita, Lampsace, Aretaphila, Camm
Sratonica, Chiomara, Timoclea, Erixo, Xenocrita, Pithis, Lucretia Telesilla,
etc. and others without number.

And therefore was the opinion of Gorgias received before that of Thucidades,
who gave precedence and prioritie in place, to such as were least spoken of
abroad, intimating that it was necessitous in a good woman to keep as well her
fame as her body within doors, neither of them daring to be heard or seen
beyond the threshold; alluding to the French proverb, La Femme in La Maiscu,
et La Jambe rompue, that is, let the woman be in her house and her leg broke,
intimating she ought to busy her self about household affairs only, and not
to go abroad: But more approved was Gorgias, allowing both their features and
fames a liberal freedom to undergo any public censure.

And therefore commendable was that law amongst the Romans, which admitted
funeral orations to be openly delivered at the obsequies of any grave and
modest matron, to animate and encourage the living, who by imitating their
excellent indowments and departments, might be partakers with them in their
obituall praises and extolments: Plutarch in the eighty fifth of his Roman
questions, says thus, Cur antiquitus mulieres neque sinebant molere ne que
coquere, etc. that is, why in the ancient times did they not suffer women
either to grind at the Mill, or to play the Cooks in the Kitch^n? His answer
is, it is in the memory of the Covenant made betwixt the Romans and the
Sabines; for after their rape of the Sabine Virgins, a peace being concluded
betwixt the two opposite nations: There was a Law written that not any of their
wives should be put to such petty works, nor any of their daughters to the
like servile drudgeries.

I spoke at first of Arts and Arms, let a few instances serve for many: Come
to painting; Timarete the daughter of Micaon, Irene of Cratinus, Martia of
Varro, Aristarche the scholar of Nearchus, or Lala Cizizena, etc. who might
compare with Apelles, Zeuxis, Apollidorus Atheniensis, Aristides, Thebanus or
Nicomachus the son of Aristidamus; for music and songry Lamia, the beloved
of King Demetreus, and Aglais the daughter of Megacles were no whit inferior
to Arion or Orpheus: In Poetry Sapho outshined Anacreon, and for learning what
man was ever known to surpass the Sibills and the Muses? and for masculine
and heroicke spirits, though I could produce infinites to make this pocket
book rather voluminus then portable, let these nine serve to vindicate the
entire number.

For whose greater honor and dignity, the seven liberal sciences, the
senses, all Cities and Countries. The Cardinal virtues, the four parts of the
world, the Muses, the Graces, the Charities are all figured and delivered in
the portrackt of women, and even Sapientia, wisdom her self is of the same
gender; who in her creation was not taken from the head of Adam, least she
should presume to overtop him, nor from his soote, least she should be vilified
by him, but from a ribbe near unto his heart, that she might be ever dear and
entire unto him; which shows the alternate love that ought to be betwixt man
and wife.

In the composure of bodies Philosophers say some consist of parts sejunct (as
an Army by Land or Navy by Sea) others of parts compact (as an house, a Ship
and the like) others of parts unite, or in one nature concreate (as man, beast,
and other Animals) so wedlock consisting of natural and reciprocal love,
has reference to that, composed of parts concreate: Children or issue to the
compact, friends and alliance, to the sejunct, and as Physicians hold that
humors in the body are totally in the total, so in the true conjugall tie, the
persons or bodies, riches, friends (or what else ought to preserve that
unanimitie, consanguinitie and correspondencie, to be all in all, and wholly in
the whole, which I wish to every one of that honorable order and consocietie,
for, venare juvitis non facile est Canibus, Fare ye well.

TO THE GENERAL READER.
GEnerous Reader (for all the Judicious are so) know, that History in general,
A distinction of History.
is either Nugatory as in all comicall Drammae's; or adhortatory, as in the
Fables of Aesop, Poggius, etc. or fictionary, as in poetical narrations; or
Relatory, such as soly adheare to truth without deviation or digression; of
which only the ancient Gramarians admitted, as worthy the name, and in which
rank I entreat thee to receive this following tractate.

Of History there be four species, The species.
either taken from place, as Geography; from time, as Chronology; from
Generation as Geneologie; or from gests really done, which (not altogether
unproperly) may be called Annologie: The Elemens
The Elements of which it consists are person, place, time, The definition.
manner, instrument, matter, and thing: It is defined, Rerum gestarum
expositio, a declaration of such things as have been done: The derivation.
Budaeus in his Greek commentaries derives Historia from (...), that is, I
narrate, I look, I see, I inquire, ask, know, seek, learn, dictate, etc.
besides whatsoever is gravely explicated, my go under the name of History.

The profit that comes by reading of history.
Simon Grinaeus speaking of the utilitie that arises unto us from the reading
of History has words to this purpose. What can be thought more pleasing or
profitable then in this spacious Theater of humane life, for a man to instruct
his understanding, by searching to know whatsoever is marvelously carried in
all the parts thereof? To view the danger of others without any peril to
himself, thereby to make him the more wise and cau^elous? to make happy use of
foreign presidents and examples by applying them to his own perticulars? to
be as it mere private with the greatest men, in their gravest counsels, and
not only privy to the purpose, but partaker of the event? To be acquainted
with all the passages of state, the quality of times, the succession of Ages
the vicessitude of both? The situation of countries, the original of nations?
the rare lives of good Princes, the lamentable ends of Cruel Tirants? To make
all that has been precedent, as familiar with us as the present, foreign
lands as well known unto us as that wherein we live: The acts of our fore
fathers as visible unto our eyes as were they now in being: As ours (if we
shall do ought worthy remembrance) commended to all the posterity: briefly
such is the benefit of History, that comparing what is past with the present,
we may better prepare our selves for the future.

Further to the exact composure of History, there belongs such an accurate
curiosity, that whosoever shall atta^ne to the true method and manner, may
boast he has transcended Herodatus, Xipheline, Dio, Trogus Pompeius, Justine,
Livy, Curtius, Tacitus, Swetonius, and even Caesar in his Commentaries: To all
which I must ingeniously confess I am so many degrees inferior that I dare
not list my self in the number of the Historygraphers being now rather a
remembrancer or collector of some passages concerning the persons now in
agitation.

But my discourse at this present is of women, and women only, intimating to
my self, that it is a kind of duty in all that have had mothers, as far as
they can to dignifie the Sex, which in my (...): or History of Women, I have
strived to do with my utmost minerva; but that was a meare miscelaine of all
ages, sexes, qualities, complexions, conditions dispositions, of rich, poor,
learned, unlearned, fair, foul, well featured, deformed, barraine, bearing,
matron, meretrix, and all in general, from the Scepter to the sheep book.
From the Court to the Cottage. But in this tractate I have only commemorated
the lives and memorable Acts of nine ^alluding to the number of the Muses.)
Three Jews, three Gentiles, three Christians. Courteous Reader, what is here
proposed to thy view, peruse without prejudice. What thou find worthy just
taxation, correct without malice: which granted, the Nine worthy Women going
before, it may be presumed that the Nine worthy Men may at some small distance
follow.

Constantly devoted to thy content, THO. HEYWOOD.

To his much respected Friend Mr. Thomas Heywood, concerning his Work of the
Nine Women Worthies.
Is It Natures wonder; that the dead revive?
You work a wonder then, make dead alive;
Nor can you (being too much) create, them new,
Yet do you (being enough) their being renew,
Who had existance by eternal will;
Have quasi-co-Existance by your Quill,
That gave them several worth; and you join now
Their worths in one, (your work) where, when, and how.
This work as theirs speaks your deserving praise,
Raising their, worthes in these our worthless days.
It intimates; dull spirits rouse for shame;
Behold nine Trophies, all of female fame:
Whom ye your selves (if not deject) may see
Honors high towering Pyramidds to be;
Which justice ever distributing dew,
Makes Tripartite to Christian, Gentile, Jew.
William Ball ( alias Bennet) Esquire.

To his learned, loving Friend Mr. Thomas Heywood, upon his History of the Nine
Women worthies.
Is It not presumption for a Penscarce known,
To write in praise of him, that of his own
Has Volumes of Eternallizing lines,
Such as have fathomed even the deepest mines
Of Poetry, and History, weighed down
With all Arts Plummets, to bring up renown
And fix it on his head? will not men say
I light my Taper in a Sunshine day?
Sure such a censure would not seem unjust;
And yet there is a necessity, I must
(To prove my loves profession does not feign
Thrust into the world amid'st the Muses train;
Who being Women, and in number Nine,
And (as of all men's honor) worthy mine:
Would say, I bear to virtue little love
When the Nine worthy Women could not move
Th'expression of a poor respest from me:
Let this then for my Pen the pleader be.
Withal I must confess 'twas my maine end,
To boast, The Author's my deserving Friend.
So avoucheth Steph. Bradwell.

To the worthy Reviver of these Nine Women worthies, Master Thomas Heywood,
Gent.
AMongst the many worthy, to attend
Thy worthy female, and thy worth commend,
Let me present my love too; to thy choice
Of this great subject, and the eternal voice,
Thy Pen has given their Ashes; to thy flame
Their second soul, now when their towering fame
Was well nie Buried with them: to thine Art,
Thy cost, thy care, clothing their every part,
In all th'adorements of such eminent stories,
So as to read almost to see their glories
In their own greatness acted: friend thy strain,
In these (these brave Viragoes of thy brain)
This Golden issue of thy Silver head,
Thy many such, shall when thy bodi's dead,
Live, as thy lines, now, make them live: for ever
Pomp lives, and dy's such worthy labors never.
Thomas Brewer.

To his worthy Friend Mr. Thomas Heywood, on his Nine Female Worthies.
WIll neither rugged time nor vast expense
Of thy unfathomed fancy and clear sense
Persuade thee to leave off, but thou will still
Make all'twixt heaven and hell flow from thy Quill?
Nay Heaven it self, and all those Heywood of Angels.
Angels there,
Those powr's and virtues will themselves declare
Thy Genuine searching soul: But these here
Thy female Angels, that do grace this Sphere,
Thrice worthy, worthy women, whose great acts
Immortallize their mem'ries, and exacts
Not thee alone, but all the noblest wits
That in the courts of truth and judgment sits
To write their Legends: But thy learned Pen,
That writ (before) their Heywoods History of women.
Story has again
From thy own works subtracted Nine, to be
The great example to posterity:
I do not flatter but I may admire
To see fire turned to Ashes return to fire;
Thy age goes backward, and thy Phaenix brain,
From the old Ashes is grown young Again.
George Estoutevile.

THE APPELLATION OF THE THREE JEWS.
DEbora the Prophetess, and a mother in Israel.

Iudeth of Bethulia, the widow of Manasses.

Ester, the Queen of King Ahashuerosh, and Niece to Mordecay the Jew.

THE APPELLATION OF THE THREE GENTILES
BOnduca, or Boadicia the Dowager Queen of Prasutagus King of the Iceni, one
of the Kingdoms of the British Scepterchy.

Penthisilaea, the warlik Queen of the Amazons, and friend to Hector of Troy.

Queen Artimesia, wife to Mausolus King of Caria, a Province in Greece,
situate betwixt Lycia and Iania.

THE APPELLATION OF THE THREE CHRISTIANS.
ELphleda, Daughter to King Alured, and wife to Etheldredus, Duke of Mercia, or
middle England.

Queen Margaret, daughter to the King of Cecile and Jerusalem, and wife to
Henry the sixth King of England.

Elizabeth, Queen of England, France and Ireland, etc. Defender of the Faith.

DEBORAH.
HE that shall take in hand to speak at large
Of women's praise, shall undergo a charge
Beyond supporture: and he better were
Take Atlas burden on him, and to bear
The Heavens upon his shoulders: If then any
Inquisitive be; why I (amongst so many)
Am now that undertaker? And shall ask
Why, to my self I durst assume this Task?
I must appeal for answer, to my rare,
(Scarce patternd) Patroness (most learned, most fair)
Whom, if these my unpolisht papers please;
It is a burden, to be borne with ease,
Whose Approbations (where soe'r Inscribd)
Shall pass a work as current, as to have bribd
All the Nine Sisters, or invokt their aid.
She, now the sole, out of so many made.
As for our worthy Iewesse now in quest,
The sequent Traectate, can describe her best.
He, that made man the woman's Head, that ^he
Despised of her superior might not-be,
Raised from her sex brave Dames (by Text allowd)
Least she might prove dejected, or he, proud.
If any one this Maxim shall gain say,
Let him but read Barach and Deborah.


OF THE NINE WORTHIES AMONGST WOMEN; Three Jews, Three Gentiles, Three
Christians.
And first of DEBORAH.
TO Deborah I give the priority, as first named in the holy text, in which we
read of two of that name. The one Rebeckahs Nurse, Two Deborahs.
(the wife of Jacob) who being dead, was buried beneath B^thel, under an Oak,
which he called, Al^on Bachuth, or the Oak of Lamentation; the other a
Prophetess the wife of Lapidothe, who Judged Israel, the Argument of our
ensuing Discourse. The name Deborah in the original, Her etimolygie.
implies a Word, or a Be; neither was her name any way averse to her nature,
for as she was mellifluous in her tongue, when she either pronounced the sacred
oracles of God, or sat upon any judicatory causes, amongst his people: so she
had also a sting at all times, upon any just occasion to wound and be revenged
on his enemies the Cananite^, who then most barbarously and cruelly oppressed
his own chosen nation. But the better to illustrate her history, it is
necessary that I give you a brief relation of that estate in which Israel then
stood.

In what estate Israel then stood.
Iosuah the son of Nun, who succeeded Moses in the Empire, and was Captain
of the Lords people in his Masters place, after the subduing and slaughter of
one and thirty Kings; and having divided the Land of Palastine amongst the
twelve tribes of the Children of Israel by lots: All his time, and all the
days of the Elders who were his Contemporaries and survivers, and ^ad been
eye witness^s of those great and stupendous wo^kes which the Almighty had done
for them; served the Lord, and were obedient unto his Commandments. But he
after he had lived an hundred and ten years, expiring, and being buried in the
Coast of his inheritance; and all that generation being likewise gathered to
their Fathers: Another ro^e after them, who neither knew the Lord, nor the
great works which he had done for Israel. In so much that they dwelt amongst
the Cananites, the Hittites, the Amorites, the Perizites, the Hevites, the
Iebusites* etc. Taking their daughters to be their wives, and giving their own
daughters to their sons, and serving their gods, The cause of the Isralites
bondage.
which was contrary to the Commandment, and the Law of Moses; by which they
incensed the wrath of the Lord which was now hot against them, in ^o much that
he delivered them into the hands of spoylers, who spoiled them, and sold them
unto their enemies; so that they were no^ able to stand against those that
hated them; namely the Gentiles, and Idolaters.

Notwithstanding which, Gods great mercy.
the Lord in his great mercy, according to his oath sworn to their
Forefathers the Patriarchs, upon their least repentance and turning unto him,
raised up some eminent amongst them, whom they called Judges, who delivered
them from the hands of their oppressors: But no sooner were those Judges dead,
but they fell again into their former rebellion, and whoring after Idols. For
the Lord (who knew them to be a perverse and stiffenecked generation) had
said, I will no more cast out before them any of the nations which Iosuah left
when he dyed, that through them I may prove Israel whether they will keep my
way to walk ^herein, as their Fathers kept it or no: But they had soon forgot
the God of their Fathers, and b^wed to the gods of the Gentiles, Baalim and
Ashcroth, so that his wrath was kindled against them, and he gave them into
the hands of Cushan rishathaim King of Aram: (which is Mesopotamia) whom they
were compelled to serve for the space of eight years; but groaning under so
great a burden, and in this their great affliction, crying unto the Lord, he
raised up Othniel the son of Kenaz, The Israelites repentance.
Calebs younger brother, who Judged the people and went to war, overcomming
the King of Aram in battle, by whose valor the whole land was in rest forty
years. But Othniel no sooner slept with his Fathers, but they fall again into
their former Idolatries, in so much that the Lord stirred and strengthened Egion
King of Moab against them, who gathering unto him the Ammonites and Amalekites,
smote Israel with a great slaughter, and held them under his subjection for the
space of Eighteen years: But when they had again submitted themselves and
repented them of their evil ways, The Lord stirred up Ehud the son of Gera
the son of Geinni a man lame of his right hand, Gods miraculous deliverance.
who slew the King of Moab in his summer parlour, and after caused a trumpet to
be blown in Mount Ephrim; where assembling the people, he slew of the
Moabites ten thousand of the strongest and most valiant men. After which
victory the land was in security and quietness fourscore years. A third
Deliverer they also had called Shamgar the son of Anath, who with an Oxe-goad
slew six hundred of the Philistines.

Ehud and Shamgar yiedling to nature, were no sooner laid in their Fathers
sepulchers, but this refractory and disobedient people, The Israelites
^ngratitude toward God.
altogether unmindfull of their so great and miraculous deliverances, like the
dog returned to their own vomit, and defiled themselves with all their
former abominations; and therefore the Lord sold them again into the hands of
Iabin, King of Canaan, who reigned in Hazor, and whose grand Captain was
Sisera, who dwelt in Haroshoth of the Gentiles. This potent King had for twenty
years sore grieved and vexed the Children of Israel; Imposing upon them great
taxes and tributes, and kept them in intolerable servitude and slavery: and
the greater terror he stroke into them was, that besides innumerable strong and
valiant soldiers, he had ready at all assayes, no less than nine hundred
Chariots of Iron, which kept not only them, but all the adjacent nations in
awe, so that his power was held to be unresistable, (and so indeed it was) in
all humane understanding. But there is a Lord of Hoasts, Gods great power*
and God of battles, who resists the proud, and at his pleasure is able to
suppress the fury of the greatest Tyrants whatsoever.

Whilst these things were thus in agitation, and the Israelites were in this
dejection, there lived Deborah who was a Prophetess, Deborah.
a woman of great sanctity and excellent knowledge, to whom the people
resorted, not only to hear those sacred and divine Oracles which she spoke
from God; but they also brought before her all differences and controversies,
how dificult and doubtful soever, which by her great wisdom, she reconciled
and ended, in so much that she lived as a Princess or governesse; For as the
Text reports of her, she Judged Israel. This excellent woman dwelt in Mount
Ephraim, under a Palm tree, between Ramah and Bethel, whether (as to our
Courts of Justice) all the people of what condition or estate soever customably
came to have their causes heard, and by her great wisdom decided.

She (as I before related) being inspired wi^h the true spirit of prophecy,
sent to call unto her Barak the son of Abinoham, from Kedesh of Nepthali,
Deborah to Barak.
who presenting himself before her, be spoke him after this manner. Has not
the Lord God of Israel (now at the last commiserating the great affliction of
his people) out of all others selected and made choice of thee? commanding thee
saying, Go Barak and draw toward Mount Tabor, and take with thee ten thousand
men, picked out of the two Tribes of Nepthali, and Zebulon, and I will draw unto
thee near unto the river Kishon, Sisera the great Captain of mighty Iabins
Army, with all his Iron Chariots and multitudes of men, and deliver them as a
prey and spoil into thine hands? which having thus spok^n unto him, she kept
silence, expecting his answer.

Who, whether distrusting in Gods almighty power and providence, or doubting
whether this were uttered from divine inspiration, or merely begot in her own
womanish fancy; or else dispairing in his own weakness and disability, he
thus replied. Barak to Deborah.
If Deborah thou thy self in person wilt associate me, I will take on me this
great and hazardous enterprise, but if thou deniest me thy presence, and that I
shall not have thy company in this adventure; impose this charge on whom so
ever else thou please, for I for mine own part will not be the undertaker.
She not well pleased with so cold an answer put on a masculine spirit and said
again: Yes Barak, that thou may know how little I fear or distrust the
success of this business, I will go foot by foot with thee, Her magnanimity.
and partake with thee in all damage whatsoever can happen. But that thou may
know that I am a Prophetess, and that I spoke unto thee was from the Lord,
know further that though thou undoubtedly prevailest over the enemy, yet shall
not this journey be al^ogether for thine honor, for the Lord shall sell Sisera
the Captain of the King of Canaans Army, into the hands of a woman: which
having spoke, she instantly accommodated her self, and after some words of
comfort and encouragement; she went up wi^h Barak unto Kedesh, who made a
present muster of the two Tribes of Nepthali and Zebulon, (the nearest unto
them) out of whom he made choice only of ten thousand fighting men, for no
greater was his Army: For he who is the great God of battles, disposes not of
the victory unto strength or number, for with an handful of men he can subdue
a multitude, (as you may read in the wars of the Maccabees,) and else where,
that his great power and stretched out arm may not only be feared but
magnified amongst the nations.

Heber the Kenite.
At this time Heber the Kenite, who was one of the posterity of Hobab the father
in law to Moses, had left his own Country and removed from the Kenites, and
pitched his tent, as far as from Zanaim unto Kedesh, which contained a great
part of that Country, he and his family living as neuters, and seeming friends
both to the Israelites and the Canaanites: so temporizing and complying betwixt
the Gentiles and the Jews, that which way so ever the stream ran or the
winds blew, he sailed without damage, for if the one prevailed he was safe, if
the other he was likewise secure: yet was his heart wholly inclined to the good
of the Children of Israel. Now the flattering of an enemy is like the melody
which the Sirens make, who sing not to stir up mirth, but rather allure unto
mishap; and as a learned Philosopher observes, It is much better to have an
open foe, than a dissembling friend, as appeared in the fall of this great
Captain Sisera.

A definition of war.
War is of two sorts; Civil, and Foreign; that which they call Civil, is
merely seditious and is indeed, a speedy overthrow of all estates, Kingdoms
and Monarchies, and the very seminary of all kind of evils though never so
execrable. For it abandoneth all reverence to God, and obedience to
Magistrates, it bredeth corruption of manners, change of laws, and contempt of
Justice, etc. But Foreign war is that which Plato calls a more generous
or rather honorable contention, and is then only lawful when it is
undertook either in the defense of true religion, or to establish peace.
Indeed nothing can make war just but necessity; nor lawful, but when it is
warranted by the word, either for a Prince or people to defend their own
right, or to repulse Gods enemies, who are ever the opposites of truth: I
conclude with the Poet, Nulla salus bello pacem, te possimus omnes.


All Generals of Armies, The office of a General.
ought to have their courages guided by wisdom, and their discretion armed
with courage; neither must their hardiness darken their judgment, nor their
judgment extenuate their hardiness: besides they ought to be valiant, as not
fearing death, and confident as not wont to be overcome; their feet ought to
be steady, their hands diligent, their eyes watchful, and their hearts
resolute: all which this godly Matron and gracious mother in Israel, with
sweet oratory, and her presence in the fields, being a president of her
unparraleld magnanimity, had deeply impressed in the heart of Barak.

Now concerning Iabin the King of the Canaanites, it proved to his great
dishonor, so that he had better to have studied to defend his own Country by
Justice, then to have sought to subdue other nations by Tyranny, and it little
profits any Prince to be Lord of many kingdoms, if on the otherside he
become bond slave to many vices: besides, it is not possible that to a man of
much pride, fortune should be long friendly. The desire of coveting and having
more is a vice common to such great men, breding in them for the most part a
brutish nature, tempered with unsaciable cruelty. The nature of ambition.
Ambition eats gold, and drinks blood; seeking to climb so high by other
men's heads, till at the length it breaks its own neck: It may not
altogether unproperly be compared to a vapor which ascends high, and being
at the full height disapeareth and vanishes into nothing; for commonly those
that strive to suppress and supplant others, in stead of honor and
superiority, purchase to themselves, shame and indignity. So much touching the
King. Now thus briefly of his Captain: That General who is bloody minded and
thirsts after revenge, is for the most part, either sold by his soldiers, or
slain by his enemies: but I shorten this digression and come to the matter now
in handling.

When Sisera had by his skouts and espials, understood, Sisera's preparation
for he war.
that Barak had gathered his forces and was gone up to Mount Tabor, and there
pitched his Tents, he like a careful and vigilant General, called for all
his Chariots, even nine hundred Chariots of Iron, assembling all the people,
even from Harosheth of the Gentiles, unto the river Kishon. Now by the number
of his Chariots, it is easy to guess of what an infinite multitude his Army
did consist; who confident in his own strength, and despising the weakness
of the enemy, waited in the valleys their descent from the Mount, thinking to
defeat and over run them at an instant; but the event happened quite
contrary to his expectation.

For the Heroicke and masculine spirited Championess, Deborah incourageth
Barak.
knowing that the Lord never failed his own people, if they left their wicked
ways and turned unto him with unfaigned repentance; came unto Barak and said,
see thou this great and (seeming) invinceable Army which cover the plains
and Country that invirons us: fear not their foot, their horse, nor their
Chariots; up therefore for this is the day that the Lord has delivered Sisera
and the host of the Canaanites into thine hand: Is not he himself gone
before thee to fight his own battle? Which words inspired such courage both
into him and his soldiers, (howsoever weakly accommodated for so dangerous an
adventure,) that with an unanimous resolution, as if so many mil-stones had
been precipitated from an high hill, they hurried down Mount Tabor, and fell
upon the camp of the Gentiles, with a sudden and violent assault, being upon
them ere they could scarce imagine them to be near them, which struck them
with such a terror and amazement, (God having a hand therein) that they were so
far from assaulting their enemies, that they had not the power to use their
weapons to defend themselves. For too much fear opens the way to
desparation, The effects of fear.
being destitute of reason, and turning the greatest courage into pusillanimity
and cowardice, according to that of the Poet, -- nos auxius omnia cogit
quae possunt firei, fact a putare timor.


Where fear once takes impression in the heart, what is easy to be done, it
makes to appear impossible.

In brief, Barak with his small Army of ten thousand, Sisera's Army routed.
rowted the great and puisant host of the Canaanites, who destroyed all their
Chariots of Iron, and pursued the enemy, even to Haroshoth, with such an
infinite slaughter, that they all fell by the edge of the sword, and not one^
them escaped alive. In which tumultuous flight Sisera was compeld to alight
from his Chariot, and cowardly to save his desparate life, fled away on foot,
and finding no place wherein to hide or shelter himself from the pursuit of
the Israelites, he came at length t^ the Tent of Iael the wife of Heber, (for
peace was betwixt Iabin being of Hazor, and between the families of the
Kenites,) who looking out from her Tent, and espying the great Commander
Sisera, late attended by so many Chariots, now forced to go upon his feet,
and he that led into the field such an innumerable Army, to have neither
servant, or so much as a Page to wait on him. And no doubt having heard the
success of the battle, she went out to meet him, and said; Turn in to me
my Lord, turn in, and fear not; who glad of so good an opportunity to be
secured from the pursuit of his enemies, accepted of her friendly offer, and
entering into the Tent, she covered him with a mantle.

Who hoping that the worst was now past, and his life in no further danger,
called unto her and said; Give me I pray thee a little water, for my travail
has made me very thirsty, who fetched presently a bottle of milk, and gave
him to drink, with which having sufficiently refreshed himself, he laid him
down again, and she again covered him; and as she was departing from him,
he called once more unto her saying, stand I pray thee in the door of the
Tent, and if any shall come and inquire of thee, and say, is any man here? thou
shall answer him and say, nay; which having spoken being weary, and over tired
in his flight, he fell suddenly into a deep and dead sleep, (for so indeed
it proved,) for he never awakned after.

Which she perceiving, and being in heart an Israelite, howsoever for
necessities sake, they with their whole Tribe complide with the Gentiles, she
would not let slip so good an advantage, but unwilling to let one of Gods
enemies escape out of her hands, like a bold virago she took a nail of the
Tent in her hand, and in the other an hammer, and coming softly toward him,
The death of Sisera.
she struck the nail into his temples, and fastened it into the ground,
peircing his skull unto the brain, with which wound he instantly expired.

Now Barak after the great host was defeated, having intelligence which way
Sisera was fled, Iael came out to meet him, and bespake him thus: Come in with
me and I will show thee the man whom thou seek, who entering with her into
the Tent, she discovered unto him the body of Sisera which lay grovelling on the
earth dead, and the nail still sticking in his temples; which object put him
in mind of the words of Deborah, when he denied to go into the field without
her company; that the honor of great Siseras, death should be taken from him,
and be conferd upon a woman, which accordingly happened. For Deborah in her
song of thanksgiving, after that great and miraculous victory over Sisera and
his host, gives unto her this extraordinary character: Deborah of Iael.
Iael the wife of Heber the Kenite shall be blessed above other women, blessed
shall she be above women dwelling in Tents; He asked water, and she gave him
milk, she brought him butter in a Lordly dish: she put her hand to the
nail, and her right hand to the workemans hammer, with the hammer smote she
Sisera, she smote off his head after she had wounded and peirced his temples,
he bowed him down at her feet, he fell down and lay still at her feet, he
bowed him down and fell, and when he had suncke down, he lay there dead. By
which so often iteration of the same words, she strived both to magnify her
act, and eternize her memory.

Neither did this great honor done unto Iael, any way take off or derogate
from the merit and magnanimity of Deborah, that any man need question which of
them did better deserve the name of a Worthy. Deborah's art and Iaels compared.
The precedence and priority undoubtedly belonging to her who was a
Prophetess, a Iudgesse, and a mother in Israel, the other only a secondary
minister and agent to have the will of the Almighty executed; Deborah in person
out-braving danger, and standing the brunt of the battle, against many
thousands, living Armed and awake; and Iael only taking the advantage of one
single man flying, trembling with fear, and after to kill him sleeping. I
conclude of her with her own words in her holy song, after so glorious a
conquest: So let all thine enemies perish O Lord, but they that love him, shall
be as the Sun when he rises in his might. After which great discomfiture,
the Land had rest forty years.

IVDETH
THe great Assyrian King, puffed up with pride
Because no Prince, was able to abide
His potency in battle: having subdued
By his (scarce to be numbered) multitude,
All bordring Kingdoms; at his mighty cost
An hundred twenty days feasted his Host,
Then, his chief Captain, Olophernes sent
With a most puissant army, with intent
To sweep all flesh from earth, who had denayd
To send him, in his last great battle, aid
He seeks to invade Judea, amongst the rest,
When of all other Cities, most distressed,
Bethalmi was: where Iudeth made abod,
Who in their great'st despair called upon God,
And more, their nations honor to advance,
Did undertake their free deliverance,
And when the spirits of the soldiers faild,
Put on a masculine spirit, and prevaild.
Match me this woman amongst men, who dared
Against an Host invincible (prepared
For her whole nations ruin) to invade
That potent army, singly with her maid,
And in her bold adventure so well sped,
To cut off, and bring thence the Generals head.


OF IVDETH A SECOND WORTHY WOMAN AMONGST THE JEWS.
KING Nabuchodonosor, and King Arphaxad were Contemporaries, Of King
Nabuchodonosor and Arphaxad
two mighty potent Princes, the one reigned in Ninevey the great City, over the
Assyrians, the other in Echbatane, over the Medes: A place as well strongly
munified, as most gloriously beautified. It happened, that King Nabuchodonosor
purposed to make war against King Arphaxad, in the great Champian Country,
in the Coasts of Ragan, and to that purpose he assembled all those that dwelt
in the Mountains, and by Euphrates, Tigris, and Hidaspes, the Countries of
Arioche, The names of sundry rivers.
the Elimeans, the streams of Chelod, with many other Nations and Languages.
He sent also into Persia, and to all that dwelt in the West, to Cilicia,
Damascus, Libanus, Antilibanus, and all those that dwelt by the Sea coast, and
to all the people that are in Carmel, in Galahaad, in hither Galilee, and the
great field of Esdrelam, and to all in Samaria, and the Cities thereof, and
beyond Jordan, unto Jerusalem, etc. But all the Inhabitans of these Countries,
Nabuchodonosors commandment despised.
despised the commandments of the King of the Assyrians, neither would they
come with him unto the battle, but sent away his Ambassadors slightly and
with dishonor: therefore he was greatly incensed against all these Nations,
and swore by his Throne and Kingdom, he would be avenged upon them, and
destroy all their inhabitants, with the edge of the sword.

In which interim, he marched in battle array against the King of the Medes, in
the seventeenth year of his reign, and prevailed against him. Arphaxad
discomfitted.
For he overthrew all the power of King Arphaxad, his Infantry, Horsemen and
Chariots, he woone all his Cities, and entering Echbat^ne, took the Towers,
defaced the streets, ruined the walls, and turned the beauty thereof into
shame. He also surprised the King in the mountains of Ragan, and caused him
to be thrust through with darts, after which great victory he returned unto his
own City Ninivey. Both he and all his Princes and Soldiers, which were a
great multitude, where he passed the time in pleasure and jollity, and
banqueted his Host an hundred and twenty days.

During which triumphall feasting, he communicated with those Princes and
Nobles which were of his intimate counsel, to destroy all flesh from the
earth, which had not obeyed his commandment, and to that purpose called unto
him Olophernes, Olophernes
his chief Captain, and gave him a strickt Commission, to execute the will of
the great King, and Lord of the whole earth, (for so he styled himself,) Then
went forth Olophernes from the presence of his Lord, and called together, all
the Governors, Captains, and Officers, of the army of Ashur, and selected an
host, of an hundred and twenty thousand foot, with twelve thousand Archers on
Horse back, besides Camels, and Asses, for burdens, and Sheep, Goats, and
Oxen without number, and victual for every man in the army, besides great
store of treasure out of the Kings house, with multitudes of strangers like
swarms of Grasse-hoppers, which attended on the Army, and to partake with the
Assyrians in the spoil.

Who from the upper Cilicia, even to Damascus, overrunne many Nations, robbed
their Cities, laid waste their Countries, and put all their young men to the
edge of the sword, His Tyranny.
so that fear and trembling fell upon all the inhabitants of the Sea coasts,
who sent Ambassadors unto him, and laid themselves prostrate to his mercy, and
after received him with Crowns, Timbrels, and Dances, into their borders, and
Cities, notwithstanding which he cut down their woods, set Garrisons in their
chief Cities, and took out of them their chosen men of war, destroyed all
their gods, commanding them to worship Nabuchodonosor only, and that all
tongues and Tribes should call upon him as their God.

Now when the children of Israel, who dwelt in Judea, The preparation of the
Isralites against Oloferues.
had hard what was done unto the Nations, they were greatly troubled for
Jerusalem, and the Temple, for they were but newly returned from the Captivity:
therefore they sent into all the Coasts of Samaria, and the bordering Cities.
And took all the tops of the high mountains, and walled in their Villages,
and put in vittailes for the provision of war: And ^oachim the High Priest
sent to them of Bethulia, and the adjacent Cities, exhorting them to keep the
passages of the mountains, for by them was an entry into Judea: but so narrow
was the passage, that two men could but elbow there at the most. Then cried
they unto the Lord, even every man of Israel; Their prayer and repentance.
their wives and their children, all with one consent, and fell down before
the Temple, in sacke-cloath, and ashes on their heads, praying that he would
not give their children for a prey, nor their wives for a spoil, nor the
Cities of their Inheritance to destruction* nor the sanctuary, to pollution and
reproach, and a derision to the Heathen; the High Priest also, and the Levites
stood before the Alter, their loins gi^t with sacke-cloath and ashes upon
their Miters, and called upon the Lord, who heard their prayer.

In this interim, it was declared to the great Captain of the Assyrian army,
that the Israelites had prepared for war, and shut the passage of the
mountains, and laid impediments in the champion Country, where with being
exceedingly moved, he assembled all the Princes of Moab, and the Captains of
Ammon, and all the Governors of the Sea coast, and demanded of them who that
people were? what their Cities? and what the multitude of their army? and why
they alone have not come down, to submit themselves, more then all the
inhabitants of the West? Achior Captain of the Ammonites.
To whom Achior Captain of the Ammonites replied: Let my Lord hear the words
of his servant, and I will declare unto thee the truth concerning this people;
and gave him a free relation of their estate from the beginning, rehearsing
punctually all those great wonders that God had done for them, in delivering
them from the Egyptians slavery; In dividing the red Sea, and overwhelming
Pharaoh and his host, and destroying the nations before them, etc. Adding
moreover, that when they sinned not before their God they prospered, but when
they departed from his way, they were destroyed in many battles, and led
Captives into strange Countries, but now (says he) they are turned unto their
God, and are come up from the scattering wherein they were scattered, and
possess Jerusalem, where their Temple stands, and dwell in the mountains
which were desolate, therefore if they have now again sinned, they shall be
easily overcome. Strange words to proceed from the mouth of an Heathen.
But if there be none iniquity, found in this people, let my Lord pass by
them, least the Lord whom they serve defend them, and we become a reproach
before all the world.

Whose words were no sooner ended, but all the Captains of the Host began
greatly to murmur, And would in their fury, have slain him, but when the
tumult was appeased Olofernes said unto Achior, because thou have prophesied
amongst us this day, The blasphemy of Olefernes.
that the people of Jerusalem is able to fight against us, because their God is
able to defend them: and who is God but Nabuchodonosor? therefore will I
destroy them from the face of the earth, and their God shall not deliver them,
but we will destroy them all as one man. And thou Achior, because thou have
spoken these words in the day of thine iniquity, thou shall see my face no
more, till I take vengeance of that people which is come from Egypt, and then
shall the Iron of mine army, and the multitude that serve me, pass through
thy sides, and thou shall fall amongst their slain, nor shall thou perish till
thou be destroyed with them. Then commanded he his servants concerning
Achior, that they should bring him before Bethulia bound, and deliver him into
the hands of the Israelites, which was accordingly done: then came the men of
the City and loosed him, and brought him into Bethulia, and presented him unto
the governors of the place, which were Ozias, the son of Micha, The
Governors of Bethulia.
of the Tribe of Simeon, and Chabris the son of Gothoniel, and Charmis the
son of Melchiel, who demanded of him, of all that was done, of which he gave
them ample satisfaction, declaring unto them the purpose of Olofernes, and the
words he had spoken in the midst of the Princes of Ashur, For which having
first praised God, they comforted Achior, and commended him greatly, and Ozias
took him into his house, and made a feast to the Elders, calling upon the God
of Israel.

The next day Olophernes removed his whole army near unto Bethulia, and cut
off all their Springs of water, thinking without the hazard of his people, to
make them perish by thirst, (for so he was counseled,) and besieged the City
for the space of four and thirty days: The great distress of the Bethulians.
in which time all their places of water failed, and their Cisternes were
empty, insomuch that they had not supply for one day, so that their children
swouned, and their wives and young men failed and fell down in the streets, so
that they murmured against the Elders, desiring them to deliver up the City to
the enemy, for it is better for us (said they) to be a spoil unto them, then
to dye of thirst, since the Lord has delivered us into their hands: which they
pressed upon them so urgently, that Ozias said unto them; my brethren be of good
courage, let us yet wait five days, in which time the Lord our God may turn
his mercy toward us, for he will not forsake us in the end, and if these pass
without help and succor from above, we will do according to your saying,
with which words he appeased them for the present, and separated them, every
one unto his charge.

Now when Iudeth heard thereof, Iudeth the wife of Manasses.
who was once the wife of Manasses, and after his death, had continued a Widow
for the space of three years and four months, in which time she wore
sackecloath, and her mourning apparel, and fasted all the days of her
Widdow-hood, save the day before the Sabbath, and the Sabbaths, and the day
before the new Moon, and in the feasts and sollemne days, of the house of
Israel, who was of a goodly countenance, and very beautiful, having great
plenty of gold, silver, and Jewels, with menservants, and maide-servants, and
cattle, of whom there was none could give any evil report, for she feared
God greatly. She (I say) hearing how the people had murmured against the
governors, and that Ozias had sworn unto them to deliver the City unto the
Assyrians within five days, she sent her maid, who had the government of all
that she had, to call Ozias, Chabris, and Charmis, the ancients of the people,
who came unto her, and she greeted them thus: Iud^ths speech to the Governors.
Oh you the governors of the Inhabitants of Bethulia, the words which you have
spoken before the people this day are not right; for who are you that have
tempted God? and set your selves in his place, amongst the children of men? For
if he will not help us within these five days; Has he not power to defend
us when he will? Do not you therefore bind the counsels of the Lord our God,
for he is not as man to be threatened, neither as the son of man to be
brought unto Judgment, etc.

To whom Ozias replied. The reply of Ozias.
All that thou have spoken, have thou spoken with a good heart, and there is
none that is able to resist thy words: but the people were thirsty, and
compelled us to do as we have done, and have brought us to an oath, which we
may not transgress, therefore pray for us, because thou art an holy woman,
that the Lord may send us rain to fill our Cisternes, and that we may saint
no more: then said Iudeth unto them. Hear me; for I will do an act which
shall be declared in all successive ages, to the children of our nation, you
shall stand this night in the gate, and I will go forth with mine handmaid,
and within the days that you have promised to deliver the City to the Enemy,
the Lord will visit Israel, by mine hand, but inquire not of mine act, for I
will not declare it unto you till you see the event. Then said Ozias, and the
Princes unto her, go in peace, and the Lord God be before thee, to take
vengeance on our enemies, so they left her, and went un^o their charge.

Then Iudeth, after she had prayed unto the Lord, rose from her knees, and
calling her maid, Iudeth changes her habit
went down into the house, and casting off her sackecloath, and putting of the
garments of her Widdow-hood, she washed her body, and anointed her with sweet
ointment, and dressed the hair of her head, and put a rich attire upon it, and
clothed her self with the garments of gladness, even those with which she
was decked in the days of Manasses her husband, and she put slippers on her
feet, and adorned her with bracelets, and sleeves, and rings, and earerings,
and decked her self bravely, to allure the eyes of all that should behold her,
and she gave her maid a bottle of wine, and a pot of oil, and filled a scrip
with flower, and dried figs, and fine bread, and wrapped all together, and
laid them upon her; thus she went down unto the gate, and when they saw how
her face was changed, and her garments altered, they marvelled greatly at her
wonderful beauty, and said unto her, the God of our Fathers give thee favor,
and accomplish thine enterprise, to the glory of the children of Israel, and to
the exaltation of Jerusalem, and the Temple: which said, she commanded the
gates of the City to be opened.

Then went she forth with her maid, and the men of the City looked after her
till they could see her no more, who came into the valley, and the first watch
of the Assyrian army met her, demanding of her of what people she was? whence
she came? and whether she was then bound? who answered, she was a woman of the
Hebrews, and fled from them to save her life, because she assuredly knew that
they should be utterly consumed, desiring them to bring her before the great
Captain Olofernes, to whom she would show a way, how to win all the
Mountains, without hazarding the life of any one of his servants; which
hearing, they chose out an hundred men, and prepared a Chariot for her and her
maid, Iudeth brought before O^ofernes
and brought her to the tent of the General, and they marvelled at her great
beauty, and wondered at her Nation because of Her. At that time Olofernes rested
upon his bed, under a Canopy, woven with purple, and gold, Emeraulds, and other
precious stones, who at the news of her coming, came to the entry of the
tent, and they carried lamps of silver before him.

Now when Iudeth saw him, she fell on her face and did him reverence, but his
servants took her up, and he said unto her, Woman be of good comfort and fear
not, but tell me wherefore thou art fled from thy people? For none shall hurt
thee, but entreat thee as one of the servants of my Lord, King Nabuchodonosor:
To which she answered, receive the words of thy servant, Iudeths speech
and suffer thine hand maid to speak in thy presence: we have heard of thy
wisdom, and of thy prudent spirit, and it is declared through the whole earth,
that thou only art excellent in all the Kingdom, of a wonderful knowledge,
and in feats of war mavelous. Now as concerning that which Achior did
speak in thy counsel: We have heard his words in the presence of the Elders,
of Bethulia and do not thou reject them, but set them in thine heart, for they
were most true* there is no punishment against our people, nor can the sword or
spear prevail against them: unless they sin against their God, which they
are now about to do, for because their victuals fail, and their water is
wasted, they are compelled to consume all things, which their God has
forbidden them to eat, by his Laws, which when they do, they shall be given
unto thee, to be destroyed the same day: wherefore, I thine handmaide am fled
from their presence, for thy servant worshippeth the God that made Heaven and
Earth, and now let me remain with thee, and go out in the night into the
valley, and I will pray unto my God, that he will reveal unto me, when this
is to be done, then I will come and show it thee, and thou shall go forth with
all thine Army, and I will lead thee through the midst of Judea, till thou
come before Jerusalem; and I will set thy Throne in the midst thereof, and thou
shall drive them as sheep that have no shepherd, and not a dog shall bark
against thee, for these things have been declared unto me according to my
foreknowledge, and I am sent to show thee.

Which words greatly pleased Olofernes, and his servants, who marvelled at her
wisdom and said, there is no such woman in the world, both for beauty and
wisdom: Moreover Olofernes replied, The answer of Olofernes.
God has done this to send thee before the people, that strength might be in
our hands, and destruction upon them that despise my Lord. Thou art both
beautiful in thy countenance, and witty in thy words; If thou do as thou have
spoken; thy God shall be my God, thou shall dwell in the house of
Nabuchodonosor, and shall be renouned through the whole earth: then he
commanded to bring her in, where his treasures were, and that they should
prepare for her of his own meat, and his own Wine, who said unto him; I may
neither eat nor drink of them, least there should be an offense: For I can
suffice my self with the provision that I have brought: but he replied, if
those things thou have should fail; how should we give thee the like, for
there is none with us of thy Nation? to which she answered, as thy soul
lives, thy handmaide shall not spend those things that I have, before the Lord
work by mine hand what he has determined.

Then the servants of Olofernes brought her into the tent, Iudeth received into
the Tent.
and she slept there till midnight, and rose at the morning watch, and sent
unto Olofernes, saying, let my Lord command that thine handmaid may go forth
to prayer, who presently gave order to his guard that they should not stay her:
thus she abode in the Camp three days, and went out in the night, into the
valley of Bethulia, and washed her self in a Fountain, in the water by the
Camp, and when she came out, she prayed unto the Lord God of Israel, that he
would direct her way to the exaltation of the children of her people, so she
returned, and remained pure in the Tent, until she ate her meat at evening.

A great feast made by Olofernes.
In the fourth day Olofernes made a feast to his own servants only, and said
to Bagoas the Eunuch, go call the Hebrew Woman that is with thee, that she
may come and feast with us, for it were a shame for us to let such a beauty
alone, and not talk with her; For if we tempt not her chastity she will
mock us: who came unto her and said, make no difficulty to go in unto my
Lord, and to be honored in his presence, and to drink wine with us joyfully,
and to be entreated as one of the daughters of the children of Assure, which
remain in the house of Nabuchodonosor; who answered him again, who am I, that
I should gainesay my Lord? so she a rose and trimmed her with garments, and
with all the ornaments that belong to women, and her maid went and spread
forth her skins on the ground, over against the place where Olofernes sat,
whose heart was ravished, and his spirits moved, and he greatly desired her
company, for he waited to insidiate her chastity, from the day that he had
first seen her, who said unto her, drink now and be merry with us: who
answered and said, She eats and drinks in the presence of Olofernes.
I drink now my Lord, because my state is exalted this day more then ever:
then she ate and drank before him, such things as her maid had prepared. And
Olofernes rejoiced, because of her, and drank more wine, than he had ever done
at one time since the day of his birth.

The evening being come, his servants made haste to depart, and Bagoas shut his
Tent without, and dismissed all from the presence of his Lord, but Iudeth was
left alone in the tent, and Olofernes was stretched upon his bed, for the feast
had been long, and he was filled with much wine. Now Iudeth had commanded her
maid to stand without, and attend her coming forth, as she had done daily, for
she said she would anon go forth to prayers, and had spoken to Bagoas to
that purpose. Then Iudeth standing by the bed, came to the post which was at
the head of Olofernes, and took down his Faulchion, and laid hold of the
hair of his head, and said, strengthen me O Lord God of Israel this day, then
she smote twice upon his neck with all her strength, Olofernes slain by
Iudeth.
and took his head from him, and roulled his body down from the bed, and
pulled down the Canope from the Pillars, and after went forth, and gave the
head to her maid, who put it in her scrip of meat, so they went together (as
their custom was) to prayer, and pressing through the Tents, past about by the
Valley, and so up to the Mountain of Bethulia, and knocked at the Gates
thereof.

Iudeth comes back to Bethulia.
Then Iudeth said to the watchmen, open to me the gate? Now when the men of the
City heard her voice, they made haste to go down and called the Elders, and
they ran altogether both small and great, (for it was beyond their
expectation that she should return) so they opened the gate and received her,
and made a great fire for a light and stood about them two: then she spoke unto
them with a loud voice, and said, praise God, praise the Lord, for he has not
taken away his mercy from the house of Israel, but by my hand, has this night
destroyed his enemies, so she took the head out of the scrip, and showed it
them saying, behold the head of Olofernes the great Captain of the Army of
Assure, and behold the Canopie under which he lay in his drunkenness, the Lord
has smitten him by the hand of a woman, as the Lord lives, who kept me in
the way which I went, my beauty has deceived him to his destruction, yet has
he not committed with me any sin, then all the people were astonished, and
blessed the Lord, and Ozias said unto her, O daughter blessed art thou of the
most high God, above all the women of the earth, surely this thine hope shall
never depart out of the hearts of men, for they shall remember the power of God
for ever, etc.

Then said Iudeth unto them, hear me also my brethren, Her counsel to the
governors.
take this head, and hang it upon the highest turret of your walls, and as soon
as the morning appears, take every valiant man his weapon in his hand, and set
a Captain over them, as if you would go down into the field toward the
watch of the Assyrians, but go not down. Then they shall run to the tent of
Olofernes, but shall not find him, and fear shall fall upon them and they
shall fly before your face. So you and all that inhabit the coasts of Israel
shall pursue and overthrow them. But first call unto me Achior the Ammonite,
who was presently fetched from the house of Ozias, and when he saw the head of
Olofernes, Achiors ecstasy.
in the hand of one of the people, he sunk down to the earth, for his spirit
failed him, but after he was taken up, he laid himself down at Iudeths
feet, who seeing all things that God had done to Israel, believed in him
unfainedly, was circumcised and joined himself to the house of Israel.

In the morning all things being ended according as Iudeth had directed, and
that the Bethulians were come down by bands, unto the straits of the
mountains, the Assyrians seeing them, sent to their Captains, who went to the
Governors and Rulers, and came to the Generals tent, and entreated them to
waken Olofernes. For these slaves (said they) are come down against us unto
battle. Then went Bagoas unto the Tent door and knocked, for he had thought
he slept with Iudeth, but when none answered, he opened the door and went
into the chamber, and found him cast upon the floor, and his head was taken
from him. Therefore he cried with a loud voice, and after went into the Tent of
Iudeth, but found her not, and then he ran unto the Captains and people,
with a loud acclamation, and said, a woman of the Hebrews has brought shame
upon the host of King Nabuchodonosor, for behold Olofernes lies upon the
ground, without an head, which when they heard, The Assyrians disheartened.
their hearts were wonderfully troubled, and there was a great noise through
the army.

So that fear and trembling fell upon them all, and as men amazed, they fled
every way both by the Valleys, and the Mountains, then the children of Israel
rushed out upon them: And Oz^as sent to all the Coasts of Judea, that all
should come freely upon the enemy to destroy them. Which when they heard, they
fell upon them together, they came also from Jerusalem and the mountains (for
they were told what was done in the Camp of their enemies, and they that were
in Galahad, and Galilee, chased them with a great slaughter, till they came to
Damascus; and the rest of them of Bethulia, fell upon the Camp of Assure and
spoiled it, and were greatly enritched, and the Israelites who returned from
the slaughter had the rest, and the Villages, and Cities, that were in the
Mountains, and the Plains, had a great booty.

Then Ioachim the High Priest, and the Elders of Jerusalem, came to see Iudeth,
and to salute her, and blessed her with one accord, saying, thou art the
exaltation of Jerusalem, the glory of Israel, and the great rejoicing of our
Nation; blessed be thou of the Almighty Lord for ever, and all the people
said, Amen. And they spoiled the camp for the space of thirty days, and gave
to Iudeth the Tent of Olofernes, and all his silver, beds, and basins, and all
his stuff, and she took it and laid it upon her Mules, and made ready her
Chariots, and laid them thereon, then came all the women of Israel to see her,
The Honor done to Iudeth for their miraculous deliverance.
and blessed her, and made a dance amongst them for her, and she took
branches in her hand, and gave unto the women which were with her, they also
crowned her with Ollives, and the maid that was with her, and she went before
the people in the dance, and all the men of Israel followed after in their
Armor, with Crowns, and Songs, etc.

Iudeths thankesgiving
Then Iudeth began a song of thankesgiving unto the Lord, who had saved his
people, by so great and miraculous a deliverance, and after they went up to
Jerusalem to worship the Lord, and when the people were pacified, they offered
their burnt offerings, and their free offerings, and their gifts, Iudeth also
offered all the stuff of Olofernes, which the people had given her, and gave
the Canopie which she had taken from his bed, for an oblation to the Lord, so
the people rejoiced in Jerusalem, for the sanctuary, for the space of three
months, and Iudeth remained with them: after that every one returned to their
own inheritance, and Iudeth went to Bethulia, and kept in her own possession,
and was for that time honorable in her Country, and many desired her in
marriage, Her constant Widow-hood.
but none had her company all the days of her life, after Manasses her husband
was dead and gathered to his Fathers.

But she increased more and more in honor and waxed old in her husbands house,
being an hundred and five years old, and made her maid free, Her age, and
death.
and she dyed in Bethulia, and they buried her in the grave of her husband
Manasses, and all the house of Israel lamented her seven days, and before she
expired, she distributed her goods to all them that were of the next of kin to
her husband, and to her own kindred, and there was none that made the childen
of Israel any more afraid in the days of Iudeth, nor a long time after.

ESTHER
INstead of Vasthi, a proud insolent Queen,
Esther, a captived Virgin is next seen
In the throne Royal, and being there placed
By King Ahashuerus loved and graced;
Who when all other earths assistance failed,
Her beauty so far with the King prevailed
(Joined with her prayer, and fasting) she redeemd
All her sad Nation, then, most dis-esteemd.
And for her Uncle Mordecai, 'cause he
Denide to Hamman, both his cap and knee:
The Agagite, when he his ruin sought
Was forced, to do him honor above thought.
This God can do, who, by their prudence saved
His chosen people, when they most were braved,
And thus destruction threatened on the lives
Of the sad Jews, their children and their wives
Powrd on their enemies heads, who shall with stand
When God himself, the quarrel takes in hand?
Hamman a gallows makes fifty foot high,
Where he does threaten to hang Mordecai,
On which he after with his ten sons died,
So sentenc't by the King (the fruits of pride
And swollen ambition) such was their sad fate,
Whilst Mordecai and she, guide the whole state.


OF ESTHER A THIRD WORTHY WOMAN AMONGST THE JEWS.
BEcause of the diversity of names, by which they used to title their Kings,
and the supputation of years, in which the Hebrews and the Greeks do much
vary, diverse Authors write diversely touching Ahashuerus, What Ahasuerus was.
some think him to have been Darius the son of Histasp^is, called also
Artaxerxes, but it may appear by the Prophet Daniel, Chap. 6. v. 1. and Chap.
9. v. 1. that he was Darius, sovereign Monarch over the Medes, Persians, and
Chaldeans, the Son of Astiages, called also Ahasuerus, which was a name of
honor, and signified, Great, Chief, or Chief head: who reigned from India,
even unto Aethiopia, over an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces.

This Ahasuerus in the third year of his reign, His feast to his Princes.
sat upon his royal throne, in the palace of Shushan, and made a great feast
unto all his Princes and Servants, and to the Captains, and Governors of the
Provinces, to show the riches and glory of his Kingdom, and the honor of his
great Majesty, which continued for the space of an hundred and fourscore
days, which time being expired, he made a second feast, His feast to his
people.
for the people that were found in the palace of Shushan, (which continued
seven days, in the Court of the Garden of the Kings Palace, under an hanging
of white, green, and blew clothes, fastened with cords of fine linen, and
purple, in silver rings, and pillars of Marble; the beds were of gold, and of
silver, upon a pavement of porphyre, and marble, and alablaster, and blew
color, and their drink was filled in vessels of gold, and they changed
vessel after vessel, and there was royal wine in abundance, according to the
power of the King; Temperance observed in feasting.
and their drinking was by order, no man was compeld, for the King had given a
charge to all the officers of his house, that every man should drink according
to his own pleasure.

Queen Vasthi her feast.
The Queen Vasthi made also a feast for the women, in the royal house of the
King: now it happened that upon the seventh day, which was the last of the
feast, that Ahasuerus being merry with Wine, commanded the seven chief
Eunuchs, that waited in his presence, to bring the Queen before him, with the
Crown Royal upon her head, that he might show the Princes, and the People her
beauty, for she was exceeding fair to look upon: Her contempt of the Kings
command.
but the Queen refused to come at the Kings sending for, wherefore he was very
angry, and his wrath was kindled in him, then the King said to the^ wise men,
(who knew the times, and had experience in the Law, and the Judgments:) who
were next him, and saw the Kings face, and sat the first in the Kingdom:
whose names were Carshena, His chief Princes.
Shethar, Admatha, Tarshis, Meres, Marsena, and Memucan, what shall we do unto
the Queen, according to the Law; because she has refused to do the Kings
pleasure, by the Commission of the Eunuchs?

To which Memucan stood up and answered, the Queen Vasthi, has not in this
act of disobedience, done evil unto the King only, but to all the Princes,
and to all the people of the Empire, for this act of the Queen, when it shall
come abroad unto the women, they shall by her example, despise their husbands,
and say, King Ahasuerus commanded the Queen Vasthi to be brought before him
but she denied to come. So also shall the Princesses of Persia, What obedience
is.
of Media, and Chaldea, say unto the Princes their Husbands, which shall be the
occasion of much despitefulnesse and wrath. Obedience shows nurture, but
rebellion, corrupt nature, and whosoever obey their Superiors, instruct their
Inferiors. The humble and obedient gain honor, but the stubborn and
obstinate, reproof, obedience forms peace, establishes commonweals, and
prevents disorders; for obedience to the Law, is the mainetenance of the Law,
etc.

Now therefore if it please the King, let a Royal decree pass from him, and
let it be written amongst the Laws of Persia, and Media, (not to be
transgressed) that Queen Vasthi come no more into his presence, but let the
King dispose of her estate to her Companion, who is better, and more obedient
then she, which Decree, when it shall be published through all your large
Dominions, the women shall give unto their husbands, all due worship and
honor, A decree against the Queen.
which saying, much pleased the King, and the Princes, and he did after the
words of Memucan, publishing unto all Nations and Languages, that every man had
power to bear rule in his own house: after these things, when the Kings wrath
was appeased, those that ministered unto him, said, let them seek for the King,
beautiful young Virgins, and Officers be appointed through all his Provinces,
to bring them unto the palace of Shushan, and the maid that shall best please
the King, let her reign in the stead of Vasthi, and the saying pleased the
King.

There was at that time in the City of Shushan, a Jew, whose name was Mordecai,
(which implies bitter, Mordecai.
or Contrition,) who was the son of Iair, the son of Shimei, the son of
Kish, a man of Iemini, who had been carried away in the captivity from
Jerusalem, with Ieconia King of Judah, by Nebuchadnezzar King of Babell, who
then had in his tuition Esther, Esther or Hadassah.
whom some call Hester, or Hadassah, his Uncles daughter, who was an Orphant
without Father or Mother, and was very fair and beautiful: now when many
Virgins were brought together, into the palace, Esther received into the
palace.
under the hand of Hege, one of the Kings Eunuchs, Esther was found amongst
them, and the Maid pleased him, and she found favor in his sight. Therefore
he caused her things for purification to be given her speedily, and seven
comely maids out of the King house to attend her: but she did not show this
to her kindred or people, for Mordecai had charged her to the contrary.

Now when the course of Esther, the daughter of Abthail, the Uncle of
Mordecai, came that she should go into the King, she desired nothing but what
Hege gave unto her, and she found favor in the eyes of all that beheld her,
who was taken in unto the King, Esther crowned Queen.
who loved her above all the women, so that he set the Crown of the Kingdom
upon her head, and made her Queen in the stead of Vasthi, and made a great
feast unto all his Princes, and his servants, and called it the feast of Esther
after her name, and gave rest unto all his Provinces, and great gifts according
to the power of a King. In these days when Mordecai sat in the Kings gate,
too of the Kings Eunuchs, whose names were Bigthan and Teresh, which kept the
door of the Chamber, conspired together and intended to lay hands on the King
Ahasuerus, Treason against the King discovered by Mordecai.
which was known unto Mordecai, and he told it to Queen Esther, and she
certified the King thereof, in Mordecha's name. And when inquisition was made,
it was found to be so, therefore they were both hanged on a tree, and this was
written in the Chonicles in the presence of the King.

After all these things, it pleased the great King Ahasuerus, The exaltation of
Haman.
to exalt Haman, the son of Hammedatha, the Agagite, and set his seat above
all the Princes that were with him, insomuch that all the Kings servants that
were at his the gate at his going out, and coming in, bowed unto him, and did
him reverence, (for so the King had commanded) Mordecai, only bended not the
knee, nor made unto him any obeisance. To whom the Kings servants said, why
transgressest thou the Kings commandment? but he harkned not unto them,
therefore they told Haman of Mordecai, and withal that he was of the nation of
the Jews. Which when he understood, he was full of indignation and wrath, and
thinking it too little, to lay his hands on Mordecai only, he sought to
destroy all the Jews, which were in the dominions of Ahasuerus, Hamans purpose
utterly to supplant the Jews.
and to sweep them from the face of the earth, and to that purpose he came
unto the King and said: There is a people scattered and dispersed amongst the
nations throughout all the Provinces of thy Kingdoms, and their laws are
diverse from all other people, neither observe they their Kings laws, nor is
it his profit to suffer them: Therefore let it be written that they be
destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand tallents of silver by the hands of them
that take charge of the business, to bring into the Kings treasury.

To whom the King (taking the Ring from his finger, and giving it unto Haman,)
said let the silver be thine, and the people thine, to do with them as it
shall seem good in thine eyes. Then were the Kings Scribes called, The decree
s^aled for the destructi^n of the Jews.
and they writ according to all things which Haman did dictate unto them, unto
the Captains, and Chief Officers in every Province, and the Letters were
sealed with the Kings Signet, and sent by Posts, into all the Provinces, to
root out, kill, and destroy, all the Jews, young and old, children and women,
in one day, namely, the thirteenth of the month Adar, which is the twelfth
month, and to spoil them as a prey, and the Posts (compelled by the Kings
Commandment) went forth, and the writing was given at the palace of Shushan,
and the King and Haman sat drinking together, but the Jews that were in the
City, were all at that time in great perplexity and trouble.

Which when it was related unto Mordecai, Mordecaies sorrow for his people
he rent his clothes, and put on sacke-cloth and ashes, and went into the
midst of the City and cried out with a great cry, and a bitter: and then came
before the Kings gate but was not suffered to enter, being clothed in
sacke-cloth, and in every Province and place where the Commission was read,
there was great sorrow, and fasting, and weeping, and mourning, and many of the
Jews lay in sacke-cloth and ashes, then Esthers maids and the Eunuchs, told
all these things unto her, for which she was very heavy, and sent raiment to
cloathe Mordecai, and to take his sackcloth from him, but he received it not,
then the Queen called Hatach the Eunuch, and gave him a commandment to go
unto Mordecai, and to know of him, what and why such things were? so Hatach
went forth and met him at the gate, to whom Mordecai punctually related all
that had happened, even to the least circumstance, and gave him the copy of
the writing, to show unto Esther, Esthers first knowledge thereof.
and charged her by him, that she should go in to the King, and make humble
supplication for her and her people.

Now when the Eunuch had delivered unto her the Copy of the Commission, and
all that Mordecai had said unto him, she commanded him to return unto him and
say, that whosoever man or woman came to the King, into the inner Court not
being called, there is a law of his, that all such shall dye, except him to
whom the King shall hold up his golden Scepter, that he may live. Now (said
she) I have not been called to come before the King these thirty days, so
he certified Mordecai of all the words which Queen Esther had spoken, who
said, that they should answer her again thus. Think not with thy self that
thou shall escape in the Kings house more then all the rest of thy Nation, for
if thou hold thy peace at this time, comfort and deliverance, shall appear
to us from some other place and person, but thou and thy Fathers house shall
assuredly perish, yet who knows, but thou art come into the Kingdom for such
a purpose? Then Esther commanded him to go back again to Mordecai, and answer
hi^ thus: go and assemble all the Jews in Shushan, and fast ye for me and
neither eat nor drink any thing, for the space of three days, and nights, I
also and my Maids will fast likewise, and afterward I will go in to the King,
which is against the Law, A Queen by her resolution
and if I perish, I perish, which having heard, Mordecai departed, and did
according to all that the Queen had commanded him.

And on the third day she put on her Royal apparel, and stood in the Court of
the Kings palace within, over against the house, and the King sat upon his
throne of Majesty, Esther ^rac't by the King.
who when he saw Esther the Queen standing in the Court, she found favor in
his sight, and he held out the golden Scepter that was in his hand, so she
drew near, and touched the top of the Scepter, to whom the King spoke, and
said, what will thou Queen Esther, and what is thy request? It shall be
granted thee, even to the half of my kingdom: Who humbly bowing unto him
said, if it please your high Majesty, let the King and Haman come this day unto
the banquet that I have prepared for them. To whom the King answered, go and
cause Haman to make haste, that he may come to the banquet of Queen Esther, at
which when they were sat; the King said what is thy request? (I speak it
again) it shall be performed, even to the half of my Kingdom: To whom she
replied. If I have found favor in the sight of the King, The King and Haman
invited to her banquet.
and that it please him to grant my request; let the King and Haman come to the
banquet that I shall to morrow make ready, and then I will declare what my
petition is to the King.

So Haman departed thence joyfully, but when he found Mordecai standing in the
gate and that he stood not up nor moved unto him, Haman, hate to Mordecai.
he was mightily incensed against him. Notwithstanding, for that time he
refrained himself, and when he came home he sent and invited his friends in
the presence of Zeresh his wife: and Haman told to them of the glory of his
riches, and the multitude of his children, and all the honors to which the
King had exalted him, and that he had set him above all the Princes, Hamans
pride and confidence.
and servants of the King, adding moreover that Esther the Queen suffered no man
to come unto the banquet with the King save himself, and to morrow, says he,
I am invited, but all this does nothing please me, whilst I see stubborn
Mordecai sit at the gate of the palace Then said Zeresh his wife and all his
friends unto him, let there be made a tree of fifty cubits high, and to morrow
speak unto the King, that Mordecai, may be hanged thereon, then shall thou go
joyfully with the King to the banquet, and the motion pleased Haman, who caused
the gibbet to be erected.

Now it happened that the same night, that the King slept not quietly, and
therefore commanded the Books of the Chronicles to be read before him, in
which it was found written, what Mordecai had told of Bigthan and Teresh, the
Kings Eunuchs, keepers of the door, who sought to lay violent hands on the
King. Which having heard, he demanded what honor, or what dignity had been
done unto him for that service? to whom it was answered by his servants that
nothing at all had been done for him: Gods providence to preserve his people.
He thinking it most unworthy his imperial dignity, to receive so great a
benefit as his life, and not to reward it, asking what one of note was in the
Court? (now Haman was newly come into the Inner Court of the Kings palace, to
speak unto him that Mordecai might be hanged on the tree which he had prepared
for him) and his servants said, Haman stands in the Court, and the King said,
let him come in, who no sooner appeared before him, but Ahasuerus spoke unto
him and said: what shall be done unto the man whom the King will honor? then
Haman thinking in his heart, to whom would the King do honor more then to my
self? answered. To him whom the King will honor, let them bring forth Royal
apparel, Pride caught in her own net.
such as the King uses to wear, and the Horse on which he rides, and let
the Crown Royal be set upon his head, and let the raiment and the Horse be
delivered by the hand of one of the Kings most noble Princes, and let them
apparel the man whom the King will honor, and cause him to ride upon the Horse
through the City, and proclaim before him, saying: thus shall it be done unto
the man whom the King will honor.

Then said the King to Haman, go speedily and take the raiment and the Horse,
(as thou haste said) with the royal Crown and do so unto Mordecai the Jew,
The case is altered with Haman.
and see that thou let nothing fail of what thou have spoken: which how
unpleasing it was to the Agagite, may be easily conjectured, since he was made
the Minister, and servant to do such grace and honor to the man, whom of all
the men living he most hated, but man purposes and God disposes, who
confounds the wicked in the malice of their hearts, and recompense^h the
innocence of the Righteous and upright man, as well in the justice of his
cause, as to give the world a testimony how he never suffers the innocent to
fall, nor the godly to perish.

We find by proof infallible, What envy is
that envy aiming at others, still wounds her self, she is blind and can
do nothing but dispraise virtue, she is the slime and Impostume of the soul,
a venom, a poison which consumes the flesh, and dries up the marrow in the
bones, it is a sickness growing from other men's happiness, she barketh at
the stars, and spurns at that which she cannot reach, she is imagined by the
Poets to dwell in a dark cave, to be pale, lean, and looking a squint, full
of gall, never rejoicing but in other men's harms, ever unquiet, and
continually tormenting her self, she makes the body to be ill disposed, and
is called the feaver-hepticke of the Spirit, and may be thus distinguished from
hatred, the one is secret, the other is open, and as grief is a disease of the
body, so is she a sickness of the soul. She always waits at virtues
elbow, but glory in the end erecteth that, which envy in the beginning seeks
to depresse, as may appear by the sequel.

For Haman, whether pleased or displeased, was forced to take the raiment and
the Horse, and brought him mounted through the streets of the City, and
proclaimed before him, thus shall it be done to him whom the King will honor,
Honor done to Mordecai.
which done Mordecai went again to the Kings gate, but Haman hasted home to
his house mourning, and his head covered, and told unto Zeresh his wife, and to
all his friends what had befalne him, to whom (after some pause) they replied:
If Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews, before whom thou have begun to
fall, thou shall not prevail against him, but shall assuredly fall before him,
and whilst they were yet talking with him, came the Kings Eunuchs and invited
him unto the banquet.

So the King and Haman sat down with Queen Esther, and the King said again
unto her, what is thy petition, that it may be given to thee? and what is thy
request? who answered and said, qsthers reEuest to the King.
if I have found favor in thy sight O King, and if it so please his high
Majesty, let my life be given me at my petition, and the lives of my people at
my request. For we are sold, I and my people to be destroyed, to be slain,
and to perish, but if we were sold for servants, and handmaides, I should have
held my tongue, and been silent, although the adversary could not profi^ the
King so much by his malice, as he should hinder him by the loss of my
people. Then King Ahasuerus said unto Queen Esther, who is he? or where is
he that presumes to do thus? who answered again, the adversary and enemy is
this wicked Haman, at which words Haman was startled and sore afraid, before
the King and the Queen, then the King arose from the banquet of wine in his
wrath: and who knows not, but that the anger of a Prince, is like the
lightning from the East, Hamans pride turned into base fear.
and the threats of a King like the noise of thunder, and went into the Palace
Garden, and Haman stood up to the Queen, to make request for his life, for his
heart failed him, because he saw there was a mischief prepared for him from
the King.

Who when he^ returned from the Garden, into the house where they had drunk
wine, Haman was fallen upon the bed where the Queen sat, at which he being
incensed, said, and will he force the Queen also before me in the house? which
words were no sooner uttered, but those which were attendants on the King
covered Hamans face, which was the manner of the Persians, when any one was out
of the Princes favor: then Harbonah one of the chief Eunuchs, said in the
presence of the King, behold, there stands yet the tree in Hamans house,
fifty cubits high, which Haman had prepared for Mordecai that spoke good for
the King, who said let him be hanged thereon, Haman hanged on the tree prepared
for Mordecai.
so they hanged Haman on the tree which he had prepared for Mordecai, and then
the Kings wrath was appeased.

The same day did King Ahasuerus, give the house of Haman to Queen Esther, and
Mordecai came and stood before the King, for the Queen had told him, of what
near alliance he was unto her, and the King took off his Ring, which he had
before taken from Haman, and gave it unto Mordecai, and Esther set him over the
house of Haman, and she spoke yet more before the King, and fell prostrate at
his feet weeping, and besought him that he would utterly abolish all those
wicked decrees of Haman the Agagite, and those inhumane devices, Esther
petitioneth for the Jews.
which he had imagined against her people, and the King held his golden Scepter
toward her, and she arose from the earth, and stood before him and said, if
it please the King, and that it may be acceptable unto him, let it be written
that those Letters of Haman the son of Ammedatha, be revoked, which he wrote
concerning the destruction of my Nation, throughout all the Kings Provinces,
for how shall I suffer, to see the evil that shall come unto my people? or how
can I endure the depopulation of my Kindred.

And the King said unto the Queen, and to Mordecai, behold, I have given
Esther the house of Haman, whom they have hanged upon the tree, because he
presumed to lay hands upon the Jews, The decree against the Jews renounced.
write ye also for them as it likes you in my name; and seal it with my Ring,
for the writings are written in my name, and sealed with my Ring, may no man
revoke. Then were the Kings Scribes called who wrote according to all that
Mordecai did dictate unto them, unto the Jews and to the Princes, and
Captains, and Governors of the Provinces, which were from India even unto
Aethiopia, an hundred and seven and twenty Provinces, and unto every Province
in such Letters and Language as was used amongst the people, that lived
therein, which having sealed with the Kings Ring, he sent them by posts on
Horseback, and those that rode upon beasts of price, as Dromidaries, and
Mules, Liberty granted to the Jews.
in which the King granted liberty to the Jews, that in what Cities soever
they were resident to assemble themselves together, and stand for their lives,
and to root out and destroy all the power of that people, and that province
which vexed them both men, women, and children, and to make spoil of their
goods; so the posts went forth, to execute the Kings Commandment, and the
decree was given in Shushan the palace.

Then Mordecai went out from the King in Royal apparel, Mordecaies royal
apparel
of blew, and white, and with a great Crown of gold upon his head, and with a
garment of fine linen, and purple, and the Jews in the City rejoiced and were
glad, to whom was come light, and joy, and gladness, and honor, and in all
and every Province, and in all and every City, and place, where the Kings
Commandment and Decree was read, there was great rejoicing, a feast and a good
day, and many of the people of the Land became Jews, for the fear of the
Nation fell upon them.

Now when this Decree grew near to be put in execution, in the day that their
enemies hoped to have power over them. It is worthy observation, that Gods
great providence, turns the joy of the wicked into sorrow, and the tears of
the godly into gladness, for the Jews gathered themselves together into their
Cities, throughout all the Dominions of King Abasuerus, to lay hands on such as
sought their damage, and no man durst withstand them, for the fear of them
fell upon all the people, and the Rulers of the Provinces, Princes, Captains,
and Officers of the King, Exalted the Jews, did them honor and showed them
friendship, for the fear of Queen Esther and Mordecai was upon them. For he
still grew in favor, power, and honor, greater and greater. Thus the Jews
smote all their enemies with the sword, The Jews revenged upon their enemies.
with slaughter, and destruction, and what seemed pleasing in their own eyes
unto all those who had conspired their death, by the instigation of wicked
Haman: At Shushan they slew five hundred men, as also the ten sons of Haman,
but they laid not their hands on the spoil, and their number was brought unto
the King.

Who said unto Queen Esther, thy people have slain in Shushan the palace,
five hundred men, and the ten sons of Haman, what have they done in the rest
of the Provinces? and what is thy petition further, that it may be given thee?
or what is thy request moreover, that it may be performed unto thee? then said
Esther, if it please the King, let it be granted also, that they may hang upon
the tree, Hamans ten sons hanged.
Hamans ten sons, and the King gave present order that it should be so done.
The Jews also that were in Shushan, assembled themselves upon the foureteenth
day of the month Adar, and slew of their enemies three hundred men, but they
laid not their hands on the spoil, and the rest of the Jews that were in the
Kings provinces, assembled themselves and stood up for their lives, and slew
them that hated them, seventy and five thousand, but on the spoil laid they no
hand. So they kept solemn, the foureteenth and the fifteenth days of the
month Adar, (which was the twelfth month) in memory of their great
deliverance, A memorall for their great deliverance.
by the hand of Esther, which days were turned unto them from sorrow unto joy,
and from mourning into a glad season, to keep them as days of solemnity, and
feasting, in which they sent presents every man unto his neighbor, and gifts
to the poor. Thus reigned she a blessed Mother in Israel, and Mordecai was
the second man in the Kingdom, next to Ahashuerosh, who was great amongst the
Jews, and accepted of his Brethren, who procured the wealth of his people, and
spoke peaceably unto all his seed, and whose dignity and honors, done unto
him by the King, are written at large in the Book of the Chronicles of the
Kings of Med^a, and Persia.

OF THE THREE WORTHY WOMEN AMONG THE HEATHEN
Whose Names are, Bunduca. Penthisilaea. Artimethia.


BVNDVCA
HOw much O Britain, are we bound to thee
Mother, and Nurse of magnanimity?
Of which thou from antiquity have lent
Unto all ages famous president,
Witness this British Queen, whose masculine spirit
Shall to all future, glorious fame inherit,
Beyond all tongues or pens, who may be proud,
Not thunders voice, can speak it self more loud,
Of whom, although our modern Authors wrote
But sparingly, least they should seem to dote
Too much upon their Natives, foreign ink
Has been so lavish, it would make man think
Her valor inexpressible; Tacitus
Made her his ample theme, and to discuss,
Her gifts, were Dio's labor: Xiphiline,
(With many others) made her acts divine,
As above all woman's performance far,
To whom I only leave this Character.
This British Queen whom just incensment fires,
Against the Roman Monarchy conspires,
And her revenge more hotly to pursue,
Of their best soldiers fourscore thousand slew.
Whose name all other glories might transcend
Had not adverse fate crossed her in the end.


THE FIRST OF THE THREE WOMEN WORTHIES AMONGST THE HEATHEN CALLED BVNDVCA.
THis Bunduca (called also by several Authors, Boodicia, Boudicea, Voadica, and
Bowndvica) was the dowager Queen, of Prasutagus, King of the Iceni a Province
which contained four shires in England, and was one of the prime of the
Sceptarchy, who all the time of his reign remained in amity with the Romans,
and was reckoned amongst their sociall Kings, who having disposed of his
kingdom to Nero Caesar, (then Emperor) and to his own two daughters,
Prasutagus makes Caesar co-heire with his Queen and daughters
intending, that having Caesar their guardian, and in hope of his favor
toward them (receiving a child's part) that they should be Queens of their
own shires, or copartners after their Mother, which being ratified by his
last will and testament, he deceased.

But the daughters, (poor Ladies) found but a sorry partnership, where the
Lion was to make the partition: For Neroe^ Captains and Officers, exercised
intolerable violence throughout the Kingdom, and not the least upon them, for
the Palace of Prasutagus their Father, The unjust proceeding of the Romans.
as also his great Riches, which were abundant, and long in gathering, together
with his whole Realm, was not received into custody, for the good of the
Orphans, nor Neroes part sequestered, and laid apart as a bequest and legacy,
but that, and all that which belonged to the Virgins was ransackt, and made a
mere booty: they also that were of the blood Royal, and kinsmen to the King,
were no better reckoned of, then prisoners and vassals, surprised in the war,
and held in the nature of slaves and bondmen.

These injust begi^nin^s, pressing in the first place, were (...) by others
fame more barbarous, and villainous, for the too Princely sisters, being yet
under the wing of their Mother, were vitiated, and irrecoverably dishonored in
their bodies, Their barbarous lust and cruelty.
and Bunduca her self, their unfortunate mother, full of most just grief and
wrath, and all the tempestuous passions which embased nobility, or violated
nature can suggest, was thought to bleed in person under smarting whips, and
cutting lashes, nor to be privileged from being forced and ravished by the
lascivious Romans: of all which inhumane violences, she after in an Oration
made unto her Army, grievously complained, but before I enter further into her
History, I will give a lively description of her person and quality.

Bundula's person and condition.
This Bunduca or Bondicia the Widow of Prasutagus was not as some have
described her a martial Bosse, or Amazonian Giantesse, but tall of stature,
and moderately fat and corpulent, her face excellently comely, yet with all
incomparably terrible, her complexion very fair and beautiful, which who will
wonder at in a Lady borne in Britain? her copious tresses flowing about her
shoulders, and dangling in compass even to her knees, were of a most bright
yellow, though by her complexion, her constitution might seem to be cold, yet
her noble actions declared that choler had the predominance in her, even to
adustion, her eyes were sparkling sharp and piercing, her tongue shrill and
harsh, as her person was tall and great, her progenitors, Kings in Britain,
and as it may be Heralisd, descended even from mighty Cassibiline himself.

Now the general reasons (besides those particular before alleged) which made
the Britains to attempt the massacre of the Romans, Reasons inducing the
Britains to rebel against the Romans.
were great and many; a deep contempt of Nero was one, for that imboldned his
Officers to do wrong, and drove the sufferers to despair of an orderly
redress: some assign too principal causes. The confiscation of goods, and
Senecaes intolerable usuries, and Bunduca's quarrel to be the chief, which
prepared the Britains for an open hostility: now in the absence of Suetonious
Paulinus, who with his forces was busy in taking in the Isle of Nerva, or
Anglesee, upon an earnest desire to annex it to the rest of the Empire, (which
Suetonius was Neroes Leifetenant in Britain, and commanded in chief over all
the Roman forces) Bunduca taking the advantage of his employment, in a place so
far remote from them; interpreted it as a good Omen, sent from Heaven, which
gave her fit opportunity to assemble the Britains her friends to a sudden
insurrection, their conventions were first private to avoid all suspicion, and
after public to defy all prevention.

Now the forwardness of the Dowager Queen, Their first insurrection.
unlockt all hearts and tongues amongst themselves, and whilst every one laid
open their griefs which in telling, kindly, they all agree to rise with her in
arms: as for the sworn covenants between the Romans and the Britains, they
are adnihilated and broken: the sword is made the Judge and Vmpire, to decide
all causes betwixt them; Right, and common liberty, the maine of their
quarrel; and confusion, spoil, and thirst of blood, the success of their
combustion: One hundred and twenty thousand men appeared openly for war at
Bunduca's musters, A royal army
being out of all the British Kingdom a strange effect, of a close and sudden
conspiracy.

Now Bunduca, the head and life of these revolted Britains came forth in
state, Her habit in battle.
attended with the chief of that conspiracy, her body clothed in a deep and
full gathered garment, embroydered with diverse colors, all over, about her
neck a chain of great wreathed linkes of gold, upon her shoulders, she wore
a military clo^ke, o^ a thick wrought mantle, buttond before, her fair goodly
tresses flowing in length down her back, served in the stead of a veil or
golden cover to all the rest, and such was her attire. She held more over with
the one hand in the lap of her gown a young Hair or Leveret as a mystery, and
in the other a Lance for terror; upon her head she wore an helmet with a
Crown, and rising from thence a goodly plume of feathers, and thus acoutred
she takes her stand upon a square hillocke of turfs rising after the fashion
of a Roman tribunal in field, The place where she encamped.
the place where the camp was then, is supposed to be either in Marshland, or
in the Isle of Ely, amongst all those in the Icenis Country, a place of the
most safety: her self in her own person being most conspicuous, had her
natural tallnesse, so helped out with the advantage of that earthy stage,
mounted upon the level flatnesse of the open Land, that she easily over looked
all their heads, whilst their eyes were intentive upon her, the effects of
whose Oration to her people, are these as I have gathered them from a worthy
and very learned Author.

The Romans are few and strangers, The effect of her Oration to her soldiers.
the Britains are domesticke and many: the Romans have their Helmets, and
Curaces, which load them with their brazen weight, and render them unapt for
pursuit; the Britains have neither Helmets nor Curaces, but Swords, and
Bucklers, and Darts, which are not burdensome: The Romans trust to their walls,
trenches, and parapets, which consisting of Oaken stubs, one fretted and woven
into another, do show them as shut up in boxes. The Britains have their
tents in the open field, and for their defense Marshes, Bogges, and
Mountains. The Romans must have their shady bowers, houses over head, bread of
ground Corn, Wine, and Oil, or else they cannot continue in the Army: the
Britains brook hunger and thirst, cold and heat, when any root or stock
serves them for food: water will quench their thirst, and every tree is to them
a Roof, or Canopy.

The Romans sow Corn, and are handicraft men; the Britains have learned
nothing, but to fight: the Romans must have their warm bathes, their
catamites, their dainty fare, and their bodies suppled with oil; the
Britains use none of these, but have their wives, and other things in common,
and count all children their own, which makes the females as valiant as the
men: the Romans are insolent, injust, insatiable, and worthy to be the slaves
unto bungling Fidlars: the Britains by such base fellows are wronged and
overborne: the Romans who so long have endured the yoke of their Lady and
Mistress, Madam Nero, (for who can think him to be a man?) deserve to
continue slaves still. The Britains have heretofore been free, and though
others should be so base, as to spend their days under a Donitia, or Neronia,
(fitter names for him then any of the masculine gender) yet it is certainly my
last resolution, rather then live basely, to dye bravely. The Romans are Foxes,
and Hares, the Britains are wolves and Greyhounds.

At which word, she suffered the Hare to slip out, A pretended Omen to stir up
the spirits of her Soldiers.
which had all that time been hid in the folds of her skirt, which they taking
for a lucky Omen, spent their mouths in an universal shout, making both
heaven and earth to echo again, to the name of Bunduca, she accepts of their
loving and hearty acclamation, The goddess Audate.
and after thanks given to Audate, (the goddess to whom she was chiefly
devoted, and the same which Victoria was amongst the Romans,) she recommended
her cause to her special protection, and when her Orisons and other Rites were
finished, she rides and leads them fiercely on, utterly to extirpate, and
root out with sword and fire, and all the extremities of war whatsoever, was
Roman in Britain, against which for the present there could be no prevention
or stop, the sudden Torrent grew so great and violent, and Camolodunum felt
the first mischief of that tempest, and perished under it.

Now Paulinus Suetonius, The providence of Paulinus Suetonius
being absent (as before was said) in the conquest of Anglesee, he like a
provident Governor, took not all his Forces along with him, to that
undertaking but he left both the Provinces and their Borders, full of Legionary
Soldiers, and of their Aids, three men are named to have remained behind.
Catus Decianus, procurator under Caesar.
Catus Decianus Principal, as being the Steward, Attorney, and Auditor
general of all Caesar's profits in Britain, and the Romans call such a man
Procurator, Petilius Cerealis.

Paenius posthumus.

Ostorius Scapulae.


Petilinus Cerealis, who commanded over the ninth Legion, and was quartered
about Gilsborrow, and Daintree, the third Paenius posthumus, Campemaster of the
second Legion, (surnamed, Augusta, and these two seats, of Legions Ostorius
Scapula, ordained when he was General here under Claudius Caesar.

The twentieth Legion, as some are of opinion, was not transported hither, till
after Neroes days: yet Tacitus writes that the Vexillaries, which some read
the Vicesimarians themselves, (that is, the twentieth Legion) were with
Suetonius at the great battle: as for the foureteenth Legion; (of all other
in Britain the most renouned;) there is scarcely any word mentioned
concerning it, The strength of the Romans in Britain.
till the battle against Bunduca: now, all the Countries were full of Roman
Castles, Holds, and Forts, full of dwellings and inhabitants all over, and not
at Camolodunum, London, and Virolam only, though they be soly named for their
singular misfortunes: other stays and affiances they also had which consisted
not in Armed power, but in amity, for the Romans were too provident, to rely
themselves, where they came upon their own strength wholly, and for that cause
made themselves as many Confederates and Friends, as they could possibly with
their honor.

In this famous place of Camolodunum, Claudius Caesar.
Claudius Caesar had placed a Colony of old Soldiers, who did not only thrust
the Natives out of their permitted dwellings, and dispossessed them of their
Lands, but heightened these wrongs with revilings, tearming them captives and
slaves, wherein they much mistook. For the Britains were conquered to yield,
but not to be trod upon, for though force had mastered their strength, yet
their natural indignation remained, and look how many old soldiers so many
new Lords there were, this bred so deep an hatred, that they began to side
with Bunduca, as foreseeing that it was no short bondage they were likely to
undergo, but in the purpose of the Romans, a perpetual; this Town at that
season lay open on all sides, The estate of the City at that time.
having neither wall, ditch, trench, or pallisad, only the Majesty of the
Roman name? which was reputed as a wall of Brass for the defense thereof.

This place, Bunduca suddenly assaulted, as also all other of the Roman
Soldiers, who lay scattered here and there upon the Frontiers, in Forts, and
Castles, and fencing the Garrisons, rusht over them with such violence, into
the bosom of the Country, as a Sea at a breach; making up with all speed to
the Colony it self, the maine object of their greatest fury: now, the Roman
party upon the first appearance of danger, had sent to Catus Decianus for aid,
who only spared them two hundred Soldiers, and those not completely armed.
The Colony it self with their Wives, Children, and Servants, could not amout
to above 20000. yet it was that brave and noble Legion, surnamed Gemina Martia
victoria, first planted there by Claudius Caesar, Gemina martia victoria.
Victricensia.
and by him styled Victricensia, but these ancient Soldiers, for the space of
ten years, living secure and in peace, had abandoned the use of Arms, and
being over mellow, with ease and pleasure, held it enough to watch up and down
with Warders, and trouncheons in their hands, (a fashion of honor.)

The Soldiers resistance.
The Soldiers being so suddenly and violently assaulted, seeing no hope left
for a common defense, quit the streets and market place, and thronged
themselves within the great temple, built by Claudius: which in veneration of
him was held as a sanctuary: (but the name of Nero the present Emperor, was
void of all honor,) yet all was to no purpose; for Bunduca being Mistress of
all the Town at an instant, did suddenly sack and fire whatsoever lay without
the walls of the Temple, the assault whereof was never intermitted till it was
won; The City demolished.
which happened upon the second day of the siege, then all went to wrack
therein, as in the rest; sword, fury and fire concurring in the execution:
neither was any thing which might be called Roman, which force spoiled not, or
revenge devoured not.

The Britains were so flesht with this bloody handsell, Bunduca intercepteth
the Roman expedition.
that Bunduca, or Bondicia, understanding how Petilius Cerealis, who commanded
the ninth Legion, was marching to the succor of the Colony, she encounters
him, giving in with so round and home a charge, that utterly unable to resist,
he was beaten from his ground, and compelled to fly away upon the spur,
with his troops of Horse only: the Infantry of the Legion being thus left
naked, and immediately overlaid, was driven to the earth, and cut in pieces,
and not any one taken to mercy; she then fell upon such places as had the
fattest booties, She prosecuteth her victory.
and least defenses, upon which they committed many insolent and bloody
outrages.

Whilst these things were thus in agitation, Suetonius Paulinus sensible of
the danger, A careful General.
the whole land stood in at that time, he left off the Conquest of Nerva, or
Anglesee, and through many difficulties with an admirable constancy, through
swarms of enemies, got safe to London, but by reason of the weakness of his
Forces, not able to mainetaine the place, at the rumor of Bunduca's approach,
he was forced to abandon it, who had no sooner quit the place, but she
suddenly became absolute Mistress thereof, and all therein: then the wild
uplandish crew of her irregular troops, spared nothing, quick or dead: thirst
of revenge in her, and rapine in them, banished all humanity: the streets and
houses were filled with miserable murders; The wares and goods found ruder
Owners, then the right ones, nor did they content themselves with a simple
massacre? but they fired the whole City: but whilst they consumed what persons
or things it pleased them, Rage above reason.
they also consumed time to their undoing, which was the cause that they
utterly miscarryed.

But the same misery that the Londoners suffered, Virulum sacked and spoiled.
befell unto Virulum, which was totally over run by Bunduca, and though the
Officers, and chief of the Town, were natural Britains, yet because they
had been received into the freedom of Rome, they gave them equal quarter
with the Romans not sparing any of them; Where sword and fire (the instruments
of all wrath and fury) devoured what rape and robbery had left. Nor fewer
thousands then ten, (of these four score which the Bunducans slew in all)
could probably perish therein.

And thus far the Actions of that mighty, yet much misgoverned body of her
Army, (assembled under a most glorious Title, namely, the recovery of the
common liberty, and commanded in chief by Bunduca) prospered above president;
but now being at the top-most he^ght, as well for success as insolence, it
fell suddenly to the ground; neither was it any wonder, in regard of their ill
demeanor, and badnesse of their carriage, for there was no quarter allowed, no
hope of ransom, (as in other wars,) only swords, The cruel behavior of
the enraged Britains.
halters, fire, gibbets, they not only striving to match their oppressors, for
wrongs formerly done unto them, but to out-doe them in worse, and greater: for
they took the most honorable Dames amongst their enemies, stripped them naked,
then cut of their paps or dugges, and stitcht them to their mouths, to make
them seem feeding, and after put their bodies upon stakes, the men's bellyes
whom they took prisoners, they ripped up alive, cut out their bowels, and others
they gored upon burning spikes, or sod to death in oil, or water, cruelties at
which barbarism it self might blush, and in themselves most horrible.

Whilst this brave Championess and her people grew ripe for ruin, the Roman
General mainetained retreat, whom she hotly pursued: but he preferring safe
courses, grounded upon reason, before good fortune imagined to happen by
chance; when he beheld the bravery of the woman, maintaining a personal chase
upon him, he thought it now was high time, either to redeem his fame or to dye
with honor, The courage of the Roman General.
and necessity of action, often begets felicity in Action, and a state of fear
proves often a state of guard: the number of his army, some held to be about
ten thousand, but with his auxiliary Forces, some voluntaries addicted to the
Roman faction, and other aides which appertained to the Legions, might make up
to the number of nineteen thousand; now concerning the number of men that were
in Bundicia's army, their nations, qualities and arms, it thus follows.

The number of Bunduca's Army.
She had two hundred and thirty thousand fighting men in field, which were
assembled from all the parts of the Kingdom, some say that she had in her
Camp six thousand armed Ladies, but that is not altogether approved: only it
is probable, that she had Soldiers completely armed and light, both horse and
foot, with chariots for war, etc. the Level or ground, on which the two
hosts were imbattelled must of necessity be a plain, Of the place where she
encamped.
at the least five or six miles over in breadth, and betwixt two woods at
either end one, some think it was upon Salisbury Plain, and some further of,
besides Severne, but of the two, that which seems to carry the greater credit,
that this battle was fought upon the skirts of the Plain of Salisbury, not
far from Stone hedge, or Stonage, about which place there survive to this age
the memorable Relickes of three ancient Camps, distinguist by the common people
by three several names Yanesbury Castle, Dunshot, and Woldsbury; and
notwithstanding Vespatian was the Founder or Auther of Yanesbury, under
Claudius Caesar, It hinders not, but that Paulinus Suetonius might make use of
it at that time under Nero, both as a strength, ready wrought, and a fortunate
handsell, by the luck of so great a Commander, The time of the year.
and concerning the time of the year, it is probably conjectured to be toward
Winter, and in the month of September.

N^w the Roman General like a provident and wise Captain, did principally
labor to keep all his enemies before him, least their number might enclose or
any way oppress him, The management of the Roman Army.
and therefore he made choice of a place, with a wood at his back, to serve as
a wall or Bullwarke behind; and ground well selected for fight, is no small
step to victory: and having thus devised for the best, and forestalled the
choice of the field, he drew out his Soldiers, well furnished, and refresht,
and set them in order of battle, deviding the body of his army (within these
straights) into three wards or bands, so that he might fight at once, and in
front quite through, the middle ward, or maine consisted on such as were armed
with Helmets, and Breast plates, each of them ballancing too or three piles, or
darting Iavelings in their hands, plated with Iron, which they could deliver
with such violence to strike through a Corslet, and sometimes the Armor, and
Man together.

The fashion of their Targets.
Ever one had also a Target, either ovall, or round, or square and hollow, about
thirty inches thwart, and about fifty long, with a broad Spanish sword, which
hung somewhat off behind, the blade not much above two foot in length, but of
excellent temper, fine and thin, able to lop of limbs, and besides very sharp
and poynant; their troops of horse stood ready in wings; the ordinary
proportion to a Legion, The proportion of a legion
was but three hundred, which they divided into two maine bodies, and
subdivided by thirties into Cornets, indeed they were all so carefully
disposed, that fighting all close together, they might at once be inpenitrable,
and invincible: then the General passing from Company to Company, inspiring
them with courage, by the life of his presence, and power of his language,
which done (as my Author says) he prepared himself for a Grave or a Garland.

On the contrary part Queen Bunduca brings up her two hundred and thirty
thousand men, Bunduca in the battle.
and casting aside the softness of her sex, she performs in person all the
duties of a most vigilent and diligent Chiefetaine, and being mounted in an
open Chariot, with her two ravished daughters, (the objects of compassion, and
with all a spur, to their greater fury) she rides about the Plain, and
marshalleth her Army, even to the last man, arranging all her several Nations,
into several Battalions: The order of her battles,
the Front of her battle extended it self to five or six miles out right, and
the frame thereof was semicircular, as meaning to enclose them, and before this
huge, and wide spread battle of the Britains, Chariots of war were placed,
with sharp sithes, standing out to mow down their enemies.

Against the maine body of the Roman Battalia, she set her Corslet men, such as
were whole armed, behind she placed the Carriages, walling the back of her
Battala's with Wagons, Waines, and Carts, in which the British Wives and
Women, Her encouraging of her Soldiers.
stood as spectators; of the presupposed victory, neither was she more wanting
to her peoples encouragement, then to their disposure for fight, her person,
conspicuity, and postures in speaking, adding to the life of her words, for
riding about from one embatteld people to another, she turned her self to them
all, in her open Chariot, Royally accommodated, presenting unto them her own
just quarrel, with the miserable fortunes of her Princely daughters, who sat
with her in sight, (a lively and stirring instigation to revenge) this done, by
giving the word she prepared for battle.

The first assault began with shrill sounds and clamours, The beginning of
the battle.
but quickly to be dampt with the groans of the dying: on the contrary
Suetonius Paulinus finding his men prompt and fiery after signal given, stood
to receive them in great silence, the Romans (holding loud acclamations, no
more then a terrible toy,) kept close together, as well to increase their
enemies presumption, as to prevent their own circumvention, and when the
Britains had discharged their Arrows at random, and were advanced within
the reach of mischief, the Romans (before silent) now join together, in an
universal and martial shout, and flinging their heavy darts into the thickest
of their coming enemies, they drew their swords, and clashing them against
their shields, sallyed out at once with all the strength they could possibly
make, and now they encountered together every where, and all over: the fight
continued hot and doubtful to the evening, which by one of our best and latest
Writers, is thus described.

The light armed of the one side, lay fiercely at the light armed of the other:
A description of the fight.
the well armed oppose their like, as, Horse encounter Horse, the Roman
Archers, let fly at the Chariots of the Britains, they again run headlong
against the Romans, and tumble them over, but for want of Armor to mock the
shot, they were enforced with the storms of Roman Arrows, to fall off again,
the foot, trampled under foot by the horse, and the horse beaten back by the
foot: many close together, to make up with a joint force, against the wagons
of war: they on the other side bear many down before them, and compel
others to fly, here the Archers advancing over forwardly beyond the protection
of their Cavallary are glad to save themselves by running away: there others
keep aloof, for fear of the piercing Arrows: these things whilst they were
not acted in one place only, but in three at once (according to the triple
destinction of the Roman host,) the conflict was long maintained of both parts
with equal boldness and bravery. Valor on both sides.


Now in this remarkable conflict, where the natural liberty of Britain, and
the title of the Empire lay at stake, the Romans dashing in with the whole
breadth of their Battalia tear their ranks in pieces, and struck the rest of
the adverse Army with amazement and terror, whom their weapons could not
reach: engaging themselves so far as that they were enforced by reason of their
enclosure, to fight all at once and about the setting of the sun, found
themselves every where through out the field victorious, now when the
Britains in the head of the battle began to shrink, The Romans Vict^rs.
it was a shrewd blow to all that were behind them, who being many thousands,
and remained untoucht, during the former fight, because they could not come up
to handy strokes, by reason of want of room in the narrowness of the field:
It was the cause that those who first turned their backs and fled, The
Brittanes Army routed
were amongst their own friends, as unresistable as their enemies, carrying
along a strong necessity, to disband, and scatter, and wholly to rely on
flight, for their present safety.

In this confusion, Bunduca seeing how the dye of war went, left the field
and fled, but the Romans, as bold in attempting, as nimble in pursuing, fell
upon slaughter, making no difference betwixt sex and sex, for all perished
together, yet many were saved alive, after there was an infinite great glut of
blood, and a victory assured: Multitudes also escaped, some by their swift
running, others by the benefit of night. In which Battalia, (as our best
approved remembrancers have left recorded) there fell of the Britains to the
number of fourscore thousand, The numbers slain on both sides.
and of the Romans but four hundred slain, and few more hurt, for which cause
this famous victory was remarkt amongst the most famous of old, and deservedly
it might be so, for besides, the glory of the day, it reduced Britain to the
Roman Empire, and fixed it to endure for sundry ages after.

Some say that after this defeat Bunduca (this brave British Championess)
slew her self by falling on her Lance, Of Bunduca after the battle.
some that she dyed by sickness, others by poison, yet all conclude, that
she was one of the bravest She Worthyes in the whole universe: her death was
grievously lamented of all her surviving friends, Her death.
who honored her funeral with most stately Rites, and buried her remains
ambitiously brave. I conclude her History with the place of her burial.

In her death, Of the place of her burial.
the two injured Princesses (her Daughters) lie obscured, of them there is no
remembrance (after her) remaining to Posterity; now concerning the place of
Interrement, (as many be gathered from the premises it was the admirable
monument of the stones upon Salisbury Plain, not being any work of the
Romans, but of the Britains, (who were wont to make stones Vocal by
inscriptions) It is called to this day Stonehendge, or Stonage, though some
think them to have been brought from Ireland by Merlin: The Roman
Histriographers, report that she was buried pompously, and with great
magnificence by the Britains, and what greater then that could be consecrated
to the perpetual memory of Bunduca? then this, whose History the whole globe
of the earth affords not a rarer? If any man shall think, as some of our
Chronologers write, that it was the place where those murdered Lords in the time
of Aurelius Ambrosius (whom the Pagan Hengist most traterously slew) were
buried, yet it is no hinderance to give credit, that it had been first erected
in honor of that Heroycall, and Masculine spiritted Championess Bunduca,
since the bones of men dug up near that place, convince it to have been
sepulcrall, but Armours of a large and antique fashion; A probability assuring
truth.
upon which the spade and picke-axe, have sometimes hit; do clear the Owners
from being in the number of those British Lords, whom the traitorous Danes
slew unarmed, and weaponlesse.

PENTHISILAEA.
SOme, in their critic fancies would maintain,
(As having Women's honor in disdain.)
Averring, it not possible can be,
That such should equal men in Chivalree.
And they would ground a Maxim thereupon,
That never in the world was Amazon,
Nor can I scarce conjecture, which is chief
In such, their ignorance, or misbeliefe.
But had such stupids, but the least commerce
With Homer, or read Ovids amorous verse:
Or almost any of the Poets; they
Of force must sing a Palinode, and say
In their blind error they were much misled,
Or had they either Quintus Curtius read,
Or Iustine: (both Historians) they would confess,
Their Learning to be small, their Judgment less,
But leaving them, now thus much understand,
Concerning this Virago now in hand,
This Amazon, though many were of name,
May 'bove the rest, a just Precedence claim.
The first brave Championess observed in field,
Armed with a Polleax and a Moved shield.
And shall a lasting memory enjoy.
For ayding Priam in the wars of Troy.


OF PENTHISILAEA THE SECOND FAMOVS CHAMPIONESS AMONGST THE HEATHEN
Virago.
ALL these Heroyicke Ladies are generally called Viragoes, which is derived of
Masculine Spirits, and to attempt those brave and Martial Enterprises, which
belong to the honor of men, in which number this Penthisilaea has prime
place, amongst the ancient remembrancers, we read of many warlike Women, of the
like condition and quality, Women of masculine spirits.
of some few of them, I will give a particular denomination.

Camilla.
Camilla, Queen of the Volscians, gave manifest signs of her future eminence
in arms, even from her Infancy, not being effeminately, educated with careful
and indulgent Nurses, but brought up in the Woods, and Forests, and fed with
the milk of wild beasts, for so she was disposed of by her Father Metabus,
who growing to maturity, cast aside the action of those common exercises, whose
practice belong to women, as the Needle, the Web, and the like, but clothing
her self in the skins of savage beasts, she followed Hunting and the Chase,
using the Iavelin, the Bow and Quiver, and to outstrip the Heart in running, and
in the wars betwixt Turnus and Aeneus, she sided with the Rutilians against
the Trojans, of whom Virgil gives a notable Character.

Hilerna also the Daughter of Ianus, Hilerna.
her Father being dead reigned by the River Tiber, taking upon her the sole
soveraignety, which before her time belonged to the men only.

Semiramis ambitious of soveraignety, Semiramis.
demanded the guidance of the Scepter for five days only, in which interim
she commanded the King her Ninus.
Husband to be first imprisoned and after slain, then taking the whole
Principallity upon her, she reigned over the Assyrians, who at least royally
repaired, if nor really built the Walls about Babylon.

Zenobia Queen of the Palmireans, Zenobia.
after the death of her Husband Odenatus took upon her the Sovereignty of all
Syria, neither feared she to take up arms against the Emperor Aurelianus, of
whom being vanquished, and led in triumph after his victorious chariot, it being
objected unto him as a dishonor, that he being so potent an Emperor, would
triumph over a woman? made answer, that it was no shame for him, being over
such a woman, who was inspired with a more then masculine spirit: Hipsicratea.
and Hipsicratea, the wife of Methridates, in all the dangers of war, never
left the side of her Husband, but cut her hair short, lest it might be any
impediment to the sitting close of her Helmet.

Tomyris.
Tomyris Queen of the Scithians, opposed in battle great Cyrus, the most
puissant King of the Persians, and in revenge of her siers death, rifled his
Tents, spoiled his Camp, and slew him, and after cutting off his head, caused
it to be cast into a great vessel, brimmed with blood, saying, after humane
blood thou ever thirsted in thy life, and now drink thy fill thereof in death:
Teuca.
and Teuca the wife of Argon Queen of the Illyrians, in person in sundry
battles opposed the Romans and became victresse overthem. Maria Puteolana.


Maria Puteolana, who had that name^ conferd upon her, from Puteolis, a City of
Campania, (the place of her descent) flourisht in the time of the famous
Italian Poet, Francis Petrarch,, by whom she is thus deciphered: she was
patient in all labor and travail, sparing of diet, and abstinent from Wine;
Never applying her self to any of those chares, belonging to Women, but was
wholly exercised in the practice of arms, delighting in the Bow, the Dart, the
Helmet, and she was so vigilant that she would watch some nights together with
out sleep, and that little rest which she took, was not upon a bed, but the
bare earth, her head instead of a pillow being laid upon her Target, and
though she was always conversant amongst Soldiers, and armed men, for which
some might have laid upon her the aspertion of impudence and incontinence, yet
she studied nothing more then Virginal Chastity, in which she continued even
to death, and was worthily ranked in the life of the Heroicke Ladies. Let these
suffice for the present, and being to discourse of an Amazonian Championess,
it shall not be altogether impertinent to the Story now in hand, if I speak
something of their Original.

The Scythians a warlike nation, having spent many years in opposing Xexores
King of Egypt, Of the Amazones in general.
and after, staying long in the subduing of Asia, their wives sent unto them,
that if they made not speedy have home, they would provide themselves of issue
from their neighbor Nations, in process of time, two Princely youths of the
Scythians, Plinos, and Scolopytus, by a decree of the Optimates, being exilde
their Country, took with them along, a great number of young men, to seek a
new fortune, planting a new Colony upon the Borders of Capadocia, near to the
River Thermodoon, and having subdued the Temiscerians, occupied their grounds,
these having long tyrannized over the bordering Nations, were at the last
insidiated by the enemy, and treacherously slain, which their Wives at home
hearing, took Arms to defend their own territories, which was not without
good and great success; and finding the sweetness of liberty, and
sovereignty added, they refused to take Husbands, either of friends or enemies,
Their Original.
accounting Matrimony, no better then a miserable servitude.

Notwithstanding, they not only (without the aid of men) maintained their
own, but trencht upon others: holding the masculine sex in mere contempt, and
because they would bear a like fortune, and that no one should be held more
happy than the other, they slew all those Husbands which yet remained amongst
them, and now after many conflicts, having settled peace, lest their posterity
should fall, they desired congres with their neighbors: all the male children
borne unto them they strangled, but the female they preserved, and brought them
up in the practice of Arms, searing of their right paps, least otherwise it
might be an impediment unto them in the use of the Bow or the Spear, of which
they had the denomination of Amazones or Vnimammae. Whence they derived their
names. Marthesia. Lampedo.


Of these were two Queens Marthesia, and Lampedo, who, the more to increase
their Dignity, and Authority, proclaimed themselves to be the Daughters of Mars,
and having subdued a great part of Europe, invaded Asia also, erecting diverse
famous Cities, as Ephesus and others, and having sent part of their Army with
great preyes and booties into their Country, the rest who stayed to mainetaine
the Empire of Asia, under the Command of Marthesia, were with her self, by the
Barbarians miserably slain: In her place succeeded Orythia, Orythia, or Otreta.
who for her martial discipline, and many glorious victories, and for her
constant vow of Virginity, as she was much famed, so she was much honored.

Two of four sisters reigned at once, Antiope.
Orythia, whom some call Otreta, and Antiope, In whose time Hercules, with many
of the prime Heroes of Greece, invaded their confines at such a time of their
security, that their troops were carelessly scattered abroad, by taking which
advantage, he slew many of them, and took other prisoners, amongst which were
two of those Princely sisters, Antiope, whom Hercules ransomed for her golden
baldricke, Menalippe.
and Menalip, of whom Theseus after her surprisall grew inamoured, and took
her to wife by whom he had issue, Hippolitus: Orithia taking grievously this
affront done to her sisters, purposed to make war upon Greece, and to that
end she negotiated with King Sagillus, who then reigned over the Scythians,
soliciting his aid, who sent to them his son Penegagaras, with a mighty
army of Horsemen: but the Amazones and he falling to dissension, by which the
Grecians set upon them, disbanded them, and were victorious over them; yet they
had before fortified so many places by the way that in their retreat unto
their Country they were not dammaged by any nation, through whose Provinces
they were compelled to make their passage.

Orythia deceasing Penthisilaea succeeded, she for the great love she bare unto
the fame of Hector, Penthisilaea.
came with a thousand armed Viragoes, to take part with the Trojans, against
the Greeks, but Hector being before cowardly slain by Achilles, and his
Myrmidons, and Achilles soon after, shot by the hand of Paris, in the Temple
of Apollo, where he should have married Polixna, the daughter of Priam and
Hecuba, And now Pyrrbus, otherways called Neoptolemus, the Son of
Dejademeia, the daughter of Lycomedes, remaining the sole Champion of hope,
upon the party of the Greeks, she marked out him as the maine aim of her
revenge: she is said to be the first that ever devised the Poleaxe, and
therefore because she much practiced that weapon, Sncurigera.
she was called securigera, as bearing an Axe, Vexilifera.
she was also called Vexillifera, as bearing upon her Lances point, a flagge or
Ensign, Peltifera.
and Peltifera from those shields, made in the form of half Moons, which the
Amazones used to wear. Of her Virgil in the first of his Aeneiids, thus
writes: Ducit Amazonidum lunatis Agmina peltis
Penthisilaea ^urens mediisque in millibus ardet
Armed with their Moony sheilds, the Queen her Amazonians leads,
And raging seems to burn, amidst those thousands where she treades.


Of her rare beauty added to her valor, diverse Authors give ample testimony,
and amongst them not the least, Propertius in these words, Ausa feroxab e quo
quondam appugnare sagitis
Moetis Danaum Penthisilaea rates,
Aurea cui posi quam nudavit Cassida frontem,
Vixit victorem candida forma virum.


Thus paraphrased.

The bold Penthisilaea durst the Danish fleet oppose:
And from her steed sharp arrows shoot to gall her armed foes:
No sooner was the battle done (Her golden helm laid by,
But whom by arms she could not take, she captived with her eye.
Valerius Flaccus lib. 5, Statius lib. 12. Hor. lib. 4. and Ovid in his
Epistles of Phaedra, to Hippolitus, uses these words, speaking of her.

Prima securigeras inter virtute puellas.
She is also by him remembered in his second book De Ponto, and the third
book De Art Amandi, he sportively begins thus: Armed at all points, the
Greek to field is gone
To encounter with the naked Amazon,
Behold, like weapons in my power remain,
For thee Penthisilaea and thy train. etc.


The death of Penthesil^a.
Some think her to have been slain in single combat by Achilles, but the most
are of opinion that she fell by the hand his son Neoptolemus, about the
beginning of the tenth and last year of the siege: after whose death the
Trojans altogether unable to resist the fury of the enemy, where forced to
immure themselves and keep close within their walls, till after the Grecians
entered the City by stratagem, as you may read it fully and excellently
delivered by the Prince of Poets, Virgil, To whom I refer you.

Penthisilaea thus dead, and many of her Ladies perishing with her, those few
which remained alive retired themselves with much difficulty into their
Country, where they had much ado to defend their Frontiers, and support
themselves against their bordering Nations, and others, overwhom they had for a
long time tyrannized, in which incertaine state they remained until the time
of Alexander the Great, over whom Minothaea, or Monithaea, Monithaea, or
Thalestris.
called also Thalestris, then reigned she in admiration of his great conquests,
made earnest suite unto him to enjoy his company in bed for the space of
fourteen nights together, which she obtained at his hands, and so returned
with her train unto her own Country, in great hope that her expected issue
would equal the fame and fortunes of the Father, but the success it seems
came short of her hope, for after her decease the Amazonian Nation, The end of
the Amazonian race.
with their name, were quite swept away from the face of the earth.

Genera^ly, of the Nation of the Scythians, their manners and their customs,
The manner of the Soithians.
(from whence the Amazonians claim their descent) it is further left thus
recorded: their dwelling houses are but small, not built upon he earth, but
lifted and reared upon Waines and Wagons, to shift and remoove from place to
place; as the necessity of occations, or their private fancies lead them.
Horrace calls them Campestres, and Lucan calls them Errantes, wanderers, for
they are never constant to one place, but remove according to the nature of the
seasons. By the virtue of one herb called Spartiana, the taste thereof gives
them ability to abstain from meat and drink for the space of twelve days
together, they are bold, and much glory in the thundering of their Horses hoofes.

There custom is at Cessant times to drinke^ deep, as being naturally much
addicted that way, but when they find themselves to have transgressed order,
and took their cups too much, they strike hard upon the strings of their bent
Bows, by which they make an harmony and such a kind of music, as weaneth
them from their voluptuousness, and recalle^h them to their Pristime
continence: sometimes, (but that of necessity) they have not spared to feed on
human flesh, and such strangers as have been accidentally cast upon their
coasts, they have sacrifized to Mars, and after kept their skulls to make their
quaffing bowls, they are for the most part pale of complexion, and of
condition bold and hardy: for so much the nature of the climate under which
they live, (being very cold) implies, the beads of their Arrows they dip in
the blood of Man, and Vipers mixed together, the least wound, racing but the
skin, being irrecoverable, and necessitous death.

The Scythians live by theft, The Scithians
nor will they labor of themselves, but feed only upon the prey, which they
can gain from others, but (...) ^aturall Scythians, (I mean the most ancient,
of whom I spoke before,) have all things amongst themselves common, saving
their swords, and their quaffing bowls, those they reserve as peculiar to
themselves. Their Wives and their Children, they hold promiscuously begot, the
one knowledge no certain Fathers, and the other acknowledging no constant
husbands, they were in the original a most simple people, and most observant
in the exact laws of justice, as allotting suum cuique, i. to every man his
own: but falling of from that regularity, they grew as violent in the
contrary, extreme, as observing none at all, Forsoone after they grew to that
inhumane barbarism, that whosoever of any foreign Nation came within their
confines, they cut off his nose as a mark to distinguish him from the rest of
their Nation.

They are naturally inclined to wrath and anger: Sauromates.
and betwixt them and the Sauramates, this one thing is common, that they
sacrifice their living wives at the obsequies of the dead husbands: they wholly
studdy grass and cattle, but neglect Tillage, and grain, as feeding upon
roots rather then bread, their habit or attire is the skins of wild beasts,
which being tanned they wear the hairy side outward, that to the Foe they may
seem the more terrible: Theft they abhor, because they have all the gs
amongst them free and common: Drunkenness is fr^quent amongst them: in so much
that to be toxt with Wine, to give it the more emphaticall expression, the
Latin says Scithissare, which is the same with Inebriari. Both which words
imply to be drunk.


In their sollemne feasts, their custom is to have a great massy bowl
brimmed with Wine to be carried from man to man, in which none is suffered to
drink, who cannot give account of the slaughter of some enemy, and he that
has slain most has the honor to drink deep^st: they have neither walled
Towns, nor Cities, but whether soever they travel, they carry their houses in
Wagons or Chariots, along with them; Images, Altars, and Temples they abhor,
only such as are dedicate to Mars; they embrace wood, they have scarce any or
none at all, and therefore such cattle as they kill, they eat the flesh sod,
or roasted with a fire made of the bones: in any set battle, the first enemy
they surprise, they first kill him, and then quaffe healths the one to another
in his blood: Those are most honored amongst the^m, who can give account that
by his own hand he has slain most of the enemies; and of the^ contrary,
those that have done no facinorious act, they extremely vilify.

When the King shall command any man to death, Barbarous cruelty.
all his male children, under go the like censure, but the wife and daughters
are free; in all contracts and covenants, they drink the one to the other, in
wine mixed with blood and such compacts are held inviolable: no slave is
admitted, or mercenary man, to attend upon the supreme Majesty, who being
dead, fifty of the prime who attended him, are strangled, and as many of his
best horse, who are also buried with him in his sepulcher.

ARTIMESIA.
OF this brave Carian Queen, my pen's at strife
Whether, she better Widow was, or Wife.
In both, there is none that reads her can deny
But she observed, her true Conjugall tie.
For Chastity, or Valor* those famed most
Cann^t (before her) least precedence boast,
In either; who shall strive her to surmount,
Needs must they come far short in their account,
For who so reads Herodotus shall find
She was of such a chaste Heroicke mind,
That both in peace and war she was like glorious,
In the Court Famous, in the Camp Victorious,
Who, to her Country (till her time) obscure,
Has left a Name, for ever to endure,
For all the monuments, on Virtue placed,
No Envy can demolish, nor Time waste,
But they shall brave all Ages to ensue,
Whose Attributes. I sum up in these few.
Three hundred thousand Persians this brave Queen
(In a great Navall conflict, fought between
Them and the Greeks) out shined; yet honored most
For one of the seven wonders; at her cost
Erected to Posterity: which rariety
She built, to express her true Conjugall Piety.


OF ARTIMESIA. QVEENE OF CARIA, A THIRD HEROIC CHAMPIONESS AMONGST THE HEATHEN
ALmost all places, but most sure I am all ages have brought forth brave and
illustrious women, renowned for sundry Virtues and qualities, as also several
Countries: Heroicke women in all ages.
for instance, we read of a Semiramis amongst the Assyrians, a Camilla of the
Volscians, a Thomyris of the Scithians, an Hester of the Persians, a Cleopatra
of the Egiptians, a Zenobia of the Palmirians, an Amalasantha of the Goths, a
Theolinda of the Longobards, a Radegunda of the Frankes or Galls, a Bunduca of
the Britains, a Maria of the Hungarians, an Isabella of the Spaniards, a
Cassiope of the Ethiopians, an Harpalice of the Amazones, an Hippolite of the
Magnesians, an Electra of the Thebans, a Teuca of the Illyrians, a Lucresse
amongst the Romans, a Inturna of the Rutilians, a Cassandane of the Medes, a
Cassandra of the Trojans, an Hermodice among the Lidians, a Penelope amongst
the Larissaeans, a Dido of the Carthaginians, etc.

And of others promiscuously thus: Renowned women.
Andromache the Wife of Hector, Creusa of Enaeus, Monima of Mithridates,
Erfilia of Romulus, Herpilida of Aristotle, Amastrix of Xerxes Hotina of
Trajanus, Atossa of Darius, Portia of Brutus, Pyrha of Deucalion, Euridice of
Orpheus, and this our Artimesia of Mousolus, etc.

She was the Daughter of King Lydamnius, Queen Artimesia.
her Paternall blood she derived from Halicarnassus, the prime City of Caria,
her Maternall from Cre^te: now Caria has its name from Capitalis, i. a head
Country, but as others would have it, from King Cara, who first reduced it to a
Monarchy, and is situate in Greece, upon one side of the mountane, Taurus,
betwixt the two Regions of Licia and Ionia, this illustrious Lady, as well for
her Conjugall Love and Chastity, as for her Heroicke Spirit and magnanimity, is
worthily remembered to all Posterity.

There are said to be Septem orbs miracula, i. seven wonders of the World, The
seven wonders of the world.
who for their state, magnimity and cost deserved a prime admiration above all
others, of which her pompous and most magnificent structure was not the least,
upon this just occasion, I will as briefly as I can, The Pyramids of Egypt.
render them unto you in order: the first were ^he Egiptian Pyramides built
upon square stones below, but sharp and pointed above, which the Egiptian
Kings, erected over their Tombs, and Funeral Monuments, as well in a vain
ostentation, of their Riches, as to set their people upon employment, to keep
them from sloth and idleness, one of which was built of one entire stone,
which either grew or was made in their own Country, in Longitude, an hundred
forty and three foot: in Altitude, threescore and two,) a second was ma^e of
stone fetched from Arabia, which six hundred thousand men were twenty years in
building, three others there were, which from their first foundation till they
were compleately finished lasted threescore and eighteen years, with six
months added.

Pliny writes that King Cleopes consumed upon the workmen in one of them,
King Cleopas.
one thousand and eight hundred talents in nothing else but Leekes, Onions, and
Garlike, by which may easily be conjectured how great and prodigious his
expense was in their meat, when their sallets cost him so much: the situation
thereof took up eight acres of ground: which unheard of prodigality so
exhausted his treasure, and drew him to that penury, that he was forced to
prostitute the fairest of his daughters to supply his present necessities.
Herodotus in his Eutirpe speaks of diverse others, too long to recite in this
place, one of which but the least was erected by the famous strumpet Rhodope,
Rhodope.
(once the Mistress of Esopus samius, (still known to us in his excellent
fables) with the great riches she gathered together by her Meretrician
practice, of these Lucan speaks in his eight Book, as also Martial in these
words: Barbara Pyramidum sileat Miracula memphis.

A second Wonder, The second wonder.
was that excellent structure, built at the charge of Ptolomeus the great, in
the Isle of Pharos, for no other use but to continue a lamp all the night
long, to direct Navigators in their course, and how to avoid the rocks,
shelves, and Quicke-sands, frequent in those places: It is said to have cost
eight hundred talents of which Sostratus was the famous Architector, Sostratus
a famous Architecture.
in the most eminent place whereof he left his name inscribed.

In the rank of these miraculous Edisicees, are numbered the walls of Babylon,
A third wonder.
either first renewed or royally repaired by Queen Semiramis in height two
hundred foot, and in breadth fifty, upon the top Chariots might meet without
jetting one against the other, they had moreover three hundred Towers, and more
should have had but that the Marshes, and Fennes, were of the one side a
sufficient defense for the City. In this work three hundred thousand workmen
were for some years employed at once: Herodatus writes that these walls were
two hundredth cubits in height, and fifty cubits in thickness, and that there
were an hundred gates of brass that moved upon hinges, the swift River of
Euphrates running through the Town.

A fourth wonder.
To the former is added the magnificent Temple of Diana in Ephesus, to which all
Asia contributed toward the buildings, which was ere it was fully perfected,
the space of two hundred and twenty years, the foundation whereof was laid in
a Marish, or Fenny ground, because it should not be subject to any earthquake:
it was in longitude three hundred twenty and five foot, according to the
standard, and in latitude, two hundred and twenty, being supported by two
hundred and seven and twenty Collumnes every one of those pillars being at the
charge of a several King, of which number twenty seven were curiously and most
artificially carved and graven, of which glorious work C^esiphon is nominated
to be the prime overseer. Clesiphon.


A fifth Wonder was the Colossus at Rhodes, A fifth wonder.
being the figure or Image of Apollo, made of Brass, and of that magnitude
that it bestrided a small arm of the Sea, between whose legs ships might
sail, without vayling their maine tops, it was in height threescore and ten
cubits, which after it had stood by the space of fifty and six years, was
utterly demolisht by an earthquake, one of his thumbes a man could scarcely
fadome, and his fingers were like large statues, yet not one joint about it,
which was not proportionably suiting with the size thereof: this Colossus was
lined with stones of an extraordinary bigness, with smaller intermixed amongst
them, it was twelve years in composing, and the charge thereof amounted to
three hundred talents. Chares Lyndius.
The chief Artifex was Chares Lyndius, the Scholar of Lysippus. The Souldan
of Egypt invading Rhodes, Laded Nine hundred Camels with the brass thereof,
from this Colosse, The Rhodians were called Colossians, and the Island it self
Colossicula.

The sixth wonder.
A sixth to these was the Image of Jupiter, which Phidias the most excellent
Artist made of Ivory, Gold, and other precious materials, Aelians.
for the Aelians of which Propertius the excellent Poet speaks, lib. I. in
these words.

Nam neque Pyramidum sumptus ad sidera ducti
Nec Iovis Elaei caelum imit at a Domus.
For not the least of the great Pyramids
Even to the stars elate.
Nor the Elean house of love
Which Heaven did imitate.
The Palace of Cyrus.
Some rank with this the Palace of Cyrus King of the Medes and Persians, all
the stones whereof were simmond with gold, whereas others are done with
plaster, of which Memnon was the Architector, but having occasion to speak of
this sixth wonder, Memnon.
though I make a small deviation, I hope no Judicial Reader, but he will say
it is somewhat to purpose, A remarkable controversy.
It thus follows.

Amongst the Grecians there was a general Law enacted, of which every
particular province took notice, that whosoever should rob the statue of any
of their heathen gods, or any Temple dedicated unto him, it was held sacrilege
in the highest degree, A law among the Grecians.
and he must imiaedtely upon his apprehension forfeit his hands to be cut of:
it so fell out that the senate of Elis, having a purpose to erect the Image of
Jupiter, sent to the Arerpagita, who were the optimates of Athens to borrow of
them the most excellent Artist, Phidias.
Phidias, who was at that time the choice and prime workman of the World: they
willing to further so pious a work, (for so they thought it) as to make a god,
assented to the motion, and delivered Phidias unto them, but upon condition,
that they should return him back (the work being perfected) every way as
sound and complete, as they received him from them or else to forfeit an
hundred Talents.

Which contract being drawn and concluded upon, betwixt these two famous
Cities, Phidias is sent to undertake the work, and finisheth it, which was
done with such inimitable Art, that it begot in them infinite admiration:
insomuch that they ambitiously covetous to engrosse so excellent a piece to
themselves, knowing it was not to be paralleld through the world, and presuming
that he who had done that, was able to compose the like, or perchance a better,
having now before him so fair a president, therefore to prevent all such
doubts and fears, they laid unto his charge, that he having received from them
such a quantity of gold, and so much Ivory, with sundry other costly and
precious materials, had detained a great part of them, not bestowing all upon
the same; and therefore reserving somewhat to his own peculiar use, had
incurred the due penalty, belonging to a sacrilegious person, for which he was
convented, convicted, and by the Senate condemned, A cruel and an injust
sentence.
so that Manus tanquam sacrilego praeci^erunt, they cut off his hands as a
punishment imposed on him who had committed sacrilege: and so sent him back
handlesse unto the Athenians.

Who with great sorrow and pity commiserating the wretched estate of their
dismembered Country man and Friend, demanded by their Ambassadors, of the
Elians, the hundred talents, according to their former covenant, who thus
argued against them: The plea of the Athenians
we can no more lend to you, or to others, a Phidias, who had hands to help
himself, before he took in hand your employment, he made you a god, nay a
Jupiter, you then, not he, are the sacrilegious, who durst offer violence to
hands consecrated: and your own god (made by him) shall doubtless revenge on
you the blood of his own maker, for which we testate, and withal implore
Jupiter, now the proper god of our Friend, Artist, and Countryman, Phidias.

It is Art that supplyeth others in their need: the excellency of his Art has
only made him necessitous and withal miserable, The hands of Phidias were the
only ground of our covenant; now wanting these hands, how are our covenants
performed, and what hope have we, that we can receive him from you; if he be
not returned unto us, as he was delivered unto you?

We sent you one whose hands could make gods, you send us one back, who has
not hands to lift up unto the gods: Moreover, are you not ashamed, to owe your
god to one whom you call sacrilegious? most true it is that the man lives but
the Artist is perished: you return not unto us Phidias, but the punishment
which was not due unto Phidias: for those hands which before have made gods,
cannot now be moved to entreat men: he made you such a Jupiter as that you
desired, it should be the last Jupiter that should be made: Hands we lent you,
and of these hands we desire (nay, the same hands) restitution; for how could
there be a competent trial, when the Elians were the accusers, the Elians
witnesses; and the Elians judges? only our poor friendlesse Country man, the
accused and sufferer? we invoke the gods, even these whom Phidias has already
made, and those which (but for your barbarous cruelty) he might have made,
against your unjust proceedings, for we cannot say we have received a Phidias,
unless you had delivered him unto us, in the same state that we gave him unto
you, and might upon the like occasion have lent him unto others.

The answer of ^he Elians.
To which the Elians made this short answer, we had gold which was hallowed, we
had Ivory which was sacred, and diverse Jewels and G^mmes, which were to holy
uses consecrate, for the employment of these we desired and sought an Artist,
to dispose of them to our own pious, not his proper uses; with these and the
like materials, our purpose was that your Phidias should have made us other
gods: but we thought it not so needful and just to adorn them as to
vindicate them, etc. This controversy, for arguments came after to be decided
by arms. In which it may be presumed (by the justice of their cause) the
Athenians were victors, I hope any understanding Reader will excu^e this my
short digression, I come now to the argument in hand, namely a seventh Wonder
of the world, which was erected by this Artimesia, (which was a sumptuous tomb
or monument) over Mausolus her deceased husband.

The seventh wonder.
The height whereof was twenty five cubits, and girt or compast with thirty
fix collumnes, or pillars. It was apparent from the South to the North,
threescore and twelve foot, the whole compass thereof amounted unto four
hundred and eleven foot. That part which looked toward the East, one Scopas
ingraved: Scopas. Briay.
that which lay toward the North, one Briax, that which reflected upon the
South one Tymotheus, and that part which looked upon the West, Tymothius.
Leocares.
Leocares. This rare Queen of Caria, ever to be remarkt for this her conjugall
piety, though she yielded unto fate and dyed before this admirable work was
accomplished, yet by her last testiment, left such order and means withal,
that the work should still go on, which was completed and absolutely
finished, by the workmen before named. A rare president in a woman which
showed that her love to her deceased Husband, ended not in her death, but that
she desired to have it live to all posterity that should succeed her.

We read of diverse sundry Architectors, and famous structures made by them,
but to this none to be paralleld, as being worthy to be reckoned one of the
seven wonders: For instance, Spintharus Corinthius built the Temple of Apollo,
Rare buildings and Architectors.
Melagines that of Minerva, Theodorus Phocensis made the glorious Altar, on
which all the great offerings presented to the Delphicke Oracle were laid.
Philo Atheniensis made the Pyraan Arcenal, or armory, Hermogines, the Doricke
house dedicated to Juno, of Magnesia, Hermodorus, a stately Obelisque, Dedalus,
Zmilus, Rholus, and Theodorus, were famous for sundry Laborinthes, Valerius
Ostiensis, for building the great Roman Theater, Romulus for his A silum;
Mnesiclus, for a famous Tower in Athens, and to omit infinite others, you may
read Machab. 2.13. That Simon Prince and High Priest, the Son of Mattathias,
and brother to that famous worthy Judas Machabeus, after his brother Jonathan,
who preceaded him in the government, was trecherously slain. He took up his
bones, and buried them in Media his Fathers City, and he made upon the
sepulcher of his Father, A glorious tomb built by Simon the High Priest.
and his Brethren, a building high to look unto, of hewn stone, behind and
before, and set up seven stately graven pillars upon it, one against the other,
for his Father, his Mother, and his four Brethren, and set other great pillars
round about them, and set arms upon the pillars for a perpetual memory, and
carved ships besides the Arms, that they might be seen by the Navigators,
sailing nere unto that coast by sea, which sepulcher (according to the phrase
of the Text) stands even to this day.

Yet neither that, nor the others before named (it seems) could parallel the
former structure built by this Queen Artimesia, from which all the funeral
monuments erected upon the bones of Princes, Kings, and Emperors, built with
great magnificence and state, are even to these times called Mausolea, Mausolea.
of which Propertius, lib. 3. speaks.

Nec Mausolaei dives fortuna sepulcri
Mortis ab extrema condition vacat.
Mausolus rich tomb can no warrant have,
To keep it self from the devouring grave.
And we read Martial lib. 1. thus.

A ere nec vacuo pendentia Mausolaea
Laudibus immodicis cares ad astra ferunt.
The great Mausolean tomb that seems hanging in the air to be,
Even to the stars O Carian Queen shall loudly echo thee.
So much for her conjugall love toward her Husbands, an imitable example for
all Wives, and chaste Matrons whatsoever, it remains now to speak something
of her heroical magnanimity, in which she was no way inferior to the former.

For being a Dowager Queen, The magnanimity of Queen Artimesia.
after the decease of her husband, and the days of her mourning now grown
over, she laid by her Widows habit, and resumed the robes and regal
ornaments belonging to a Princess, but finding the affairs of state, too
burdensome for her free and unlimitted spirit, she disposed of her estate to
those of her Counsel, whom she best trusted, and because her very palace
grew distastefull unto her, without the consociety of her dead Lord, she
utterly abandoned it, nay, her very Country growing as irke some to her, as her
palace, after she had given order for the erecting of her Husbands monument,
she purposed for a time to forsake it, and seek out for some foreign
adventures.

Xerxes.
It happened at that time Xerxes, the great Persian Monarch, ambitiously aiming
to reduce all Greece under his Scepter, and subjection, having gathered an
innumerable host by Land, and a seeming invincible Navy by Sea, she adhering
unto his party, rigged and manned three ships of her own, of which she her
self was Archithalassa, or Armirall: her people that took part with her in
that adventure were Carians, or Halicarnassians, Coeans, of the Isle Coos,
Nysimiaus, and Calydinians, and being thus plenally accomodated, she put her
self under the patronage of the Persian Emperor.

It would ask too long a circumstance to discourse of the whole navall
conflict, I will only deliver unto you so much as concerns the person of
Artimesis, who so valiantly did bear her self in that blooddy fight, that her
ships (known by their flagges and streamers) were eminent above all others of
the Persians, Her demeanor in the Navall fight.
both for defense and offense, for her small squadron, more dangered the
Greekish Navy, then ten times their number, notwithstanding which her brave
opposition, the Persians were vanquished, and the Greeks (though against
infinite odds) the glorious victors, in which Marine honor: the Eginita had
the first place, and the Athenians the second: The Greeks prime Commanders.
and of the Commanders, Policrates of Egineta, and of the Athenians, Eumena,
Anagyrasius, and Aminius Palenaus, who above all others, most hotly pursued
Artimesia in her flight, but when he had found that she was too swift of sail
for him, he sent other light vessels after, proclaiming ten thousand Drachnes
to him that could take her alive, as holding it an indignity that a woman
should give such an affront to their A thenian Navy, notwithstanding al, she
with some few others escaped and safely arrived at Phalerum.

On the contrary part, Herodatus in his Vrunia, thus reports of her that Xerxes
himself beholding how bravely above all in his fleet, she in her ship behaved
her self even at that time, when his Navy was almost quite defeated, one who
knew the vessel by the colors, answered it was Queen Artimesia, he fetching
a deep sigh uttered these words Viri quidem extiterant mibi femina: Xerxes his
character of Queen Artimesia.
femina autem viri. i. All my men this day have proved themselves women, and
the women only showed themselves to be men: And so much concerning Artimesia,
who as in her life time she was gloriously famous, so after death, even to all
perpetuity shall survive famously glorious, etc.

OF THE THREE WORTHY WOMEN AMONG THE CHRISTIANS.
Whose Names are, Elpheda. Queen Margaret. Queen Elizabeth.


ELPHEDA.
HEr royal birth my Muse dares not to smoother
A great Kings Daughter, a great King her Brother,
Who, though she never to that height arrived,
To be styled Queen, yet was she Prince-like wiv'd,
Her Husband Duke of Mercia, which we
Number amongst the British Sceptarche,
By which a Kingdoms name it after gaind,
When as at once, seven Kings in Britain raignd,
Which bred this war like Lady n^re the place
Whence brave Bunduca does derive her race.
I should but Antedate her life to tell
How, and in what this Lady did excel,
Not possible it is that one small page
Should comprehend the wonder of her age.
And therefore further to express her glory,
I must refer the Reader to her story.
For that (as of the rest) is still the chief
Of my intent, yet thus of her in brief.
British Elpheda, of the Saxon race,
To none of all the former need give place,
Who for her Masculine Spirit much honor gains
In many battles fought against the Danes.
And might with any of her Sex compare,
As being Religious, Valiant, Wise, and Fair.


THE FIRST OF THE THREE WOMEN WORTHIES AMONGST THE CHRISTIANS, CALLED ELPHEDA.
AMongst so many reckoned up for their Valor and Virtue. It shall not be
amiss to present the Reader with a commemoration of some who have been the
occasion of much combustion and trouble. Of turbulent and combustious women.
Helena.


Helena was the cause of the Trojan wars, and Pelops succeeding in the
Kingdom of Phrigia, brought an army against King Oenimaus, because he denied
unto him his daughter Hippodamia, Hippodamie.
of whom he was greatly inamored: the Poet Arcbillus, an Iambicke Writer, writ
so bitterly against Lycambes, because he refused to give him his Daughter in
marriage, that upon the reading of them, he presently hanged himself, and
Pericles at the instigation of his concubine Aspatia, Aspatia:
made war upon the Sabines, and subdued them to the Milesians; Teuca.
we read also of Teuca Queen of the Illirians, who because Titus Cornucanus,
then Ambassador from the Romans delivered unto her a bold and peremptory
message, commanded him to be slain in her presence, against the Law of Arms,
which was the ground of much bloodshed and slaughter.

Menelaus being dead, Megapenthus, and Nicastratus, the sons of Orestes,
pursued Helena, (cause of the ten years war betwixt the Trojans and
Greeks) into the Island of Rhodes, In hope to shelter her self under the
patronage of Triptolemus: of whom Polizo his wife growing jealous, Polizo.
she caused her to be strangled, for so writes Voletaranus: Lavinia, Lavinia.
the daughter of King Latinus, and Amata the Queen: were the sole occasion of
so many bloody conflicts betwixt the Trojans and the Rutilians, and lastly, of
the death of Turnus, slain by Aeneas: Dejaneira was the motive, Dejaneira.
to the duel betwixt Hercules and Achelous, and of the conflict with Nessus
the Centaur, and after of his own death, by sending him the shirt which was
poisoned. Evander Nephew to Pallas, King of the Arcadians, at the instigation
of his Mother Nicostrate, Nicostrate.
slew his own Father, and Ptelerus King of the Thebans by the treason of his
own daughter Polidices, Polidices.
was betrayed into the hands of Creon and slain.

Lucretia
Lucretia being violated by Sextus Tarquinius, after long war, was the cause
that the Romans regained their liberty, and Virginia the daughter of Virginius
that the government of the Triumviri, Virginia
was utterly abrogated: Hippolitus being falsely accused by his stepmother
Phedra, for unlawfully attempting to corrupt her chastity, Phedra.
flying his Fathers fury, was hurld from his Chariot, and being bruised with
the fall perished. Martia, Martia.
the strumpet of Antonius Commodus the Emperor, betraide him into the hands of
a Groom, on whom she doted, by whom he was trecherously slain. Alexander the
great, Thais.
at the instigation of Thais the prostitute, caused the great City Persepolis
to be burned, be with his own hands giving the first fire, and then his
Concubines after Octavia the sister of Augustus Caesar, being repudiated by M.
Anrony, was the occasion of a civil war, and Antiochus warring against the
Romans by his effemiary, and dotage on a Chalcidonian Damsel, lost all his
honor, giving way to the enemy, for an easy victory of these and the like, we
thus read Ovid Elegiar: lib. 2.

-- nisirapta fuisset
Tyndaris, Europa, pax Asiaeque foret,
Femina silvestres Lapit has populumque biformem, etc.
But for the rape made of the Spartian Queen,
Europe and Asia, still in peace had been,
Woman and Wine, that blooddy banquet made,
In which the two shaped Centaurs did invade
The Lapithes, who doubly text with lust,
And the grapes juice, lay tumbling in the dust.
In Latin's kingdom (for his Justice praisd
Woman, a second Trojan tumult raisd,
Two bulls I have seen for a fair heifer fight,
With lustful fire enraged at her sight, etc.
But contrary to these, A brief catalogue of eminent and excellent women.
diverse of the same sex (though not in that great number) have been very
eminent in advancing both the profit and honor of their Nations, as Dominica,
the wife of the Emperor Valence, Dominica.
with her great eloquence, and hazard of her person withal, pacified the
barbarous Goths, from sacking, and utterly subverting Constantinople, the
Metropolis of the Grecian Empire. Iuguldis
Iuguldis the sister of Childebert, King of France, by her Arguments and
earnest solicitations, brought her Husband Hermogillus, the Son of
Lemigildus, King of the Goths, quite to abjure all paganism, and sincerely to
profess the true Christian Religion; Clotildis Queen of France, after the
like manner brought her Husband Clodoveus, Clotildis.
the son of Chilpericke, to the profession of the faith, In the year of grace,
three hundred and twelve, Autaulphus, King of the Goths, laid his seige against
Rome, to assault it at least, if not to spoil it, and to change the name
thereof, and for Roma to call it Gothia, But Placida the wife of Honorius with
her sweet persuasive language, Placida.
so insinuated into the ferocity of his barbarous diposition, that she caused
him to relent, and quite altering his bloody purpose, Pompeia Paulina.
to raise the siege, and leave the City in safety: Pompeia Paulina wrought the
like upon the tyrannous disposition of the Emperor Iulianus her husband,
causing him to take of those taxes, and heavy impositions, which he had with
great rigor laid upon his people. To which number may be added Helena the
Mother of Constantine, and Monica, Helena. Monica.
the Mother of Saint Augustine, and some others, and not the least meriting,
this Lady Elpheda, Elpheda.
the subject of our present treatise.

Whose Father Aluredus, (whom some of our Chronologers, call Alphredus,) the
fourth Son to Adolphus, and Brother to Etheldredus, late King: began his
reign over the West Saxons, and diverse other Provinces of England, in the
year of Grace, eight hundred threescore and twelve, and in the thirtyeth year
of Charles, surnamed the Bald, King of France. It is written of him that he was
twelve years of age, before he was taught to know any Letter, but after by his
great industry, he not only excelled in learning his brothers, but many
others, who were before him in time. The first School in Oxford.
He was the first raised a School in Oxford, and gave that Town great
freedoms and Immunities. He caused also many Laws to be translated out of the
British tongue into the Saxons, Especially the Mercean Laws, Mercia.
which Mercia was an absolute Kingdom, called also middle England, he was
further a very skillfull Architector, as having great knowledge in building,
and for hunting, and hawking, he was able to instruct any, but needed
direction from none, he was of a comely stature, and fair, both of
countenance and condition, and of all his other children, the best beloved of
his Father.

He when he came to maturity, espoused a noble Lady, Ethel^ida.
whose name was Etheluida, by whom he had two sons, King Alareds issue.
Edward surnamed the elder, and a second called Egelward, Elpheda, whom he
after married to Etheldredus, whom he made Duke, or Prince of Mercia) the
second was called Ethelgota, he made a Nunrie or Votaresse, and the third had
to name Elphrida, all his children as well daughters as sons, he caused to be
diligently instructed, in the art of grammar (so much he affected learning) and
was in many battles victorious over the Danes, who often and in sundry places
invaded the Land, and tyrannized therein, and amongst many other his Heroyicke
acts, one passage I cannot omit being so remarkable.

A remarkable accident
Being in one battle much overset, by reason of the multitude of his enemies, he
was forced with a small train to hide himself in the woody Country, about
Summerset shire, and had no other food save such as he could provide by
hunting, and fishing, yet at length being better comforted, he began to show
himself more public, and at large, so that daily there resorted unto him,
men out of Wiltshire, Summerset shire, Hampeshire, and other places of the
Kingdom, so that in Process of time, he was strongly accompanied, and much
better accommodated, then the Danes any way dreamed of, upon a time the King in
person took upon him the habit of a Bard or Musician, and with his Harp or
some such instrument, he entered the Tents, and Pavilions of the Danes, and
sung unto them many pleasant Ballads, and Ditties, which greatly delighted
them, in which interim he espied their sloth and idleness, took full view of
their host, their strength and how it was ordered, and withal discovered much
of their Counsel and purposes, and after returned unto his own company, The
Danes defeated by stratagem.
who with some chosen men, fell upon them in the night, and utterly defeated
and routed them, having ever after, the upper hand of his enemies.

It is further remembered of him, The day well divided.
that he divided the night and day into three parts, (if he were not otherwise
hindered and molested by his enemies,) whereof eight hours he spent in study,
and other eight in Alms deeds, and prayer, and the remainder in his diet,
exercise, and affairs of the Realm: he reigned three and twenty years, and
dyed a notable, and most memorable president, to all that should hereafter sit
on the throne of Majesty, whom succeeded his son Edward, Brother to this our
Elpheda, who though he was lower degreed then his Father in Arts, and
Literature, yet excelled him in state and Majesty.

This high spirited Virago quite abandoning all softness, Elpheda too as
Virago.
and effeminacy, betook herself wholly to the practice of Arms, by which she
grew famously glorious, assisting her Brother in all those great conflicts
against the Danes, but ere I come to give you a particular character of the
sister, let it be held no unnecessary digression to speak somewhat of the King
her Brother, who by his first wife named Edwina, had a Son called Ethelstane,
King Edwards Royal and numerous issue.
who after succeeded him in the Throne. By his second wife two Sons, Edredus,
and Edwinus, and seven daughters, of which the eldest named Alnuda, or Almida,
he married to the Emperor Otto, the first of that name, and Algina, the
second, to Charles King of France, surnamed the simple, and the youngest of his
daughters to Lewis King of Guien: By his third wife. Ethelswida, he received
two sons, Edmond and Eldred, and two daughters, Edburga, and Edgina, thus was
he blessed with a numerous Issue, setting all his sons to School, to teach
them knowledge in the Liberal Arts, but the Ladies his daughters to spinne,
and card wool, taking his president from Charles, of France surnamed the
Conqueror, from which, even our greatest Ladies, nay even Princesses
themselves, if they be either cited in Court, Spinster from whence it came.
or arraigned upon any Capitol offense, they are indicted by the name of such
an one Spinster, to this day.

About the first year of his reign, one Clito Ethelwaldus, a near kinsman to
the King, rebelled against him, and strengthened himself at a place called
Win-burne, near unto Bathe, and took thence perforce a beautiful Nun, and
with her fled unto the Danes, A Nun ravished.
who then had peaceably seated themselves in Northumberland, animating them by
very pregnant and persuasive reasons, to take arms (in his behalf) against
the King his Nephew, who notwithstanding so hotly pursued him, that he was
compelled to forsake that Country quite, leaving the Nun behind him, and for
his safety fly into France, so that the King with drew his forces, and left
off his pursuit, restoring the Nun unto the same cloister from whence she
was violently taken: In all which expeditions, this brave Heroina, The first
proof of Elphedaes valor.
with Etheldredus her Husband, Duke of Mercia, assisted the King her Brother,
as also in that which follows, being highly extolled above many other prime
Commanders, for her forward and excellent service.

The next year following, this Clito (before spoken off,) with a crew of
Frenchmen landed in the East part of England, and gathered unto him all the
Danes of that Country, robbing and pillaging all the Towns and Villages, as
they marched onwards, especially those about Crekingsford, and Crickland, and
after passed the River of Thames, and spoiled all the Lands near unto
Bradenstuake, and so from thence retired themselves into Have Anglia, which
were the two Counties of Northfolke, and Suffolk.

But the King with his sister made after them with all possible speed, making
havocke of all those Lands, which they then held of him by composition from the
River of Owse, as far as the borders, of Saint Edmonds bury, and soon after
the two hosts, encountered, where a bloody battle was fought, to the great
loss of both sides, in which conflict Elpheda, Her monomachy.
fought hand to hand with Clito, and though sundred by the multitude, yet came
off with the best; the event was, that Clito with many of the Danes were
slain, and left dead in the field, and the King and his Sister shared in the
honor of the day. Those that survived were forced to seek and sue for peace,
upon condition that they should keep themselves within the bounds to them
limited, and moreover pay an annual tribute for all those grounds they held
of the King.

In the twelfth year of this Edwards reign the Danes repenting of those
Covenants before made (as thinking it an impairing to their honor, assembled a
mighty host, with which the King and his sister met in Stafordshire, at a
place called Toten-hall, A brave victory.
and soon after, at Wodnesfield, at which two places, they slew two Kings, two
Earls, and diverse Commanders of note, besides many thousands of the Danes, of
which the Chronocles afford us no exact number, most of which came out of the
Country of Northumberland, where they had been peaceably seated.

This excellent Lady was as Religious, as Valiant, Her valor and piety.
who amongst other of her pious acts, prevailed so far with her Husband, that
they betwixt them at their proper charge, translated the bones of King Oswal,
(who had been Cannonized for a Saint) from Bradony to Gloucester, and there
erected a fair and beautiful Monastery, dedicated to the honor of Saint
Peter, soon after which (for it presently ensued) the last battle before
spoken of) dyed Etheldredus Duke of Mercia, The death of Etheldredus.
or middle England, after whose expiration the King having had so long proof
of his Sisters love, valor, and wisdom, conferred on her the sole and entire
rule and government of that Country, in as ample possession, as her Lord had
before enjoyed it, the City of London only excepted, which he reserved to be
under his own patronage.

Of this masculine Spirited Lady, to reckon up all her virtues would ask long
circumstance, Elphedaes Acts, Buildings, etc. and reparations of decayed Cities.
but I will particularize unto you some few of those brave deeds, she has
left memorable to all posterity, as building, and repairing many Towns,
Cities, and Castles, as Tamworth, besides Lychfield, Stafford, Warwick,
Shrowsbury, Watersbury, and Eldesbury, in the Forest besides Chester, she
erected also a Castle in the North end of Mercia, upon the River called Merce, in
the Saxon tongue Ramcofan, and since Runcora, she also built a bridge over the
River Severne, called Brimsbury Bridge, she more over both by her purse and
wisdom, greatly assisted the King her Brother, as well in the mannaging the
affairs of the Realm, as in erecting sundry Forts, and Cittadels, as the
strong Castle of Hereford, in the edge of Wales, and in repairing the walls and
City of Chester, by the Danes much defaced, which he much enlarged, so that the
Castle which was before without the Walls, is from his time, even to this day
contained within them.

Her rare Chastity.
It is further reported of her, that after she had once prooved the pain of
travail in Child birth, she for ever after abandoned the bed, and embraces of
the Duke her Husband: saying, it was neither convenient nor seemly for a Kings
Daughter, and Sister to a King, to expose her self to any such lust full
action, which might beget those pangs, and throws, which women were enforced to
endure in travel, a rare continence and not found in many, and that was one
prime occasion, Elswin^.
why after the birth of her sole and only Daughter Elswina, she left all other
effeminacies, and applying her self unto the condition of those turbulent and
combustious times, became a stout and warlike Virago, whose example could not
choose, but put courage into the most dastardly cowards, beholding a woman so
valiant.

Of her rare continence and vowed chastity: too much cannot be spoke in her
praise for Chastity as Solon defines, it is the beauty of the soul, Chastity.
the grace of the body, and peace of the mind: it is a virtue always
companion with fortitude, and as it is both in Virginity and the Widdowed, much
approoved, so even in Wedlock it cannot be but commendable: and as idleness
is the greatest enemy unto it, so by being in continual action, is to oppose
it, abstinence from fleshly lusts, are best tried in extremity, and in the end
crowned with eternity: for let the body be never so fair, without that, it
cannot be truly called beautiful: Beauty, may be compared to the flowers of the
Spring, Beauty.
which soon fade, but Chastity to the stars of Heaven, which last ever, for
with the reins of reason it curbeth the rage of lust. The greatest honor
conferd upon women, without that, is but like a Mandrakes Apple, fair in show,
and poison in taste, it is the seal of Grace, the staff of Devotion, the
glory of life, the comfort in death which when it is joined with Humility, and
Charity, they may be called the three virtues of the soul:

I come now to the thirteenth of this King Edwards reign and the first or
second at the most, Further of Elphedaes valor.
of her Widdow-hood, at which time a great Navy of Danes, which in the time of
King Alured, were beaten from the coast, and forced to fly into France, now
returned and sailed about the West Country, The outrages of the Danes.
and landing in diverse places, took sundry preies at their best advantage,
and then retired themselves into their ships again, and amongst other of
their direptions, they spoiled a town called Irchinfield, from which place
they took a Bishop, and carried him aboard their ships, whom they soon after
ransomed for forty pounds sterling, but as soon as the King and his Noble
Sister, had intelligens of these outrages, he assembled his Forces, and they
sped them Westward by Land, and sent out a Navy by Sea, of which the Danes
hearing, they cowardly quit the Land, and fled into Ireland.

And therefore to prevent the like inconveniences, to which the Realm in those
days was much subject, the King by the advice of his fellow Championess,
built a Castle at the mouth of the River Avon, and another at Buckingham, and a
third near unto it, and after returned into Northamptonshire, and gave battle
to the Danes, who had there planted themselves under a great Duke called
Turbetillus, Turbetillus defeated.
whom they utterly defeated, and had of them an honorable victory.

It is further Recorded of this Martial Virago, that she without the aid of
her Brother, gathered her Knights together, and where the Welsh-men made
invation into the Land, about Brecknocke, she valiantly opposed them in all
violent Hostility, and amongst other prisoners, and preyes surprised, the
Queen of their Country, An Emlation betwixt two women.
who came in person to the field, and thinking to aspire unto her fame, came
far short of her Forture. The year following, which was the foureteenth of
the Kings reign, he caused to be erected, (or at the least reedified) the
Towns of Torsetor, and Wigmore. Utterly demolishing a strong and famous
Castle, which the Danes for their security and defense, had built at Temesford.

The same year also, this Noble Lady won the Town of Derby, from the power of
the Danes, in which assault, they put her to that hard adventure, that four
Knights which were called the guardians of her Corpse, A strange deliverance.
were slain close by her, yet she (notwithstanding) by her great valor
escaped; and after so many perils, hazards, battles, and conflicts, in all
which, both for magnanimity and action, she out did the most, and equalled the
best: death which durst not look upon her, in her Armor, as being frighted at
the terror of her angry countenance, stole upon her unawares, when her plumed
helmet, victorious sword, and impenetrable Curace, was laid by, arrested her by
the hand of his minister sickness, and then taking the advantage of her
infirmity and weakness, Elphedaes death.
struck her dead about the Summer Solstice, which is the middle of June. Who
was much lamented by the King and the Commons, and her body with great
solemnity interred, in the Monastery of Saint Peter's, which the Duke her Lord,
and she had before erected in Gloucester, which was after in the troublesome
combustions of the Danes, quite raced and demolished, but in the process of
time, again reedified by Aldredus, Bishop both of York, and Worcester, who
was loath that the memory of so magnanimous a Lady should be drowned in Lethe,
and not her monument remain to all posterity.

Elphedaes Daughter.
This excellent Lady being dead, her young daughter Elswina was possessed of all
her seigniory for a season, having a like principality with her mother, who
preceaded her, and was styled Princess of Mercia, or middle England: but the
King her Uncle taking the affair into his more mature consideration, by the
advice of his Nobles, thought it to be too great a burden for her to support,
especially her indisposition coming so far short of the wisdom, and valor
of her Mother, and therefore discharged and dispossessed her thereof, annexing
it to the Crown, and making it a prime limb, of the body of his Kingdom:
which though it was done with some contention, and difficulty; yet the King
prevailed in his purpose, allotting unto her the Towns of Notingham,
Tom-woorth, and Derby: expecting she would have defended them in as brave and
warlike a manner, as her Mother before her had done, but finding the contrary,
he took them also from her, and reduced them into his own subjection.

Henry, Archbishop of Huntington, an Histriographer, and Poet (such as those
times afforded) wrote much of the Chronicles of England, and composed many
Elegies, and Ditties of this noble Lady Elpheda, of which these ensuing are a
part.

Caesar's triumphs were not so much to praise, Her Epitaph.

As was of Elpheda, that shields so often did raise
Against her enemies, this noble vanqueresse
Virago, whose virtues can I not express.
These amongst others are remembered by Fabiam, one of our English Chronologers,
whom in this brief tractate (for the contractedness used in his Annals) I
have strived to imitate.

King Edward, in the death of his Royal sister Elpheda, having lost his chief
supportresse, yet notwithstanding builded a new Town directly over against old
Nothingham, and made a fair Bridge, to make a passage betwixt them, of whom
Marianus the Scot, William of Malmsbury, and Henry of Huntington further
report, that he subdued the two Kings of Scotland and Wales, King Edward
subdued the two Kings of Scotland and Wales.
who about the twentieth year of his reign elected, and acknowledged him for
their Lord and Patron. He also in the North part of Mercia, by the River
Merce, built a City or Town called Thylwall, and after repaired the City of
Mouchester, which had been much defaced by the Danes, after which and many
other his structures, and noble achievements, which would appear too tedious
here to relate. He finally expired, (having reigned in great honor and
trouble) at Tarringdon; in the twenty fourth year of his reign, and from
thence his body was conveyed to Winchester, and interred in the Monastery of
Saint Swithine: leaving behind him diverse Sonners, of which Ethelstane was the
eldest, and succeeded in the Throne Imperial, who began his reign over the
greatest part of England, in the year of grace, nine hundred and twenty five,
and in the third year of Rodolphus King of France this Ethelstane, King
Ethelstane.
much beautified the tomb of his Aunt Elpheda, and is said to be the first
anointed King of this Land, etc.

QVEENE MARGARET
QVeene Margarets Father, as all pens agree,
King of Jerusalem and Sicilee.
Had neither Crown nor Country (the Annals say)
And what is command, where none are to obey?
Yet those mere timpanous Titles, Suffolk drew
Twixt her, and the sixth Henry to pursue,
A speedy match, mauger the prae-contract,
Tweene him and the heir to the Earl Arminack,
Which raised strange combustions in the state,
This flourishing Kingdom, nigh to ruinate.
In which, she took on her a Sovereign power,
S^iting her present fortunes, not her Dower,
Her: many strange desasters did befall,
But her undaunted spirit ore-came them all.
She knew the manage both of Pen and Pike,
The Court and Camp to her were both alike,
In bloody battles she took great delight,
And would, (if fly to day) to morrow fight.
Who can this Queens heroicke spirit express,
A foe to Peace, in field, a Championess,
Usurping all that Majesty could claim,
Leaving her Husband, nothing save his name,
He wears the Crown, she Sword and Scepter bore,
What could the brave Semiramis do more?


THE SECOND OF THE THREE WOMEN WORTHIES AMONGST THE CHRISTIANS, CALLED MARGARET
QVEENE OF ENGLAND.
IN the year of grace, one thousand four hundred forty and two, Ambassadors
were sent from England into Guian, Preparation for a marriage.
where a match was concluded betwixt King Henry the sixth, then of the age of
one and twenty, and the Daughter of the Earl of Arminacke, which after was
disannulled by the Earl of Suffolk, (a mighty man in those times) which
occasioned a great afront betwixt the Lord Protector and him, which grew unto
much rage and bloodshed, (as may after appear,) but to follow the History
close, the before named Earl of Suffolk, after the former match fell off,
went with others his Assotiates, and concluded a marriage betwixt the King, and
the Lady Margaret, Daughter to the King of Cicile, and Jerusalem, upon which
contract were delivered unto the said King, the Duchy of Angeon, and the
Earldom of Maine, then called the two keys, to open the way into Normandy,
and in the next year after, the Earl of Suffolk, being created Marquess,
with his wife and other of the most honorable Ladies of the Realm, The Lady
Margaret brought over into England.
sailed into France, to bring over this Lady into England, which was done with
all solemnity; when Thomas Catwoorthe, was Lord Major, and Nicholas Wilford,
and John Norman were Sherifes of London.

The month after her arrival into the Kingdom, The marriage of the King to
the Lady Margaret.
she was espoused to the King, at a Town called Sowthwicke, in the County of
Hamshire, and from thence was honorably conveyed, by the Lords and Peers of
the Land, to Blacke-Heath, and there met by the Lord Major, and the Citizens,
and in great triumph brought to Westminster, and upon the thirtyeth day of May,
which was the Sunday after Trinity Sunday, was solemnly Crowned; great Feasts,
Iusts, and other martial exercises, were held in the Sanctuary, before the
Abbey, for the space of three days after: But this match was held to be very
unprofitable for the Kingdom; An unprofitable match.
first by giving up out of the Kings possession Angeon and Maine: And then,
that for the charge of her coming over, there was demanded in Parliament, a
fifteen and an half, by the Marquess of Suffolk, which drew him into such a
contempt and hatred of the people, that it after cost him his life.

Some also held it very ominous, because that after this Match, as the King
lost his revenues in France, so he also hazarded the Natives and people of his
own Nation, for presently after, all the Common weal, and affairs of the
estate, were managed by the Queen, The Queen assumes regal prerogative.
and her Counsel, (being a woman of a brave and Heroicke Spirit) she assumed
prerogative into her hands, all things began after to go retrograds, and
preposterous, which many conjectured was by the breach of that promise made by
the King, unto the Earl of Arminackes daughter, for there fell upon this, that
the King lost all his right in Norwaige, upon which followed a dissension and
division of the Lord within the Realm; the rebellion of the Commonalty,
against the Prince their Sovereign, and in conclusion, the deposing of the
King, and the Queen, with the Prince her Son, to be compelled to avoid the
Land.

In the five and twentyeth year of this Kings reign, a Parliament was held at
Saint Edmunds bury, in Suffolk, to which all the Commons of that Country, were
commanded in their most defensible array, to wait upon the person of the King,
where the Lords were no sooner assembled, Humphrey Duke of Gloucester the Kings
Uncle
but Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, and Uncle to the King, was arrested by
Viscount Bewmount, then High Constable of England, (accompanied with the Duke
of Buckingham, and others) and two and thirty of his Principal Servants,
committed unto several prisons: His death.
after which arrest, the Duke after six days was found dead in his bed, being
the four and twentieth day of February. And his body being exposed to the
public view of all men, there was no wound found about him, notwithstanding
which, of his death the Marquess of Suffolk, A true character of Duke
Humphrey.
was shrowdly suspected, he was a man greatly honored, and beloved of the
Commons, as well for his discreet government of the Realm, during the Kings
nonage, as for his brave and noble hospitality, in which none ever exceeded
him, for which and many other of his unparalleld virtues, he purchased unto
himself, (and not without cause) to be called the good Duke of Gloucester,
whose body was after conveyed unto Saint Albones, and near unto the shrine
sollemnely interred.

Not long after, in the year one thousand four hundred and fifty, during the
foresaid Parliament, the Marquess of Suffolk was arrested and sent to the
Tower, where he lived a month at his pleasure, which Parliament being after
adjourned to Lecester, A Parliament at Lecester.
thither the King came, attended by Suffolk, where the Commons made great
complaint of the delivering up of Angeou and Maine, to the dishonor of the
kingdom; For which they accused the Marquess, and others as guilty, as also
for the murder of the good Duke of Gloucester: to appease whom, they Exiled him
the Land for five years, who obeying the sentence, took shipping in
Northfolke, intending to have sailed, into France, but was met by the way by a
ship of war, called the Nicolas of the Tower, whose Captain knowing the
Duke, put into the Road of Dover, and caused his head to be struck off on the
side of a Boat, The death of the Marquess of Suffolk*
and there left both head and body upon the sands, and then put to Sea again,
and this was the end of the Queens great favorite, who save of her, and some
of his own creatures, dyed altogether unlamented.

I omit to speak of sundry insurrections, as that of Blew-beard, Blew-beard,
Jack Cade.
and the Kentish men, with their Captain Jack Cade, who called himself
Mortimer, and Cousin to the Duke of York, with others, and come to tell you
that the Duke of Somerset, succeeded Suffolk in the Queens favor, by whom,
and her Counsel, all the affairs of the Realm were managed: For she was a
Lady of an haughty and invincible spirit, and in the thirty second year of the
Kings reign, The birth of Prince Edward.
was delivered of a Princely Son called Edward: In which interim great
discontent arose among the Nobles and Peers of the Land, especially the Duke
of Somerset, and others of the Queens Counsel grew in great hatred, for the
giving up of Normandy by appointment: for which and other grievances, the Duke
of York (father to him who was after King Edward the fourth,) with other
confederate Lords, opposed the Queen, and her faction, of which mortal war
ensued.

The King being much instigated by this magnanimous Lady his Queen, The Queen
the instigator of all combustions.
accompanied with the Duke of Somerset, with a great army, took their journey
toward the Marches of Wales, being ascertained that the Duke of York, with
sundry other Lords, were up in Arms, who understanding of the Kings coming
with so great a power, The proceeding of the Duke of York
swarved from his Host, and took his way toward London, but because he
could not be received into the City, to refresh his people, he went over
Kingstone Bridge, and so into Kent, where on a place called Bremt heath he
embatteld himself: soon after came the King to Blacke-heath, and did the
like; these two Armies affronting each other, a motion was made to mediate a
peace betwixt them, to further which, to the Duke were sent the Bishops of
Winchester, and Elye, and the Earls of Warwick, and Salisbury, to whom the
answer was, that he intended no violence against the person of the King, A
Peace mediated betwixt the King and the Duke.
only to remoove from about him, some evil disposed persons, by whose means
his people was much oppressed, and the Commons greatly impoverished, the
chiefest of which was the Duke of Somerset, to satisfy whom, it was concluded
by the King, that he should be kept in durance to answer all such Articles, as
the Duke could object against him.

Upon which promise made by the King, the first day of March, being thursday,
the Duke broke up his Camp, and personally came to the Kings tent, where he
found the Duke of Sommerset at liberty, and the next attending on the King, The
Duke of York sent to the Tower.
and by the Queens means, the Duke of York was sent to London, where he
remained in a sort a prisoner, and more straightly had been kept, The Earl of
March soon to the Duke of York.
if present news had not come, that his Son Edward then Earl of Marsh, was
hastening up toward London, with a strong power of Welsh, and Marchmen, which
stroke so sudden a terror into the Queen and her Counsel, that the Duke
was set at large, having liberty to retire himself into his own country:
soon after by means of the Queen, Summerset created Captain of Ca^is.
the Duke of Summerset, was created Captain of Callis, which kindled a new
fire in the Yorkists, insomuch that the Duke being in the Marches of Wales,
called unto him the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, A new combustion.
with diverse other Lords, Knights, and Esquires, and sufficiently strengthened
himself, and in April, made what speed he could toward London.

Which hearing the King and the Queen, she suddenly caused, (using the Kings
name and Authority, in all things) a strong Army to be levied, entending to
conveigh the King Westward, without incountring the Duke of York. In which
were employed the Dukes of Summerset and Buckingham, Lords of the Queens party
the Earls of Stafford and Northumberland, the Lord Clifford and others, who
held their journey toward Saint Albones, which the Duke hearing coasted the
Country, and upon Thursday before Whitsunday: took one end of the Town, where
whilst motion of peace was treated on the one party, the Earl of Warwick with
the March-men, entered on the other, and skirmished violently against the Kings
people: The battle at Saint Al^ones
In conclusion, the day fell to the Yorkists, where that time was slain the
Duke of Sommerset, the Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Cl^fford, with
many other Noble Gentlemen: which victory thus obtained by the Duke, he with
great seeming honor and reverence, the morrow following, The Kings prison.

The Duke of York Protector.


conveyed the King to London, and lodged him in the Bishops palace, and
soon after by a Parliament held at Westminster, the Duke of York, was made
Protector of England, the Earl of Salisbury, Chancellor, and the Earl of
Warwick, Captain of Callis, and all persons (before) near unto the King,
remooved, and the Queen and her Counsel, who before ruled all, both King, and
land, utterly disabled for having voice in either: at all which her high Spirit
seemed nothing daunted.

But with some Lords, who secretly adhered unto her party, she so far persuaded
that in making the King insufficient, it was such a dishonor to him, and
disgrace to the Realm, York discharged of his Protectorship.
that by policy and friendship, she caused the Duke of York, to be
discharged of his Protectors place, and the Earl of Salisbury, from being
Chancellor, which was the cause of new combustion, and finding (as she
thought) the City of London, to favor more the Yorkists, then her faction,
she caused the King to remove thence to Coventry, whether the Duke with the
Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, were sent for, who in their way were so
ambusht, that with great difficulty they escaped from being surprised: an other
assembly of all the Lords, was appointed at London, where all of them were
richly accompanied, and strongly attended where a seeming atonement was made
betwixt them, for joy of which, upon our Ladies day in Lent, the King, the
Queen, and Lords of both parties, Procession to Paul's.
went in sollemne procession to Paul's.

But this smothered fire broke quickly into open flame, I will let pass many
of the circumstances, and come to the matter: The Duke of York knowing the
inveterate malice, which the Queen bore unto him: assembled his Friends, and
gathered a strong army of March-men and others, in the beginning of the thirty
eight year of the King, and strongly encamped himself at Ludlow; the Queen
also gathered like strength, to encounter the Duke, unto whose aid the Earl
of Warwick sent a strong band of men from Callis, Andrew Trollope.
in whose company one Andrew Trollop, who the night before the encounter, with
the entire company of those Callis soldiers, left the Dukes Host, and went
unto the Kings, where they were joyfully received, which much dismaide the
Yorkists, and the more because they were privy to all their counsel, Yorkes
flight and his Army dissolved.
wherefore upon mature deliberation, they resolved to fly and leave their
Camp standing, as if they had still kept the field: the Duke with his two
sons, and some few others fled into Wales, and so after into Ireland, and there
remained: the other Lords of his confederacy, took their way into Devonshire,
from thence they sailed into Garnesy, and after to Callis.

In the morning, when all this was known to the adverse party, there was
sending and running to all Ports, The Duchess of York prisoner, and Ludlow
spoiled.
and places, to surprise these Lords, but their pursuit came to late, so that
the Kings Army spoiled Ludlow, and the Castles, and took the Duchess of
York, and her children, and sent them to the Duchess of Buckingham, her
sister, then were all the Yorkists proclaimed Rebels, The Yorkists proclaimed
Traitors.
and Traitors, and the young Duke of Summerset made by the Queen, Captain of
Callis: but notwithstanding, all the Kings Authority joined with hers, he
could not be there received, which was the cause of many skirmishes, and much
blood shed, in which, though the Lords lost many men, yet they came daily so
thick unto them, out of diverse parts of England, that their loss was not
perceived; In which interim one John Dinham, was sent with certain ships, to
set upon the Kings Navy at Portsmouth, John Dinham surprised the Kings Navy.
who sped him so well that he took the Lord Rivers in his bed, with the Lord
Skales his son, with other rich preys, taking of the Kings Navy what ships
them best liked; which some conjecture was not without the consent of the
Mariners, who bore a singular affection to the Earl of Warwick.

With part of these ships the Earl of Warwick sailed into Ireland, to
confer with the Duke of York, about their re-entry into the Land, and
returned into Callis with safety, in which time a Parliment was held at
Coventry, by Authority whereof, the Duke of York with the other Lords were
attainted and their Lands and goods ceased to the Kings use, then provision was
made to defend the Havens, and Ports, and at Sandwich was ordained a new
strength, under the command of one Sir Simon Mountford, that none should pass
unto the aid of the Lords, of which they having intelligence, sent out another
Navy un^o Sandwich, and after long fight with the said Mountford, Simon
Mountford beheaded by the Yorkists.
took him, and at a place called Ris-banke, smote off his head: after which
the confederate Lords seeing what power they had with them, and knowing that
many hearts in England adhered to their faction, after they had set Callis in
order, they prepared for England, and landed at Dover, and marching through
Kent, The York^sts land in England.
came to London the second day of July, where having well refreshed their
people, they sped them toward the King, who was then at Coventry, and awaited
there with a sufficient army.

The battle at Northampton.
Who marching as far as Northampton, the ninth day of July both hosts
incountred, where betwixt them was a blooddy battle fought, but in the end, the
victory fell to the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, and the Kings host were
utterly defeated, The Kings host discomfitted.
and many of his Noblemen slain, amongst which were the Duke of Buckingham,
the Earl of Shrewsbury, the Vicount Bewmount, Lord Egremond and others, and
the King taken in the field: The King taken.
after which victory by the Lords obtained, they brought the King (still
keeping his estate) up to London, and lodged him in the Bishops palace, and
sent news of their happy success to the Duke of York who was at that time in
Ireland: A Parliament was then called in the name of the King, and holden at
Westminster, during which, the Duke of York, upon the tenth day of October
came to the City of Westminster, and lodged him in the Kings palace, York
lodges in the Kings Palace.
upon which a rumor rose that Henry should be deposed, and the Duke of York
made King.

Whilst these things were thus in agitation, the Duke came one day unto the
Parliament Chamber, York lays claim to the Crown.
and in the presence of the Lords, sat him down in the Kings Chair, and
boldly made claim to the Crown, as his rightful inheritance. At which the
Lords began to murmr, as well his friends, as others, and after the matter
was long disputed, the Duke was persuaded to renounce that claim, during the
life of King Henry: In all which time the Queen, whom all these terrors could
not daunt, The Queens magnanimity.
kept her self with the Lords of her party, in the North, and using the Kings
name, gathered a strong power, which (as she protested in the front of her
Camp) was to be revenged on the Kings Rebels, and Enemies: There is one thing
worthy observation, that during this Competitorship betwixt the King and the
Duke, though they lodged both within one palace, yet would he for no
intercession or entreaty, Yorks pride.
once visit the King, which could be little less interpreted, then an haughty,
and ambitious insolence.

To proceed, it was after concluded by the Authority of the whole Parliament,
The decree of the Parliament.
that King Henry should continue King all his natural life, but after his
death, Prince Edward his son to be made incapable of that Royal dignity, but
the Duke and his Heirs to be Kings; and he in the mean time to be made
Protector, and Regent of the Land and if at any time the King of his own free
will, were disposed to resign, it should be to the Duke, if he then lived, or
else to his Heirs after him: which on the Saturday next, being the ninth day
of November, was proclaimed through the City. And further, because Queen
Margaret, with the Prince her Son, the Dukes of Summerset, and Exeter, with
diverse other Lords, kept her still in the North, and came not up at the Kings
sending, it was concluded by the Lords there present, that the Duke of York
with the Earl of Salisbury, and others, should raise an Army to fetch in the
said Queen, and Lords, who hearing of their coming met with him near unto
Wakefield, where was fought betwixt them a sharp and bloody battle, The battle
of Wakefield. The Duke of York slain.
in which the Duke of York was slain with his young Son, the Earl of
Rutland, with Sir Thomas Nevell, son to the Earl of Salisbury, and the Earl
himself was taken alive, and soon after beheaded.

It is said that the Duke of York being sore wounded, was brought before the
Queen, who in great derision and scorn, placed him on a molehill, instead of
a Throne, and put a Crown of paper on his head for a Diadem, and after she had
sufficiently taunted, his ambition, caused him to be slain; this done with her
victorious host, she made what speed she could toward London, and at Saint
Albones was met by the Earl of Warwick and the Duke of Northfolke (who
brought the King with them to the field, Another battle at Saint Albons.
where after a strong fight, upon a Shrovetuesday in the morning, the Duke, and
Earls Army were routed, and the King again taken and brought unto the Queen.
Prince Edward made Knight.
The same day she caused her son Edward to be made Knight, with other
Gentlemen to the number of thirty persons.

The Queen being now in her former supreme command, and thinking to sway all
things as before, at her own pleasure: news were brought that Edward Earl of
March, eldest Son to the Duke of York, Edward Earl of March raises new
forces.
and the Earl of Warwick were met, with a great strength of March-men, and
others, and were speeding toward London; which tidings compelled the King and
Queen, to retire them with their Army Northward, the other taking this
advantage entered the City, the first week in Lent; to whom resorted great
numbers of Gentlemen, from the South and East, then was a great Counsel called
of the Lords, spiritual and temporal, who after many argumen^s debated, gave
up this sentence, that forasmuch as King Henry contrary to his honor, and
promise at the last parliament made, and also that he was reputed unable and
insufficient to govern the Realm, by their general assents he was thought
worthy to be deposed, and discharged of all royal dignity. Henry thought
worthy to be deposed.


Then incontinently by the Authority of the said Counsel, and consent of the
Commons, there present: Edward the eldest son to the Duke of York, with an
unanimous suffrage was elected King, Edward Earl of March made King.
and being royally accompanied to Westminster, was invested in the Throne, and
took possion of the Crown, thence by the Clergy, he was conveyed in
sollemne procession to Saint Edmunds shrine, and there offered as King,
receiving the Homage and ^ealty, of all the Lords there present, etc. Then was
great provision made for the North, against the Queen and her partisans, the
Earl of Warwick, upon a Saturday, in the beginning of March, with a great
puissance of people, departed from London Northward, and on the Wednesday
following, the Kings Infantry followed, and upon Friday next after, being the
tenth of March, the King rode through the City, with a great band of men,
passing Bishopsgate, and so holding on his journey, sped him so well, that he
with the rest of his Forces, met with their enemies, at a Village, The bloody
battle at Towton, or Shirborne.
nine miles and an half on this side York, called Towton or Shirborne.

Upon Palm sunday he gave them battle, which was fought with such eagerness
and fury, that in the field, and in the chase were slain of the Queens party,
thirty thousand men, besides those of special note and name, amongst which are
numbered the Earl of Northumberland, the Earl of Westmerland, the Lord
Clifford, the Lord Egremond, Sir Andrew Trollop, (who had before revolted with
his Callis Soldiers, from the Yorkists at Ludlow) with diverse others, there
were taken also the Earl of Willshire, or Devonshire, who was sent to York,
and there after beheaded, Henry with his Queen fly into Scotland.
of which bloody conflict, and irrecoverable loss, Henry and Margaret, having
notice, they with their son Edward, the Duke of Summerset, the Lord Rosse,
and others, in all have fled toward Scotland, and the King upon the morrow,
with much of his people entered into York, and there kept his Easter.

Thus the most unfortunate Prince Henry, (of whom it is truly observed, Henry
in all his actions most unfortunate.
that he was never personally in any battle, but it was lost) when he had
reigned full thirty eight years, six months and odd days, and that
Heroycall Lady Margaret, (whom even this last disaster could not daunt) was
forced to fly, whilst King Edward having settled all the affairs in the North,
under the charge of the Earl of Warwick, visited all the Countries, South and
East, and about the beginning of June, came to his Manor of Sheene, (since
called Richmond) in which time of his abode there, provision was made for his
royal Coronation. Then upon the twenty seventh of the same month being
Friday, he rode to the Tower of London, attended by the Lord Major and his
Brethren, and upon the morrow being Saturday, he made twenty eight Knights of
the Bathe, and four more after: the same afternoon he was with great
solemnity conveyed through the City, The Coronation of King Edward, the fourth
of that name.
those two and thirty Knights riding before him in blew gowns, and hoods, and
upon the morrow being Sunday, and Saint Peter's day, with great triumph Crowned,
and annoyn^ed by the Archbishop of Canterbury, etc.

Queen Margarets Army.
In the second year of this King, Margaret late Queen, came out of France into
Scotland, and thence into England, with an Army of Frenchmen, and Scots, of
which King Edward having notice, he sped him into the North, with a strong
Army, at the rumor of which (by reason of the cowardice of her Soldiers, she
was forced to disband and fly, Margaret distressed by Sea.
and took a small ship, intending to sail into France, but by reason of a
great tempest, she was forced to leave her own bark, and take a small
Fisher-boate, by means of which she landed at Barwicke, and came unto the
Scottish King, where she heard her bark perished in the tempest in which she
had great riches and treasure: notwithstanding, at her instigation, the year
after, she with her Husband invaded England, with a great Army of Scottish
men; which hearing, then the Lord Montague, (Brother to the Earl of Warwick)
he assembled the Northern men and gave them battle at a place called Exham,
Exham field.
and there routed them, chasing Henry so nere that he surprised certain of his
followers, habited in Iackets of blew Velvet, garnished with Crowns of gold,
and fretted with pearl, and other rich stones; notwithstanding his so narrow
escape, in the end of the same year, Henry took Prisoner.
he was taken in a wood in the North Country, by one named Cantlow, and
presented to the King, who sent him as Prisoner to the Tower, where he remained
a long time after.

Some few months before this, King Edward at a place called Graston, near
unto Stony Stratford, King Edward marryeth Elizabeth Gray.
upon the first day of May, secretly espoused Elizabeth, late wife of Sir John
Gray, Knight, who was slain at Towton field near unto York, at which
marriage were present none save themselves, the Duchess of Bedford, her
Mother, two Gentlewoman, and one Gentleman, who the next year after, upon
Whitsunday, was with great sollemnity Crowned at Westminster, which marriage
was the occassion of much trouble in the Land, of which I am loath long to
insist, as unwilling to meddle with any impertinences, not genuine with the
particular actions, and fortunes of the Queen Margaret, the subject now in
hand.

Yet thus far I must travel in the History, to inform you that the Earl of
Warwick, was before sent into France, to treat about a marriage betwixt the
King and the Lady Bova, The Lady Bova.
who by reason of the former match, thought himself much disparaged and
dishonored: therefore he withdrew himself from the King, and confedered unto
him the Duke of Clarens, who had before married his daughter, and
notwithstanding the King sent peaceably unto them, as desiring reconsilement,
yet they sailed into France, soliciting the aid of Lewis the eleventh, who by
reason of the former affront (concerning the Lady Bova) gladly condiscended to
their request, where they consulted with Queen Margaret, and the Earl of
Oxford, The Duke of Clarens, and Earl of Warwick proclaimed Rebels.
for their return into England, in which mean space, King Edward commanded
them to be proclaimed as Rebels, and Traitors, throughout the Realm.

In the tenth year of the King, and the month of Sceptember, the Duke of
Clarence, the Earls of Warwick, Pembrooke, and Oxford, with others landed at
Dertmouth in Devonshire, and made Proclamations in the name of King Henry,
Henry again proclaimed King.
to whom much people desirous of innovation resorted, and drew toward the
King, (then being in the North,) who having with him, but small strength, and
(of them too) those whom he durst scarce trust, he with the Duke of Gloucester,
the Lord Hastings, and a few others, took the next way toward the Washes in
Lincolneshire, and with great danger, not without the loss of some of his
company, King Edward flies the land.
got over into Flanders, and sped thence to Charles Duke of Burgoine, who had
before married his sister, where he rested for a season, mean space the Duke
of Clarence, and the other Lords drew nere unto the City, and after rode unto
the Tower, and withal honor and reverence, Henry received as King.
brought out King Henry, and conveyed him to Saint Paul's, and lodged him in
the Bishops palace who was generally admitted, and taken for King, through the
whole Land.

And now was great expectation for the landing of Queen Margaret, Strange
alteration in the state.
and her Son Prince Edward, and great provision made through all the coast,
to oppose King Edwards landing, who in a Parliament then called, Gloucester, who
was after Richard the third.
was proclaimed usurper of the Crown, and the Duke of Gloucester his younger
Brother Traitor, and both of them attainted by the said Parliament, then the
Earl of Warwick rid to Dover, to have received Queen Margaret, but was
disappointed, for the wind was to her so contrary, that she lay at the Sea
side, tarrying for a convenient passage, from November till April, so that he
was forced to return without effecting his purpose.

Edward landeth in England
In the beginning of which month April, King Edward landed in the North, with
a small number of Flemmings, and others, all which could scarce m^ke up a
thousand, and sped him toward York, making his Proclamations in the name of
King Henry, He makes his Proclamations in the name of King Henry.
and protested to the people as he went, that he came for no other intent but
to claim his ancient inheritance, the Dukedom of York; notwithstanding
which, the City denyde him admittance, till he took an oath, which having
done, Edward possesses York.
they opened their gates unto him, when after he had refreshed his Soldiers,
he held his way on toward London; and having passed (either favor of fair
words) the Lord Marquess Montacut, who lay with an Army in the way to
interdict his journey, seeing that his strength was greatly increased, and that
the people daily flockt unto him, he then made proclamations in his own name
as King of England, and held on his way to London, where he was releeved, and
the same day he rode to Saint Paul's Church, Henry surprised by Edward.
and offered at the Altar, which done he went to the Bishops palace, where he
found King Henry, almost alone, for all the Lords, and others, to save their
own lives, had utterly forsaken him.

Then King Edward lodged himself, where King Henry lay, and committed him to
strict keeping, and rested himself till Easter Eve, who hearing of his
brothers coming, and the other Lords with him, with a strong host, unto Saint
Albones, he sped him thither, and lay that night at Barnet, whether the Duke
of Clarence, (contrary to his oath made to the French King) came with all the
strength he had, and reconciled himself to his Brother: at which the Lords
were much daunted, yet by the comfort and encouragement of the Earl of Oxford,
The Earl of Oxford leads the Van.
they marched on to Barnet, (the foresaid Earl leading the van) and there they
strongly embattelled themselves.

Upon the morrow being the foureteenth of April and Easterday, very early in
the morning, the two hosts defied each other, upon the one party were two
Kings, Edward and Henry, (who brought him with him to the battle, The Battle at
Barnet.
) Clarence, and Glossester, the Lord Barnes, etc. And upon the other was the
Duke of Exeter, the two Earls of Warwick and Oxford, the Marquess
Mountacute, with many other men of note, and name: In which fight, the Earl of
Oxford quit himself so manfully, that he quite routed that part of the field
which he set upon, insomuch that news was carried to London, King Edward had
lost the day, and if his Soldiers, had kept their ranks, and not fallen to
rifling, most likely it had been so. But after long and cruel fight King,
Edward got the victory, Lords slain in the battle.
having slain of his enemies, the Marquess Mountacute, the Earl of Warwick
his brother, with many others: (on the Kings party, the Lord Barnes, and upon
both parties, to the number of fifteen hundred and upwards: the same after
noone came King Edward to London, and made his offering at Saint Paul's, and
after rode to Westminster, and there lodged; and King Henry was again
committed to the Tower, where he remained till his death.

And now great preparation was made against the landing of Queen Margaret, and
her son: who all this while had been nere to the Sea side, expecting a
wind, which after blew for her, Queen Margaret landeth in England.
most infortunately: yet was she safely landed, with an Army of French men,
and others, and entered so far within the Realm, till she came to a place
called Teuxbury, where the King met with her, The battle at Teuxbury.
and after some resistance, distressed and chased her whole company, in which
conflict many were slain, and their bodies found dead in the place, Margaret
with the Prince her son taken.
and she her self with her son Edward, both taken Prisoners, and brought to
the King: whom she fronted with a bold and an undaunted countenance, and
forgetting what she was then, a prisoner: Her magnanimity.
boldly spoke to him, as what she had been, a commanding Princess; which the
King not having the patience to endure, commanded her from his presence.

The Prince also, the true heir to his Mothers magnanimous spirit, being not
only reprooved, but somewhat villified by the King, whose blood was not yet
cooled, since the late battle, replied unto him in a language, best suiting his
birth, and the Son of such a Mother, at which King Edward being highly
moved, and beyond all patience incensed, (having then his Gantlet on) (for he
had not yet put of his armor) struck him upon the face, Prince Edward
murdered by the Duke of Gloucester.
which blow was no sooner given, but he was instantly dragged from the Kings
presence, and by the Duke of Gloucester (as same reports) most tyrannously
murdered, and this happened upon the fourth day of May.

When the Queen heard of the death of her Son, and the manner thereof, the
more to aggravate it, great (no question) was her grief, but much greater, and
altogether inexpressible, her rage and fury, not having power to revenge her
self upon her enemies: this more tormenting her, then the durance of the King
her husband, her own captivity, or the loss of her kingdom, yet outwardly
she is said to have borne all these disasters, with an incomparable
magnanimity: who was first conveyed to London, and from thence, (with small
attendance, Queen Margaret sent into her own Country.

The death of Henry.


and less estate) sent over into her own Country, and upon Assention Eve next
ensuing, the body of Henry the sixth late King, was brought unreverently from
the Tower, through the high streets of the City, to Saint Paul's, and there
left for that night, and the next morrow with bills and glaves, (as he was the
day before) brought from the Tower thither, conveyed to Chertsey, and without
any sollemnity at all, there interred, His burial.
of the manner of whose death there be diverse reports, but the common fame
went, that he was stabbed to death with a dagger, by the bloody hand of Richard
Duke of Gloucester.

QVEENE ELIZABETH.
THis Virgin Sovereign of our Maiden Isle.
On whom blind Fortune did both frown, and smile
Great Honor, and great Horror, did endure,
Not safe, being Subject, not being Queen, secure;
Examine both: It is not easily guest,
In which of them she did demean her best;
And of those double Fates, it is hard to know
In which, she did most dangers undergo.
Had I more heads then Spanish Gerion, he
Who to one body had no less them three,
More hands then great Briareus (to be wondered)
Whose active skill (at once) could moove an hundred,
In every one a pen: As many eyes,
As Juno's Argus, waking; to devise.
Of her perfections only; Head, Hands, Sight,
(In striving but to pattern her aright)
All, (though in their full vigor) I should sinde,
Struck on the sudden, Stupid, Dull, and Blind.
Chaste Virgin, Royal Queen, beloved and feared,
Much on the Earth admired, to Heaven indeer'd.
Single, and singular, (without another)
A Nurse to Belgia, and to France; a Mother
Potent by Land, sole Sovereign of the Maine,
Antagonist to Rome, the scourge of Spain.


THE LAST OF THE THREE WOMEN WORTHIES AMONGST THE CHRISTIANS, CALLED ELIZABETH,
QVEEN OF ENGLAND, FRANCE, AND IRELAND, etc.
AS the most famous Painter of his Time, Apelles, to frame the picture of one
Venus, A Character of Queen Elizabeth.
had a^ once exposed to his view an hundred of the most choice and exquisite
Virgins, of Greece, to take from one the smoothest brow, from a second, the
most sparkling eye: a third, the Rosiest colloured cheek, a fourth the best
Corrall like lip; a fifth, the sweetest dimpled chinne: a sixth the daintiest
swelling breast, a seventh, the whitest hand: from another, the most delicate
foot, and so of the rest: and all to make the exact portrature of that
Emergent goddess; so in the accurate expression of this rare Heroicke
Elizabeth, should I peruse all the ancient, and Authenticke Histories, and out
of them select the lives of the most virtuous Ladies, for their rare and
admirable indowments, commended to posterity, and perpetuity; taking and
extr^cting from them severally, those sundry gifts and graces by which they
were remarkeably eminent above others, (whether Piety, or Virgin^ll purity;
Beauty, and bounty; Majesty, and magnanimity; Language, and learning;
polliticke Government, or practice of goodness; pity of forra^gne distressed
nations, or indulgence over her own Natives, etc.) Nay, what praecelling
virtue soever, was commendable in any one particular, or all in general, may,
without flattery be justly conferred on her.

She was the Daughter of King Henry, the eighth of that name; Her descent.
and of his second wife, the Lady Anne Bullaine, first created Marchioness of
Pembrooke, and then espoused to the King, the five and twentyeth day of
January, 1533. and upon Whitsunday next following at Westminster crowned
Queen, the seventh of September after, Her birth.
she was delivered of a fair Daughter, to the great and unspeakeable joy,
both of the Prince, and people, she was Christened the third day next ensuing,
Her Baptism.
being Wednesday, in the Friars Church in Greenewich, in a Font of silver, The
old Duchess of Northfolke held the Babe: Her Godfather was Thomas Cranmer,
Archbishop of Canterbury, and Metropolitan of all England, her Godmothers,
the Duchess of Northfolke, and the Marquionesse of Dorset, both Widows.

Not long after the birth of this young Princess, An oath of Allegiance taken.
a general oath of Allegiance past through the Kingdom to support and
maintain the successive heirs, descending from the bodies of the King, and
Queen Anne, lawfully begotten, in the possession of the Crown and Scepter,
and all Imperial honors to them belonging, Katherine the mother, and Mary the
daughter disabled of all^ regal claim.
by which Katherine of Spain his former wife, and the Princess Mary their
daughter were disabled to lay any claim at all to the Royal dignity: and for
this cause were the two young Ladies brought up a part, which might be a reason
also, why there was such distance in their dispositions.

I have further read of this young Lady Elizabeth, that there were pregnant
hopes of her, Under what Constellation she was borne.
even in her Mothers conception, Mercury being the star which was at that
season most predominant, whose influence is sharpness of wit, and ingenuity;
Jupiter, at her birth being in conjunction with Venus; and Soi, with a
favorable Aspect, shining on either, a doubtless presage, that the Infant
borne under that Constellation, should be fair and fortunate, powerful in
war, yet a Patroness of peace, excellent in Learning, exquisite in language,
in life honored, in death lamented: Her Infancy.
who in her tender Infancy was said, almost as soon to speak as to go, and
that her words had sense, as soon as sound, and not being full four years of
age, Her Childhood,
used every morning when she opened her eyes, to ask for her book, before
she called for bread, and at all other times of the day was observed to be
more ready to pray, then to prattle.

Queen Annes life being taken away by a violent death, Queen Anne dead.
the morrow after, the King was married to his third wife, the Lady Jane
Seymer, daughter to Sir John Seymer, who on the twelfth day of October, Prince
Edward borne. Created Prince of Wales.
In the year of grace 1537. was at Hampton Court delivered of a Son, whose
Mother dyed the second day after, much lamented and pittyed, and the young
Prince called Edward, was the eighteenth of the same month created Prince of
Wales, and Duke of Cornwall, and Chester: the Father being so joyful of his
Son, that he cast a neglectfull eye on his two former daughters, Mary and
Elizabeth, but the later of the two was in the first grace, for when Mary was
separated from coming near the Court, Elizabeth was admitted to keep the
young Prince company, and from his Tutors received all such necessary
documents, that by her childish dictating unto him, he might be the more
capable to understand them, and such was their proxinity in blood, An alternate
affection between the Prince and his sister Elizabeth.
that it begot in them a mutual and alternate affection, insomuch that he no
sooner knew her, but he began to acknowledge her, neither was their love the
less, coming from one loins, then had they issued from one and the same
womb, being equally fortunate and unfortunate, as having one Royal Father,
but either of them to be deprived of a mother, and in that too, having a kind
of mutual correspondence, that though her Mother suffered by the sword, and
his dyed in Child bed, yet both endured violent and enforced deaths.

To cut off circumstance: in the year one thousand five hundred forty six,
The death of King Henry the eighth.
and of his reign the thirty eighth, King Henry the eighth, expired the 28. of
December, and was the sixteenth day of February, next following, with great
solemnity buried at Windsor.

And upon the one and thirtyeth day of January, Prince Edward procl^imed King.
was Prince Edward proclaimed King over all his Fathers Dominions and Realms
by the style of Edward, the sixth of that name, and on the nineteenth of
February, he rode with his Uncle, Sir Edward Seymor, Duke of Summerset, and
Lord Protector through the City of London. And the day following was anointed
and Crowned King, at Westminster, by Thomas Cra^mer. Archbishop of Canterbury,
and Metropolitan of all England, who that day administered the holy Sacraments,
etc.

The King was no sooner Crowned, but the Lady Elizabeth gave way to the present
state, His Coronation.
neither continued they in that frequent familiarity as before, for whereas in
former time she loved him as a Brother, her discretion now taught her to honor
him as her King, for though he was a Prince of great meekness and modesty:
for that Royal Majesty, which makes the difference betwixt the Son and the
Father, distinguishes betwixt the Sister and the Brother. for they which had
lived in great familiarity, now meet not but at distance, which proceeded not
from his will, but the Majesty of state, the death of the Father which raised
him to the Crown: Her retirement into the Country.
Remooved her from the Court into the Country, in which retirement, being nobly
attended by diverse voluntary Ladies, and Gentlewomen, as also her own train
and household servants, she led there (though a more solitary) yet a more safe
and contented life, and being there settled, she received, to add unto her
revenue, many private gifts, with often visits sent from the King, who was very
indulgent over her honor, and health.

Scarce was she full fourteen years of age, when her second Uncle Seymor,
Brother to the Lord Protector, and Lord High Admiral of England brought her a
Princely suitor, Her first suitor.
richly habited, and nobly attended, who after much importunity, both by
himself and friends, finding himself by her modest repulses, and cold
answers, crossed in his purpose, His name is conceald.
settled in his mind, though not satisfied in her denial, retired himself
into his Country.

The first unwelcome motion of marriage, was a cause why she studied a more
retired life, as being seldom seen abroad, and if at any time the King her
Brother had sent to enjoy her company at Court, Her Virgin modesty.
she made there no longer stay, then to know his Highness pleasure, and make
tender of her duty, and service; and that done, with all convenient speed,
took her journey back into the Country, where she spent the entire season of
her Brothers reign; who the sixth day of July, in the sixteenth year of hi^
age, and the seventh of his Princely government, The death of King Edward the
sixth.
departed the world at Greenewich.

The two Uncles of the King (the only Supporters, on which the safety of his
Minority leaned) being cut off by violent deaths, It was a general fear,
through out the Kingdom, that the Nephew should not survive long after them,
which accordingly happened: for the two great Dukes of Northumberland and
Suffolk, being in the prime and sole authority, concluded a match betwixt the
Lord Guildford Dudley, Son to Northumberland, and the Lady Gray, Daughter to
Suffolk, thinking thereby to disable both the Sisters, The Lady Jane Gray
proclaimed Queen.
Mary and Elizabeth, from any claim to the Crown: and therefore the fourth
day after the Kings death, the Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen.

The Lady Mary being then at Framingham was much perplexed with that news,
especially when she heard it was done by the consent of the whole Nobili^y: to
whom the Suffolk men assembled themselves, offering her their volentary
assistance, The Duke of Northumberland sent against the Lady Mary.
to attain unto her lawful inheritance; which bruited at Wort, The Duke of
Northumberland, having a large and strong Commission granted him, from the body
of the whole Counsel, raised an Army to suppress both her and her
Assassinates, which was no sooner advanced, but the Lords repenting of so great
an injury done to the late Kings Sister, ^ent a Countermaund after him and when
he thought himself in his greatest security, the nobility forsaking him, and
the Commons abandoni^g him: being at Cambridge, saving his sons and some few
servants, he was left alone, where he proclaimed the Lady Mary Queen, in the
open Market place: Notwithstanding, he was arrested in Kings College, of high
Treason, Northumberland beheaded
and from thence was brought up to the Tower, where upon the Hill, at the
common Execution place, he lost his head, the twelfth of August next ensuing,
the like fate happened to the Duke of Suffolk, The deaths of Suffolk, the
Lady Ian^, and Gu^lford Dudley.
not many weeks after, as also to the sweet young couple, the Lord Guilford
Dudly, and the Lady Jane Gray, of whose much lamented deaths, I cannot now
insist.

The Lady Mary was proclaimed by the Suffolkemen Queen at Framingham, Mary
proclaimed Queen.
the twentyeth of July: and the third of August next, went by water to take
possession of the Tower: her sister, the Lady Elizabeth, (whom, she had before
sent for out of the Country) accompanying her in the Barge. from the Tower she
rode through London, toward the Palace at Westminster: The Lady Elizabeth to
whom all this time she showed a pleasant and gracious countenance, rid in a
Chariot next after her, drawn by six white Horses trapt in cloth of Silver,
the Open Chariot being covered over with the same, in which sat, only (to
accompany her) the Lady Anne of Cleave. The first day of October, Her
Coronation.
Mary was crowned Queen at Westminster, by Stephen Gardener Bishop of
Winchester; the Lady Elizabeth being most Princesse-like attended, and present
at her sisters Coronation.

I come now to her troubles, The troubles of the Lady Elizabeth.
and notwithstanding her many and miraculous dangers and deliverances being an
absolute Princess, yet greater were the difficulties she past being a
Prisoner, then those the which the Pope menac'st her with his Bulls abroad: Her
danger greater in her solitude then in her soveraigntie.
now the Popes agents seek to supplant her with their power at home, and then
her adversaries were Alians, now her opposites are natives. Then foreign
Kings sought to invade her, now a modern Queen labors to entrap her, they
strangers, she a sister: She lived then at freedom and without their
jurisdiction, The reasons.
she lives now a captive subject to an incensed sisters indignation; she was
then attended by her Nobility and grave Counselors; she has now none to
converse with her, but Keepers and Jaylours: she in her soveraigntie never
stirred abroad without a strong guard of tall Yeomen and Gentlemen Pentioners;
she now is kept within close prisoner, waited on only by rude and unmannerly
white and black coat Soldiers.

But having before published a tractate of this excellent Lady, entitled from
her cradle to her Crown, I will now only give you a brief nomination of
these passages most pertinent to this project now in hand, referring the Reader
for his better satisfaction to the discourse before remembered.

Winchester infidiateth her life.
Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and other Romists, offended with her
Religion, labored not only to supplant her from the Queens love, but (if
possible) to deprive her of her life, possessing the Queen that she was
consenting unto Sir Thomas Wyats insurrection; therefore a strict Commission
was sent down to Ashridge, where she then sojourned and lay extremely sick,
where the Lords, the Commissioners besieged the house with Soldiers, entered
her Bedchamber without leave. Doctor Guin and Doctor Wendiffe.
And notwithstanding two learned Doctors affirmed she could not be removed
without danger of life, the next morning hoysted her into an Horslitter toward
London: Being arived at Court, for fourteen days confined to her chamber, no
acquaintance to confer with her, no friend to comfort her; whereafter she was
strictly examined and sharply reprooved, and notwithstanding nothing could be
proved against her, commanded to the Tower by water, Her committing to the
Tower.
and at such a time when in shooting the Bridge, the Barge grated against the
Arches, being in great danger of splitting: her landing at the Traitors
stairs, Her hard usage.
her churlish entertainment, her keeping close prisoner, her Family dissolved,
her servants discharged, her frights by day, her terrors by night: her often
examination to entangle her in her speeches: her very diet served into her by
grooms and common Soldiers; her conducting from one place to another, no day
without threatening of danger, Her infinite dangers.
no night but menacing death: her very lodgings fierd about her ears (as at
Woodstocke.) And after all these miseries and far more inexpressible
calamities, her own sister to set her hand to a warrant for her execution, out
of all which, notwithstanding, God in his infinite mercy miraculously delivered
her.

Thus I have given you a small taste of her troubles, in all which as the
difficulties were almost inevitable, Her great patience.
so her patience was altogether incomparable, neither though by means of King
Phillip (mediating for her in her troubles, King Phillip favors the Lady
Elizabeth.
) though her liberty was the greater, were her fears any whit the less all
the time of her sisters reign, to the end of which I will come as briefly as I
can.

A great rumor ran through the Land that the Queen was with child by King
Philip, An imposterous birth.
and the time of her reckoning being come, it was given forth she was brought
to bed of a son, and such an one as it was suspected was ready prepared, of
which Philip being informed, he would not depart the chamber at the time of her
delivery, King Phillip discovers the plot.
by which means the plot took no effect, yet this young heir was so voyced
abroad that the Bells rung merrily in London, and great triumphs were made at
Antwarpe and other places: Triumphs for the supposed heir.
some said she never conceived at all, others gave out that she was with
child, but the Abortive miscarried, others reported she had only a Timpany, and
some that it was only rumoured for policy: The truth is King Philip seeing
himself frustrate of an heir, King Phillips departure out of the Land.
upon the foureteenth of September took leave of the Queen, and went over to
visit his father the Emperor, and to take possession of the Low Countries, to
her great grief, whom (as many were of opinion) he but little affected,
staying there a year and six months: His return.
And after at his return back he was met by the Queen at Dover, and thence
brought through London with as great state and solemnity as at a Coronation.

Observations concerning Queen Mary's reign.
It is observed that Queen Mary's reign was the shortest of all Kings since
the Conquest (save Richard the third, and that more Christian blood was spilt
in that small time then had been (in case of Religion) in any one Kings
reigns since Lucius the first establisher of Christianity in England. In the
latter end of her reign Callis was lost, Callis lost.
which two hundred and eleven years had belonged to the Crown of England: It
was first won by Edward the third, (the eleveth King from William the
Conqueror) who had besieged it some few months, it was lost by Mary, being the
eleventh from Edward, in eight days which when she heard, she said; The loss
of Callis is written in my heart, and therein may be read, when my body shall
be dissected.

Her conception failing, great dearth in the Land reigning, much harm done by
thunders on shore, and by fire on her Royal Fleet by Sea, home troubles,
foreign losses, King Philips absence, and unkindnesse. These with other
discontents brought her into a burning Fever, The death of Queen Mary.
of which she dyed at Saint James near Westminster the seventeenth of
November, Anno. 1558. after she had reigned five years four months and
eleven days, having lived forty two years, nine months, and six days, and
lies buried in a Chapel in the Minster of Saint Peter's, without any monument
or other remembrance.

The same day that Queen Mary dyed, Lady Elizabeth proclaimed.
the Lady Elizabeth in the twenty fourth year, second month, and tenth day
of her age remooved from Hatfield to the Charterhouse, from whence she was
royally attended to the Tower, and the foureteenth of the same month passed
from thence through the City of London toward Westminster: I omit the stately
Pagents and presented in the way to this her inaguration (which would ask a
large expression) to conclude the next day following being the fifteenth she
was with all solemnity anointed and crowned. Her Coronation.


I proceed with the beginning of her reign; How the state stood in the
beginning of her reign.
when the state was not only much weakened but greatly afflicted, having many
enemies and few friends, notwithstanding with a dauntlesse and heroic spirit
she exposed the most potent Philip King of Spain and of the Low Countries her
brother in Law, upon the installing his great Grandfather Ferdinando, whose
daughter Katherine (by the Popes authority had been before espowsed to two
natural brothers, Prince Arthur and Henry, so he likewise by the like
dispensation endeavored to marry with two sisters, first Mary and after
Elizabeth: King Phillip a suitor to marry Queen Elizabeth.
but mauger all the dangers depending upon her denial, abhorring in her chaste
reservations any such incestuous contract, though he pretended the connivence
at least, if not the full approbation of the sea of Rome, by refusing the match
made him her public and professed enemy, which after broake out into defiance,
and the publication of open wars.

A second observable thing was, that the French King Henry the second, having
married his son Francis the Dolphin to Mary Queen of Scotland, (moved by
the house of Guise) had interlaced the Arms of England with those of Scotland,
Great prepa^ation of the French to invade England.
proclayming Mary his Queen and wife the indubitate heir to the Crown of
England, alleging for their color that Elizabeth, A weak ground to support
so great a title.
in regard she stood at that time convicted by the Pope of heresy was
incapable of the Royal Crown and dignity: thus animated by the Guisians,
they sent their Armies into Scotland with a constant assurance that as soon as
Scotland was but entered, Sebastian Marteguinus two forward.
England was as good as conquered: in so much that Sebastianus Marteguinus a
young man of the family of Luxenburg having the command of a thousand foot
could hardly be diswaded from subduing England first, and then to retire
himself for his pleasure into Scotland after.

Thus we see her Majesty not only threatened, but ready to be invaded on all
sides by three puissant and spleenefull enemies, Spain, France and Scotland
combine against Queen Elizabeth.
Spain, France and Scotland: The state by her predecessors Edward and Mary
mightily distracted, and much indebted, the treasure quite exhausted, Her
debilities.
the Frontier town of Barwaick lying unfortified; Callis the last year of her
sister dishonorably lost. Her subjects in Religion divided, her kingdom
without strength naked of Soldiers, and unfurnisht of Armor: notwithstanding
all which defects, difficulties and incombrances, she managed all her affairs
with that prudence and masculine spirit that manger King Philip who had then
the entire government of the Low Countries, she furnished her kingdom with
Armor and ammunition out of Germany, Her prudent preparations.
provided herself of tormentary Engines fit for war; caused Brass and Iron
Ordinance to be cast, Calievers and Muskets to be prepared, Gunpouder before
fetched from foreign Countries to be made at home, strengthened Barwick, then
weak and undefensible, built a strong and well accommodated Navy, fortified
all her Ports and Havens, bred and encouraged noble and brave spirits, making
them fit for action, so that in a short season before her great enemies were
well aware, she was not only able to maintain a defensive but make an
offensive war, being ever as ready to maintain the causes of others
oppressed, as to support her own engaged.

I pass to the fourth year of her reign in which Arthur Poole, Arthur Poole
encouraged by the Guisians, etc.
with his brothers descended from George Duke of Clarens, confedered with one
Anthony Fortescue, who had married their sister; these conspired with the Duke
of Guise, to bring over an Army into Wales, and there to proclaim the Scottish
Mary Queen of England; New invasions t^eatned.
then was sent abroad the thundering Bull of Pope Pius Quintus which Ipso facto
deposed Queen Elizabeth, The Bull of Pope Pius Quintus.
and infranchised all her subjects quitting them from their allegiance; this
was the first animating and giving life to the insurrection in the North, first
set on foot by the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, into which the
Duke of Norfolk that noble gentleman, A rebellion in the North.
deluded with vain hopes was so far engaged that it cost him his head; but
all this great conjuration was both prudently and politickly prevented.

For it was so projected by the enemy, that if the two Earls Forces joining
with the Dukes could have been brought to one head in any convenient place of
the Land, one Army was appointed to run from Ireland, Duke D'Alva
another the Duke D'alva was to send out of the Low Countries to seize upon the
person of the Queen, subvert the state, supplant the Religion, and to despose
of the Crown and kingdom at their pleasure, all this was cast but not
compast; Man purposes, God disposes.
so by them proposed, but by God Almighty otherwise disposed, yet this royal
virago notwithstanding their menaces rested unmoved at all these devilish
plots being no whit daunted.

After these Leonard Dakers second son to William L. Dakers of Gellesland,
Dakers revolt from the Queen.
after he had given his faith to the Queen for the suppressing of these
troubles in the North, and having took leave of her Majesty to that seeming
purpose made a contract with those rebels first attempting to kill the Lord
Scroope, and the Bishop of Carlisle, but failing in his project took Grastocke
Castle with Naworth Castle and others fortifying them, Bakers Forces routed by
the Lord Hunsden
but the noble Lord Hunsden with the trained Soldiers of Barwick, met with him
by the River of Geli, and rowted his people, who fled into Scotland, and thence
into the Low Countries, and after dyed miserably at Lovaine.

Commotions in Ireland.
After this were diverse commotions raised in Ireland, but suppressed by the
Earl of Ormend, the King of Spain never ceasing with his Ministers and agents
to molest her Majesty in all places, and upon all occasions; he first
pretended the deliverance of the Scotch Queen, but Duke D'alva being then his
General in the Low Countries dissuaded him from that enterprise, Spanish Plots.
by reason of her former marriage with the French King, alleging that when
England was first invaded, and then conquered, which they presumed was to be
as soon achieved as attempted, it would rather fall to the French then the
Spaniard, yet they concluded that they should never be peaceably possessed of
the Low Countries till they had England in their possession; which to compass
they thought it best to begin with Ireland, but after some vain attempts not
answering their hopes, and many preparations which they kept smothered all, in
the year eighty eight burst out into flame and combustion. Eighty eight.


In the interim were diverse domestic conspiracies discovered, Domestic
conspiracies.
in which were engaged Thomas Standly and Edward his brother the younger sons
of the Earl of Darby; in this were interessed Thomas Gerard, Hall, and
Rolstone, a Pentioner to the Queen, who was the first that disclosed the
dissigne: Sir Henry Percy made another attempt to the like purpose, upon
condition that his brother the Earl of Northumberland might be delivered out
of Scotland, Discovered.
where he sheltered himself; his assotiates were Powell Sanford, a Gentleman
pentioner, and one Owen, a servant to the Earl of Arundell; Prevented.
about this business were committed the Earls of Arundell and Southhampton,
the Lords Lumlee and Cobham, etc.

After these in the year 1576. Don John of Austria brother to Phillip king of
Spain, Don John of Austria aims at the Crown of England and Scotland.
much tumored with the honor purchased in that incomparable Sea fight against
the Turk, commonly called the battle of Lepantho, in which he had been
chief General, and now being made Governor of the Low Countries, conceiving
that poor title too narrow to limit his unbounded aims, begins to cast diverse
projects how first by releasing, and after marrying the Queen of Scots, to
possess himself of the two Crowns of England and Scotland, One brother
crosses the other.
but King Phillip unwilling the younger brother should parallel the elder,
either in style or state, and reserving England as a dainty morsel to relish
his own palate, would neither afford him countenance nor assistance, though
to that purpose he was earnestly solicited by one Escovedus sent by him out of
the Neatherlands into Spain; but being slightly put off by Peresius, Secretary
to the Catholic King, yet secretly and subtly did Don John negotiate this
business, laboring to have in his entire possession, all the havens of Biskey
where a Navy might be prepared there to make their randevoues, ready at all
opportunity to invade England; England aimed at by all.
deeply dissembling all that while with Queen Elizabeth, under the color of
soliciting a perpetual peace, which juggling was first discovered by the Prince
of Orange; and she finding it to be true, concluded a league with the Low
Countries, with a promise of mutual aid one to another, which soever should
be first distressed: The death of Don John.
soon after Don John in the height of his hopes and prime of his age expired,
some think by poison, others of the Plague, others of grief, to be so
slighted by the King his brother, after he successively had aimed at the
kingdom of Funis, where Guleta in Afric was left to his great dishonor.

Captain Thomas Stukeley.
I cannot here omit the traiterous attempts of captain Thomas Stukeley, who
after he had rioted his whole estate here in England went over into Ireland,
and there having projected with some Romists, went thence into Italy, where by
his great ostentations and bragges, he got admittance into the presence of Pope
Pius quintus; whom by his insinuation he made constantly believe that with a
small Band of Italian Soldiers he would not only expel all the English out
of Ireland, Brave boasts.
but bring it under the principality of Rome, burning the Queens Navy, etc.
but Pope Pius dying before ought was concluded; he then importuned his
successor Gregory the thirteenth who hearkened unto him upon promise to make
James Beulampagno (who went under the name of the Popes bastard, and was a
little before made Marquess of Vineola) King of Ireland; Tempting titles.
Stukeley also should be honored with the titles of Marquess of Lageu, Earl
of Wepford and Ca^erlogh, Viscount of Morough, and Baron of Rosse; all these
things concluded, Stukeley was made general of eight hundred Italian Soldiers
who were stipendaries to the king of Spain. But Stukeley arriving with his
army in Portugal, and entering the mouth of Tagus found there Sebastian the
young King (before solicited by Mahomet the son of Abdela King of Fesse
(prepared for the African wars, which King so far persuaded and prevailed
with Stukeley that he assotiated him with his Italians into (...), Stukeley
slain in the great battle of Alcazer.
and was slain in that great battle of A'lcazer, where dyed with him that
day three Kings; Sebastian, Mahomet, and A^del M^lech: by Sebastians death the
King of Spain altered his purpose, for the present invading England to
possess himself of the Crown of Portugal, and his pretended invasion did
not discover it self till the year eighty eight.

Notwithstanding the death of Stukeley, new troubles were raised in Ireland by
one Nicolas Saunders, Nicolas Saunders a pestilent Traitor.
a pestilent Traitor; whose pen and tongue were most maliciously saucie against
her sacred Majesty, who in his contumelious Libells neither spared the Queens
mother dead, nor the daughter living; he having purchased a consecrared Banner
landed amongst the Rebels, Sam. Josephus.
with power Legantine, whether also was sent one Sam. Josephus with seven
hundred Italians and Spaniards to join with the rovolted Earl of Desmond his
brother Fitsmoris and others, but in small process after much effusion of
blood on both sides the Earl dyed miserably, The unpittied death of the
rebels.
and Saunders mad.

To pass over the Treason of Sommervele, and his father in Law Arderne, in
which the young man animated by the Jesuits drew his sword in the Court to have
slain the Queen: Diverse other conspirators.
as also the conspiracy of Thomas Lord Paget, Francis Throgmorton,s Charles
Arundell, with diverse noble gentlemen, drawn into the suspicion of horrible
undertaking; as Henry Earl of Northumberland, Phillip Earl of Arundell, Henry
Howard, brother to the Duke of Norfolk, which drew themselves into question of
their loyalty by their several commitments.

Monstrous also and unmanly were the projections of Bernardinus Mendoza,
Bernardinus Mendoza base proceeding.
Ambassador here for the Catholic King, who most perfidiously and against the
Laws of kingdoms and nations, during his residence here, conspired against
the life of her sacred Majesty, not only hiring Ruffaines and debnist male
contents to that purpose, but even seeking to corrupt her Mayds of Honor next
about her, which though proved against him, yet she suffered him to depart her
presence, gently admonisht but no way disgraced, but stung in his own
conscience he soon after basely and shamefully as a man branded with all
infamies stole out of the Land.

The like machinations were hatched by Cardinal Alan Engle-field and Rosse,
Cardinal Alan and others
both against her person and Provinces, being all her natural subjects, as
also the Hispani^ied and Italionated Doctor Parry made up out of Spaines
policy and Italies poison, Doctor Parry.
who notwithstanding her Majesty had pardoned his life forfeit for burglary,
and after received him to grace, and vouchsafing him her presence was armed
with a Pistol to have flaine her in her Garden.

Concerning the fourteen Traitors I will only give you their names, The
fourteen traitors.
whose Jesuitical plots began in one savadge, whom report gave out to be
Filius populi, a Bastard being (as he said) persuaded to that treason by
Gilbert Gifford and one Hodstone, Priests, that (being begot in her) was
seconded by Anthony Backington; incorporated into that blooddy action by
Ballard Priest, to these were conlatinated Edward Winsore a young Gentleman,
Thomas Salsoury of an ancient house in Denbigh-shire, Charles Filney, a young
heir, and the sole hope of his Family, Pentioner to the Queen, Chedioc
Fitchburne of Hamshiere, Edward Abenton, whose father was Cofferer, Robert Gage
of Surry, John Traverse, John Charnock of Lancashiere Gentlemen, John Jones,
whose father had been Queen Mary's Tailor, Henry Dunne a Clearke of the first
fruits Office, and Barowell an Irish Gentleman, who of all the rest was only
known to her Majejestie.

Queen Elizabeth's confidence in the Almighty.
One thing I cannot here forget to observe her great magnanimity and confidence
in the Almighty, when this conspiracy was known unto her, notwithstanding
all these lay lurking about the City to wait their best opportunity, yet
she not forbearing to show her self abroad, and living then at Richmond, and
walking to take the Air upon the green before the Court gate she espied
Barowell, and taking special notice of him as one that had vowed her death,
though she saw him armed to the like purpose, she went toward him, when
suddenly turning her self to Sir Christopher Hatton and the rest of the Lords
she said, am not I well guarded think you my Lords, A rare spirit in a
Princess
who conducting me abroad if I should be injured or assaulted have not one
Sword amongst you all to defend me? then looking earnestly upon Barnwell said
unto him; but here is a Gentleman I see who walks better armed; this done she
retired her self, and thus much Barnwell the same night told to the rest of
the conspirators, whom the devil had so blinded that they perceived not by
that, their plot to be disclosed: all the use they made of it was to say, how
easily might she then have been dispatched if more of us had been then
present; but to come to their ends, The death of the foureteen Traitors.
they were all apprehended, committed, convicted and condemned, and on the
twentieth of September in Lincolnes Inn fields hanged and quartered.

In the year 1567. L' Aubespineus the French Ambassador, a man wholly engaged
into the Guisian faction, The French Ambassador.
was no less turbulent then Bernard Mendoza the Spaniard, he by his Secretary
Trappius and others daily undermining the State, and insidiating the Queens
person, dealt with a Gentleman called William Stafford, whose mother was of the
Queens Bedchamber, who promised him wonders both from the Guisians, and the
King of Spain, if he would undertake to kill the Queen, which confessed by
Stafford, and being palpably proved against him he excused all his proditory
underminings with the privilege of his place.

The Spanish Armado.
Next was the great preparation of the Spanish Armado, styled by the Pope the
Navy invincible, provided with infinite care, and accommodated with inestimable
cost, which till it was discovered upon the Seas, was not known to be ready
for action, by reason that the Duke of Parma at that time continued his
dissembled treatise of peace, and had Deligates then in England with commission
to the same purpose; but their supposed invincibilitie being really vanquished
and their great Armado most of it sunk, The Navy styled invincible defeated.
and the rest destitute and scattered, yet the beaten and battled Spaniard,
seeing he could neither endanger her Land, nor damage her life, by force, set
his Engines on work to undermine them by fraud, and though in that great and
invaluable loss sustained in the perishing of his Navy; when his Coffers were
almost quite exhausted, yet could they offord fifty thousand crowns (promised,
though not paid down, to corrupt Doctor Lopez a Jew borne, and one of her
sworn Physicians to take away her life, Doctor Lopes his treason.
by poisonous confection; the easilier to be done because he was one in whose
fidelity she much trusted, which the avaritious wretch (whose motto was Quid
labitis) undertaking, was like a perfidious Traitor soon after drawn, hanged,
and quarterd. His death.


Let me not here forget the Camp at Tilbery in which her Majesty was in
person, Her Majesty's deportment in the Camp at Tilbury.
and that if the Spaniard had prevailed by Sea to have given him battle by
land, appearing in the head of her Troops, and encouraging her Soldiers,
habited like an Amazonian Queen, Buskind and plumed, having a golden
Truncheon, Gantlet, and Gorget; Arms sufficient to express her high and
magnanimous spirit, who when she understood the proud enemy was utterly
defeated, and that her English soil was too hot for any invaders to tread
upon, she dissolved her Camp. And to show how much she vilefied their former
undertakings, and how little she feared what they might attempt thence after;
the very next year following she sent an Army into Portugal, The next year
she assaulted Lysbone.
invading the invaders, and braving her much daunted enemy even in his own
dominions.

I conclude all her miraculous preservations with that of Edward Squire, The
treason of Edward Squire.
one belonging to the Queens stable; who being in Spain received from one
Walpoole a Jesuit, a strong and mortiferous confection in a bladder, to poison
the Pummell of her Saddle, who after his return waiting his opportunity, and
by reason of his place and former acquaintance not being suspected, when her
Majesty was to take horse, he came openly with a smiling countenance in the
presence of many, and having pricked the bladder wearing a thick can'd glove
clapped his hand upon the Pummell of the Saddle, and with a cheerful voice
said, God save the Queen, wherein it pleased God (as mine author says) to
take his word not his meaning; for by Gods great providence neither in mounting
nor alighting, nor all the way she rode she once touched the Pummell. A
miraculous preservation.
For which attempt he by his voluntary confession was convicted and condemned.

Thus have I described unto you a Vestall for virginity, A Character of Queen
Elizabeth.
a Mirror of Majesty, no less celebrated for religious piety, then regal
dignity; with no afflictions afrighted, no disasters daunted: to her friends a
mother, her foes a terror, maliciously pursued, miraculously preserved, of
women the wonder, of Princess, the Paravant, Elizabeth.

FINIS.
A brief Index or Table of the Contents in the Premises.
In the life of DEBORAH.
WHat this Deborah was. Page 5. The Etimoligy of her name. p. 6 Her Character.
ibid. In what estate Israel stood in her time. ibid. Ioshuahs victories with
the manner of his death. ib. Isreal's Idolatry. p. 7 Gods great mercy toward
them. ib. The Judges. ib. Isreal's Trial. ib. Baalaim and Asheroth. p. 8 Of
Cushan Kishataim, King of Aram. ib. Othnill the son of Ken^z. ib. Eglon King
of Moab. ib. Ehud the son of Gera who slew Eglon ib. Shamgar the son of
Anath. ib. The Israelites ingratitude toward God. p. 9 The tyranny of Iabin,
King of Canaan. ib. Deborah a Iudgesse in Israel. p. 10 The place where she
dwelt. ib. Her speech to Barack the son of Abinoham. ib. Baracks
timerousnesse. p. 11. Deborah's magnanimity. ib. The muster of the two Tribes
of Nepthali and Zebulon. ibid. Of Heber the Kenite. p. 12 His temporisings
betwixt the Israelites and the Cananites. ib. The dangerous effects of war.
p. 13 The office of a General. ib. The fruits of tyranny. p. 14 The nature of
Ambition ib. Of Sysera and his preparation for war. p. 15 Mount Tabor. ib.
The River Kishon. ib. Deborah incourageth Baruck before the battle. ib. The
effects of fear. p. 16 Syseras Army ro^ted. ib. He flying, comes to the Tent
of Jael the wife of Hebar. ib. Her entertainment of Sysera. p. 17 His fear
being in her tent. ib. J^el kills Sisera. p. 19 Debora and Jael compared for
their masculine virtue. ib.
IVDETH.
OF the two Kings Nabuchodonozer and Arphaxad. p. 22 The two great Cities of
Ninivie and Echbatane. ib. The nomination of sundry Rivers. p. 23
Nabuchodonozers commandment despised. ib. King Arphaxad discomfited and slain.
ib. Nebuchodonozer after his victory feasteth his boast an hundred and twenty
days. p. 24 Holophernes his chief Captain; and his Army. ib. The magnificent
provision of his boast. ib. His tyranny. p. 25 Nabuchodonozer proclaimed a God.
ib. The preparations of Israel against Holophernes. ib. Joachim the high
Priest. ib. The Israelites prayer and repentance. p. 26. Achior Captain of the
Amorites. ib. His speech to Holophernes. p. 27 The blasphemy of Holophernes.
ib. Achior brought into Bethulia. p. 28 Ozias, Chabris, and Charmis, Governors
of Bethulia. ib. Achior comforted and feasted by the Elders. ib. The great
distress of Bethulia. p. 29 Judeth the widow of Manaffes. ib. Her zeal and
abstinence. p. 30 She reproacheth the Elders of Bethulia. ib. The reply of
Ozias to Judeth. p. 31 She changes her garments of widdow-hood. ib. Her
wonderful beauty. p. 32 Her maid. ib. Judeth brought before Holophernes. p.
33 Her speech to him. ib. The answer of Holophernes. p. 35 She is brought into
his Tent. ib. The feast of Holophernes to his servants. p. 36 Bagoas the
Evenuch. ib. Holophernes infidiateth her chastity. ib. She eats and drinks
in his presence. p. 37 Holophernes overcome with wine. ib. Holophernes slain
by Judeth. p. 38 Judeth with her maid come back to Bethulia. ib. Her counsel
to the Governors. p. 39 Achiors ecstasy at the sight of the head of
Holophernes. ib. Holophernes found without an head. p. 40 The Assirians
disheartened. ib. Their buast utterly discomfited. p. 41 The High Priests and
the Eldersblesse Judeth. ib. Their honor done to her for their miraculous
(...). p. 42 Judeths thanksgiving and offering. ib. Her age and death. p. 43
ESTHER.
WHat Ahashueras was. p. 46 His great feast to his Princes. p. 47. His feast to
the people. ib. Queen Vasthis feast. 48. Her contempt of the Kings command.
ib. Memucans censure of Vasthi. ib. A decree against the Queen. 49 Who
Mordecai was. 50 Who Esther or Hadasha was. ib. Esther received into the Kings
Palace. ib. Esther crowned Queen. 51 Treason against the King discovered by
Mordecai. ib. The exaltation of Haman, Mordecai bends not the knee to Haman.
ib. Hamans purpose utterly to supplant the Jews. 52 The decree sealed for the
destruction of the Jews. 53 Mordecai's sorrow for his people. ib. Queen
Esther comfort her Uncle Mordecai. 54 Queen Esthers fast. 55 Queen Esther
appears before the King and finds favor. ib. The King and Haman invited to
her banquet. 56 Hamans hate to Mordecai. ib. His pride and confidence. ib.
Haman makes a Gibbet fifty foot high to hang Mordecai. 57 Gods providence to
preserve his people. ib. Pride catch^ in her own net. 58 Haman is force to
honor Mordecai. ib. What envy is. 59 The King and Haman at Esthers banquet.
60 Esthers request to the King. ib. Hamans pride turned into base fear. 61
Haman hanged on the gallows prepared for Mordecai. ib. Esthers petition for
the Jews. 62 The decree against the Jews broken. ib. Liberty granted to the
Jews. 63 Mordecai's royal apparel. ib. The Jews revenge upon their enemy.
64 Hamans ten sons hanged. 65 A memorial for the Jews great deliverance. ib.
Mordecai the second man in the kingdom. ib.
BONDVCA.
HEr several appellations. 70 Prasutagus her husband makes Caesar Co-keyre
with his Queen and daughters. 71 The unjust proceedings of the Romans. ib.
Their barbarous lust and cruelty. 72 Bunduca's person and condition. ib.
Reasons Inducing the Britains so rebel against the Romans. 73 Swetonius
Paulinus the Roman General. ib. Bunduca's first insurrection. 74 Her royal
Army. ib. Her habit in Battle. ib. The place where she encampt. 75 Her
oration to her Soldiers. ib. Her devision of the Romans 76 The goddess Andate
or victory. 77 The providence of Paulinus Swetonius. ib. The strength of the
Romans in Britain. 78 The estate of the City Comelodunum at that time. 79
The estate of the Roman Colonies. 80 The City demolished. 81 Bunduca
intercepteth the Roman expidition. ib. She prosecuteth her victory. ib. The
demeaner of the Roman General. 82 Virulam sacked and spoiled. ib. The cruel
behavior of the enraged Britains. 83 The courage of the Roman General. 84
The number of the Bunduca's Army. ib. The place where she encamped. 85 The time
of the years. ib. The martialling of the Roman Army. 86 The proportion of a
Legion. ib. Bunduca in the Battle. 87 The order of her Battle. ib. She
incourageth her Soldiers. 88 The onset on both sides. ib. A description of the
Battle. 89 Valor on both sides. ib. The Romans Victors. 90 The Britains
Army routed. ib. The numbers slane on both sides. 91 Of Bunduca after the
battle. ib. Her death and place of burial. ib. Diverse opinions concerning
her place of enterrement. ib.
PENTHISILAEA.
OF Viragoes, or women of masculine Spirit. 96 Of Camilla, Helerna, Semiramis,
Zenobia. 97 Hypsecratea, Tomyris, Teuca, Maria, Puteolana. 98 Of the Amazons in
general. 99 Their original. 100 Whence they derived their names. 101
Marthesia, Lampedo, Orreta, Antiope. ib. Menelippe, Penthifilaea. 102
Securigera, Vexillifera, Peltifera. 103 Penthisilaea's beauty. ib. The death of
Penthisilaea. 104 Monithaea or Thalestris in the time of Alexander. 105 The end
of the Amazonean race. ib. The manners of the Scithians. 106 The custom of the
Sarromates. 107 Their Kings at their death. 109
ARTIMESIA.
HEroicke women in all ages. 112 Renowned women. 113 The seven wonders of the
world, and first of the Aegiptian Pyramids. 114 Of King Cleopas and Rhodope^,
the second wonder. 115 The third and fourth wonder. 116 A fifth wonder. 117 The
sixth wonder. 118 The beautiful Palace of Cyrus. ib. A strange controversy
betwixt the two Cities of Athens and Elis. ib. Phidias. 118 The pleading of
the Athenians. 120 The stout answer of the Aelians. 122 The seventh wonder
erected by Queen Artimesia. ib. The gravers of King Mausolus Tomb. 123 Rare
builders and Architectors. ib. Mausolea. 124 The magnanimity of Queen
Artime^ia. 125 Her brave demeanor in that great navall fight betwixt the
Persians and the Grecians, Xerxes his character of Queen Artimesia. 126
ELPHLEDA.
OF com^ustions and (...) women. 132 Helena, Hyppodamia, Aspa^ia, Poli^o,
Lavinia. 133 Dejareira, Nicostrate, Polidices, Lucretia. ibid. Virginea,
Phaedra, Martia, Thais. 134 A Catalogue of excellent and eminent women. ib.
Dominica, Iuguldis. 135 Glotildis, Placida, Pomp^ia, Paulin^, Helena, Monicha.
136 Etheldredus raised the first School in Oxford. 137 King Alureds issue. ib.
A remarkable accident. 138 The Danes defeated by stratagem. 139 King Edwards
numerous issue. 140 Whence Spinsters came. ib. The first proof of Elphledas
valor. 141 Her monomachy, and brave victory. 142 Her valor and piety. 143
Her Acts, buildings and repayring of decayed Cities. ib. Her rare chastity and
of her daughter Elswina. 144 Of chastity and beauty. 145 Further of her
valor, the Danes outrages, and the death of Turbitillus. 146 An emulation
betwixt two women, with a strange deliverance. 147 Elphleda's death, and
further of her daughter. 148 Her Epitaph. 149 Her brother King Edwards
victories, and of King Ethelstane. 150
Queen MARGARET.
A Preparation for her marriage. 154 Her bringing over into England with her
marriage to King Edward the sixth. 155 She assumeth regal prerogative. 156 The
death of Humphrey Duke of Gloucester, with his Character. 157 A Parliament at
Lecester: the death of the Marquess of Suffolk. 158 Blew-beard, Jack Cade,
the birth of Prince Edward. 159 The Queen the raiser of all combustions. ib.
The proceedings of the Duke of York, a peace betwixt the King and the Duke;
The Duke of York sent to the Tower. 160 Sommerset made Captain of Callis, new
combustion by the Queens party. 161 The battle at Saint Albans, the King
prisoner, the Duke of York Protector, and discharged of his Protectorship 162
Procession to Paul's, and of Andrew Trollop. 163 John Dinham surpriseth the
Kings Navy, and Simon Mountford beheaded by the Yorkists. 165 The bettaile at
Northampton, the King taken, and York lodged in the Kings Palace. 166 York
claims the Crown, his pride, the decree of the Parliament. 167 The battle
of Wakefield, the Duke of Yo^ke slain. 168 Another battle at Saint Albans,
Prince Edward made King, the Earl of Marsh raises new Forces. 169 Edward
Earl of Marsh made King, the bloody battle at Sherborne. 170 Henry with his
Queen fly into Scotland. 171 Edward crowned, Queen Margarets Army, her
distress by Sea. 172 Exam-field: Henry took prisoner, King Edward marries
the Lady Gray. 173 The Lady Bona, the Duke of Clarens, and Earl of Warwick
proclaimed Rebels. 174 Henry Proclaimed King again, and Edward flies the
Land. 175 Edward Lands in England, possesses York, King Henry surprised by
Edward. 176 The battle at Barnet. 177 Queen Margaret Lands in England, the
battle at Teuxbury. 178 Queen Margarets magnanimity, Prince Edward murdered
by the Duke of Gloucester. 179 Queen Margaret sent into her country, King
Henry's death and burial. 180
Queen ELIZABETH.
A Character of Queen Elizabeth. 184 Her descent. 185 Her birth, baptism;
Queen Katherine the mother and Mary her daughter disabled of all regal
claim. 186 The Lady Elizabeth's constellation, infancy, childhood. 187 Prince
Edward created Prince of Wales. ibid. The great love betwixt Edward and
Elizabeth, brother and sister. 188 The death of King Henry the eighth. ibid.
Prince Edward proclaimed King, his Coronation. 189 The Lady Elizabeth's first
suitors, her modesty. 190 The death of King Edward the sixth, the Lady Jane
proclaimed Queen. 191 The Duke of Northumberland sent against the Lady Mary.
ib. Northumberland beheaded, the deaths of the Duke of Suffolk, the Lady Jane,
and Guilford Dudley. 192 Mary proclaimed Queen. ib. Her Coronation, the Lady
Elizabeth's troubles. 193 The Bishop of Winchester pursues her life, her
committing to the Tower. 194 Her cruel usage and patience, King Philip
favors her. 195 An imposterous birth. ib. King Phillip discovers the plot,
his departure out of the Land. 196 Observations concerning Q. Mary's reign,
Callis lost. ib The death of Queen Mary, the Lady Elizabeth proclaimed Queen.
197 Her Coronation, and how the state stood in the beginning of her reign. 198
King Phillip would marry Queen Elizabeth. ib. Preparations of the French to
invade England, Spain, France and Scotland combine against her. 199 Her
prudent preparations, new invasions threatened, the Bull of Pope Pius Quintus.
200 A rebellion in the North, Leonard Dakers, his revolt from the Queen. 201
Dakers Forces routed by the Lord Hunsden, commotions in Ireland, Spanish plots.
202 Domestic conspiracies discovered, prevented, and of Don John of Austria.
203 The death of Don John, and of Captain Thomas Stukeley 204 His brave
boasts, tempting titles, and at length slain in the battle of Alcazar. 205
Nicholas Saunders a pestilent Traitor Sam. Josephus the Earl of Desmond, with
diverse others, conspirators. 206 Bernardin, Mendozas base proceedings, Cardin,
Allan, Doctor Parry, the fourteen Traitors. 207 Q. Elizabeth's great
confidence in the Almighty. 208 The death of the fourteen Traitors, the
French Ambassador 209 The Spanish Armado, styled Invincible, Doctor Lopez, his
Treason and death. 210 Her Majesty's departments in the Camp of Tilbury, the
Treason of Edward Squire. 211 Queen Elizabeth's miraculous preservation, her
Character. 212
Excusing the Compositor, who received this Copy in a difficult and
unacquainted hand, and the Corrector who could not be always ready in regard
of some necessary employments, I entreat the generous Reader to take notice of
these Errata following, and to rectify them in his reading after this manner,

FOr Geinni, read Gemini Page 8. for firei, r. (...), p. 16. for Bethalmir.
Beth^^^^ p. 10. for moved. r. mooned p. 94. for (...) r. sons p. 98. for
^^xores, r. ve^bres p. 99. for o^bes r. orbis p. 114. for Azerpegita r.
Areopagitae p. 117 for for r. from p. 112. for Med^^ r. Modi^. p. 124. for
Vru^ia r. Urania, for (...). Elphleda p. 130. and so through the whole history,
for effeminary, Efferminacy p. 13^ for possion r. possession p. 170. for Lady
Bov^ r Bona p. 174. for wor^ r Co^rt, p. 191. for exposed r. opposed, for
demend r. ormard p. 202. for Funis r. Tunis* for lest r. lost p. 204. for
wepsond r we^sord p. 205. for Backington r. ^ubington p. 208 for Conlatinated
r. concatinated, ibid. for filney r. Tyl^ey, ibid, for Fichburne r. Tichburne,
for (...) ibid, etc.

FINIS.

