A MODEST DEFENSE OF THE CAVEAT GIVEN TO THE WEARERS OF impoisoned Amulets, as
Preservatives from the Plague:

Wherein that point is somewhat more largely reasoned and debated with an
ancient Physician, who has maintained them by public writing:

As likewise that unlearned and dangerous opinion, That the Plague is not
infectious, lately broched in London, is briefly glansed at, and refuted by way
of Preface, by FR. HERING D. in Physic.

Read without prejudice: Judge without partiality.

Quemadmodum ex attritu lapidum ignis elicitur: sic ex collatione, and
conflictu opinionum emergit veritas. LONDON Printed by Arnold Hatfield for
William Jones dwelling in Red-crosse street at the sign of the Ship. 1604.

TO ALL THAT love health, and honor Physic, health of Mind and Body.
THere is an old saying (friendly Reader) that Philosophers and learned men
agree together like the clocks of a great city, which do seldom concur, but
for the most part differ, and vary one from another. This is not without some
color of truth. Nevertheless we must take heed, that we do not therefore
condemn good Arts and Sciences, either of uncertainty or of falsehood, folly
and vanity, as some have done. For this were Solemn in crimen vocare, cum
lippientes potius oculos tonsori Licinio committeremus. As if a bleere-eyed man
assaying to read at midday, and finding inability, should lay the fault upon
the Sun, and not rather seek remedy for his ill-affected eyes. Hominum haec
sunt vitia, non Artium. These are the faults of men, and not of good Arts,
whose principles and theorems are true, certain, constant, catholic, and
full of most clear, resplendent and divine light; as the Poets have most
pithily shadowed in the Fable of Prometheus, whom they set forth stealing fire
from Jupiter out of heaven. Ingenia nostra habent suos morbos, quemadmodum
corpora. Our wits indeed have their diseases as well as our bodies: as Phylauty
or self-love, Pride, Ambition, Malice, Hatred, Covetousness, Vaineglory: and
these as so many clouds, do come betwixt us and Lady Alethia, (...) and
darkening Prometheus sparks, the little candle or light of our minds, in such
sort, as often times we can not, and sometimes we will not see the truth. Books
and opinions are Mentis pignora and quasi liberi, as it were the begotten, and
children of our minds. And what father is there (though otherwise never so
prudent) who may not be resembled to the Crow which thinks her black bird
the fairest of all other; or to the Ape who so ouer-loueth her young ones, that
by colling she kills them? It must be a foul and black fault which a father
or rather a mother will see in her son: and it must be a gross and palpable
error which a man will acknowledge, if it be of his own breeding, brooding,
or broching.

Ingenio qui vult cedere rarus erit. Suum cuique pulchrum. Every one is in love
with his own shadow. It is therefore nothing strange unto me, that the ancient
Physician (with whom I confer in my (...) discourse) and other learned men,
having received these (...) by tradition, without any great examination, do
labor to maintain them in their writings, by show and color of reason. But I
must needs confess, I cannot but greatly wonder at the strange, uncouth, and
unreasonable Paradox, broched of late in this city, That the Plague is not
contagious. This fantastic conceit brings to mind that of the Orator:
Nescio quomodo fiat, vt nihil tam sit absurdum quod non dicatur and defendatur
ab aliquo Philosophorum. I know not how it comes to pass, that nothing can
be spoken so absurdly, which is not defended by some of the Philosophers.

If any one of our coat, should maintain this monstrous and pernicious
heresy, the Tribe of Physicians would be so far from disputing the matter
with him, as they would straight send him that Anticeras to purge his brain
with Hellebore. Contra principia negantem non est disp^^tandum. No argument is
to be held with him who denies principles, and razeth the grounds and
foundations of Arts.

Pestis est morbus acutus contagiosus plurimos inter fiens etc. The pest is a
sharp contagious disease. Fracast. lib. 2. cap. 3. de morb. contag. Gal. 1. de
diff. feb. cap. 2.
So that you see the Plague is placed by Physicians in that rank of sharp
diseases, which are contagious. To this judgment of Aescalapius school, the
Philosophers, Orators, Poets, and wise men of all ages have subscribed. How
often does Tully call Cataline, and other such like factious firebrands, Pestes
patriae, the plagues of their country: because as the plague spreads his
poison upon the bodies of men: so they infected the minds of such Citizens as
conuersed with them, with poisonfull and seditious thoughts and inclinations.

Shall the ich, scab, measels, small pox etc. be acknowledged Animal
mansuetum, an harmless and innocent creature. But they easily reject the
authorities and reasons of Physicians as Naturians, for so they call them, and
reason thus from the Scriptures. The plague is called the sword, the hand, the
arrow of God, therefore it comes not by Contagion, since neither an hand, a
sword, or arrow does wound by contagion.

The French disease is called by a great learned man, Flagellum diuinum
scortatorum, Gods whippes sent from heaven, to scourge whoore-masters. But if
any man would hereupon conclude that it were not contagious, common experience
would put out his Eyes. Therefore these two will well concur together, that
the Lues Gallica, is a punishment inflicted by God upon the filthy and beastly
sin of whooredome (which in this age is counted but a sport) and may be
truly called the hand, the sword, the arrow of God smiting whoore-masters, and
that withal it is catching and infectious, as appears evidently in that it
comes not only by unclean company, but likewise by the breath or
contrectation of the tainted parties, and is sucked in, from the breast of
impure women, by poor infants, and the nurses themselves giving suck to a
child whose parents were polluted, are oft-times infected. The like may be
said of the Leprosy, which may be also called the hand and arrow of God, and
nevertheless is so infectious, that in all well ordered commonwealths, the
parties tainted therewith, Communi consortio excludantur, are commanded to
dwell apart, Non est malum in ciuitate, quod non faciat Dominus. There is no
evil in the city, which the Lord does not. It is therefore a fond conceit, to
think that to every particular man a several plague or arrow is sent, and not
rather a general disease whereby one infecteth another. But they argue further.

That which God inflicteth upon men by the ministry of angels, is not to be
reckoned among natural effects: But the plague etc. Psalm. 88. 1. Paral. 21.
Ezech. 4. therefore it is not to be reckoned among natural effects, and by
consequent the plague is no natural disease.

If they will reason firmly, they must add this word (immediately) unto the
proposition. And then we will challenge the assumption as faulty and
insufficient. It must be confessed that the angels themselves are not to be
reckoned among natural causes. But what shall let that, by the appointment of
God, natural causes should be moved, and actuated by the angels. Do not
angels both good and badde move and stir up the will of man, though the
manner of their workings be secret, and to us unknown, if not incomprehensible?
This is evident by the history of Achab, Vid. hist. Achab, Iudae.
and Judas. But who will deny that the will of man is in the number of natural
causes, and principles. And if the will of man may be inclined and disposed by
angels, why should we think that they have nothing to do with other natural
causes. Moses by lifting up his rod, brought armies of flies and lice upon
Egypt, raised a terrible hail, smot the Egyptians with malignant ulcers. This
was an extraordinary ministry of Moses, as well as of the angels. But shall we
therefore think, that the lice and flies came not of putrefaction, the hail
of vapors concret suddenly in the air, the ulcers by the rotting of humors.
Satan having a commission signed from God, by a mighty tempest of wind blew
up the roof where Jobs children were. Does it therefore follow that he used no
natural causes, or is not rather evident that those Princes of the air, do in
a moment stir up those natural impressions? The devil casts the saints
into prison, 2. Apocal. 10. But by Tyrants and enemies of the church. In the 6.
chap. The pale horse, on whom death sits as the horseman, receives power to
kill, by sword, famine, wild beasts. Why shall we suppose that he used not
natural matter in bringing the plague and famine, as well as in sending wild
beasts or the sword, which are natural instruments. Afterward in the 4. chap.
The angels have charge to restrain the four winds that they hurt not the
earth or sea. Whereupon it follows that upon the Lords command they are
likewise turned loose, and bring with them diverse affections and mutations of
the air, and especially contagious seminaries. It is apparent that the devil
(who being a spirit, and of long continuance and experience, must needs be a
great Naturian) reaches to certain witches called Veneficae, diverse strong
and unknown poisons: whereby those wretched creatures work much mischief.
Again, if no natural causes did concur in the pest, then could no natural
remedies ease it, much less cure it. But experience leads us that both these
are untrue. We deny not but that the angels are used as instruments and
ministers to inflict this judgment and plague of the plague for the sins of
men, neither that this disease has in it Diuinum quid, a secret and hidden
nature, so that we may justly with the inchanters of Egypt acknowledge it the
finger of God, yet we think it as absurd to affirm that there comes no
plague, but by the stroke and ministry of angels, as if a man should contend,
that there was never any hail, tempest, thunder, proceeding from natural
causes, because we read, that great hailes, storms and winds have been
raised by the ministry of angels. Historians report, that an old arc or
monument being opened in Babylon, there exhaled out of it, so pernicious and
infectious a spirit or breath, that propagated the plague even to the remote
Parthians. And in the time of Marcus the Emperor, the soldiers of Auidius
Cassius, digging into an ancient sepulcher in hope of gold, which had not
been touched for many hundred years, there followed instantly a huge and
fearful mortality. Julius Obsequeus reports, that Aetna casting smoke and
fire in abundance, did exanimate and kill the fishes of the sea adjoining,
which the Liparenses certain Ilanders feeding upon greedily, brought a
grievous pestilence among them. Orosius, Eutropius, Augustine de ciuit. Dei,
and Liuie lib. 9. make mention of prodigious swarms of Locusts in Africa,
which lying dead upon the shores, and corrupting the air, bred such a pest, as
consumed in the sole kingdom of Masinissa, 80000. and many more in the
adjacent Countries, and in Vtica, of 3000. men, 10. only suruiued.

This may be sufficient to show that the plague is not always the immediate
stroke of angels. Galen reports, that upon a dearth in his time, wherein the
poorer sort of people were constrained to feed upon roots, acornes, with other
more unwholesome and corrupted aliments, there insued a great mortality. The
ulcers and botches which are thrust out by nature, the preternaturall heat, the
drought, the restlesnesse, with many other symptoms and accidents of fevers,
do proclaim this affliction a natural malady. It has been observed in
this last mortality among us (the wounds whereof are yet fresh and bleeding)
that women have passed through the pikes more easily and happily than men. So
that this has been called The women's year; because it is thought that for one
woman, 6. or 10. men have died. We must not therefore think, The like may be
said of children who have died in great numbers: nature in the^ being weak and
not able to resist the fury of the disease.
that either the Angel is partial in sparing them, or their sins less heinous
or notorious than the sins of men. The reason hereof (as Physicians have
conceived) is because they have been more tractable and easily persuaded to
keep themselves warm, to keep house and bed: and by these means (their
bodies being likewise more soft, tender, and perspirable) have spent by
sweating and insensible transpiration the venomous matter of the Plague; giving
thereby more speedy passage to that enemy of life, from the heart and other
noble parts: Whereas men for the most part being ill house-doues, accustomed to
stirring and motion, have been very unruly and inobsequent to the counsel of
their Physicians, and by exposing themselves to the air, have looked in that
dangerous guest, to whom they should rather have made a golden bridge. It has
been likewise observed, that this Epidemicall disease has had as his
beginning, so his increment, state, and declination, and that it is now (for it
walks still amongst us in corners) nothing so acute, violent and peremptory
for the most part, neither so contagious and pernicious, as it was in the State
and Strength. Some have had the plague twice or thrice this year: but if it
came only by the Angel, he might undoubtedly say with him, Let me strike once,
and I will not strike the second time. Secession and departing the city has
been questionless a mean to preserve many; as appears evidently in that a
small handful among those great numbers who have stepped aside, have fallen by
this sickness in the Country, and those carrying with them from hence the
seminaries thereof, in comparison of those huge multitudes which have died in
the City: And could not the Angel have found them out, as well in the
Countries as in London? Again, diverse families upon their return, being safe
in the Country, have been presently visited, and emptied. Shall we imagine
that the punishing Angel stayed their retiring, and had no commission to deal
with them out of the City? and not rather think, that the air of the City
being tainted, and their bodies disposed to receive infection, this evil has
seized upon them? If we look into the city, we shall find that in Cheap Side
and other open and large streets, Remember the hideous and lamentable cry in
Olives parish in Southwarke.
and in fair, roomy, and spacious houses the Pest has not set in such sure
footing, nor made such havoc, as in narrow lanes, allies, and other pestered
and noisome corners, where families of poor people are thronged together, as
men use to pack woollsacks one upon another, so that one of them can scarce
breathe beside his fellows face. Shall we imagine, that fair and ample
streets, that sweet and goodly houses are privileged from the stroke of the
Angel, or from the arrows of the Almighty, more than poor and smoakie
Cottages? Are not such places as full fraught and replenished with sins of
all sorts crying to heaven for vengeance, as those low and base Cabbins of
simple and miserable creatures? I am not ignorant how ignorant and unlearned
men argue (as they suppose) strongly against all these things. If the Plague
proceed from natural causes, or corruption of the air, then all persons
without exception, who live and and breathe in the corrupted air, must needs
be poisoned and infected: which all men know to be untrue. But Reason it self
will easily teach us the inconsequence of this argument: for who knows not,
that one and the same cause does not always work alike, and that effects are
varied according to the variety and diversity of the suffering matters and
objects. The same Sun hardens the clay, and mollifieth the wax: one and
the same Northern wind does not pinch and pierce all bodies with the like
coldness. If we should grant that all men's bodies were alike disposed to
receive the infected air (which is most false) yet there may be many causes
why the like effect should not follow in them all. As (to make it plain)
because one man has carefully used some sovereign and apposit Preservative,
another has neglected or contemned all such courses; and as bold and blind
bayard rushed upon all dangers: another being a little touched or tainted, has
straightway sent for, or consulted with a learned Physician, and taken a
convenient and rational medicine: another either scorneth and refuses
Physicians and Physic, or else sends to the Physician, when the bell is
ready to toll for him, and when the steed is stolen begins to shut the stable
door.

But beside and above all this, we must know that God Almighty has an
ouerruling hand, whereby he does guide and direct natural causes and effects,
and hereupon it comes to pass, that Contagion though never so strong,
cannot seize on all though never so much disposed and exposed thereunto. All
men are not poisoned that drink poison; Psalm. 91.
nor all killed with the sword or shot, that go to war. Marc. 18.
And yet poison is lethall, and the sword deuoureth as well one as another.
Therefore to argue that diverse Physicians, Nurs-keepers and Surgeons,
conversant about sick persons, are not tainted at all, therefore there is no
contagion in the Pest, is all one as if a man should reason thus, that the
poison of the viper were not deadly, because the Apostle Paul, being bitten by
a viper, had no harm, or that the sword is no deuourer, Act. 20. 5.
because Iehosaphat being strongly belaid, and crying to the Lord, was
delivered and passed with his life. I have cursorily run over these things,
because the argument has been more largely handled of late by a judicious
Divine, and the opinion has been since that time somewhat minsed, and
qualified; how substantially and clarke-like I will not now stand to discuss.
Only I thought meet (because this conceit is not only erroneous, but
dangerous and pernicious to the weale-publicke, and being too grossly broched
at the first, has left a deep impression in the minds of the vulgar sort,
who are as the Orator says, Pluma ipsa leuiores, as light as feathers, tossed
to and fro with every blast of vain, ann idle heads, briefly to touch it by
the way, Tanquam aliud agens. It remains, that acknowledging the pests,
contagion, we notwithstanding (who are Christians) carefully avoid that
faithless and Paganish fearfulness, whereby we are made to break all the
bonds of Religion, Consanguinitie, Alliance, friendship and policy: the
husband forsaking and abandoning his dear wife, the parents leaving their
children to sink or swim, the Pastor exposing his flock to every devouring
woolfe, and the Magistrate his people under his charge to all confusion and
disorder. We are apt to rush into extremities. This were Incidere in Scyllam,
whilst we would Charibdim vitare, to avoid one evil, and commit as great, or
greater mischief. As he is to be esteemed a good subject and citizen, who
though he will not intrude into every fray made by desperate Ruffians, with
whom he has nothing to do, least he catch a broken pate, or worse turn, yet
will boldly enter the battle against the enemy of his Country when he is
thereto called by his Prince, though with evident hazard of his life: so he is
to be reputed a grounded and discrete Christian, who as he will not rush rashly
into every infected and visited house without just cause, warrant or calling,
so when he is called, or tied by any bond of Piety, Nature, or Policy, he will
not forsake his station, or detract and forslow any duty or office, though the
performance thereof be with evident danger of health, goods or life it self.
For in these cases we may confidently expect a protection from Heaven, and say
with Hester, If I die, I die. If we fall, we shall fall in, and not out of our
way, wherein the Lord of heaven guide us by his good spirit of wisdom, till
we come to the end thereof, which is the salvation of our Souls.

Now to return to our Amulets, from whom by occasion we have made ouerlong a
digression: as I gave at the first a brief advertisement concerning them,
without any evil intention to wound any particular man in his credit, (no not
if I had been able, as I am not) so I have reioyned not in any contentious
humor, but in a desire to be satisfied if I err, and reformed in my
judgment. I must needs acknowledge, that considering the object of my
Profession, which is that short Epitome of the grand world, that wonder and
Miracle of Nature, that Temple of the holy Ghost, that Lord of the inferior
creatures, Man, I have been very scrupulous (if not superstitious in) using any
doubtful, suspicious, or dangerous Medicine whereof I have not been well and
thoroughly persuaded. If any suppose this to be Contentio de lana caprina aut
asini vmbra, too base and mean a toy or trifle to be stood upon, let him
remember that it is made no base dredge, but a noble, catholic, and divine
Medicine, by the Authors and commenders thereof. He may likewise call to mind,
that the most precious Balmes, and sovereign Antidots, and (which is more,
Physic herself, that noble science, is esteemed no better by many than a
mere trifle. Besides this, if the greatest, learnedest, and complet Prince of
Europe, have vouchsafed of late to stoop so low as to take up (though to throw
away again) that base, strange, ill-sauouring weed, or rather intoxicating
poison Tobacco, discoursing thereof so learnedly, iudicially, and admirably, as
he may seem to have been brought up all his life, at the feet of Hippocrates,
and not exercised from his birth, in the government of great States and
Kingdoms, it can be no disparagement for me, who am infimus e plebe, to spend
some few spare hours in the examination of these Amulets. Wherein, if I have
failed, and slipped now and then, (as I fear I have too often) impute it I
pray thee (friendly Reader) to my manifold auocations and distractions in this
heavy, doleful, and lamentable time of visitation: Da mihi Maeoniden and tot
circumspice Casus
Ingenium tantis excidet omne malis.
The Lord of his infinite goodness continue and perfect his gracious work of
mercy toward us, in remoouing wholly this grievous, contagious, and fearful
Plague, putting up his sword altogether into the sheath; and restoring unto us
the days of Health and Comfort, that we being schooled by these afflictions,
may every one of us break off our sins by compassion to the poor, and
putting away the wickedness that is in our hands, serve him in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life.

A MODEST DEFENSE OF THE CAVEAT GIVEN TO THE WEARERS OF impoisoued Amulets, as
Preservatives from the Plague.
AMicus Plato, Amicus Socrates, sed magis Amica Veritas. Plato is a friend, and
Socrates a friend, but Truth ought to be the chiefest friend to all true
Philosophers, much more Christians. I set forth of late a short Caveat,
concerning empoisoned Amulets, or Plague-cakes (as they are called) moved
thereunto, as by many other reasons, so especially, because I greatly feared,
that through an unsound and idle persuasion of their force, other more
rational and effectual remedies were neglected. An ancient and grave
Physician, whom I reverence for diverse good respects, has stood up, and
pleaded their cause. I amno Pythagorean; Nullius addictus iurare in verba
magistri. I would not willingly pin my judgment upon any man's sleeue, be he
never so grave and learned, unless I be drawn by good and sound reason.
Humanum est errare. Therefore remaining yet unsatisfied, I have thought good,
not in any contentious humor, but in desire the truth may be sifted out, and
my self resolved and better instructed (if I err) to consider of them
somewhat more largely; That if they be found so noble and Catholic a Medicine
as some esteem them, they may be still retained, and embraced in our bosoms;
and if upon examination they prove suspicious, dangerous and hurtful, they
may be cashered and abandoned. First therefore, because Opinion and Name
prevail much to forestall the Market, and wholly possess men's minds with
prejudice, leaving no one room for reason, I will be silent a while, and you
shall hear one of the most learned, wise, and famous Physicians of Europe (I
mean Horatius Augenius) very learnedly, ingenuously, iudicially, gravely and
honestly (after his manner) uttering his mind of this point in Question. Whom I
produce the rather, because it is intimated, that Italian Physicians (which
Country without question breeds many excellent men in that faculty) have
these Amulets in high and rare estimation. Hear therefore what Augenius
without exception one of the greatest Masters in Physic that Italy
nourishes at this day (if he be yet alive) speaks to this purpose Lib. 3. de
Peste cap. 27. De sublimato, Arsenico Cristallino, and Puluere Bufonis. I have
read in the writings of some Empericks, that the powder of a Toad, Arsenicke,
or Sublimat, if they be worn upon the region of the heart, so as they touch
the skin, do maruellously preserve men from the Plague. And they esteem this
as a great secret; and as I understand have drawn some rich persons to be of
their opinion. I who do not easily believe every thing which I read or hear,
do greatly doubt of the force and nature of those poisons, and do assuredly
persuade my self, that they can never produce any such effect. And that I may
lay open my opinion, we must know that Experience (especially in such kinds) is
perilous: for since the action of the Physician is performed upon so noble a
Subject as the body of Man, the nature and force of every unknown medicine is
with great judgment to be examined and searched out: and the Rule of
Examination is to consider whether Reason approve and persuade it, or disclaim
and reject it. If Reason allow and persuade it, thou may boldly use it
without scruple; but if Reason gainsay it, no medicine is to be used, unless
thou be assured of the operation thereof, by the long experience of men of
singular judgment. I say long experience; for we must not trust one, two, or
three experiments: but very many are to be diligently considered and wisely
gathered, that the right habit of experience may be attained, which may deserve
the commendation of all men, because it is one of the instruments (as we have
said elsewhere) by whose means and help, Remedies are invented. We must
likewise mark well, that our experience take her original from a man worthy
to be credited, of great judgment, wise, knowing well how to distinguish from
what cause the success proceeds, whether from the medicine, the temperament
of the body, the time of the year, chance, or other infinite respects. It
falls out daily, that we see many effects, which have a far different cause
from that the common people dream of. Now to apply those things that have
been spoken, to our purpose, I affirm confidently, that such a medicine of
poisons applied outwardly to the body, has no manifest, probable or
demonstratiue reason, whereby we may be persuaded that they have so miraculous
efficacy against the Plague. They will say, that by similitude of substance
there is attraction of the venim from the heart, to the outward part, by the
attractiue virtue of the poison. But this can not so much profit, as evidently
hurt. Let us grant, that the venomous faculty of the poison penetrateth to the
heart, I pray you what effect will it produce there? It can not draw the venom
to it: for there is none, because he whom we will preserve is yet sound. If
therefore, the heart be disposed to receive the venomous infection of the air,
what shall hinder the force of the outward poison, that it may not infect the
heart and other principal parts, and if it be once entered into the heart, what
shall let the distribution of it by the Arteries into all the body? O great
miracle, and never yet heard of, that a venomous faculty should flow into the
heart, wander through the Arteries, and not finding his looked for friend,
should go out again without any offense offered to the parts whereby he
passed. Besides, if the attractiue faculty be inuenimed, what reason can be
given, the heart should not be continually offended by the poison thereof. It
is evident, thar the heart is the principal object of poisons: how then shall
it be touched by a venomous quality, and not endure wrong? Touching their
experience, I cannot yet give credit to it. I desire to see these things often
tried, with good success, to have many testimonies of Physicians of great
judgment, before I can believe them. But let us come to those that are
infected, and have the poison actually seized on their heart. It may be they
may do them good. None at all. For attraction proceeds from the stronger
power, which draws to it that which is weaker. Let then some man tell me how
he can be sure, that the poison of the Plague shall not draw to it the venim of
the outward medecin; and why the poison thereof may not be stronger and
greater than the other. Besides, the matter of the Plague is not properly
poison but by similitude, and therefore cannot be drawn by another poison. But
me think I hear one answer to all my arguments, that the effect is performed,
though the cause be unknown because it is secret. This is the miserable refuge
of al empericks, whereby they may easily wind out of any doubt, and absolve the
most intricate Question of our Art without much ado. But I abhor this from
my heart; not because I allow no secret causes, which I grant, but because I
think it a notorious fault, redounding greatly to the reproach of our Art, if
we run still to hidden causes, when manifest reason may easily end the
controversy. How will they demonstrate that poisons have this effect? By
experience. But what experience can they show worthy to receive this credit?
And where are the Physicians of note and learning, which approve them? You have
heard my opinion, reserving to others their better judgment.

Now that I have stayed your stomachs with this honest, grave, and judicial
speech of Father Augenius that great and learned Italian Physician, who (if I
be thought too light) may well weigh in the balance with any one man whosoever
he be, give me leave briefly to examine the reasons that are produced to prove,
that these Amulets do no hurt: secondly, that they do good.

The first Argument, if it be not altogether impertinent, must thus be reduced
to form:

There is use of poisons in Physic: therefore impoisoned Amulets of Arsenicke
or such like, may be safely used by men in health, to preserve them from the
Plague without hurt.

The proposition is somewhat largely stood upon, which was never to my
knowledge called into question by any man of judgment, and the consequence
which should have been proved, left altogether untouched.

Physic consists of diverse parts. That may be of use in the Hygieine the
preserving part, which has no place in the Therapeuticall. And there be many
things of special virtue in the Therapeutice, which if a man should practice
upon sound bodies to preserve their health, he might well be sent to Anticyrae
to purge with Hellebore his unsound brain. A sturdie horse requires a rough
rider. Duro Nodo durus Cuncus. In magnis and (...) Morbis, vbi ager
necessarioex morbo periclitatur anceps potius Remedium tentandum quam nullum.
Vrimus secamus.
In such cases Physicians are enforced to use Euphorbium, Opium, and Paracelsus
his deceitful Laudanum, and that sometimes in large quantity: which yet no
wise man will prescribe to his Patients to preserve them in health. There is
therefore utterly no consequence in this, that because there may be sometimes
in some diseases use of Deleteries in the Therapentice, therefore they may be
safely used as Preservatives to maintain health. For in such cases they are
opposed against the disease to fight with it as an Enemy, and so by their
colluctation Nature sometime saves herself, as when by the fighting of two
dogs, a Man sometime escapes without hurt or wound.

In the Curatime part of Physic, there is a necessary use of the Saw, and of
both potentiall and actual fire. Secamus, vrimus. And yet by your leave a Man
in health will hardly be persuaded to such Preservatives.

Before I leave this argument, I will by your patience point at some defects in
the proof of the proposition. Arsenicke, Orpiment, Toads and Adders, are
acknowledged rank and deadly poisons in the highest degree. This is true
concerning the Minerals which consist of similar parts. But touching Toads and
Adders, it cannot be verified, that they be absolutely and generally poisons.
For these have their venom, Incertis, and determinatis Partibus: in certain
and determinate parts, not universally diffused through the whole body.
Touching Adders or Vipers it is evident that their Poison lodges only in the
head, (specially the teeth and tail. Their flesh (which only is received)
into that noble Medicine (which thereof has his name, and is called Triacle)
is so far from being a poison, that it is a present Antidote against the
poison of the other parts. And this will not seem strange if we dare credit
Iacobus Ferrarius, a learned Physician of Mantua, who in his book De Theriaca
lately set forth, reports that he has seen men's hands besprinkled with the
blood of Vipers, without any farther offense than a little itching for a short
time. And I have been informed by men yet living in our own Country, that
they have seen of our adders after their teeth have been pulled out, handled
in men's hands, and carried in their bare bosoms familiarly without hurt. The
like is to be verified of the Scorpion, who carries his venom in his tail. And
therefore when they would dispatch themselves, they turn up their tail toward
their back, and there shooting their stings kill themselves. And this they do
when they are so pursued as they see no way to escape, making by that means a
speedy riddance of themselves. Neither could they die so speedily of so small
wound, if the instrument inflicting the same were not venomous, since they will
endure far greater wounds, without danger of life. Therefore it is evident,
that there is in the tail of the Scorpion a poison contrary to the life and
temperament of the Scorpion. The poison of the Spanish flies called
Cantharides, is esteemed to reside in the head, wings, and legs, and the body
very medicinable. So the poison of a mad dog lodges only in his foam. The
poison of Asps in their eggs: of the Leopard in the gall or choler only: of
the venomous Mouse in the urine: the Tortoise in the outward skin. But to
return to Adders or Vipers, incomparable, Galen in his 11. book of the
faculty of simple medicines, and in his book De opt. Secta cap. 12. tells of
certain persons who being desperately diseased, by the use of wine, whereinto
whole adders had by chance fallen, not only received no manner of hurt, but
happily thereby recovered their health. There is therefore so great virtue in
the flesh of vipers to resist malignity, that the venom of the external parts
seems by the force thereof altogether drowned and subdued. It follows not
therefore, because there is poison in the viper, therefore his whole subject is
a strong poison. For so a man might conclude, that the whole body of some men
is poison, because there is in their spettle and teeth a venomous quality, as I
my self with others have seen evidently by a man in London, who being bitten
by another lightly in the hand, was so impoisoned, that the whole hand rotted,
and the party thereof shortly died. I marvel therefore that a man of note for
experience and judgment, would open such a gappe to the vulgar sort, to loath
and contemn Physic and Physicians, (whereunto they are prone enough of
themselves) as to affirm that one of their most noble and famous medicines
has a strong poison, his Basis and principal Ingredient. Galen in his book
De There. ad Pis. says, that the fat of the Crocodill laid upon the wound,
helps those that are bitten by the Crocodill. The biting of the venomous
Mouse, is healed by the Mouse bruised, and laid upon the place. After the same
manner, they that are smitten by the Viper, are helped if you bruise the Viper
and apply her to the wound. The body of the Scorpion laid upon the part,
heals her poison. Dioscor. lib. 6. cap. 44. E alia quam plurima animalia sua
curant maleficia. Yet the fat of the Crocodill, the body of the Scorpion, or
venomous Mouse, are not received into the composition of the Treacle, but do
only help their own poisons. We must therefore observe, that nature has not
only given venomous parts to these creatures, but others which are alexeterys
to their own poison. Secus (ait quidam) omnia illa, ad vnum maleficium
edidisset, ac de venenis sollicita, remediorum fuisset oblita Otherwise she
should have framed them wholly to evil and hurt, and being careful of poisons,
should have been forgetful of remedies. Natura autem vt in superfluis non
abundat, sic non deficit in necessarijs. Nature as she abounds not in
superfluities, so she is not defective in necessaries. Now these alexetery
parts (as I may call them) are of two sorts: Some have an ingenit property of
curing their own poisons, without admistion of other things, as the fat of
the Crocodill and the Scorpion whereof our Merchants that travel to
Constantinople have good experience. Other have an ingenit and mixed faculty,
as the body of the Viper, which without other alexeterys being laid on the
wound, cures her own poison: and with commistion of other Antidots,
extinguisheth in a manner all poisons: Galen explicateth this twofold faculty,
Lib. de There. ad Pis. cap. 4. where having said that the head and tail of the
Vipers are to be cut off, he adds: And marvel not that these parts being
taken away, the rest of the members do make the Antidot more effectual, by
the ingenit and admixed faculty of helping, which is in their flesh. After he
calls their faculty ingenit, and admixed: For as by their ingenit faculty
they cure their own poison, so by their admixed property, Potentissimum
efficient Alexipharmacum. He that would be farther satisfied, let him peruse
the book of Galen, and he shall not think his labor lost. Your sweet kernels
in bitter shells, precious Diamonds in course stones, and Pearls in base
oysters, might serve well to illustrate this which has been already proved,
that there are certain living Creatures which have some parts very hurtful,
or of no or little use, and others very commodious and beneficial to the life
and health of mankind: but makes nothing at all for your Arsenicke, who is a
mineral and consists of similar parts. The sweet kernel is of a different
temperament to the bitter shell, the precious Diamond of a more excellent
substance then the course stone, or Oyster wherein he is found. The flesh or
sides of Vipers is of a differing temperament from the teeth and head, wherein
only resideth the poison. But in your Arsenicke you can show me no part, be it
never so small, which is not Arsenicke, and that is a strong and rank Poison,
you may seek a good while here, before you find either Kernel, Diamond or
Pearl. This is no news to them who have any the least insight in Philosophy:
who know right well that in the body of man, there be Organical parts much
differing in temperament and nature: and that every least parcel or portion of
a similar part is of the same nature and substance. Your cures wrought by the
fume of Orpmint and outward applying of Arsenicke, make nothing to our purpose:
for it has been showed, that there is use of many things in the healing part
of Physic, which have no place in the preserving part. And yet Doctors will
perhaps make doubt of them, and be twice well advised before they draw them
into practice in hope to work such miracles as is reported by them. It is well
known that your dried Toad has failed in that marvelous effect attributed to
him.

But of all other the words following sound very strangely and harsh in my
ears. I know not how they can be perpetually opposite to man's nature, nay if
that be a true and sufficient definition of poison. At no time to agree with
nature, I see not how these things may simply be called poisons, that at
sometimes and in some cases agree with nature as well as a man would wish. Here
is strange doctrine and new learning indeed, for our Philosophers and
Physicians. You see not how Arsenicke and such like poisons can be perpetually
opposite to nature. Then give me leave since I learned Logic since your time,
to show how I have conceived of these matters. The very name of poison or venom
implies (in my conceit) an absolute contrariety and hostility unto Nature. And
War is not more adverse and contrary to Peace, virtue to vice, black to
white, then poison is absolutely, perpetually and irreconcilably opposed unto
nature. This will more clearly appear if we peruse the definitions of poisons
set down by the best and most acute and sound Philosophers and Physicians.

Mercurialis in his first book of Poisons, cap. 5. following Gallen and other
Philosophers, defines poison according to the common notion and apprehensions
of men, to be such a thing as kills men and beasts irrecouerably, the cause
being unknown. Auicen (not so properly) calls it a Medecin contrary to man's
nature. Galen lib. 3. de Temp. calls that an Aliment which is subdued by
Nature, and that Poison which subdueth and vanquisheth Nature. Himself
defines it thus: Poison is a mixed substance, enemy to the heart, and
corrupter of humane nature. Fernelius the French Galen lib. de Abt. Rer. Cause.
defines poison to be, not that which always kills or opposes the heart the
fountain of life, but whatsoever by his whole substance and secret force does
either extinguish or notably offend the substance of the faculties or their
functions.

Physicians consider and contemplat a threefold difference of Subjects in their
reference and relation to humane Nature: The first sort are called Aliments,
the second Medicaments, the third and last Deleteries or Poisons. Aliments all
are such things as have a substance like and familiar unto ours, containing a
certain benign and wholesome heat and spirit, whereby the heat and spirits of
our bodies are cherished and supported, and a matter passing by alteration into
the matter of our bodies nourishing and increasing the substance of them.
Deleteries are such as in their whole substance, directly and as it were ex
Diametro, are opposed to Aliments. For as they are in a near familiarity and
affinity leagued and linked to our Nature; so these are altogether enemies and
pernicious unto her, which being used do not only affect us with their first
and second qualities, but in their whole kind do corrupt whatsoever they touch
in our bodies, and putrefying the substance thereof, turn it into their own
kind and Similitude. Therefore Aliments and Deleteries are in their whole
kind and substance extremely contrary one to the other. In the middle rank
betwixt these two extremes purging Medicines have their place; which neither as
nutriments may be converted into our substance, neither as Deleteries
altogether corrupt and consume the same. These do partly agree and partly
disagree with Nature, so as they neither overcome her nor can be overcome by
her. Therefore Nature thrusts them out of doors as seditious and turbulent
guests, suffering them only to carry with them bag and baggage, I mean that
humor which she may well spare, and has most agreement and affinity with
them. Now if Poison be contrary to Nature, if it subdue and overcome Nature, if
it be an enemy to the heart, and a corrupter of Nature, if it be in his whole
kind and substance opposed to Aliments, Natures food, as Auicen, Galen
Mercurial, and Fernelius, the Lights and fathers of Physic and Philosophy
have determined, I hope we shall salve Galens credit well enough: and Galens
description of Poison will stand as true and sufficient, That Poison is that
which at no time agrees with Nature. How then shall we answer this argument?
If it it be a true definition of Poison at no time to agree with nature, then
you must put out Arsenicke, Orpmint with others mo out of the cense and order
of Poisons, which sometimes and in some cases agree with Nature as well as a
man would wish. How is this proved? Thus. All those things which do cure any
Disease, agree with Nature as well as a man would wish. Arsenicke, Orpmint do
cure some Diseases, as Ulcers and such like; therefore they agree with Nature
as well as may be.

The lame leg of the proposition has been in some sort already pointed at,
and the extreme limping and halting thereof will easily appear to him that
has but half an eye in Philosophy or Physic, at the first glimpse. For many
Philosophers hold it as a Principle (though not so soundly) that all
Medicaments or Curers do Vim aliquam infer Naturae. They that are more sound
and judicial make three Orders and Ranks of Medecines, which (though some
apply to purgers) may be verified of all in general. The first Order is of
those which they call Benign and blessed medicines, because they are very
familiar and friendly to Nature, performing their operation without any the
least offense of her. Others are called Indifferent or moderate, more strongly,
yet without offering any singular or

Now if you will have Arsenicke a Medicament, you must needs set him in one of
these three ranks. In the first or second I am well assured you will not place
him. It remains then that he must be ranged in the last band of sturdy and
boisterous Companions, who are ywis no great friends unto Nature. In this order
are Scammony, Hellebore, Euphorbium, who though they have their use, and the
woorst of them be more tolerable then Arsenicke, yet was it never (as I
suppose) pronounced of them by any man of judgment, that They agree with
nature as well as a man would wish. The saw, the burning iron or actual
causticke do cure some diseases, yet how abhorrent these things are to nature,
all men do know. We must not think that all those things who by vanquishing
and subduing their enemy the disease, do give relief and ease to nature, are
therefore in themselves and their proper essence agreeable and friendly unto
Nature. Ellebor, Scammony etc. (of whom before) who in their own essence being
hot and fiery, are apt to inflame the body, and to kindle a fire or fever where
none was before, yet in a body stuffed with choler, melancholy, and such ill
humors, do by carrying away with them the fuel which gave nourishment to the
fire, do by accident relieve nature, put out the fire, and cure the disease.
Two or three Flemish draughts of cold water have sometimes cured a burning
fever, by quenching the flame: And yet Arius the Grammarian was killed by
Thessalus by one only draught: and cold water agrees so well with most men's
Natures, that they had rather power it into their shoes then their stomachs.

In the next place we are instructed how to prevent or cure the blisterings and
vlcerations procured by these plague cakes. This is all one as if a man should
first break his fellows head, and then give him a plaster. Only one means
is mentioned to prevent this inconvenience, which is, the taking away of the
cakes, or rather (as I would counsel) the utter rejecting thereof, which I
cannot mislike. Otherwise your lapping of him in thicker stuff, your putting
linen betwixt him and the breast, your anointing the place with oil, as they
give more than suspicion of his churlish and malignant property, adverse and
pernicious unto nature, who seems to be in best case when he is farthest from
her, and to delight nothing in his neighborhood, so they will be found poor
helps, and weak means to encounter his strong poison, and malitiousnesse.

As for the question which is moved; Whether to have such things appear, be
not rather a benefit than an harm. I take it to be out of all question, that
to raise blisters and vlcerations, in so noble a place, so near to the heart
the fountain of life, by so venomous a subject as Arsenicke, cannot be any way
beneficial, but every way offensive and noisome. For first what learned
Physician has ever counseled Vesicatorys to be applied in that Region so
near unto the most principal Part. Next, what reason is there of any such
Euacuation, when we labor to preserve them that are sound. And if they be
tainted with any venomous matter, how shall we be persuaded that Arsenicke will
by blisters expel the same, and not rather join hand in hand with it to
overthrow Nature, having by them entrance and access: especially if we
consider the old Maxim, Simile simili additum fit magis simile. Besides the
best learned who have received these Amulets, hold that Arsenick by a
similitude of substance does draw the poison of the plague unto it self, and
not expel it, which must be done by an Antipathy and contrariety: for that
Arsenicke should strengthen Nature and help her to expel it, since it is an
undoubted and deadly enemy to Nature, is improbable if not insensible.

As no man does affirm that all blisteres are poisons because of that effect,
and therefore you might have spared labor in proouing that which is not
denied, so it is evident that diverse poisons do produce that effect, and
therefore are the more dangerously applied near any principal part, because
hereby they do open as it were a door or window to convey into the body
their infecting noisome spirits. The cause why Garlic and Mustarddo blister
the outward skin, and yet taken inwardly, have no such operation, is (as I
suppose) because their heat is an agent being applied to the outmost skin,
which is a cold and membranous part, and so having no resistance does rarifie
and dissolve his continuity. But taken inwardly, they are Patients, the inward
heat subduing them, and scattering their spirits, so as they can not unite to
perform that action. But Arsenicke is of a far other Nature, whose pestilent
heat will not be commanded by Nature, whether he be outwardly or inwardly used,
but does subdue and extinguish natural heat. And this I take (under
correction) to be the solution of this your Proplem.

Whereas in the words following you affirm that it is manifest both by
Experience and Reason, that things outwardly applied, have action, and work
into the Body by communicating their spiritual qualities, to the Spirits of
our Bodies, by means of the warmth that opens our Pores, and ratifying the
subtle parts of the medicine, is the cause of a reciprocal action and
passion; and hereupon infer that it may seem strange that Arsenicke and such
like strong Poisons, having so strong poisoning Spirits, should not poison our
Spirits wheresoever they meet, you acknowledge that these are strange works and
woonders in Nature: First, that such poisonfull spirits should mingle with our
Spirits, and not offend them: Secondly, that they should strengthen them and
help them to expel infection. These indeed are strange effects, and therefore
if we be readier to wonder at them than to believe the^ hastily, I hope you
will pardon us. But let us hear how you satisfy us, and unloose this Gordian
knot. First therefore, you set down this Maxim or Principle: Arsenicke and
Orpmint are no ways poisonfull or hurtful to Nature, but by their
corrosiuenes, or fretting qualities: otherwise, they are as good both
Preservatives and Curers, as any other most in use: and therefore so long as
they are kept from corroding or fretting, they can do no harm, but may do much
good in that kind which they do respect: that is to say, in all Arsenicall
Diseases, as the Plague, the Plurisie, Noli me tangere, Cankers, and Fistulas.

If Arsenicke be a strong Poison (as you acknowledge) and Poisons be (as has
been showed) Toto Genere and Substantia Naturae contraria. The deadly Foes,
and irreconcilable Enemies to Nature, then your Principle and Ground must needs
shake, and will prove no good Foundation to build upon, which makes it only
hurtful to Nature by his corrosiuenesse or fretting quality. If to be
offensive to Nature by excess in some quality or other be sufficient to prove
and make a Poison, then are Scammony, Turbith, Colocynthis, etc. Poisons, and
not Medicaments; for these all offend Nature in quality. You must therefore
either make these Poisons with many more, to consort with Arsenicke: and then we
shall have good store of Poisons. For all such things as are in the 4 Degree of
cold or heat, must be put into this rank; or else bring back Arsnicke from the
cense of Poisons into the Class of Medicaments: for which I suppose you will
have small warrant. These indeed by reason of their excess in quality, are
said prope accedere ad venena, and are called Maligna, or Venenata; but Venena
Poisons they can not properly be called or accounted ^ction and passion,
according to Arist. 1. de Genesis 50. 51. Fit inter contraria qua sub vno,
eodemque Genere comprehenduntur. Therefore an Agent according to qualities,
shall affect the qualities of the Body, but an Agent in the whole substance
alters the substance of our Body. Now it is manifest, that Arsenicke does not
only work upon the Qualities, but that he corrupts the very temperament and
substance of the Body.

If you mean by Arsenicall Diseases, such maladies whose Curer and specificall
Antidot is Arsenicke, then are we beholding greatly to you, who have found out
an appropriat Alexetery for the Plague, whereunto the greatest and most
profound Philosophers and Physicians could never attain. For it is generally
confessed by all, That the specificall Antidot of the Pest is yet unknown.
Thucidides says, That that Malady did Superare Humanas vires, or rather
Humanam imbecilitatem. And the learned Masters of our Profession with one voice
proclaim that forasmuch as the special weapon to kill that Monster is not yet
found out, we must Pugnare contra illam Beluam communibus praesidijs and
remedijs aliorum Venenorum. But I rather suppose you call those Diseases
Arsenicall, because they have in them a malignant, poisonfull, and pernicious
venim, resembling the poison of Arsenicke. How then shall Arsenicke be their
Curer, when all Diseases are cured by their contraries? unless you will
maintain that dotage of Paracelsus (for so I must needs call it) against
Galen, That Diseases are cured per similia, by their like. And then, if the
Body be empty, exhaust and extenuat, we must exhaust and empty it more, and
not restore and repair it. If it be too full and plethoricke, we must fill it
more, and not euacuat, if it be stopped and obstructed, then we must ram and
stuff it up more, and not de obstruct and open: if it be too hot, we must lay
on more wood, and not put out the Fire either by taking away the fuel or
quenching the flame. If there be Solutio continui, we must not unite, but
disioyne the parts, and sic in cateris. If I thought that this uncouth and
vnscholarlike Paradox would be maintained, it were easy for me to make the
Point as plain as the Kings highway. But I muse much how the Plurisie comes
into the Tribe of these Arsenicall Diseases, unless you put an addition to
him, and call him a Pestilentiall Plurisie.

The way whereby these Poisons are metamorphosed into as good if not better
Preservatives and Curers as any most in use, is to keep them (as you say) from
fretting and corroding. And that this may be done, you prove by example of the
Quacksaluers in Germany, who first drinking sallet oil, and after taking great
quantities of these poisons, are preserved from harm and danger. That Sallet
oil, butter, or any other unctuous things are good against poisons, it will be
readily granted. But that they should be of such force and efficacy as to
secure a man that should take after them great quantities of Arsenicke, you
shall give me leave to doubt. And I think I shall have mo fellows, then there
be Mountebanks in Germany, or Curtesans in Venice. For why should we not think
that there is as much virtue in Treacle, Mithridate, and those other Antidots
which they take after those Poisons, at the least, as in Sallet oil. And yet I
hold not them sufficient to match and master these Poisons. Neither is it like
that Mathiolus had any such inward familiarity with Mountebanks, Mathiolus
tells of another fraud or iugling trick far more probable. lib. 6. coment.
in Diosc. prefat.
as that they would acquant him with the secrets and mysteries of their Art,
which they conceal, Tanquam sacra Eleusinia. But suppose he was told this by
some odd Quacksaluer or other, and that he was so credulous to believe it,
shall we build the conclusions of our Art upon the credit of a iugling
Mountebanke, or will any man be so mad that is compos mentis, upon the
Mountebanks word to try the Experiment, and arming himself with a good draught
or two of Sallet oil, afterward devour great quantities of Arsenicke.

That the corroding Quality of Arsenicke, may be clean taken away, you shall
pardon me if I believe not your Chynists, if they do (as you say) affirm it
never so confidently. We have an homely and true saying, The Devil will be the
Devil whether you bake roste, sees, or broile him, or howsoever you handle
him. Naturam expellas etc: So Arsenicke so long as he remains Arsenicke,
(unless you destroy his Nature, and then the case is altered, He is no more
He) will undoubtedly show of what house he comes by corrodings and
corrupting. Neither do your instances of Aron roots, or the gall of an ox
prove the contrary. For we must remember that there be two kinds of
Qualities, the one common or as some call them accidental; the other
specificall and formal. The Qualities which are common or accidental, may be
removed from their Subjects. But those that are specificall, cannot be
separated, Sine interitu subiecti. As in a man to be hot, cold, moist, dry,
may be absent or present with him: but to be risibilis or irascibilis, can in
no wise be separated from him so long as he is a man. The burning Quality of
Aron roots is accidental and common, and therefore remooueable. But the
corroding or poisoning Quality of Arsenicke (for these you make al one) is by
all learned Physicions held specifical and essential. For else how should it
be Toto genere, and substantia Deleterium. Concerning your Ox Gall, whose
bitterness you say you have removed, I say only this: If it be Gall, then it
is bitter, if it be not bitter, then it is not Gall. If a man put three gallons
of water to three spoonefull of wine, and drawing out a glass full, make his
friend drink thereof, affirming it to be wine, he will be ready to say, that
were it not for the name of wine, he had as leave drink water. Such mixture
must have their name of the Praedominant. And I suppose that he that should
taste your sweetened Gall, would call it galled sugar, and not sugared gall, as
one did a cup of drink mixed by his friend, yet not to the liking of his
stomach, wined water, and not watered wine.

Whereas you think it absurd, that there should not be as sure away to correct
the poisoning quality of Arsenicke by mineral means, as there is means to
correct the offending qualities, of Scammony, Agaricke, Hellebor, etc. by
vegetables, me thinks your speech is very harsh and uncouth, both for the
phrase and sense. For mine own part I never heard or read of the correcting of
poisons, but only of Medicines offending in quality, of which sort are those
which you have reckoned, whose offensive quality being retunded, they are used
without danger, and to the benefit and comfort of mankind. But as for Arsenicke
or such like poisons, being as has been often proved Toto genere deleteria,
the infest and mortal enemies of Nature, you may as soon make an Ethiopian
white with washing, as make them friendly and comfortable to our bodies by
correcting, unless by correcting you mean destroying of their Nature and
substance altogether, by reducing them to a Caput mortuum, as you call them, and
that is a strange kind of correcting: or else they produce such effect by
accident, intending no such matter any more, then Iasons enemy did, who by his
sword cured his Aposteme, which the Physicions could not heal.

All this while you have endeavored to prove that these Amulets may be worn
without harm, which how you have performed, Aliorum sit Iudicium. Now you will
show how they do good.

Your opinion concerning the manner how they do good, you set down in these
words. I assure my self that there is in these Minerals which the Alchymists
call their spirits, good store of gold, or to speak a little plainer, of the
spirits of gold, and from thence in my opinion it has that incredible and
admirable operation in preserving our spiritis from infection.

This (as I suppose) will be an incredible and admirable opinion unto our
Philosophers and Physicians, who may turn over a good number of books, before
they find any mention of such a far-fetched and dearly bought conceit. There
are three several opinions concerning this matter. The first is, that by
wearing these Amulets, the heart is inured and accustomed unto poison, and so
by this familiarity learneth to contemn it. Concerning this conceit I will say
nothing my self, but you shall hear what Crato that most learned German,
and Imperial Physicion speaks to it, Epist. ad Monanium.

Touching the bags of Arsenicke, I find no other reason for them worth
mentioning, save that thereby the heart is accustomed unto poison. But how
weak and dangerous a reason this is, and that a man careful of a good
conscience ought not to trust to it, you easily discern. Therefore though you
should produce six hundred Authors which allow them, you shall not persuade me
to use or approve them. I can tell you, since you urge me, upon my own
knowledge that Creckouius was so weakened and exulcerated in the breast by them,
that he threw away the bag with great indignation in the castle of Grauestem.
I could say the like of others. That which follows in Crato is worth the
reading, but I must make haste.

The second opinion is that of Antonius Firmanus, who says that Arsenicke by
similitude of substance draws to it the venomous and contagious Seminaries of
the Plague, and by that means preserves him that wears it. This opinion the
Discourser at large would seem to follow in his English Treatise of the
Pestilence, lately set forth, wherein he allows and commends the use of
these Amulets because by a similitude one venom draws another as Arsenicke
does, who voideth the poison of the Plague insensibly. Quod venenum and corpore
attrahat, and tota forma and ratione caliditatis. This Antipathy in Arsenicke
experience does allow, etc.

Mark how Clarke-like he reasons. First he says that Arsenicke draws the
venom by similitude of form, and ratione caliditatis. Then in the very next
words, either forgetting what he had said before, or notvnderstanding, what he
was about to say, he attributes this effect to an Antipathy or contrariety.
But I will stand no longer about him, but leave him to his wandering Muses: Ne
quem non inuenio vsquam esse putem nusquam. Yet one thing by the way would not
be ouerpassed, that whereas he would be reputed a great Linguist, he has in
the Epistle to the Reader inserted only two Greek words, and the last seems
not to be understood, and for the first a mean scholar in Mulcasters school,
will easily tell him that it is neither good Greek nor yet true Latin, but
Caco ethen scribendi indeed.

Concerning the opinion it is not true, that eueryvenome is like to Arsenicke,
neither that every poison is like in substance and Nature with another poison:
neither can all contagious seminaries be like to Arsenicke, since they are not
of the same violence, Analogy, or similitude one with another, as might be
easily showed some infecting only Cattle, others Fishes, others men. What then
if the poison of the Plague be not like in Nature with Arsenicke: what if it be
like in Nature but stronger and hoater then Arsenicke. Surely then it must draw
the poison of Arsenicke, unto it into the body, and double the evil.

The third and last opinion is, that Arsenicke does by a certain secret
Antipathy or contrariety oppugn, vanquish and expel the poison of the Plague.
This has of all other the most probability and ground of reason, but it has
place only then when the seminaries of the Pestilence are contrary to the
poison of Arsenicke; for then the two poisons may war and skirmish one with
the other in such sort as they both spending their forces and rigor, each
against the other, and so dying in that colluctation and combat, the party by
accident may escape with his life. And in this case peradventure there might be
some truth in that observation which Philippus Ingrasias, Fallopius and Massa,
learned men, and worthy of good credit, have made. And in this case some
suppose that might be true which Ausonius Gallus reports of a lewd huswife in
these verses.

Toxica Zelotypo dedit vxor saeua Marito
nec satis ad mortem credidit esse datum.
Miscuit argenti lethalia Pondera viui
cogeret vt celerem vis geminata Necem
Diuidat haec si quis faciunt discreta venenum
Antidotum sumit qui sociata bibet
Ergo inter sese dum noxia pocula certant
cessit lethalis noxa salutiferae.
Protinus and vacuos alui petiere recessus
lubrica deiectis qua via nota cibis
Quam pia cura deum? prodest crudelior vxor,
and cum Fata volunt, bina venena iuuant.
And yet the discreet and prudent Physician will not hereupon counsel the
wearing of Arsenicke to cure the Plague. For in poisons opposing Nature in
their whole substance, there is no Artificial or rational method as Galen
teaches Meth. 13. cap. 6. and the Physician cannot discern but by event unto
what poison, or Analogy of poison Arsenicke is opposite. The sympathys or
antipathys of poisons together with the forces and secret insults of contagious
seminaries, are unknown to the Physician. The idiosygcrasye, or particular
Natures (as Galen calls them, are unknown, and (for ought we can see)
incomprehensible unto humane imbecillitie, Gal. 3. Meth. cap. 7. And if the
Degree, Nature, and faculty of that poison be not to be easily discerned,
which proceeds of corruption of humors in our bodies, much less is that
hidden maliciousness of these Minerals which is far more subtle, secret,
and unsearchable. First therefore there must be a poison in the body: next that
poison must be contrary to Arsenicke: thirdly it must be of equal force, else
if he survive and be of force after he has subdued his enemy, he may do a
shrewd turn when al is done. We conclude therefore that it is rash and
temerarious counsel, to use a Medicine, which if it find not an enemy to
struggle with, will easily speed and kill the party. Better it is to follow
Galens advise, who in his book De Simp. writing against Zenocrates, would have
a Physician never to use any Medicine which may be prejudicial or hurtful to
the health or life of mankind.

As for the fourth opinion, your golden Conceit that this marvelous operation
should be wrought by the spirits of Gold in Arsenicke, I suppose there is far
less likelihood or probability therein, than in the golden dream of the
Philosophers stone, whereinto many have fallen being rich, and awaked out of
the same stark beggars.

First, how should we imagine, that the Gold or golden spirits which are
fancied to be in Arsenicke should more prevail in preserving Nature, than the
Arsenicall spirits (whose Quantity must needs be far greater) in violating
and corrupting her. Secondly, if this wonderful work of preservation proceed
from gold and his spirits, being in so small quantity (as they must needs be
if they be at all) in a little lump of Arsenicke; why do you not rather
counsel men to wear about their necks, upon the Region of the heart a double
Ducate or a plate of Gold, seeing therein must needs be greater quantity of
spirits, more nearly and firmly united then in Arsenicke? Beside this might
be done without all danger and great security, the Arsenicall spirits (which
are so ill neighbors) being removed. I know right well that gold is of great
virtue. Auri sacra fames quid non mortalia cogis Pectora?

One says truly, that there was no fort inexpugnable, Ad quod Asmus auro
(...) possit ascendere. It is a cunning lock which a golden key will not open.
But yet among all the virtues and effects of Gold (which are manifold) I never
heard that reckoned, that it should preserve the wearerers thereof from Plague
and Poison.

Whereas you send us to the Refiners of Metals to be satisfied in this point,
I can assure you that one of the skilfullest workmen and best practiced in
that kind about London being demanded, What Gold he thought to be in
Arsenicke, made this answer: That there was as much Gold in Arsenicke as in a
Rat. And this he affirmed to be not only his judgment, but the conclusion of
the cunningest workemasters in Minerals about the City.

As for Paracelsus to whom in the next place you refer us, I would be loath
Bonas hor as tam male collocare, though I have misspent some time in my days,
and it may be about him: of whose writings I may say the clean contrary, that
Socrates did of Heraclitus book. Those things (said he, being demanded what he
thought of it) which I understand are very excellent, and therefore I suppose
the rest which I understand not to be answerable to them: For I can say, that
such things in Paracelsus which I understand, are exceeding frivolous, absurd
and ridiculous, and therefore I suppose the greater part (if not all the rest
included in his barbarous Riddles) to be suitable and agreeable with them. But
because you style him absolutely the most learned Chynicall writer and worker
that ever wrote, and I may perhaps be deemed partial, you shall hear the
judgment of that grave, learned and most judicial Physician Crato concerning
him, with whom I concur in that point, Epist. ad Theod. Zuingerum. Ep. Med. a
Scoltzim ep. 137. where having purged himself of a false calumniation, that he
should be an enemy to Chymicall Preparations, he annexeth these words: Insaniam
vero Paracelsicam qui summos in Art Med. Magistros, imo Artem ipsam Med.
propter Arcana sua (vt appellant) contemnit, and nouam nobise fumis Medicinam
fabricat, atque discentes a bonis Authoribus ad Fornaces ablegat, omnem denique
Seculi nostri Excellentiam deijcere studet, vt sua Medicamenta extollat,
nunquam probani. Artem enim ipsam Hippocratis and doctrina methodicae Galeni,
acceptam far, vt eruditum Medicum oportet; ita Paracelsica somnia, tot
verborum falsitatis iuolueris tecta and tam monstrosis nominibus variata,
fugere virum bonum decet.

Let Paracelsus be esteemed by you and his followers a skillful Chymicall
writer and worker, undoubtedly he was never learned, neither will be ever so
reputed among the learned. Give him what place you please among Mechanics or
Empericks, if you will needs have it so; for that is the highest Form whereunto
you can advance him: but if you offer to set him on the Bench among the Sages
and Senators of Learning, you shall do him wrong and your self to. Neither
do I yet deny but that he has some things of good use. And so had Thessalus
that old Bragadochian of Galens time, and Fioronamus that notorious Empericke
and Impostor of our time, who was banished Venice, but those, mixed with so
much vanity, pride and insolency as marreth all. You shall find it ordinary
in illiberall and illettered Natures (if you mark it well) that having
attained any little smattering knowledge, small portion of riches, or mean
degree of honor, they are far more elevated, and transported with high and
ouerweening thoughts, than ingenuous and generous minds of far greater
sufficiency. I have often marvelled how any man of wisdom and modesty,
seeing the incredible insolency and impudency, the intolerable vanity and
folly, the ridiculous and childish crakings and vantings of Paracelsus, should
once commend him without nothing his contrary vices, and giving him a dash with
a black coal.

Touching Pistorius whom you only produce as a Patron of your Amulets, though
I have little or no acquaintance with him, yet if ex vngue Leonem I must needs
say, That his speeches savor of too too much vanity (if not folly and
falsehood) and come very near the Mountbanks phrase, who use to set out their
basest trash with el-long and bombasted terms, and craking and lying vaunts.
First he affirms, That many Italian Physicians are of opinion, That there was
never a more excellent thing granted to mortal men by God, to preserve them
from the Plague. Secondly, That they call it a divine Medicine invented by God.
Thirdly, that they take it upon their oaths, That never any fell sick that
ware them. Haec dum recensentur satis superque, confutantur.

You heard in the beginning, These are Italian Physicians of great name.
what Father Augenius that learned and grave Italian Physician conceived of
them. And it is certain, that Massaria a learned Reader of Padua has
learnedly and largely disputed against them. And sure I am that Gerardus
Columba the great Physician of Messana disclaimeth them utterly. But it is
worth noting, First that these Physicians who so highly commend these Amulets,
are namelesse. Secondly, that they offer oath upon the matter, fearing belike
that their words would not be taken: whereas (if their credit were good) their
bare words would pass as currantly as their oaths. Lastly, their hyperbolicall
co^mendations of a poor poisoned cake, seems to me the language of vaunting
Quack-saluers, rather than of learned Physicians. As for his experiment in
Zuricke Ann. 64. and in Basil, that he knew none die who wore them; who will
believe him, since we have more than sufficient experience, both heretofore and
of late in London, Of the contrary.
and you your self acknowledge the same, but hold it pity to derogate from
the credit of so noble and general a Medicine, for a few particular Instances.
How noble a Medicine it is, I hope has appeared by this time. Sure I am that
it is no rational Medicine, and that the most learned Physicians, who have
handled the Argument of the Plague, do either directly oppugn it, as Augenius,
Columba, Massaria, etc. or else pass it over in silence, as not worthy to be
named or mentioned with rational and noble Antidots and Alexeteries (as
Palmarius or rather Fernelius that worthy Light of Physic (for that learned
book of the plague being the most Scholarlike, judicial and absolute in that
kind, that I ever met with) is thought to be written by him, and set out by
Palmarius his Scholar) or else if they mention it in the Tale after a great
rank of other rational Medicines, they set this or the like brand in the
forhead of it. Quidam Emperici, or Quidam (without naming them) Consulunt
tabellam ex Arsenico. Certain Empericks, or certain (not worthy to be named)
counsel a table of Arsenicke, as Platerus Heurnius, etc.

To conclude since Physic is the Art of helping, healing, curing, I see not
what we have to do with Poisons, unless it be to give council of Precaution,
and Prevention, or to relieve them, who by error or malice have meddled with
them. Me thinks it is wholesome and Fatherly counsel that Hippocrates gives
to all his Scholars, That they should always propound unto themselves these
two ends: First, Ne noceant. Secondly, Vt prodesse possint. First, That they be
sure to do no hurt to their Patients. Secondly, That they endeavor to do some
good. As for those who leaving so great variety of safe, wholesome and
salutiferous Medecins, as God of his infinite bounty has stored us withal,
will needs be still tampering with Poisons, and Deleteries, they seem to me
like the foolish flies, who forsake the sweet herbs and flowers to buzze about
the candle, so long till their wings be singed, and themselves often times burned
with the Flame. I might give instances hereof, but that I hasten to an end. It
is not good meddling with edge-tooles. Qui amat Periculum peribit in eo.

Thus I have presumed to inquire somewhat more at large, concerning these
Amulets non contentionis amore, sed veritatis indagandae studio: and that it
may appear that I am not of a servile disposition to rely upon the opinion of
any, be he never so learned, unless it be underpropped with Learning and
Reason: the rather because I understand that this Task was expected at my
hands. As for that learned and ancient Physician (who has taken upon him their
Defense and Patronage) I confess that as I aimed not directly and particularly
at him in my first writing against them (they being ordinarily dispensed by
many Chirurgians and Apothecaries in London, some of them being my kind
friends, so I do now bear him no more grudge, malice, or envy, then my
self: though I have been of late discourteously and hardly entreated,
rejected and shut out from conference. Which kind of dealing, how it agrees
with the Rules of Christianity or liberal Profession, let indifferent men
judge. Who knows not that our greatest Divines and best Lawyers do dissent
one from another, in some one point or other of their Arts. Do they therefore
break off all society, and proclaim open hostility one against another? God
forbid. I have read that Aristides and Pericles though they were at odds, and
iarred often in the Senate of Athens by reason of secret emulation, yet when
they were to undertake any public affair or embassage, they did Simulates in
finibus Patria deponere, easque redeuntes resumere. So I could wish that
Physicians should leave their private grudges and discontentments at home in
their own houses, and not carry them abroad in their bosoms among their
Patients, to the disgrace of their fellows and public opprobrie^, and
slander of their Profession. As for me, I am neither too skillful to learn,
nor too old to err: But desire to follow that council of the Orator. In
sententia permaneto. Enimuero nisi alia vicerit melior.

Sit nomen Domini benedictum.

Amica sit (quaeso) haec inter nos dissentio, Opinionum non Voluntatum,
Studiorum, non Animorum.

Non opus habes Amuletis and Periaptis quibus simul concurrit, and cooperatur
Diabolus.

Thou have no need of Amulets, with whom the Devil does concur and cooperate.



