THE PEARL OF PRACTICE, OR PRACTISERS PEARL, FOR PHYSIC AND CHIRVRGERIE.

Found out by I. H. (a Spagericke or distiller) amongst the learned
observations and proved practices of many expert men in both faculties.

Since his death it is garnished and brought into some method by a welwiller
of his.

AT LONDON, Printed by Richard Field, dwelling in the Blackfriars. 1594.

TO THE FAMOVS MECAENAS, OF ALL GOOD LEARNING, HIS HONORABLE GOOD PATRON, SIR
GEORGE CAREY, Knight, Knight Mareschall of her Majesty's household, Governor of
the Isle of Wight, etc. Health of soul and body, be multiplied for ever and
ever.
THis piece of timber, which an other man had roughly hewn over, wanting a
name (which I have given unto it) but not a defense and patronage, under whose
covert, it may be shielded, from the venomous darts of carping toungs: think
it not amiss, to present the same unto your excellent worthiness; since you
have even borne, as good and liberal a mind, to learning, and learned
workmen, in any faculty, as any noble Gentleman throughout this Realm of
England. The subject matter, whereon it consists, is charitable learning or
learned charity, practiced upon and performed unto those, which have stood in
need: and published by those, that are not ashamed, to show their names
(though for good causes two letters may yet serve to express them) being well
known to the best, and may be compared with the best, in the faculty of
Physic and keeping of a good conscience. The ground the^ being firm, and the
title free hold, whereupon the frame stands: how can the stormy winds,
proceeding out of the mouths, of unwholesome Aeoles, infect it with their
corruption, or one whit move it with all their violence? I learned this true
position long ago amongst other axioms in the nurserie at Ca^bridge. Non nobis
solum nati sumus, etc. we are not borne for our selves alone, but our country
challe^geth an interest in us, our children, our friends, and our posterity,
do lay claim to us. Howbeit such wicked days are come upon us, though a man,
for glory to God, love to his posterity, good will to his country, or other
honest motives, makes private things public, for the common commodity, of the
Church and common wealth; he is not praised of any, but reproved of many, and
condemned of all malicious Momes. Bonum quo communius eo melius, has been and
will be a true moral principle: though some great learned men do scorn to put
it in execution. The best Master that ever I served did reprove and condemn
him, for an evil and ungracious servant, that hid his talent in a napkin,
refusing to put it forth, to his masters advantage: Bind him hand and foot,
and cast him into utter darkness was, and will be the guerdon, of such private
companions. As those practisers, are justly reproved, which (to toll in more
customers) do hang out their signs, and gild their garlands, professing much
cunning, and have little or no learning: so dare I not avouch, to be of their
Religion, which purpose nothing less, then to practice their cunning. God gave
Galene leave (as Sippontinus writes) to live seven score years, what
separation he made of impurities from any simple, or what parting of elements
he used, I could never yet read or hear. But Paracelsus (nicknamed the
Sectarie) did more good in three score years by working with his own hands
(according to natures direction) concealing no Theorie nor practice from
posterity, showing much art, celando artem, though Filijs artis he is as
plain as a pathway. His scholars and followers, that practiced his teaching,
and taught his practicing, are a cloud of witnesses, to make demonstration of
this true position. That with a few medecines, rightly compounded, and with
some simples simply, and without couin prepared, more good has been, and may
be done, in one week against any disease, then in a month with all the gross
confections (as VVecker terms them) in their blew pots, or with their hoarie
heared drugs, in their brave boxes, which once in a year or two (if all men
deal truly) must be swept out of doors. Show me not the meat, but show me the
man: talk not of the receipt, but speak truly of the effect. So many as are
sand blind, and will not be stone blind, may verify the truth of the safest
kind of curation; if they will bestow the pains, to peruse the book
following. Herein is no bragging of cures done, nor promise of impossibilities:
but the manner how, the persons who, and upon whom they were performed, is
truly and plainly set down, even as they were delivered by writing or word of
mouth. Briefly and in a word to conclude, I appeal unto their consciences that
have found certainty in this kind of course, for all desperate diseases:
albeit they will not be persuaded to give every one his due, but speak worse
of Spagirickes, then they have found by them. Thus not to be further tedious
unto your Worship, I do break off in the half way, not doubting, of your
favorable acceptance of this poor gift, which I beseech your noble eyes, not
so much to regard, as the true and serviceable heart of the giver, to pray for
your felicity, for my good Ladies happiness, the health and prosperity of
all your retinew.

Your Worships in the possible performance of all kind of duty for your self
or your household, To command at all times, James Fourestier.

TO THE FRIENDLY READER, AS MVCH HEALTH AS HE WISHES OF SOVLE AND BODY.
MEn many times meddle in some matters, wherein they take more toil then
thank for their labors: and he which thinks in the night, that he has
pleased all, shall find in the morning, that he has angered some. So many as
know me well, and whereto I was chiefly addicted, within these eight or nine
years, that is unto the study and practice of the soul Physic; may now
make a question, of my meddling so long with bodily Physic. But my two fold
answer they may take with them, for their satisfaction. First that I keep
still Depositum illud, which God has committed unto me (and sealed the same,
by mine own spiritual birth, and other men's sanctification) till he that has
said, Go, points the time, and gives the occasion, of my further service, in
that weighty function. Secondly, as when I conuersed in that calling, I was
chargeable to none: so (not surceasing the same of mine own accord) I have
since by God his blessing of my labors herein, as not greatly enriched my self:
so not impouerished any. That wherein I have thus continued, since it
concerns learning, and an honest ma^s maintenance, cannot or ought not offend
any, that are well in their wits. These few secrets, contained in this
Collectio^ and Appendix thereto adjoining (which I have reduced into method
for his sake that gathered them here and there) cannot or ought not to
scandalize any, that have a sanctified cunning, in Physic or Chirurgerie. I
must needs tell thee, that I lean more to that safe, speedy, and pleasant
kind of curation with medecines rightly prepared, then to the careless
composition, made by addition of other simples, clogged with more impurities,
then are in that simple, which they labor to correct. I dare also avouch, that
any poor body, may better commit his crasie body, to be healed or helped, of
any outward or inward malady, by the right prepared medecines, for the value
of ten shillings (which he can hardly spare) then a wealthy man, to their
deceits) I would say receipts) for ten crowns, which he may well enough
forbear: Many of the ignorant sort have counted the chymicall or Paracelsicall
Physic dangerous, and not without cause, for woeful experience has brought
it into that suspicion. But (good Reader) hear me in that which He tell thee,
and so take thine answer for this time. Some of the learned, and most of the
ignorant, have in general despised the^, but by your leave after they have
heard in particular of the excellent success attained by many of the^; they
have adventured upon those, without knowledge, experience, direction: and so
have made many patients to smart for it. Therefore I would not that the fine
fingered Physician should scorn to wear this pearl, which is as fit for Sir
John Lack-latin, for the la^dleaper, or cogging quackesaluer, as a pipe for an
ass, or a cage for a cow. The salts, oils, waters, extractes, tinctures,
simples prepared, and co^positio^s of simples co^ioyned mentioned in this book
or not mentioned, I mean not to make sale of (as the Grocer does or the
Apothecary:) but I keep them in store, and mean to increase them, for mine
own use, and my friends, and for such as shall need the^, as the learned
counsel, of Physic rules, shall give occasion. The greatest part of them,
were prepared by John Hester of Paul's wharfe, now deceased, a man that spent
much, and inda^gered his body, about such works, whereof many excellent men
have enjoyed the benefit. The effect of his labor, has and does commend him,
in England, and other countries, which have these many years made proof, of
these his preparations. All which as not long since I bought of the Suruiuer:
so I am willing at all times, to part with any of the^, to salve the wounded,
or heal the diseased. In the mean while and for evermore, I commit thee
(Gentle Reader) in health or in sickness, to the protection of the
Arch-Phisitian, and creator of our souls and bodies, who always preserve us,
and all that be his, unto the end and in the end.

From my study in the Blackefriers the 19. of January. Thy loving friend. James
Fourestier.

A NOTE OF SVCH PREPARED SIMples, and compositions, as are mentioned in this
book: with other things, not mentioned therein, whereof there is particular
use in Physic and Chirurgerie, and are to be had at the house of James
Fourestier aforesaid.
The names of the several kinds of Saltes.
Salts of Herbs as, of
Wormwood. Mintes. Carduus Benedictus. Chamomill. Radish. S. John's wort. Sea
holy. Centaurie. Rosemarie. Fennel. Time. Bean stalks. Black Hellebore.
Brionie. Sage. Maioram. Germander. Mehlote. Chamepitis. Hysope. Feuerfew.
Gentian. Alisanders. Mugwort. Fumitorie. Origanum. Eufrasie, or Eyebright.
Tartar Christalline. Pockwood, or Lignum vitae.
Saltes of trees and fruticall plants, as
ASh. Juniper. Iuie. Broom. Vine.
Saltes of spices and other things, as of
Cloves. Ginger. Cinnamon. Nutmegs. Urine. Armoniacke of Amber. Vinegar. Salt,
or Sugar, of Saturn. Salt niter out of Ireland. Alome del Plume. Tartar six
times calcined. Sal conditum. Lapilli Vrinae. Salt common calcined. A
causticke.
The names of the diverse kinds of waters as of
Cinnamon. Cloves. Nutmegs. Franckincense. Turpentine. Wax. Honey. Aqua fortis.
Aqua Regis. Aqua Spermatis ranarum. Eggs. Hearts horn. Amber. Vinegar
distilled. Spirit of wine. Fragariae with spirit of wine. Man's scull.
Pockwood. Resinae pini. Percepier. Roses. Aqua vitae of roses. Sweet water.
Aqua vitae of Percepier. Aqua vitae of Juniper berries. Aqua vitae of Turkey
balm. Aqua Benedicta. Walnuts. Annise seed. Sal gum.
Oils of Herbs as of
The several kinds of oils drawn by distillation or otherwise prepared.
SWeet margerome. Sage. Time. Origanum. Rosemarie slowers. Hysope. Mintes.
Lauender. Penyroiall. Camomill flowers. Nenufar grossly prepared. Betonie and
Camomill grossly prepared. Roses by distillation. Thorn apple. Wormwood.
Oils of seeds as of
ANise. Fennel. Dill. Carui or Caraway. Commin. Mustard.
Oils of fruits, berries and spices, as of
NVttes. Figs. Sweet almondes. Orange peeles. Lemon peeles. Bay berries.
Juniper berries. Misselto of apples. Nutmegs. Cinnamon. Ginger. Cloves. Maces.
Pepper.
Oils of trees, or woods, of gummes, stones, and other things, as of
LIgnum vitae. Ash. Broom. Wax. Honey. Turpentine. Tar. Franckincense.
Colophonie. Galbanum. Sagapenum. Masticke. Labdanum. Ammoniacke. Amber. Iet.
Benzoin. Storax liquide. Castoreum. Man's scull. Butter. Eggs. Tartar. Stinking
oil of Tartar. Vitrioll. Sulfur. Petroleum de Lateribus. Deares suet.
Spermacaeti. Worms.
The several kinds of Extractes of Essences, as of Herbs, roots, etc.
Wormwood. Chamomil. Sage. Celandine. Betonie. Agrimonie. Tansie. Horehound.
Eufrasie. Marygold. Fumitory. Henbane. Chamepitis. Tormentill. Philipendula.
Black Hellebore. Aristolochie. Gentian. Angelica. Sauine. Perwincle. Carduus
Bened. Feuerfew. Percepier. Rue. Peonie. Juniper. Broom flowers.
Hermodactiles. Sena. Agaricke. Cnicus or bastard. Saffron. Rubarb. Colocinthis.
Soldanella. Laureola. Aloes. Polipodie. Bruscus. Centorie. Enula campana.
Mellissa or Balm. Ginger. Musk. Squilla. Sarcocolla. Cantarides. Spicknard.
Zedoaria. Pepper. Orange peeles.
A NOTE OF THE DIVERSE KINDS of compositions as follows.
LAudanu^ ^anodinum. Panchimagogon. Amuletum Palmarij. Oleum benedictum. Oleum
sine Mumia Tartari. Oleum Heracl. Rulandi. Mumia vitrioli. Creta vitrioli.
Crocus Martis. Balsamum sulphuris. Flos sulphuris. Oleum Camphorae. Essencia
perlarum. Flores Antimonij. Mercurius Antimonij. Vitrum Antimonij. Turpetum
minerale Quercetani. Turpetum Diaph. Sulphur vitriolatum. Mercurius sublimatus.
Mercurius precipitatus. Aqua Theriacalis. Calx testarum ouorum. Emplastrum
Fodicationis. Gibsons balm. Petra Philosophale nostra. Pillulae Aquilone.
Oleum Hypericonis compositum. Oleum Balsami. Aqua Balsami. Dia Aromatico.
Electuario Angelica. Balsamum artificiale. Electuarium magistrale. Aqua
preseruans. Magno liquore. Cerotum magistrale. Oleum Philosophorum de
Terebinth. and cera. Vnguentum ex Lytargirio. Aqua reale. Sirupo del Ebulo
composit. Unguent against contractions. Vnguento magno. Pillulae contra morbum
Gallicu^. Cordiale rosaru^ sine sulphur. Balsamus vrinae descriptione
Willichij. Our solutiue liquor. Oil of Nicotian. Paracelsus his Vulnerarie
oil. Water for the eyes. Water for pin and web. Aqua Persicariae. Vnguento
nigro. Unguent to cause hair to grow. Unguent to cleanse wounds. Unguent
defensatiue. Unguent stomachall. Unguent against aches and bruises. Extract
against all obstructions. Adeps vrsi. Medulla Mummiae. Our composition against
the strangurie, Ischurie, or stone in the bladder, etc. Balsamum Tartari.
Spirit of honey. Spirit of Tartar. Tincture of sulphur. Powder to mundifie
ulcers. Matter Balsami. A composition against burning and scalding. Vigoes
balm. Aqua del petra Vegetab. Tinctures of Spices. Spiritus tartari cu^
colcothare rectificat. Another water for the eyes. Syrupus spinae merulae.
Cinnamon water. Unguent de Peto. Man's blood dried. Craneum humanum calcined. Our
composition against all fevers. Our compositio^ against the worms. Gum of
the root and herb Henbane.
A TABLE OF ALL THE PRINCIPAL matters contained in the Collection.
In the Proeme are contained these things.
THe duty of an expert Chirurgian. page 1 The general cure of wounds. 1 Why
wounds cannot heal quickly. 2 How to deal generally with wounds in the head.
ibidem
Of Wounds.
A Grievous wound on the head cruel. 3 A dangerous wou^d cured in five days.
ibidem A wound on the ear. ibidem Wounds in the head with the fracture of the
scull. 4 Concusions in the head or else where. 5 Contusion qui^^ly healed.
ibidem Wound in the head with the scull fractured. ibidem To heal wounds
speedily. 6 Wounds by shot or lance. ibid. A singular remedy for the speedy
healing of wounds. ibidem Wounded eye with a splinter. 7 Puncture in the eye.
ibidem Another cure done in like manner. 7 A squatted hand healed. 8 A punctured
arm healed. ibidem Five wounds in the breast healed. 8
Of sores, ulcers, etc. and their cure.
SOre mouths healed. 9 Ulcer in the upper lip. ibidem Ulcer in the throat.
10 Scald head healed. ibidem Another for the same, ibidem Ulcer on the thombe.
ibidem Vlcerated leg. 11 Two putrified ulcers on the leg healed. ibidem
Three ulcers in the leg healed. ib Old rotten sores cured. 12 Ulcers in most
parts of the body and head. ibidem Scabs like the leprosy. 13 A child healed
that had the French pockes. 14 A canker cured. ibidem Pockie pustules with
Serpigo healed. ibidem Tetters and ringwormes. 15 Another. ibidem Tetters on
women's breasts. 16 Shingles healed. ibidem To break a plague sore. ibidem
Scabs and itch, etc. ibidem. Three deep fistulaes in the breast cured. ibidem
Lichen or Impetigo cured. 18 A great wenne taken away.
Seco^nd part of the Collection.
Of the cures of internal diseases.
OF grievous aches and pain in the body. 19 Aches coming of the pockes
cured. ibidem An excellent unguent to ease any pain. 20 To ease the gout.
ibidem To cure aches coming of heat. 21 The cure of the scuruie. ibidem
Tumors throughout the body cured. 22 Swelling of the cods. 23 Another of the
same. ibidem The Ischiatica cured. ibidem Against the crampe. ibidem Against
contraction of sinews. 24 A wrie neck set straight. ibidem Another. 25
Squinancie cured. ibidem Alopecia cured. ibidem To purge the head. ibidem Pin
and web cured. 26 An approved water for the eyes. ib. Another. ibidem To stay
bleeding at the nose. 27 Another for the same. ibidem Another. ibidem Another.
ibidem Another. 28 Other ways to do the same. ibid. Spatting of blood. ibidem
Another. ibidem Lift up the vuula. ibidem Cure of the hicket. 29 Another.
ibidem The falling sickness cured. ibidem Another. ibidem Iaundies cured. 30
Another. ibidem Another. 31 Iaundies with obstruction of menstrues. ibidem
Windiness in the stomach. ibid. Cough of the lungs. 32 Another with stitch in
the side. ib. Shortness of breath with a cough. 32 Another. 33 To stay vomiting.
ibidem Another. ibidem Vomiting of blood with a flux of the belly. 34
Vomiting with a fever. ibidem Plurisie cured. 35 Plurisie with spatting of
blood. ibi. Plurisie with inslamation of the tongue, etc. ibidem Plurisie in a
woman. 36 Another for the same. ibidem Diaphoretical decoction. ibidem Plurisie
broken with a potion. ibid. Another. 37 An inward Aposteme or bastard plurisie.
ibidem Pain in the side. ibidem Pain and wind in the body. 38 Expelling of
wind. ibidem Dropsy cured. ibidem Against worms in the stomach or else where.
39 A quartaine of long continuance. ibi. Against the pestilence, plurisie and
quartaine. 40 Swelling of the spleen. ibidem Fra^tick fevers for want of
sleep. ib. Pestilent fevers. 41 Against poison or the pestilence a
Diaphoreticall potion. ibidem The signs of death in the plague. ibidem
Counsels, preservatives, etc. against the plague. 42 An inueterate Gonorrhea in
man or worman. ibidem Another. 43 An Electuarie against Gonorrhea. ibidem To
stop the immoderate flux menstruall. 44 Another. ibidem To stop a flux.
ibidem Bloody flux cured. 45 Cures of the Hemorhoides. ibid. Ficus in ano.
ibidem To provoke menstrues. 46 Another of the same. ibidem Suffocation of the
Matrix. 47 Another for the same. ibidem To provoke urine. ibidem To provoke
urine and to heal other obstructions. 48
The first part of the supplement, or Appendix, etc.
Of pain in the head and the cure. 49 Of the catharre and reume in the head.
50 The second cause to cure the Catharre. 51 Contusion in the head. 52 The
healing of the white scall, 53 Pain in the eyes. ibidem An unguent for sore
eyes. ibidem To stay spatting of blood. ibidem The description and cure of the
Squinancie. ibidem The description and cure, of scrophulae. 54 Another cure for
the same. 55 Another for the same. ibidem Another. ibidem Of Panaricium and the
cure. 56 Ulcers in women's breasts. ibidem Of Astma and the cure of it. 57 To
know a confirmed dropsy. 58 Against worms. ibidem Hardness of the milt and the
cure. ibi. Another for the same. ibidem Of the Gonorrhea and the cure. ibi. Of
the Hemorrhoides and their cure. 60 Of the diverse sorts and effects of the
Hemorrhoides and their cure. ibi. Suffocation of the matrix and the cure
thereof. 61 Of the rupture and the cure in the beginning. 62 Another. ibidem Of
rete^tion of urine and the cure. 63 Of the difficulty of urine and the cure
thereof. 68 Another for the same often proved. ibidem Of retention of urine
with stitch in the side. 69 Swelling of the legs and feet and their cure.
ibidem Of Chilblaines and their cure. 70 Of corns in the feet and to take
them away. ibidem Of a grief under the nails of the fingers and toes and the
cure. 71 Of Erisipela and the cure thereof. ibi. The cure of wartes. 72
The second part of the Appendix, etc.
Of Danewort and his virtues. 73 Of Eleborus niger and his virtues. 73 Of
Gratia Dei, and the virtue thereof. 74 Of Rubarb and his use. ibidem Of
Tithymale and his virtues. 75 Of Soldanella and his virtues. 76 Of Cyperus and
his virtues. ibid. Of Elder and his virtues. ibidem Of Tabaco and his use.
ibidem Of sweet Margerom and his virtues. 77 Of Persicaria and his use. ibidem
Of man and the medecines taken from him. 78 Of an hen and the Physical use
thereof. 79 Of Ecles and their medecinal use 80 Of the Barbill and her use in
medecin. ibidem Of Bees and their medecinall use. ib. Of Frogs and their
Physical use. 81 Of Centumpedes, Crickets, etc. and their use. ibidem Of Tacca
mahacca and the use thereof. 82 Of the gum Caranna and the use thereof.
ibidem. Of Liquide amber and the use of it in medecin. ibidem.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
In the Epistle Dedicatorie, page 1. lin. 17. for these words have even borne,
read these have ever borne. Page 8 of the book, lin. 5. for Carton, read
Carlton. page 40. lin. 11. for Paraceli, read Paracelsi. page 54. after the 6.
line before the tittle of the Chapter, read CHAP. 111. which is omitted in the
number. page 3. lin. 6. for you find, read you shall find. page 12 lin. 17.
for heat, read heal. page 77. last line thereof, for our part, read one part.
page 31, last line saving one, for vicious cause, read, viscous cause. page 35.
lin. 15. for lb. j read, Pj, page. 48 lin. 3. Add thid word Note in the
margent. page. 63. lin. 13. for the vain, read the urine.

THE PROEME, OR ENTRANCE, INTO THIS COLLECTION: CONTAINED IN THE first four
Chapters.
CHAP. I What the duty of an expert Chirurgian is.
A Good and true Chirurgian, is no other, the^ a minister and helper of nature:
who has three operations to perform, in curing of wounds. The first is, that
he join the separated parts close together, the second to preserve it from
pain: the third, that he keep it from putrefaction: all the rest he may leave
unto nature, which will work with good expedition. And this is a sure
intention: concerning the cure of wounds. Never keep the flesh open, with
tents or pledgets, neither weaken nature, by letting of blood, or by purging,
nor yet by strait diet, to cause the pain to increase, but keep the wound
always clean, washing it with Aqua balsami; and lay upon the wound, clothes
wette in Magno licore. This is a good, and an approved order: whereof whosoever
will know more, let him look in Leonardo Fiorauante his book, of Rational
secrets, where he shall be satisfied more at large.

CHAP. II The cure of all manner of wounds in general.
ALl kind of wounds, may be healed, with these medecines following (according
to the method before mentioned) viz. with our balsamo, with Aqua balsami,
balsamum artificiale, quintaessentia vini, oleum resinae pini, oleum cerae and
terebinthinae, magno licore, cerotum magistrale, elixir vitae, oleum
hypericonis compositum, our secret powder, all which are set down, in the
forenamed book, and for the most part, are to be had, for a reasonable
consideration, at the house of M. James Fourestier, student in Physic
dwelling in London, in the Black Friars, between the two tennese courts.

CHAP. III. The cause why vvounds cannot heal quickly.
THough there be many more, yet chiefly they may be reduced unto two causes.
The one is an immoderate and extreme diet, which weakneth the stomach and body
so much, that nature cannot prevail, to conglutinate or soder the flesh
together. And thus thorough want of natural heat, the wound falls to
impostemation, Gangrena, fistulaes. etc. and can hardly be cured. The second
cause is, the keeping of them to much open, by reason of their tents or
pledgets, so that they cannot join together again, but grow to Cancers, and
Fistulaes, whereupon many times, the patient remains lame ever after, or else
speedy death is the end thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Of wounds in the head, how they must be dealt vvithall.
ALl wounds in the head, must be close ioyed and kept together, the blood must
be crushed out, then wash it well, with something that has virtue to liquifie
the blood, as the Quintaessence of wine, or such like. Then lay thereon lint,
wet in oleum benedictum: this medecin you shall change in four days, but
every day once wash the wound round about, with that Quintaessence, and anoint
with the said oil, and at the fourth days end, dress it again, and let it
remain two days more, and after that for a day more, and the wound (by the
help of God) shall be cured in xij. or xiiij. days. Thus may you deal, with
all wounds, save those, that are made in the belly. As for all other, either
simple or compound wounds: you find their cure, methodically showed, in the
Rational secrets, of Leonardo Fiorauante published in English.

CHAP. V The healing of a grievous vvound on the side of the head.
THe wound was made, on the side of the head, almost to dura matter: and it was
healed in this manner. First there was put into the same, the Quintaessence
aforsaid, then a little balsamo, then there was applied a cloth which was wet in
magno licore, made very hot, upon which cloth, was laid our secret powder,
covered with lint, and thus he was dressed, once every day, till he was whole.
You must note, that whenever the scull is hurt, unto dura matter, there must
be cast up at the nosethrilles, our balsamo: that the smell may pierce upward,
and resolve the offense. Sometime also, in stead of a defensatiue, you may
anoint round about the wound, with the foresaid balm; which preserves from
putrefaction, and alteration.

CHAP. VI. A dangerous vvound in the head, cured in five days.
IT was healed very quickly, by putting therein our Aqua caelestis, and
balsamo, and by applying unto the same, very hot clothes, wet in magno licore.

CHAP. VII. The cure of a vvound, on the ear to the scull.
A Sore wound was made on the care, which was cut unto the scull of the head,
and was healed in this manner: first by anointing it with our Quintaessence,
which caused it to wax very hot, the space of two hours. After that, there
was put in, our oleum philosophorum, de terebinthina and cera, and so he
dressed it every day once.

CHAP. VIII. How three vvounds in the head, with fracture of the bone or scull
were healed by I. P.
A Certain miller in Buckinghamshire, called Peter Bull, being sore wounded in
the head, whereof one wound was in the midst of the head, with fracture of the
scull, an other within an inch of that, six inches long, he had an other wound,
over his eyebrow two inches long. Besides the wounds in his head, he had also
a great wound, in the bowt of his arm, beside the elbow, so that a man might
have laid: his three singers in it, diverse of his fingers were also cut, and he
lost two joints. This man bled by the space of seven or eight hours, before it
was stinted: neither was he dressed, until the next day, but yet he was cured
in this manner. First the hair was shaven away, round about the wounds on his
head, and the wounds were made clean, then was there dropped into the wound,
balsamum sulfuris, made very warm: and a sine cloth wet therein was applied to
the wounds, and round about the wounds there was a defensatiue applied: thus he
was dressed once in 24. hours, and within the space of three weeks, he was
perfectly helped, that he ware no plaster at all. Also you shall note that upon
the wound, next the cloth, there was laid cerotum magistrale, of Leonardo
Fiorauante: Forget not that this balsame must always be used warm, with a
fine linen cloth, or a piece of Cambrick, and not with any lint. This balsame
did cause the hair to grow so fast about the wounds: that it was feign to be
shaven away very often.

CHAP. IX. Of contused vvounds on the head or other parts of the body.
THe ancient practitioners, have esteemed contused wounds to be very
dangerous. For they say contusions must first be brought to putrifactio^, and
turned into matter: which opinion is not to be allowed, for the bruses are to
be dissolved without maturatio^, which has been a thousand times proved in the
wars, after this manner to have been performed. Recipe, magno licore, oleum
benedictum, ana, mix them, and being very hot, wet clothes therein, and lay
thereon twice a day, and in three or four days they will be resolved. Also the
oil of Franckinsence, or oleu^ philosophorum de tereb. and cera, will resolve
any simple bruise in three or four hours, only by continual anointing the
place therewith, so fast as it drinks in any. Provided, that the bruise be
not above six or eight hours old, for if it be, then will your work be
somewhat the longer, before it be finished.

CHAP. X. A contused vvound in the head, healed by I. P.
A Young man of 28. years of age, that had a great contusion on the head with
a staff, was helped thereof in nine days; by applying thereunto balsamum
sulfuris, before mentioned.

CHAP. XI. A vvound in the head, with fracture of the scull, cured by I. P.
A Little boy, with a fall from an horse, had a fracture in the scull, which was
healed with balsamum sulsuris, and cerotum magistrale Leonardo. The child, did
at his dressing, vomit very often: which argued the breaking of his scull,
yet was he healed in seven days.

CHAP. XII. To heal wounds speedily.
FIrst wash them very well with our aqua balsami, then join them very close
together, and lay thereon a cloth wet in olco resinae pini: and (through Gods
help) they shall quickly be healed.

CHAP. XIII. To heal vvounds, by shot, or lance.
HE that will cure wounds, that are made with shot, lance, arrows, etc. must
first wash the wound well with urine, and dry the wound well, then let him put
therein the Quintaess. of wine and forthwith join the wound close and hard
together. Then let him put immediately therein, five or six drops of our balsamo
artific. and lay a cloth upon the wound, wet in magno licore, which must be
applied so hot, as he may suffer it: thus must he do the first day. That being
done, he must put thereon our Quintaessence of wine, and then a little balsamo,
after that, some magno licore (as before was said) and so let him hold on, unto
the end of his cure.

CHAP. XIIII. A most singular and vvonderfull remedy, to heal wounds
quickly.
VVOunds must be helped, with drying medecines, (as was noted in the third
Chapter) such medecines I say, as have virtue, to preserve the part offended,
from putrefaction. This will be performed with our aqua balsami, and the oil
distilled from vernice liquide: for these two, are apt to heal all sorts of
wounds: if ye wash them with the water and anoint them round about with the
oil, for they do not only keep the wounds from putrefying, but they help to
cicatrise quickly, and in such manner, as it seems maruailous, most
profitable for the wounded patie^t, but best for the good and honest Surgeon,
which abhors in his work, to play the tinker, which in stopping of one
hole, is wont to make three, but with as much safety and speed, as nature and
art will yield, to bring to pass all his honest intentions.

CHAP. XV. A vvound in the eye, with a splinter, healed by W. H.
A Splinter of wood, leapt into the eye of a certain maiden, as she was
chopping of sticks. The wound was so grievous, that the gellie of her eye came
forth, by the space of a month: all this while, she could neither see, nor
take any rest. By the blessing of God within four days after, she could thread
a needle, and was recovered in this manner. First there was dropped into her
eye, balsamum sulfuris warm, and then a cloth wet therein, was applied
thereunto by which only she was cured: the maid dwells in Nottinghamshire.

CHAP. XVI. A prick in the eye, with a knife, healed by W. H.
A Child of seven years of age, had a puncture in the eye, with a knife, which
was cured, by dropping therein, balsamum sulfuris warm, and laying a
defensatiue round about it.

Another cure performed in like manner by W. H.
ONe George Clarke, servant to the right worshipful, M. Butler of Denham (then
high Sheriff of Bedford) was healed, of a punct^^^ in his eye, with the
foresaid medecin.

CHAP. XVII. An hand flat squatted, and contused, healed by W. H.
AN old man, called Thomas Smith, of Carton in Northamptonshire, husbandman, in
lopping of a tree, had his hand caught between two boughs, and was squatted
in pieces; this contused hand, was presently put close together, and anointed
which oleum philosophorum de Tereb, and cera, and through Gods goodness, was
perfectly cured in eight days.

CHAP. XVIII. A vvou^^ or puncture thorough the arm. I. P.
A Young man called Hudson, a Carpenter of Carlton in Northamptonshire, being
thrust thorough the arm, with a pitchforke, was thus cured. First there was
iniected Magno licore (as hot as he could abide it) into the wound. Then was
there a linen cloth, wett in the same oil, applied unto the wound, upon the
which cloth, was also laid, a pledget, of cerotum magistrale: this wounded man
was healed in five or six days.

CHAP. XIX. Five wounds in the breast.
A Certain man, that had five stocadoes into the body, was thus cured. First
there was put into the wounds, the Quintessence of wine. Then were the wounds
dressed, with balsamo artific. which caused him to vomit, and to avoid much
bruised blood. After that he drank, every morning a little aqua balsami, and in
short time by Gods help was perfectly cured.

The manner to stay any flux of blood, or vain: you shall find in the 17.
Chapter of the second part of this collectio^, and in the secrets of Leonardo
Fiorauante, where he entreats of wounds.

THE SECOND PART OF THE FIRST DIVISION.
VErbum sapienti sat est, and a man may know by the half, what the whole
means. By these few experimented secrets, you may proceed, unto the cure of
any wound, contusion, or puncture: in what part of the body soever they
shall be. The things wherewith you are to work, as balsamum sulfuris, oleum
philosophorum de Terebinth. and cera, cerotum magistrale, etc. you may have of
M. James Forestier; dwelling in the Black friars. Now let us proceed unto the
experimented secrets, concerning Ulcers, and Sores, either simple, or
complicate with diseases, as they have been observed, by those which have
proved them.

CHAP. XX. The healing of sore mouths.
THe Ulcers and Sores, that have been, in the mouths of young and old, have
been healed, by the lotion or gargarisme, made with plantaine water, honey
suckle water, and barlie water, mixed with saccarum Saturni.

CHAP. XXI. An Ulcer in the upper lip.
A Certain porter of London, having an Ulcer on his upper lip, which was
like a cancer (some called it Noli me tangere) continually running, with
filthy stinking sanies, was thus cured. First he was purged, with Turpetum
minerale: then was the sore dressed with this medecin.

. aloes lotae, ss, salis preparati, ij, Mellis iiij, misce, and vtere.

CHAP. XXII. An Ulcer in the throat, ex morbo Gallico.
A Young woman, that was much troubled in the throat, with a grievous Ulcer,
was thus cured. First she was purged with Aromatico, and twice or thrice with
our Quintaessence solutiue, mixed with syrup of roses, then was the sore
touched, with Aquarealis, two or three times, with a little lint, and lastly she
used this gargarisme.

. mellis rosarum, ij, Diamorum, ij ss, honey suckle water, ana vi. oleum
vitrioli, as much as will suffice, to make it tart: this has been often proved
in dangerous cases.

CHAP. XXIII. The healing of a scald head.
A Woman had all her head covered, with a most filthy scab, which was dry
above, and moist underneath, very noisome to behold, who could neither be
healed, by purging, or local medecines, that were used, till this medecin was
applied unto her. Once in a day, oleu^ ligni guaiaci, was applied, and in short
time, the scall fell away, like a scull of an head, and there began hair to
grow underneath it: this cure was performed in twelve days.

Another cure performed upon a scald head.
A Maiden of eighteen years of age, having an huge great scall upon her head,
was cured (after she had taken one dose of Aromatico) by often washing the part
affected, with Matter balsami Fiorauante.

CHAP. XXIIII. An Ulcer on the thombe.
ONe had such a filthy, and stinking Ulcer on the thumb, that the
Chirurgians, would have (...) of the whole thumb. This party was afterward
cured, by the application of Fodicationum emplastri.

CHAP. XXV. An Vlcerated leg swollen.
A Young boy, that had an vlcerated leg wonderfully swollen, was thus cured.
He received at two several times, Quintaess. solutiue, with syrup of roses.
Then were the sores washed, with salt of vitrioll, dissolved in plantaine
water: a cloth being wet therein, and applied thereto morning and evening.

CHAP. XXVI. Two putrified Ulcers on the leg healed by I. P.
FIrst this patient was purged, with Aromatico Leon, once or twice: then his
Ulcers were dressed, with this vngue^t, made of rubified vitrioll: and a
cerote, called the great Cerote. This was applied unto the Ulcers, with a
pledget of lint, and was suffered to lie 24. hours, which mortified the sores.
Then was more of the same unguent applied, and with an instrument the escare
was loosed round about, and in three or four days, the escare came away
easily, with a pair of Mullets: then he healed it up, with Magno licore, and
saccarum plumbi, within a little while after.

CHAP. XXVII. Three Ulcers in the leg, healed by W. H.
A Certain woman of Bedford, had three Ulcers in her leg, who had sought her
cure, at the hands of diverse, the space of four years, but could find no
help, yet she was afterward cured in this manner. First she took in the
morning fasting Aromatico Leonardo, which euacuated her stomach and b^^ie. Then
was there applied unto the sores, saccarum plumbi, three or four days
together, which caused every day, a certain thin skin to come upon the
Ulcers, much like the filme of an egg, the same skin was taken away every day.
With this medecin following, it was dressed the fourth day: which caused it,
to look fair, and red, the next dressing: and so in short time it was
perfectly cured. To one spoonful of magno licore was put as much saccaru^
Saturni, as would lie upon a three pence;: and so it was incorporated warm:
the sores were dressed therewith every day.

CHAP. XXVIII. The cure of old rotten sores by W. R.
A Certain old woman, did in this manner, help diverse old sores in the body.
First she purged the patients, and then she applied this unguent to the sores.
Take a pot of strong ale, and set it to boil over a gentle fire, till it wax
thick, like a salve, and then use it. At the first this medecin will smart,
and be somewhat painful to bear, nevertheless it will cleanse and heat.

Note.
Also a friend of mine told me, that the juice of marigold leaves, or the
leaves, boiled with milk to an unguent, will heal all ulcers and wounds.

CHAP. XXIX. The healing of ulcers, in most parts of the body: but chiefly in
the head by W. H.
A Certain man being full of ulcers, coming of the pocks, in most parts of
his body showing themselves, but chiefly in the head, was cured in this
manner. First he was purged, twice or thrice, with Panchimagogon, after that,
he kept his chamber, (that had a good sire in it) and took six grains of
Turpetum diaphoreticum, mixed with j of Amuletu^ Palmarij. Half an hour
before, he took a draught of fat broth, and kept his bed: and always as he
^ited, he washed his mouth, with a convenient gargarisme, and sweat thereon,
one hour or two, and then was dried with warm clothes: That done, he reposed
a day or two, and took the foresaid Turpetum again, in manner aforesaid: this
he did three or four times. In the mean while, he anointed his ulcers with
oleum guaiaci, which did both cleanse, and heal. Also diverse times, he used
this potio^ in the morning, which caused him to sweat.. ij of the water of
lignum vitae, made by distillation, and as much of the sirrupe of fumitorie,
and j of the salt of lignum vitae, mix them warm, and drink it fasting. Thus
in very short time he was cured. This one thing must not be forgotten, that
when there shall come, any inflammation or soreness in the mouth, you do use
this gargarisme following. Take plantaine water, honey suckle water, ana iiij,
barlie water, vi. mel rosarum ij ss, Diamorum ij, oleu^ vitrioli, as much as
will make it tart: this will heal any sore in the mouth. Remember also, that
if the ulcers be very corrosiue, and foul, you shall touch them, once or
twice, with oleum vitrioli or oleum tartari faetens, whereby they will heal
the sooner, this has been often proved.

CHAP. XXX. The healing of scabs, like the leprosy, by G. M.
A Young man (which was thought to be infected with a leprosy) had on his
head, and most parts of his body, hard and dry scabs, but he was cured in
this manner. First he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo once or twice. Then
every morning till he was cured, he took j of the extract of Camepiteos,
either in a pill, or in drink as he thought good. After that, his sores were
dressed, with this unguent.. succi semperumi ij, sucei plantaginis iiij ss,
succi solani iij, sacchari Saturni ij, ss, mix them, and stir them well
together over a gentle fire, till all the saccharum be dissolved, and therewith
dress the sores twice a day.

CHAP. XXXI. The healing of a child, that was full of ulcers, coming of the
pockes.
A Young child four years old, that was grieuouslie tormented with the French
disease, having extreme pain in his body, and being full of sores, was thus
cured. the distilled water of lignum vitae, j, salis eiusdem j, mix them, and
thereof the child drank, with sirupe of furnitorie or hops, morning and
evening, and sometime the child sweat thereon. Also the sores were anointed,
with this unguent,. oleum guaiaci, ss, balsamum sulfuris, ss, saccarum plumbi,
ss, oleum camphorae, five or six drops, the caput mortuum of aqua fortis, j.
Mix them well, and grind them on a stone, with May butter, and therewith the
sores were anointed morning and evening.

CHAP. XXXII. A cancer cured by an old Empericke.
A Certain Empericke, did help many cancers, in diverse people (that were
troubled with the^) after this manner. He took certain worms, called in
Latin Centumpedes, in English sowes: they are such as lie under old timber, or
between the bark and the tree. These he stamped, and strained with ale, and
gave the patient to drink thereof morning and evening. This medecin caused
many times, a certain black bugge, or worm to come forth which had many
legs, and was quick: and after that the cancker would heal quickly, with any
convenient medecin.

CHAP. XXXIII. The healing of pockie pustules, with Serpigo by W. H.
A Certain man, having a number of so^es, all over his body, and a serpigo in
the palm of his ^^nd, so grievous, that a man might have laid great strawes
therein, was healed in this manner. First he was purged three times, with six
grains of Turpetum minerale Phaedronis, mixed with half a dram of Amuletum
Palmarij. That done, he anointed all his sores twice or thrife, with oleum
Tartari foetens: afterward with vnguentum ex Lithargirio Fiorauante. Now
touching his hands, which had the serpigo, he held them morning and evening,
over a bath of otes, or other warm herbs, that they might sweat: and then
anointed them, with balsamum sulfuris, and in short time they were helped. An
unguent made with saccarum Saturni and oil of roses, will do the like effect.

CHAP. XXXIIII. A tetter or ringworme, cured by W. K.
THere is a certain worm or tetter, which many times comes on the back of
the hand or arm, and does corrode, like a serpigo, but it is none, which
(after the use of many other medecines) has been cured in this manner. The
place was anointed 5. or six times a day, with the sirupe of sugar, that the
worm might come to the upper place or skin. Then within three or four days
after, he anointed the place with oleum Tartari foetens: and in short time he
was cured, though his disease, had continued three years, coming and going.
Some have killed the worm, with oleum vitrioli.

CHAP. XXXV. A man cured, that was full of tetters.
THis was the manner of his cure. He took the rennet of a calfe, and drunk it
in milk three or four times, and sweat thereupon: then he anointed the
parts affected, with saccarum Saturni, mixed with byle of roses warm.

CHAP. XXXVI. Tetters in vvomens breasts, oftentimes cured as follows,
THey took five sponfulls of Madder, and boiled it in ale, and then strained
it clear, without pressing it at all, and drunk thereof, three or four
mornings. Then with the foresaid ointment, they used to anoint the parts
grieved, and thereupon (with Gods help) were quickly healed.

CHAP. XXXVII. The healing of Shingles.
THey took for them, doves dong newly made; and barlie meal; stamped them
well, and mixed them with half a pint of vinegar: they used it cold, to the
place grieved, and applied vine leaves (to keep in the liquor) round about it.
Then they bound it up with clothes, and suffered it to lie three days, and
then (if need were) refreshed it again with a new plaster, and at the most,
with the use of three applications, it was perfectly helped.

CHAP. XXXVIII. The breaking of a plague sore, by W. K.
HE took of elder leaves, as much as was sufficient, he stamped them very
well with dry figs, and put thereto auxungiae porcinae, and applied it warm
to the sore, three or four times a day, and it quickly brake it.

CHAP. XXXIX. Scabs and itch, with small pustules, taken quite away by I. H.
A Certain man greatly troubled, with i^ hand pustules, in his hands,
proceeding of a dissol^ in his body, could find no help, till he used this
course. He took Panchimagogon, twice in three days: that done, he washed his
hands, with the salt of vitrioll dissolved in plantaine water, and shortly
after they went quite away.

CHAP. XL. Three deep fistulaes in the breast, cured by W. T.
THere was a certain man, called R. B. dwelling in London, which having three
deep fistulaes in his breast, had been long under the hands of unskillful
Chirurgians, consuming both himself and his substance: but afterward by Gods
help, he using the course, that W. T. prescribed, was cured very speedily.
First he was purged every second or third day for five or six times together,
with Turpetum minerale Phaedronis, receiving thereof five or six grains in
Amul: Palmarij. Afterward, he was caused to sweat five or six times, with this
potion following.

. the distilled water of lignum vitae ij, salis eiusdem j, water of Carduus
benedictus ij, which being mixed, he drunk it warm in the morning, and sweat
thereon two hours. After he was purged, he dressed the fistulaes two hours,
with this unguent (until they were mundified) upon tents of shoe leather. When
the fistulaes were cleansed, he dressed them only with Emplastru^ Fodicationis
(being made liquide, to wrap up the tent with) till they where whole.

The mundificatiue ointment was this.
. oil of wax, of succinum, of guaiacum, oleum hyperic. compositu^, ana ij,
mix them without sire and use it with the aforesaid tents. Also you shall
note, that he drunk no other drink then this, all the while.. lignu^ vitae,
the bark, sarsaparilla, ana iiij, the roots of Torme^till, Bistorta, virga
pastoris, liquorice, (...) ij, Juniper berries, j, Mallow leaves, Sanicle,
Alchim (...) Mugwort, Hypericon, Brunella, Comserie, ana M ij. Bring these into
powder and for every gallon of new tunned drink, add thereto, two or three
ounces of this powder, in a linen cloth: let it stand till it be stale, and
let him drink thereof.

CHAP. XLI. The cure of Lichen, or Impetigo, by M. K.
A Certain maiden 17. years old, had all the flesh on her thombe, and
forefinger eaten away, with the foresaid disease: which was cured by strawing
thereon saccaru^ Saturni, and applying thereto Cerotum magistrale Fiorauante.

CHAP. XLII. A great vvenne taken away by, W. H.
(...)
ONe that was troubled, with a great wenne, had it taken away, by washing it
with strong lie made of oken ashes. I have been since told, of a certainty,
that if ye rub the wenne often, with the hand of a dead man, until the wenne
wax hot, it will consume away in short time after. Some roast an egg hard,
and cut it in the midst, and lay it thereon and using this often the wenne will
wear away.

THE SECOND PART CONCERNING THE CVRES OF INTERNAL DISEASES. Thus much
briefly, in these short Chapters, is expressed and declared, concerning
wounds and ulcers: wheresoever they be, or howsoever they arise. By which
examples, the learned artist, may undertake other things, which are not here
mentioned. But in any case, let him be advised by the wise Physician, in his
business, when there is any difficulty and not run by and by to his receipt
or experiment. It follows now (in manner aforesaid) to set down the observed
practices of those that have cured internal diseases, which have taken
effect, and brought forth syntomes, outwardly or inwardly.
CHAP. I. Of the cure of grievous aches, and pain, performed, by W. H.
A Certain man was greatly afflicted, with diverse woeful aches, and pains in
his knees and shoulders, who was cured, by receiving a dose of Aromatico, and
by application of emplastrum faetidum, unto the grieved parts.

CHAP. II. The healing of aches, coming of the pockes, by W. H.
ONe of a ver^^ dark and melancholic complexion, to whom son^ in London, had
given the fume, and the unction, three or four times: and yet left him
possessed with most pitiful aches and pain in his joints; who for want of
maintenance, was enforced to go into the country, where he was borne, and was
there pitied of an honest Gentleman, which cured him in this sort. First he
purged him twice or thrice with Aromatico Leonardo: which done, he took for
four or five days together, ss, of the extract of Hermodactiles, with white
wine. Then unto the articular parts that were g^ieued, he applied emplastrum
faetidum, W. H. and thus in short time he was healed thoroughly.

CHAP. III. A notable experience, of a medecin that has brought great ease,
to any great ache or pain, as of the gout or otherwise.
TAke one or two, of the foremost sucking whelps, of a mastif or bearebitch,
kill them, and take sorth the guts, fill them with black snailes, roast them,
and bast them with xij, of oil of spike, colored with saffron. Reserve that,
which droppeth from them, and mix it with as much oil of wax, and therewith
anoint any ache or grief.

CHAP. IIII. A particular way whereby the pain of the gout is soon eased or
prevented, S. N.
TAke minium, the yolke of an egg, oil of tartar, oil of roses, as much of
each as you think sufficient, and with a little saffran make it in form of a
plaster, and lay it on cold. I knew an other Gentleman, grieuouslie vexed with
the gout, who was in this sort soon eased. First when he supposed that the
pain would come, he took a dose of Aromatico Leonardo: then the next day,
unto those grieved parts, he applied this plaster. Take a pickle herring, and
cut forth the bone, stamp it very small (...) a little bole Armoniacke, and
rose water, and apply it cold to the grief, from place to place, as it goes.
Many men, after they have been well purged, have had great ease by anointing
the place, three or four nights together, with aqua balsami Fioraua^te. Also
oleum cerae, is very profitable in that case.

CHAP. V. The cure of goutes, and all aches, coming of heat, by L. F.
FIrst the patients were purged with Aromatico, then was this plaster applied,
which is attractiue, resiccatiue, resolutiue, as being intentions far better
fitting that purpose, then any other. Take the marrow, of the bones of a calfe
new killed, lb j vitrioll in manner rubified, lb j ss, Cantarides in sine
powder, j, the ashes of the vine, vi, mix the^ all on a small fire, until
they be incorporated, the^ with oil of wax, make it in a liquide ointment,
and spread it on a cloth, and lay it on cold. And when it waxes dry, chafe it
till the pain be ceased: this has eased many in a short time.

CHAP. VI. The remedy against the Scorbute or Scuruie, and the gout, by W. T.
A Young man of 26. years of age, mightily troubled with the gout, and
scuruie was after this sorr cured. First he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo.
Then he used the purging drink following every morning, that he might have
each day 3. or four stools. At night, he took two ounces, of the distilled
water of lignum vitae, with j of the sirupe of Couslips. Also he used to eat,
these conserues following mixed together.. conserve of Couslips iiij. of sage,
of rosemarie flowers, ana, ij. of red roses j. The quantity which he took at
once, was as much as a walnut. Also he anointed the grieved parts with this
unguent.. auxungiae humanae distilled ij, oil of Turpentine, (...), of wax
ss, mix them together. Also in his usual dru^^^e, which he drunk with his
meat, was mixed Chamepiteos, sage, rosemarie, and betonie, this was the
purging drink. the strong decoction of lignum vitae, put therein of the leaves
of (...) iiij. Epithimum ij, Hermodactiles iiij, Turbith j, Coloquintid. ss.
let them stand in warm sand 24. hours and strain it, this he drunk in the
morning fasting.

CHAP. VII. Tumors in all parts of the body, taken away, by R. A.
THis was sent me by a friend of mine, who had seen the experience thereof
diverse times. First he purged the patients twice, with Aromatico Leonardo: then
he gave unto them ij of Quintaessence solutiue, with j of sirupe of roses,
four or five mornings together: and after it, they drank a little good broth
made sweet with sugar: that done, they drunk this water following..
herbegrace, sothernwood, mugwort, wormwood, ana M j. Juniper berries, three or
four handful, cut the herbs and bruise the berries, and infuse them in a
gallon of white wine vinegar.24. hours in a warm place. Then distill it with
a gentle fire. This done, take that distilled vinegar, and infuse therein fresh
herbs and berries, and distill it again as before. Do so the third time, and
distill it as before. At the last infusion, you shall put therein iiij of good
Mitridate, or Triacle, and distill them together, and keep them close to your
use. Thereof the patients took, at four a clock in the morning, iiij, very
warm, whereupon they laid them down and sweat, two or three hours, always
wiping it away with warm clothes. Every sweating time, they changed their
shirtes. When this medecin was ministered to a woman, she took but ij thereof.
To a child he gave ij. In this sort, he cured not only Tumors, but sores,
pustules, fevers, laundies, etc.

CHAP. VIII. Swelling of the coddes mitigated and resolved, by R. A.
A Certain man, riding on a trotting horse, had his stones swollen, as big as
ones fist, who was thus helped. First he was purged once or twice, with
Pa^chimagogon, the^ this Cataplasme was applied warm, unto the part twice or
thrice a day.. the crumbs of brown bread, bean flower, ana as much as is
sufficient, boil them with new wort; when it is almost boiled, put thereto a
little Comminsced, and a dish of fresh butter, and so apply it warm. I have
seen the fat of an horse, to have cured the foresaid grief.

Another for the same.
Take a pint of pure honey, as much bean slower, and two spoonfuls of vinegar,
of Comminseed ij, mix them well together, and spread it on a cloth, and warm
it a little against the fire, and apply it.

CHAP. IX. The cure of a painful Ischiatica, by I. H.
A Certain man, that was grievously troubled with the Ischiatica, was healed
in this manner. First he was purged with Aromatico, then he took for five or
six mornings together, two drammes of Quintaessence solutiue, with sirupe of
roses, and after the taking thereof he drunk a little sweet broth. That done, he
drew a blister with Cantarides, and when it had run enough, he anointed the
place, with oleum de terebinth. and cera; and in short time he was helped.
Since which time, I have known three or four persons helped in the same
manner, by anointing the grieved parts with Aqua balsami Fiorauante.

CHAP. X. An excellent remedy, against the crampe, proved often, by R. G.
THey that were affected therewith, did upon their bare skin and places
grieved, wear the root of common Flagge. Also the skins of twenty silver
eeles, new fleane, and chopped small, boiled in two pound of May butter, and
four handful of Rue, scumme it well, and anoint the place therewith work the
same effect. A worshipful Gentleman, that had diverse times proved the same,
sent these notes unto me.

CHAP. XI. Contraction or shrinking of sinews, with consumption of the
party, helped, by W. H.
A Man 26. years old, having a sore and grievous vlcerated leg, fell into
the hands of inexpert Surgeons, who with their corrosiues shrunk up his
sinews, that he could neither go nor stand, but in short time after, he was
cured in this manner. He was once purged with Aromatico, then he took
Quintaesse: solutiue two or 3. days together, in sirupe of roses, and drunk
thereupon a little broth. Then did he use the bath following diverse times, and
anointed him with the ointment, against contraction of sinews, described by
Leonardo Fioraua^te. Another man having his hand shrunk together, upon the
like occasion, was healed in the same order. This is the description of the
bath. Take two or three young whelps, that cannot see, boil them in water
with mallows, Hollihock, mellilot, walwort, Camomill, ana one handful: boil
the whelps, till the flesh fall from the bones, this done strain it, and use
to bath therewith very warm.

CHAP. XII. The cure of one, whose neck was drawn awrie, performed, by W. T.
A Child had her neck drawn awrie, with a kind of conuulsion, or crampe
called Tetanus, and was thus cured. First she drunk, every morning and
evening, a little Aqua balsami Fiorauante, then was her neck anointed, with
some of the said water mixed with Magno licore Fiorauante, and in ten days she
was cured.

Another of the same, by W. T.
TAke Oleum de lateribus. i, Oleum Terebinth, ss, of Juniper berries, ij, of
Cloves, j, Nutmegs, Maces, Ana. ss. mix them with Oleum Cerae, q. s. to make
it in form of a liniment, and therewith anoint the parts.

CHAP. XIII. The Squinancie cured by I. P.
THis medecin following, did help one that was so swollen and grieuouslie
pained, that he could scarcely eat or drink. Olei philosophorum de
lateribus, ij, olei lini, vj, olei cerae, j, mix them warm, and anoint the
place affected, oftentimes in the day. Also one dram of the tooth of a wild
Boar, being drunk with iij of oil of Lineseed, does help it presently.

Also another man, was forthwith cured thereof, which drunk one spoonefull of
Aqua balsami, and wetting a cloth therein, applied it to his throat.

CHAP. XIIII. The cure of Alopecia, by I.P.
MAgno licore Fiorauante, being anointed on the head, causes the hairs to
grow again abundantly, which are fallen away, and to wax black. Balsamum
sulfuris also does the same.

CHAP. XV. A gargarisme to purge the head, by I. S.
TAke Spikenard, Alizander seed, ana j. beat them into powder, and boil them
in vinegar till half be consumed. Then strain it, and put thereto lb ss of
Mustard, and iiij, of Rose water, boil it a little, keep it close to thy use,
and when you will, you may take a spoonful warm in the morning, and gargle
therewith.

CHAP. XVI. The Pin and Web, cured by M. R.
HE took an handful of Centumpedes, or Sowes, stamped and strained them with
Ale, and gave the patient to drink thereof, three or four mornings, and
willed the patient to stop his nose and mouth, and to hang down his head, and
therewith he was healed, as I was credibly certified.

CHAP. XVII. A water for sore eyes, proved by M. E.
A Gentlewoman with this water has cured a very great number of sore eyes.
She took an Egg, hard sodden, cut it in the midst, and took forth the
yoalke, and put thereto as much white Copperose as a Nutte. Then she closed it
together, and wrapped it in read Fennel, and laid it to steep four and
twenty hours in Rose water, then she strained it hard through a cloth, and
dropped it into the eyes, morning and evening; it was held for a great secret.

Another manner or way, to heal the Pin and Web in the eyes.
TAke nine of the Worms called Centumpedes, or Sowes, stamp and strain
them, with the juice of VVoodbine, or Betonie, for three or four mornings
together warm: which being drunk, will consume the VVebbe in the eye.

CHAP. XVIII. The staying of the bleeding at the nose, done hy M. R.
TAke burnt Lome, M ij, sharp vinegar, lb ss, mix them well, and lay it
between a linen cloth: and bind it to the forehead cold, and in short space
it will stint.

Another for the same. I. H.
A Man of fifty years of age, had a great flux of blood at the nosethrill,
which had continued a long time, and could find no remedy, till he used this
order and medicine following. First his ring finger was bound hard with a
thread, then was this cataplasme following, applied to his forehead and temples.

Take burnt lome, made in powder, M vj, strong vinegar, as much as will
suffice, to make it in form of a Cataplasme, to be applied cold, thus in few
hours the blood stinted. Nevertheless he took morning and evening, the fume
of Succinum album, at the mouth and nose: which stayed the flux: and comforted
the vital and animal spirits. His diet was cold and drying, his drink was
water, or red wine, wherein was put Crocus martis.

Another kind of curing the same, performed by D. B.
ONe bleeding at the nose a day and a night, was thus helped. He made a tent
of lint, and dipped it in Ink, and put it into his nosethrils, and laid a
defensatiue over his eyes and nose, made with Sanguis draconis, bole
armoniacke, and a little vinegar.

Another way.
MAny have been cured, by applying unto their cods, a linen cloth wet in
Vinegar.

Another.
SOme have had the bleeding stinted, by applying the herb Peruinca unto the
nose.

Other ways to do the same.
CArduus benedictus bruised, and put up into the nosethrils, Note.
stinteth the bleeding at the nose. The same it performs in a wound.

The herb Geranium, which has a red stalk, being put into the nosethrils or
wound, does the same: very often proved.

In like manner, and to the same effect, works Crocus martis.

Also the blood of a man dried, works after the same order: both for the
staying of blood at the nose, and in a wound.

CHAP. XIX. Spatting of blood stayed, by I. H.
A Certain woman spat blood three or four days in great quantity, who was
cured by drinking the decoction of mints in vinegar.

Another for the same.
ALso five or six drops of Oleum Mastiche, drunk in Cinnamon water, staieth
the spatting of blood.

CHAP. XX. The falling down of the Vuula, and the inflammation of the Almonds,
in such sort, that they could not swallow their meat, nor fetch their breath
well, cured by W. T.
TAke white Amber groslie beaten j, and with a funnell take the fume thereof
cast on a few coals, morning, noone, and night. Then take j of old leaven, and
spread it plasterwise on a cloth, strew thereon a little Commin seed, and the
powder of white Amber, and apply it half an hand breadth to the crown of the
head, the space of an whole day, then at night lay on another, and in short
time it will take away the swelling, often proved.

CHAP. XXI. The cure of the hicket, by W. B.
ONe that was diverse times grieuouslie troubled with the Hicquet, was cured, by
applying a brown tossed warm to his stomach: the toste was steeped in Triacle
and Aquauitae.

Another.
Diverse have been cured thereof, by taking four or five grains of Landanum
nostrum, in wine or Malmsey.

CHAP. XXII. The falling sickness cured, by W. H.
A Certain woman, being a Barbars wife in Bedfordshire, which was grieved
therewith every change of the Moon, was preserved, by taking each day three
drops of Oleum Heraclei. with the extract of Peonie.

Another performed by I. H.
FIrst you shall purge them with the extract of Helleborus niger: the dose
whereof is from eight grains to twelve, being before well corrected, and then
drunk in some convenient liquor or potion. That done, he gave them morning and
evening of this composition: the which the longer that they use, the better
will it be for them. essenciae Peoniae, conserve of Rosemarie flowers, of
Betonie, ana q.v. mix them together in form of an electuarie: then add
thereto, for every of that composition, of oleum cranij humam j, and ss of oil
of Rosemarie flowers, and twelve grames of oleum vitrioli. Hereof let them take
ss, at a time, either by it self, or with some convenient liquor, broth, or
potion. Also the nuke of the neck, must be anointed with Oleum castorei: when
they do fall, you shall anoint their nosethrils with oleum succinum, for that
will in short time recover them again. It will be also very expedient to use
those things that comfort the brain and the heart.

CHAP. XXIII. The cure of the Iaundies, by I. P.
A Young maiden, much affected with them, was in this sort cured. She was twice
purged with Aromatico, and as often with Panchimagogon. This done, she felt
her self very much eased, save only in her yellow color, which was thus
also taken away. She took three or four mornings iij, of the decoction of
Goose dung, ij. of the extract of Centorie, which she drunk warm, and so was
cured.

Another for the same, by W. H.
A Woman that had the yellow Iaundies', above two years together, was thus
cured. First she took j, of Balsamum artificiale Leon. Fior. with a spoonful
of white wine in the morning: which caused her the next day, to be as yellow as
Saffron, all her body over, yea her hair of her head, and the nails of her
hands, and feet, very strange to behold. The third day, she took the same
again, and in three times she was perfectly cured. This was at Carleton,
five or six miles from Bedford. Certain practitioners, have found a great
secret, in the salt called Lapilli vrinae, or Paracelsus his Rebisola, against
the Iaundies, and all obstructions.

Another way, by the same Person VV. H.
TAke Nucis Cupressi, Cassiae ligni, ana j, extract Centaurij, ij, mix them,
and drink it in white wine warm: and they shall after the receipt thereof,
euacuate in their urine, great store of yellowish choler, but by taking this
medecin, twice or thrice, it will vade quite away, as has been often
proved. Remember, that before you take this medecin (that it may work with
better effect) you receive a dose or two, of Aromatico Leonardo.

The cure of the Iaundies, with obstruction of the menstrues, performed by VV.
H.
A Young Gentlewoman, eighteen years old, was greatly grieved with the
Iaundies and suppression of her natural sickness: but was in this sort cured.

water of Madder roots, Sage, and Betonie, ana iiij, Spiritus Tartari, ij,
oleum vitrioli, ij, mix them, and drink thereof morning and evening two or
three warm. Also you shall note, that she was purged once (before she took
this drink) with Arom. Leonardo, and so was perfectly cured, and had her
courses again, which before she wanted seven months and more.

CHAP. XXIIII. The healing and cure of great windiness in the stomach by I. H.
A Certain Gentleman, who was afflicted with a windiness in the stomach, that
many times with extreme pain, he fell into a sound. In this misery he
continued three years and more, but in this manner he was helped. First he
took Aromat. Leon. which euacuated upward and downward, the gross and viscous
cause of this wind. After that he had used this potion following forty days
together. He took every morning and evening, Spiritus tartari, corrected with
his Cristaline salt half a spoonefull, Aqua preseruans as much. This withdrew
the cause, opened all obstructions in the body, so that in a month he
remained perfectly cured.

CHAP. XXV. Cough of the lungs, cured by W. T. after this manner.
REcipe Aquae Marrubij, vj, sirrup of Iuiubes, iij, mix them, and make thereof
a Iulepe: whereof the patient took four spoonfuls, with j of Balsamum
sulfuris, every four hours till he was well.

Another cured by W. T. which had also a sore stitch in the side.
FIrst he took Aromat. Leon. and then took this potion following, for
certain days. Carduus Benedictus, Hypericon, Folefoote, a little Enula
compana, make thereof a decoction with Ale, and he drank every morning j of
Balsamum sulfuris, and a spoonful of Aqua Balsami Fiorauante, morning and
evening, till he was cured.

CHAP. XXVI. Shortness of breath, with a cough, remedied by M. R.
FIrst he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo, then he used this diet, with hot
and drying meats, roste or sodden. Enula campana, Hisop, and Liquerice, were
infused in his wine. Also he used every morning, to drink or eat in a rere
Egg. ss of Balsamum sulfuris, and thereby was safely and quickly cured.

Another remedy for shortness of breath.
THe worms called Centumpedes or Sowes, are of great virtue, to discharge the
lungs, that are stuffed with gross fleame.

CHAP. XXVII. An approved remedy to slaie vomiting, by M. R.
A Man of thirty years old, was troubled a long time with sore vomiting,
throwing up presently whatsoever he ate or drank, and was thus relieved..
Malmesey vj. Oleum vitrioli, vj. drops or more, mix them together, and take
thereof every morning fasting, j, or there about, and in short time it will
stay the vomit.

To stay vomiting of blood.
TAke five or six drops of oil of Mastick, and drink it in Cinnamon water.

To stay vomiting, another way.
A Pultus thus made, as follows, and applied to the stomach, staieth
vomiting. Take Rye leaven, and mix it with the juice of mints, and a little
vinegar, over the fire, in form of a pultus, when you do apply it to the
stomach, strew thereon the powder of Cloves, and so often as it cools apply it
warm. Also a Rye toste stieped in vinegar, is profitable for the stomach.

The oil of Wormwood (that comes by distillation) being drunk with
convenient liquors, or potions, and the same compounded with other convenient
things, and applied to the stomach, does work notable effect this way, and is
good against many other maladies.

CHAP. XXVIII. Vomiting of blood, with a cruel flux of the belly, stayed by
M. R.
A Man 45 years old, that had congeled blood in his body, did vomit
abundance of blood, and avoided downward a certain black matter like unto
pitche. He had a great stitch in his side, without a fever: and always when
he vomited, it was thought he would have died, this man was by Gods help thus
cured. First he took this potion. Take the water of Nettle roots viij, Oleum
vitrioli, as much as will make it tart. He drank thereof cold, which presently
mitigated both the fluxes. Then unto the stomach and throat, was applied this
pultus warm, both morning and evening, which wrought an excellent effect.. the
crummes of Rye bread, M xij, Red wine or Aligant, strong Vinegar, ana q. s.
boil them to the form of a pultus. Then he took at the mouth and nose, the
sum of Succinum or Amber, which strengthened the vital and animal spirits.
His side was anointed with this ointment, which took away the pricking and
pain.. Unguent. de Althea, 4, amigdalarum dulcium, j, mix them, and therewith
anoint the side, morning and evening. His diet was this, all his meat was
boiled in Red wine, or Smithes water. His drink was the decoction of Nettle
roots, or Red Wine, wherein Steel had been quenched diverse times.

Vomiting joined with a Fever.
A Gentlewoman affected with these greefes, was in this manner comforted..
Aquae balsami, j, Aquae preseru. ij, oleum piperis, Grains vj, mix them well
with a good spoonful of the sirupe of Quinces, and so she drank it, at the
beginning of the heat.

CHAP. XXIX. A great and sore plurisie cured, by M. R.
A Certain man of xxiiij. years old was vexed with a most grievous plurisie,
with pricking, shooting, and a cough, with a continual fever, and
inflammation of the tongue. First, there was good store of blood taken from the
liver vain, on that side where the pain was. Then were these sirups (that do
decoct and purge) ministered unto him.. Syrupi de liquericia, de Hysopo,
acetosae ana j, Oximellitis squillitici, aceti squillitici, ana iij, make
thereof a loche, whereof in the morning he licked with a Liquorice stick, which
caused him to spatte easily, and took away the heat or burning of the
tongue, being used with this decoction.. French Barlie, iij, Carduus
Benedictus, M j, Roses, Violets, ana lb j, Licorice scraped, iij, Figs iij,
Raisin, j ss, Sugar Candy, ij, boil them in xvi. lb. of water, till two pound
be wasted, and so drink it cold. Also his diet was light and thin, as broth
and drink, etc.

Plurisie, with spatting of blood, cured by M. R.
FIrst there was made this purging preparatiue.. Senae vj, Carduus Benedictus,
M ss. Sugar, ss. Ginger, ss, lay them to infuse one night in warm whaie, made
of Goats milk, lb j ss, whereof ye shall give morning and evening, iiij
warm: this purges gently, and causes to spat easily. Then three days
after, they must bleed well on the liver vain, and their drink at meals, was
the decoction of hysop, violets, liquerice, and raisins with sugar.

Plurisie, with inflammation of the tongue, and costiuenesse of the body. M. R.
FIrst they were purged with Aromatico, and then used this gargarisme..
Semperuiue, or howsleeke, M ij, boil them in a quart of water, till a third be
wasted. Then strain it, and put thereto ij of wine vinegar, wherewith they
gargarised warm oftentimes. Then they used Mel rosarum, which took away the
blackness of the tongue. Their diet was moist and cooling as follows.. French
Barlie ss, Figs vij. Raisens iiij, boil and strain them, and put thereto
oleum vitrioli, q. s. to make it tart, and so drink thereof.

Plurisie in a woman cured.
FIrst she was purged with Arom. Leonardo, then unto her side there was applied
this unguent, seven or eight times a day, which took away her pain,.
vnguenti de Althea, ij, oil of sweet Almonds, ss. mix them together: the
next morning she was let blood in the basilike vain, on that side where her
pain was. Her diet was the same that was spoken of before. After meat, she
used a Lochsanum sit for the purpose, and so in short time she was cured.

Another woman cured of the same disease, by M.R.
FIrst there was ministered unto her this potion,. the water of Carduus
benedictus, lb ss, Oleum vitrioli, q. s. to make it tarte like a Pomegranate.
The next day she was let blood in manner aforesaid, about x. After she had bled,
she took this potion following, five days together, morning and evening:
which caused her to sweat well, and thereupon she was quickly cured.

The Diaphoreticall decoction.
REcipe, Cardui Benedicti, M ij, liquorice scraped, iij, figs v. Raisens ij,
sugar candy, i ss, boil them in a sufficient quantity of water, and strain
them to drink.

A plurisie broken with a potion.
FOr the breaking of his Aposteme, there was ministered unto him Aromatico
Leonardo, with honied water. The next day, the basilicke vain, (...) the
Pleuciticall side was opened. His drink at dinner and supper was this
decoction. Take Isope dried, M j, Violets, P ij, six Figs, liquerice scraped,
ss, Raisens iiij, boil them in ix. pound of water till one pound be wasted,
then strain this pectorall decoction, and use it.

Another cured in this manner.
FIrst he took Aromatico Leon. and thereupon drank the water of Carduus
Benedictus. The next day, they let him blood on the same side where the pain
was. His diet was moist and cooling, and he drank Barlie water, mixed with
sirupe of Roses, and oleum vitrioli, and shortly after was cured.

CHAP. XXIX. An inward impostume, or bastard plurisie, cured by W. M.
A Man having an impostume in his side, which would have turned to the
plurisie, was thus cured. Take a good sweet Apple, and cut off the crown,
take out the core, and fill it with powder' of Olibanum, bind on the crown
again, and roste it under the embers, till it be soft. Then mix with it three
or four drops of Oleum vitrioli, and let the patient eat it, and sweat
thereon.

Also with the same medicine, at the same time, there was a boy helped, that
had a plague sore on his neck.

Pain in the side with a cough, cured by W.T. after this manner.
REcipe, Floris Sulphuris, ij. the extract of Enula Campana, j, Ireos and
Liquorice, ana j. honey, q. s. to make it in form of an electuarie. Before it
be made up, put thereto, ss, of Oleum sulfuris, and use it morning and evening.

CHAP. XXXI. Pain and wind in the body, cured by I. H.
A Certain woman 28. years of age, being often troubled with a griping pain
and wind in her body, was presently eased, by taking four or five grains of
Laudanum nostrum in Malmesey, with two or three drops of oil of Aniseeds.
After this manner, diverse persons have been cured. Provided always that the
body be loose, else must it be moved, either with some gentle clister or
suppositarie.

The expelling of wind out of the body, by L. F.
THis course following, has been diverse times proved most effectual,
against wind in the stomach, and other parts of the body. First let them take
a dose of Aromat. Leonardo. Then let them take morning and evening, half a
dream of this composition, three or four days togeter, either in potion or
pills.

. the essence of Gentian, ij, the essence of Ginger, oil of Aniseed, Fennel
seed, ana ss, make thereof a mass, and keep it to your use.

CHAP. XXXII. The cure of the Dropsy, performed by W. T.
A Man of three and forty years old; troubled with the Dropsy, was in this
manner cured. Take the roots of blew Flower de Lilce, sliced, and steeped in
vinegar, three or four hours, and then dried, ss, the bark of Laurel
roots, so prepared, as much; the leaves of Sena, in powder, one spoonful,
Aniseed, and Ginger, ana i, mix them, and take of that powder every morning,
from the weight of four pence, till it give you four stools a day, continue
herein so long, as you shall think it good.

CHAP. XXXIII The killing and expelling of worms in the stomach or elsewhere,
by I. H.
AN infinite number of people, both young and old, have been cured thereof,
with this composition following. Take the seed of Carduus sanctus, Wormeseed,
Dittanie, Semen Caulium, cornucerui vsti, coralline, vermium terrestrium, ana
ss, mix them in fine powder, and give thereof ss, either with honey, or sweet
milk, in the morning and evening. Anoint also the stomach, and belly
downward, with this unguent following, and apply a little unto the navel,
with brown paper, and no doubt of it, within two or three days, the patient
shall be cured. For it does not only kill the worms, but causes them to come
forth by siege, making the belly soluble, so that they shall have two or three
stools in a day. The cataplasme or unguent is this.. Farinae lupinorum, Aloes,
centauriae, myrrhae, theriacae optimae, ana ss, beat them into fine powder, and
make thereof an unguent, with the juice of peach leaves, and keep it to your
use. Also two or three drops of Oleum vitrioli, being drunk with water of
gramen, or such like, for three or four days, kills worms. Also ij, of
Quintessencia solutiuo Phiorau. drunk with j, of sirupe of Roses, kills the
worms, and expels them by siege.

CHAP. XXXIIII. A quartaine of long continuance, cured by L. F.
FIrst the patient was purged, with 12. grains of La petra Philosophale, Leon.
Phiorau. mixed with ss of good Mithridate, the next day he took of this
decoction warm, vj, and so continued 14 days, morning and evening..
Chamepiteos lb j, white wine lb viij. white honey lb j, distill them with a
gentle fire, till five pound be come forth. Then let it cool, and filter that
which remained in the vessel, and mix it with that which was distilled before,
keep it in a glass, close stopped, and use it. Also the raines of the back,
was anointed every night with Balsamum artific. Leon. Phior. and so he was well
cured.

CHAP. XXXV. An approved remedy against the pestilence, plurisie, and
quartaine.
Diverse people have been cured of these foresaid diseases, by taking a dose of
Turpetum Diaphoreticum, Paraceli, either with Amuletum Palmarij, or with some
excellent good Mithridate, in the morning fasting, and sweating thereupon.
Sometime it is given with other potions or compositions, according to the
disease.

CHAP. XXXVI. The swelling of the spleen, in a melancholic person, cured by
W. T.
A Certain melancholy man, was much grieved in his milt, heart, and head: but
he was thus cured. First he was twice purged, with j. of Panchimagogon, and one
of the extract of Sena, mixed with sirupe or Roses, and two or three drops of
oil of vitrioll. That done, he took a quart of posset Ale, made of white wine
and Burnet, and drank thereof, morning, noone, and night, a good draught, with
half a spoonful of Aqua Balsami Fiorauan. Also now and then, he took morning
and evening, a toste of white bread, stieped in Aquam Preseruans, and within
ten days after, he purged again, and so remained in good health.

CHAP. XXXVII. Frantic feauers, for want of sleep, often cured by I. P.
MAny that were so greeuouslie vexed, with a burning fever, that they could
not sleep, and were in manner frantic, have taken five or six grains of
Laudanum, with conserve of succorie flowers, and therewith were speedily
delivered out of their extremities.

Pestilent feauers, with great thirst cured, by I. H.
FIrst they were purged once or twice with Aromatico Leonardo: then was the
stomach comforted with some pectorall potion. That being done, there was Barlie
water made with raisons, licorice, and cool herbs, if you may have them. Then
strain it clean, and put therein as much Oleum vitrioli as will make it
tarte, like a Pomegranate, Drink thereof when you are dry, for it comfort
nature, swageth heat and thirst wonderfully, opens all obstructions, and
defends the body from putrified feauers. If they be grieved with the
headache, you shall cause them to be let blood under the tongue, cutting those
veins overthwart, and they shall presently be cured.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Against poison, or the Pestilence, a diaphoreticall potion, by
W. T.
REcipe Mirrhae, croci, ana ij, Amuleti Palmarij j, Spiritus vini lb j, Oleum
piperis, Oleum gingiberis, ana j, mix them in a glass, and give thereof ss in
old Sack at once, against the pestilence or poison.

CHAP. XXXIX. Signs of death in the Plague. W. K.
TAke a quick Frog, and lay it with the belly next the sore: if the party
will escape, the Frog will burst, in a quarter of an hour. Then lay on
another, and this you shall do, till no more do burst, for they draw forth the
venom. I have been told that a dried tode will in better sort do the same. If
none of the Frogs do burst, the party will not escape, this has been often
proved.

CHAP. XL. Counsel, antidotes, and preservatives, against infectious aires, on
the water, or land, by W. T.
YOu shall use to chew, or hold in your mouth, a little of Essentia Angelicae.
Also it would be very profitable to drink three or four drops of the same
fasting. Also Oleum Camphorae being drunk, effects the same. In like manner,
aqua balsami Phiorauante, if it be drunk in the morning with wine, or Allome,
preserves a man from all poison and pestilent aires: and is a most singular
remedy against surfets, or the pestilence. Also, if you be in any infected
ship, or house, it were necessary to wear a bag of Saffron under your arm
pits to defend the heart.

Also it were very necessary, to drink two or three drops, of the essence of
saffron, for the same purpose.

Amuletum Palmarij, is also very excellent, being taken in the morning fasting.

Dissolved pearl, eaten or drunk, defends the heart purifieth the blood, and
reuiueth the spirits above all other things. You may make it in lozinges, or
drink it in any cordial, in what quantity you will.

CHAP. XLI. An inueterate Gonorrhaea, either in man or woman, oftentimes cured,
by W. T.
MAny have been cured of this, and such like infirmities, with this composition
following. Among the rest, one Gentleman in Buckinghamshire, who was vexed
therewith, above seven years continually.

A Gentlewoman also, was so greeuouslie afflicted with slux. albo, that she
waxed lame, and went with a staff: these were both cured in 12. days. But one
thing must be remembered that if it come ex lue venerea, it were necessary,
first to be purged, and then to use these pills.

. magisterij perlarum, j, Gum Tragacanth, ss, fine bole Armeniack, terra
sigillata vera, ana. j. Laudanum nostrum, j, make an hard mass, with
Turpentine, and take thereof, ss, when you go to bed, until this quantity be
spent. In the mean time also, you shall anoint the reins of the back, with
this unguent.

. vnguentum album camphoratum, ij, saccarum Saturni, ij, misce, fiat vnguentum.

An other for the same. W. T.
First purge them with Aromatico Leonardo, once or twice, then let them take,
morning and evening, half a dram of the pills following: and anoint the
reins of the back, with the foresaid unguent.

. Symphyti, crassulae, ana ij. Magisterij perlarum, dissolved coral, ana j,
Laudani nostri, j, nucis moschatae, numero ij, boli Armen. terrae sigillatae
verae sem. papau, albi, Tragacanth. ana ij, make them up in a mass, with
Turpentine and use them in manner aforesaid.

An electuarie against Gonorrhaea, by W. T.
A Certain man, being troubled with a stinking Gonorrhaea, was in this order
cured. First he was purged with Aromatico Leonardo: the next day, he took a
pill or two, of Venice Turpentine, washed in plantaine water, That done, he
used to eat morning and evening, the quantity of an hazell nut, of this
electuarie, until he was helped which was not long after.

Take the kernels of hazell nuttes, blaunched, iiij, magisterij perlarum,
laudani nostri, ana j, terrae sigillatae, boli, very, sanginnis draconis in
grain, ana ij, Seminis Plautaginis, rasurae Eboris, ana j, nucis moschatae. 3.
or 4. Cinamomi, j, Saccari, iij. mix them well together, and use it. Also in
the mean time, he anointed the raines with the foresaid unguent.

CHAP. XLII. The immoderate sluxe menstruall, suppressed or stared, by W. T.
A Certain woman, being greeuouslie weakened with that disease, and having
great heat and pain in her body, was thus cured. Take the roots of Orpine,
and comferie, thin sliced, Clarey q. v. boil them with a chicken, and with
that broth make Almond milk, and to every handful of Almondes, add one of
Laudanum nostrum, Grind them well together, and drink thereof morning and
evening. Also you shall anoint the raines and grieved parts, with the unguent
mentioned in the Chapter aforegoing.

Another against the same.
I Was informed, that the powder of a land Frog, bound about the woman's neck,
does stay the foresaid flux.

CHAP. XLIII. A Flux stopped by G. F.
Dissolve Baie salt in Malmesey, and therewith wash the soles of your feet,
and in three or four days it will stay the Flux. Diverse Souldiars in the
wars have been cured thereof, by setting their fundament in warm Horse
dung. Also the powder of red Roses, drunk in Red wine, is very profitable for
the stopping of the Flux.

Bloody Flux of long continuance, cured by W. T.
REcipe, conserve of red Roses, Marmilade of quinces, electuarie of Sulphur, of
Leon. Fiorau. his description, ana ij, Amuletum Palmarij, ss, essentiae croci,
Laudanum nostrum, ana ss, aquae preseruantis, ss, oleum vitrioli, and sulfuris,
ana ss, mix them, and take thereof, j, morning and evening.

CHAP. XLIIII. The cure of the Hemerrhoides or Piles, performed by I. H. And
many other.
TAke Mullen, and fry it with Butter, and therewith anoint the part diverse
times.

The oil of Eggs is a notable remedy, to withdraw the said infirmity.

Balsamum sulfuris, anointed upon them, does with great speed and good
success, cure them: this also has been oftentimes proved very excellent.

If they be anointed with Oleum Tartari faetens, it dries them up in short
time. But first it were necessary, to purge the body of the melancholic
original of that disease, both by vomit and siege.

Some use to take them away, by applying a caustic unto them.

The cure of Ficus in ano, ex lue venerea, performed by I. P.
MAny have been sore troubled with warts or blathers in the fundament, which
have in very short time been cured, by anointing them with Balsamum Tartari
faetens. Among other men, there was a strong lusty fellow fifty years old,
of complexion melancholic, which was beastly beraied with the Pockes, about
whose fundament, or Longanon, there remained 14 or 12 growing, whereof some
were so big as a little sigge, all of them did run or yield, a loathsome
yellow sanies or matter. This man was cured, with Balsamum Tartari foetens:
without any pain to him and the warts were so dried, that they were pulled of,
with a pair of mullets: after which he remained whole. This man was healed in
Bedfordshire.

CHAP. XLV. The provoking of menstrues, by I. H.
BY this composition following, many more then it is here requisite to speak
of, have had their menstrues provoked, and many other obstructions opened:
especially if it be given with brothes, liquors, or medicaments, appropriate
thereunto.

extractionem Chamomillae, Calendulae, Gentianae, Briomae, Chamepitcos,
Paeoniae, Centaurij, Iuniperi, Genistae, Sabinae, Spicaenardi, Rutae, Melissae,
Chelidoniae, Philipendulae, Matricariae, ana j. Essentiae Zedoariae, Croci, ana
ss, Mirabolanorum, Castorei, ana ss, mix them, and keep it close. The dose is
from j, to j, upon extremity, either in pills or convenient electuaries. It
must be ministered four or five days before the new Moon, and as many after,
with the infusion of Sena, or in sirupe of roses, for the intent above named.

To provoke menstrues, in melancholic people. W. H.
TAke of the extract of Helleborus niger, five graynes, Panchimagogon 15.
graynes, make it into three small pills, and anoint the pills, with Oleum
anisi, and thereof take once or twice. After that take this composition
following.

Take of the Essence of Gentian, Sabinae, Angelica, ana j, Essencia Croci, j,
Castorei ss, mix them, and make them up in form of pills, and take thereof
each night, when you go to bed, j, either in pills, or dissolved in some
convenient liquor, about the foresaid time of the Moon. A very melancholic
maiden, was cured in this manner.

CHAP. XLVI. Suffocation and pains of the Matrix, with retention of menstrues,
cured, by I. P.
REcipe extract. Brioniae, j ss, the leaves of Sena, ss, ginger, j, Cinnamon, j,
sugar, j, lay them to infuse one night, in a pint of warm whay, made of goats
milk. Then strain it, and drink thereof three mornings warm, about the new
Moon; keeping a warm and drying diet, your wine must be infused with
rosemarie flowers.

Another that has cured, the rising of the mother, by R. C.
REcipe the flowers or buds of a walnut tree, in May, give the patients as much
thereof to drink, as will lie on a groat, and with two or three doses they
shall be cured.

Also if you give. j, of oleum succinum album, in wine, it will presently cure
the same disease, a thing oftentimes proved with good success.

CHAP. XLVII. To provoke urine, and to cause the Iaundies to flow. W. K.
THe powder of earth worms, drunk with white wine, pouoketh urine and cures
the Iaundies and Tertians.

Also gray soap, ij. bay salt, finely beaten, j, mix them, and therewith
anoint the navel, and belly.

Also Castile Soap being drunk, with warm wine, provoke Urine.

Also, if you shall apply quick earth-wormes, upon a whit blow, called
Panaricium (of some Panaricies) they will cure the same.

CHAP. XLVII. To provoke Urine, and to heal other obstructions, a most
excellent, and procued receipt, by I. H. and many other.
THis composition of artificial salts, breaks, and (after a sort) consumes
all tartarous diseases, as has been very often and truly experimented by
diverse and sundry persons: yea it prevails much against the Gowte, being
taken with potions, electuaries, and sirrups, appropriate unto the particular
ministrations.

the salt of Radish, of Eringus, Bean stalks, Broom, Alizanders, Juniper,
Ash, Aniseed, Fennel, Camomill, Wormwood, Urine, Tartar Christalline, ana,
mix them in a warm mortar, and keep it close, and in a dry place, for in
the air and moisture it will quickly resolve. The dose hereof, is from half
a scruple, to an whole scruple, and may be very safely administered, without
peril, to any age or sex: upon good occasions, and at times convenient, after
that the body it prepared for the same purpose.

The end of the second part of this Collection.
A SVPPLEMENT, OR ADDITION, UNTO THE FORMER COLLECTION.
This Appendix or Addition, contains both Philosophical discourses, of the
causes and cures, of diverse and sundry diseases: as also many pithie
discourses, of the virtues and use, of many vegetables, animals, etc. culled
and translated, out of the Phisickes and Chirurgerie, of Sr. Leonardo
Fiorauante, and left to pass sorth in Print, with this Collection.

CHAP. I. Of pain in the head.
THe pain in the head, is an infirmity, whose cause until this time has not
been sufficiently known: as by mine own experience I shall prove unto you.

All or the most part of Phisicions, in the world, do hold this position, that
pain in the head, is no other thing, then vapors arising from the stomach:
and ascend unto the head, which do offend membrana, whereupon ensues pain.
Herein they speak some part of the truth. But (in my judgment) they are not
yet come perfectly, to know all the cause of this infirmity. For I see that in
the cures, which these Theorickes would perform, it falls not out, according
to their expectation and desire, for that they know not the whole or the
principal cause of the malady, therefore what certain medecin can they
find out to cure the infirmity? They may percha^ce (as the blind man hits the
crow) help, they know not what, which thing I speak not, to backbite or
injury any of the^: but to tell them of love that I bear to them and others,
the whole and true cause of that, whereof heretofore they have been ignorant.
The first cause is putrified blood, in Leonichie, the second is, the vapors
that ascend from the stomach and offend the head: the third is, the humiditie
or moisture, between the skin and the flesh. So that the causes are three,
and the remedies as many, to dissolve the antecedent causes. I have now showed
thee, the original and root of the pain in the head; about which thou shall
never more need to beat thy head, or break thy brains, either in seeking
the Aphorisms of Hypocrates, the Commentary of Galene, or the authority of
Auicene: for in these four or few words I have said all. Now of the cure of
this disease, as I have experimented the same an infinite sort of times in my
life: which way soever the cause comes, work thou after this manner, and
thou shall never sustain blame, or discredit.

When the pain in the head is confirmed, and that thou can find no help,
by common Theorick or Practike, do these things following. First let them blood
on Leonichie, cutting it overthwart, and let the patient spat as much as he
can. Then the next morning, let them take our Aromatico fasting. The next day
let the head be shaven, and lay thereon an attractiue plaster, drawing out the
humiditie: whereof I have made mention in my Caprici medicinale. In the end,
cause them to neese, and hereby all the pain in the head will cease.

CHAP. II. Of the Catarrhe, and rume in the head.
THe Catarrhe, is a moist vapor, which assaulteth the head, and afterward
falls down again, into the stomach: where it ingrosseth and corrupts.
This moisture, has his beginning of the moisture of the lungs, and until such
time, as the lungs be discharged thereof, the Catarrhe will continue in his
force. This infirmity reigns more in flegmaticke, and melancholic bodies,
then in any of other constitutions. Such as are troubled with it, are not long
lived, because their lungs consume, by little and little, and thereupon they
are troubled with the Ptisicke: and consequently they perish, if they be not
quickly relieved. I will now show thee a rare secret to cure the same.

Take Pulmonaria and Sena, that is fresh, and new; infuse them in wine and
water, over a small or gentle fire, till the wine have drawn out the virtue.
Then strain it, and put thereunto our Quintaessence, and keep it close in a
glass, let the patie^t drink thereof every morning iij, luke warm, for
twenty days together: let him eat good nourishing meats, for they agree
well with this disease. If the patient be not too far spent, you shall see
your cure performed in short time. In the mean while, if the patient be weak,
you shall give him new laid eggs, and good white wine. If the humiditie be
perceived, not to be quite expelled and euacuated, then give him our Aromatico:
afterward comfort him again, with restoratiues and cordials, to make him
strong, and no doubt by the help of God he shall be cured. This method, of
curing this infirmity, differs from the common course that Physicians take,
which would cure it, with diet, bleeding, and mollifying liniments, and causing
them to spat, and such like, which are means rather to augment the Catarrhe,
then to diminish the same.

The second course, to cure the descension: that comes from the head to the
stomach.
Use these five things if you will cure this disease: first our Electuario
Angelica, 2 Quintaessence solutiue, 3 our pillulae pro descenso, 4 Unguents for
the stomach and head, 5 our Quintaessence vegetable. The electuarie cleanses
the head and stomach, the Quintaessence solutiue euacuateth the body, the
pills take away the cause of the descension: the unguents dry, and the
vegetable Quintaessence preserves the body from all ill and noisome
infirmities. The Electuarie must be taken first in the morning: of the
Quintaessence solutiue, you must take a spoonful, in the morning, in a little
broth and sugar keeping a reasonable good diet: and do this four or six days.
Then take the pills in the evening, and in the mean time, anoint the head
and stomach, with Oleum cerae, and drink every morning, a little of our
Quintaessence, which if you do use continually (by the blessing of God upon it)
there is no doubt, but the body shall be free from many troublesome maladies.

There was a certain woman, of the age of 58. years, who being greatly
troubled, with a Catarrhe: was cured by the use of our Aqua preseruans, morning
and evening, and by anointing the stomach with balsamo.

One that was affected with a Catarrhe, and a stitch in the side, was thus
cured. He took our Aromatico twice. Then he took every morning a spoonful of
our Quintaessence solutiue, with the broth of a capon for seven or eight days
together: and every night when he went to bed, he anointed his stomach, with
oleum incompostibile, and thereby was soon after cured.

A woman that had great pain in her head and stomach, and had her menstrues
stopped; with loss of her appetite, was thus helped.

First she took two doses of our Pillulae Angelica, that done she took every
morning, a spoonful of Quintaessentia solurtuo, with broth and sugar, for five
or six mornings together. After that, she took every morning, one spoonful
of our Aqua preseruans: whereupon in short time after she was cured.

A contusion in the head.
A Certain man, had a great fall from an horse, wherewith he bruised his head
most grievously, who was cured in four days; by anointing the place, with
Oleum benedictum nostrum.

The taking away, or healing of the white scall.
THis noisome malady, is perfectly cured, by purging the patients with our
Aromatico, and anointing the head with our Oleum Philosophorum.

Also the Artificial balsame of our description: does the like, and Oleum
benedictum nostrum effects the same.

Pain in the eyes with great dimnesse of sight.
A Certain man that had great pain in his eyes, and was almost blind,
recovered his sight; by letting blood, under the tongue. The next day he took
Aromatico once: after that he used our Quintaessence solutiue, seven or eight
days together, and every night he anointed his stomach, with Oleum cerae
rectified: then was dropped into his eyes, our Quintaessence for the eyes, and
thereof was he well cured.

An unguent for sore eyes.
TAke rose water, fenell, and cufrage water, ana, put therein a small quantity
of Verdi greece: and boil it a little on the fire. Then let it settle, till it
be clear, and power it of. With this water, see that you wash Anxungia
porcinae seven or eight times: and of that, put a little into the eye, when ye
go to bed.

To cure or stay the spatting of blood.
ONe that spat blood, was cured in ten days, by drinking the liquour of honey,
morning and evening. An other was healed by drinking the decoction of mint in
vinegar, another by drinking of Crocus martis.

The description and cure of the Squinancie.
THis disease, is a windy moisture, and a suffocation of blood, as you may see
by experience, that such as are possessed therewith, have a great alteration,
or many chaunges of fevers; with a swelling in the throat: and many times if it
be not quickly helped, it will choke them, and this is the cure thereof. You
shall give them j, of the powder of a wild Bores tooth, with iij, of oil of
linseede, and forthwith by the help of God they shall be greatly eased.

The description and manifold cures, of the disease called Scrophulae, or for
unculi, which some do call waxing kernels, but rather the kings evil.
THe Scrophulae or waxing kernels (so called of some) which use to come in the
throat, or other parts of the bodies, of young children, do arise and are
caused, of great quantity of melancholic humors, because that does for the
most part reign in persons, that are weak of complexion. For you may easily
see that such as are vexed with that infirmity: are not very quick spirited.
These Scrophulae, are a long time ere they will come to suppuration: and before
they break, and when they are broken, they cause excessive pain, and are hard
to be cured. For all infirmities that come of melancholy, are troublesome to
cure or resolve, as you may see in the quartaine and such like. But here I will
show thee a secret, to cure these Scrophulae. First you must remove the cause,
and then cure the effects: for otherwise it were impossible to cure them with
outward medecines. This melancholy is purged, with our sirupe against
melancholy, which you must use eight or ten days. The dose is about 4 cold.
That done give them our Aromatico, which cleanses the head, and stomach, and
purifieth the blood. As touching local medicines, to break it, you shall lay
thereon our caus^ (...) 24. hours: which mortifieth and dries, for it will
dra^ a great deal of moisture. After this, anoint it with ^ agno licore,
until the escare be fallen out: and when it is mundified, apply thereon the
cerote of Gualtifredo di Medi, and use no other medecin, for it will
incarnate, and cicatrise, without scare.

Another cure for Scrophulae.
A Certain young boy of 14. years, of complexion choleric, and
melancholicke, who had Scrophulae in his throat, on both the sides, was cured
thus. The first medecin that he took, was the infusion of Rhabarb, with the
trochiskes of Agarick, and acetum squilliticum, and water of maiden hair,
mixed together, which he used by the space of ten days. Then was laid upon
the Scrophulae, a plaster of cerote magistrale with Cantarides: which drew
forth the malignitie of the ulcer, and great store of Sames, being applied for
15. days together. This done, I gave him the decoction of Salsa parilla, with
a good diet, for twenty days together. Then I applied unto the sore a cerote
of Gualtifredo di Medi, which in a short time cured him, that had been vexed
with them four years before.

Another for the same.
ANother which was a maid of 13. years of age, was vexed with Scrophulae in
her throat, which was also in this manner cured. First I gave her the extract
of Elleborus niger, with mel rosarum; which does very effectually purge the
melancholicke humor. That done, I gave her our sirupe against the melancholic
humor, for eight or ten days together: and applied unto the sores an unguent
of Lytarge, boiled with the powder of Scrophularia: thus was she in short time
cured.

Another against Scrophulae.
REcipe Verdigreee, Pelitorie of Spain, docke root, the juice of leekes, of
the herb Scrophularia, ana, mix them, and lay on lint, and apply it unto the
Scrophulae, but take some care thereof.

CHAP. IIII. Of Panaricium, or Panaricies, called the whit blow.
THis grievous and intolerable malady, (as those know well that have felt
them) comes on the end of the finger; and is an infirmity, bred in the
liver, whereof nature being willing to discharge her self, sends it to the
extreme parts of the fingers: and most commonly it comes to the finger next
the thombe, but seldom in the other. The reason or cause whereof is hidden,
save that we may conjecture (as we have said before) an accident in the liver,
which nature sends forth unto those parts to ease her self. When it comes
to the end of the singer, that it can go no further; it causes a sharp and
excessive pain: and the accident coming unto that place, not having passage,
is so hot, that in short time it putrifieth the sinews, muscles, and
cartilages, and in the end rotteth both flesh and bone. The secret of this
grief, is not commonly known, of the most Surgeons: who with all their
learning, cannot devise to cure it, as it ought to be cured. The most part of
such, as have that infirmity, lose their finger: but if thou will quickly
help them, follow this method.

First let them bleed on the liver vein: then let them be well purged.
Afterward dress the finger, with oleum sulfuris: which will cause some pain,
nevertheless (to have some ease) you must abide it. The next day dress it
with Magno licore, until it be whole, which will be in short time, as I have
often proved.

CHAP. V. Of greeuotu ulcers, in women's breasts.
FIrst they must be touched with oleum sulfuris: then make this unguent. Take
of the yolks of eggs, ij, turpentine, butter, barlie flower, honey of roses,
ana ss: incorporate them all in a mortar, and therewith dress them, until
they be whole. But if they come of any kind, or spice of the pocks, this
unguent will be to very small purpose. But then shall you dress them, with our
Vnguento magno: which is appropriate unto the disease, and look that you purge
them with our Aromatico.

CHAP. VI. Of the disease called Asthma, and the cure thereof.
THis disease, which is called the Ptisicke, is a certain infirmity,
contained in the lungs, which does harden and dry them in such manner, that
such as are troubled therewith, cannot fetch their breath. It proceeds of
adustion of the blood, that cannot run in the veins: and so the lungs
lacking sustenance, works that effect. This disease is cured four manner of
ways. First you shall let them blood under the tongue cutting, those veins
overthwart, and suck them as much as they can: for it euacuateth and opens
the opilation of the blood, and eases the lungs of all that evil matter which
offends. Secondly you shall give them a dose of Aromatico, which euacuateth
the stomach, of all evil qualities, that offend the lungs. The third is, to
let them eat for a month together, every morning j, of our Electuario de
Althea. The fourth, to anoint the stomach, every night with Magno licore. But
every ten days, you must take a dose of our Electuario Angelica, whereby thou
shall help them quickly. You must also keep a sober diet: refraining fish,
porke, slimie things, spice, baked meats, cheese and such like, which nourish
grossly, and do infect the blood.

CHAP. VII. To know the Dropsy confirmed in a man the cure whereof, is showed
in the xxxij. Chapter of the second part of the Collection.
THere are three signs or tokens, of a confirmed Dropsy. First look whether
the tongue be white and cold: then, whether the yard be shronke into the belly,
and lastly if there do any veins appear, on the belly. If you perceive
these, they are infallible declarations of a confirmed Dropsy.

CHAP. VIII. An excellent remedy, against the Worms.
YOu shall give the patient ij, of our Vnguento magno, to drink with Mel
rosarum, three mornings together; anoint the nosethrilles therewith, and in
three days, they will be expelled were they never so many.

CHAP. IX. Of the hardness of the milt, and the cure thereof.
THe spleen or milt is hardened, by reason of superfluous humiditie, that it
takes from the liver, and lungs. Therefore if you will help this infirmity,
it were necessary, to use medecines abstersive, and drying, which thou shall
do thus. First give them our Aromatico, then let them use this Electuarie,
which is of maruailous virtue in that operation. Take Crocus Martis,
Scolopendria, ana j, Spiknard, lapis lazuli, ana ij, Cinnamon, ss, mix them,
and make an Electuarie thereof with purified honey, and take thereof every
morning one spoonful, and every night, (two hours before supper) an other
spoonful, and anoint the outward part part, where the grief is, with our
Balsomo artific. and in short time, the disease shall be cured.

Another remedy, very effectual, for the former disease.
LEt them blood on the two veins, under the tongue. That done, mix mustard
seed with the urine of a boy, and lay it between two clothes: and apply it
to the part affected, one night, and then (if thou feel not good ease) use it
again till the disease be gone. Also the decoction of oak, helps the
swelling of the milt.

CHAP. X. Of the Gonorrhaea, or running of the raynes, and the cure.
THis disease, is a corruption, caused of the superfluous use of women, that
are infected therewith: for such men as have knowledge of them, they receive
the said corruption which afterward comes forth of the yard, with great pain
and difficulty in making water; and moreover in the night, when that part is
erected, it causes great torment: which for fifteen or twenty days, causes
extreme pain. This is the beginning of the French pocks, a fit sauce for that
sweet sin of Lechery. It brings most commonly pain in the interior
parts, or pain in the raynes, arms, and legs: in so much that in fine, it
comes to that foul disease. For such as have this Gonorrhaea, never
suspecting or fearing the afterclaps, suffer their disease, to grow on further
and further till their cure will very hardly or never be accomplished.
Therefore I wish every man, to seek help in time, least by letting it pass;
in the end, it turn to his destruction. The cure is as follows.

First you shall give them our Aromatico, once in white wine. Then morning and
evening, for seven or eight days, use this potion following: anointing also
the raynes, and those parts, with our Aqua saetida, being cold, and in short
time they shall be healed.

. the whites of sour or five new laid eggs, ij of fine sugar, iij of rose
water mix them well, and drink it morning and evening. This is a rare secret,
and often proved, the drink must be drunk cold.

CHAP. XI. Of the Hemerhoides, and their cure.
THe Hemerhoides, are an alteration in the Hemerhoidall veins, caused of a
corrupt and putrified humor, whereof nature being willing to discharge her
self, sends forth by those veins unto the extreme or outward parts, where
it cannot pass through, and causes the alteration and inflation that is
called the Hemerhoides. This corruption and putrefaction, is caused of the
evil quality of the liver, which corrupts the blood, and is the cause of
all this inconvenience. Commonly the original and beginning thereof, is caused
of the pocks, a thing that must be considered of in the cure. Now for the cure,
it were necessary to help the liver, to purify the blood, to alter the
Hemerhoides, and to discharge nature of that impediment. First therefore, give
them our Electuario Angelica, the next day, they shall take our Sirupo
solutino, whereof they shall take five or six doses. Then let them anoint the
Hemerhoides, with our Caustike, once or twice, and they shall soon after be
cured.

Of the diverse sorts, and diverse effects of the Hemerhoides, and their cure.
BY reason of this disease, that comes always at the end of Intestino, or
Longanon, some have maruailous pain about the fundament, some burn
wonderfully, and others do scald: which comes, because of the good or bad
qualities in some, more then in other some, as experience shows. For (as I
said) some have such a burning, that they can take no rest, some have such
pain, as they cannot sit, some have it so scalding hot, that it is
intolerable. Though this infirmity is more hurtful in one complexion, then
in an other, and the cure hard: yet you shall cure them in this manner. First
give them Aromatico, then purge the body five or six times, with our Sirupo
solutiuo. Then give him our fume at the lower parts, three or four times, and
then anoint the parts with our Balsamo artisic. of that will dry, and take
away the pain altogether, and the patient shall be surely healed.

There are diverse kinds of Hemerhoides, but two in principal. The one sort is
in the fundament, and causes great pain when they go to the stool. The other
sort comes forth of the fundament, and are not so paynfull as the first. To
cure those within the fundament, you shall give the patient eight or ten days
together, our Sirupo magistrale warm, then let them take our Aromatico, once,
and use clisters, wherein is put half an ounce of Aqua reale Phiorauante at a
time, and so thou shall help them. The best way for those that are come forth,
is to make incision, or to make a little hole in them, that the blood (which is
putrified) may come forth, and so by euacuation thou shall help them. Also you
shall understand, that vomiting is very necessary in the cure of both sorts,
because it opens the veins. Also Oleum ouorum, does ease the pain of the
Hemerhoides very greatly: so does the oil of figs, if you anoint them
therewith. The tooth of an horsefish bein gworne in a ring on the finger after
the body is purged takes them away by a secret and hidden quality, a thing
proved more then an hundred times.

CHAP. XII. Of the cure of such, as were troubled with suffocation of the
Matrix.
A Certain woman, affected therewith having much pain and grief, in her
stomach, was cured, by taking a dose of our Electuario Angelica. Then she used
our sirupe against pains of the mother, eight or ten days, and anointed her
stomach, with Magno licore every night.

A certain young woman, afflicted in manner aforesaid, wanted also her
natural sickness, and began to loose her natural heat: so that nature could
not digest, the superfluous matter in her body, was thus helped. First she
took our Electuario Angelica, and every night, anointed her stomach,
nosethrilles, and pulses, with Magno licore, and every morning drunk of our
Quintaessence, and so was cured.

CHAP. XIII. To cure a rupture in the beginning.
IN every ten days once, give them our Aromatico, and every morning fasting
give them j, of white Tartar, in water or wine; and two hours before supper,
you shall take the like: Let your bread be rye, also you must wear a trusse
fit for that purpose, and use this remedy following. Take of the spirit of
wine xij, frankincense Olibanum, mastiche sarcocolla, ana ss, infuse them in
the said Aqua vitae, and therewith wash the rupture twice a day, then presently
cast thereon, the powder of Bislingua, and the herb Balsamina, and lay thereon
a cloth, wet in the said water, and bind on the trusse so hard, as he may
possibly abide it; and hereby shall thou heal any great rupture in an hundred
days, but see that you keep a diet accordingly.

Another for the same.
TAke very stiff and thick paper well gummed, chew it in thy mouth till it be
soft: then lay it upon the rupture, and wear thereon a trusse fit for the
purpose.

Some use to steep the paper in lie, and wring the same out till it be dry,
and apply it to the rupture, changing it once in 24. hours.

CHAP. XIIII. Of retention of Urine, and the cure thereof.
THe retention of urine, arises of many causes, one is grauel, that stops
the co^duits, where it should pass, an other is the want or weakness of the
virtue expulsive; so that nature cannot expel; an other is a carnositie, which
is an alteration caused of corrupt and putrified humors, which do so restrain
the powers, and urine, that it cannot pass. There is another, and that is
viscositie of the reins, so gross, that it hinders the urine from passing.
Another cause, which is too too common, is the Gonorrhaea, when it changes
into Stranguria, that it is a stopping or choking of the conduites, that carry
the vein to the bladder. All these foresaid causes, proceed of one original,
even of the distemperature of nature, whereof if you ask the reason, you shall
understand, that it arises of that filthy beginning, the French pocks. That
which moves me to believe it, is the observation thereof diverse and sundry
times, for I have cured many that were infected with the pockes, which were
troubled, some with Carnosity (before spoken of) some with gravel, some with
debilitie of the virtue expulsive, some with Gonorrhaea; all which when I had
cured of the pockes: the other distemperatures were therewith also cured. For
that disease, is the cause of twenty mischiefs, and the reason, why many
Physicians, make a long cure of the former distemperatures, is for that they
know not the main and principal cause of them. But now I will show thee a
true and excellent manner of curing the retention of urine, which way soever it
comes.

First give them a dose of Aromatico, then give unto them our Syrupo solutiuo,
eight or ten days, but in any wise keep no straight diet, but a good
government as you do most commonly use: and eat such meat as pleases thy
stomach best: cause them also to sweat, and in short time, thou shall
thoroughly cure them.

CHAP. XV. A most excellent remedy to cure the difficulty of urine.
THe difficulty or retentio^ of urine, caused diverse ways, as of gravel,
viscositie, exulceration, etc. is in this sort very well and safely cured. When
the cause of this difficulty of urine, is in the reins or kidneies; so that
it be not a stone in the kidneies: or some great store of gravel, see that
thou work thus.

. Rognoni of a male hare, boil it in good wine, when it is well boiled, stamp
it small, and pass it thorough a strainer with the said liquor wherein it was
boiled. Remember that when you boil it, there must not remain much liquor in
the vessel. Then take the said matter, that you strained, and put thereto as
much purified honey, and boil it on a soft fire, until it come to the form
of an Electuarie. When it is boiled, put thereunto, for every pound of that
Electuarie, these things following, made into fine powder, of Lignum aloes, of
Cinnamon, ana j, cloves, saffron, ana j, musk, grains four, Aquae rosarum j,
our Quintaessence i ss. Incorporate these well together, while it is warm, and
keep it in a glass, close stopped. And when you will use it, you must first
take a dose of our Electuario Angelica, and while you use the Electuarie,
remember to anoint the reins, with our Aqua faetida, when you go to bed. Of
the Electuarie you must take j, in the morning, and fast thereon four hours,
and use some exercise, and in short time, thou shall see a maruailous good
work performed. For the reins will be strengthened, the viscositie will be
resolved, the powers will be opened, and the urine will be expelled, and
cleansed, all which are effects, necessary for him to regard, that will with
honesty and credit, help the former malady.

Another often proved.
If thou will presently help one, that cannot make water, by reason of wind,
viscositie, or other grievous cause, vexing the party: anoint their reins,
and all the privy parts, with our Balsamo Artificiato, and keep them very
warm, and forthwith they shall make water, to their great satisfaction.

Retention of the Urine, with stitch in the side.
ONe was in very short time cured of these infirmities, after he had taken our
Aromatico: and anointed him, in manner above specified, with our Balsamo
Artificiato.

CHAP. XVI. The swelling of the leg, and foot, cured in manner following.
FIrst the patient took one dose of Aromatico, then he used our Quintaessence
solutiue, three or four mornings together, in a little broth. That done, he
drunk every morning, a little of our Quintaessence vegetabile, fasting, and
every night, he anointed his leg, with Oleum Philosophorum nostrum. Also
now and then he took a dose of Pillulae Angelica, to keep the body soluble,
he kept a reasonable good diet, he used not much walking, so that very shortly
after he was well cured.

CHAP. XVII. Of Chilblaines and their cures.
YOu shall understand, that Chilblaines (as we term them) are caused of no
other thing, then of humors dried, and restrained in our bodies. For in the
winter, when it is cold, the pores do shut so close together, that the humor
cannot pass, or come forth, neither by sweat, nor other exhalation or
expiration. For that cause, the humors in a young man (who is hot of
complexion) may not be kept in; for then nature (which would ease her self)
sends that exhalation, unto the extreme parts of the body, that is unto the
hands and feet; where remaining there is caused that alteration: and in
process of time, the skin does open, and the humor goes forth; but cannot
heal, till the spring, when warm weather comes in. Howbeit I have found out
a secret to cure them quickly, and with great ease. First let them blood, then
give them a dose of our Electuario Angelica: after that let them take our
Syrupo solutiuo, six or seven days together not keeping any straight diet or
rule. After this anoint them with Oleum philosophorum de cera and
terebinthina, at night when they go to bed: and do thus one week at the least,
and then no doubt thou shall cure them as I have often proved. Also the oil
and water of franckinsence, will do the like.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Corns on the feet, and the manner to take them away.
THe corns that come on the feet, are a kind of hard tumor, or thick
excrescence, caused of corrupt and putrified humors, whereof nature being
willing to discharge her self, sends them to the lower part of the feet,
whereout because they cannot pass, there do they make residence: ingendring
that kind of tough excrescence, which is grievous and painful. Many times,
the cause hereof, arises of that noisome disease, Morbus Gallicus, as some
write, and then must it be remedied with medicamentes appropriate thereunto.
But if they come otherwise, then to take them away follow this order. When they
are in their, greatest state, and cause most pain, cut them until they bleed,
then anoint them with our Balsamo Artificiato applying it so hot, as you may
suffer it; thereupon go to bed. Then touch them once or twice with Oleum
sulfuris, and anoint them with Oleum Philosophorum de terebinthina and cera,
until they be whole.

Some take the juice of Semperuiuum, and anoint the corns therewith. Then
they take wormwood, and lay it upon an hot tile stone, and sprinkle it with
strong vinegar, and being hot, bind it upon the Corns, and in three or four
times so doing (as I have been credibly certified) the Corns will be taken
away.

CHAP. XIX. Of an infirmity that comes on the fingers ends, and in the
feet, under the nails, and the cure of it.
MAny men are greatly troubled herewith, and in such manner, as thereby they
are made altogether unfit to go. It comes on the great toe, under the nail,
or the side of the nail: for the most part, and a man would think, that the
nail grew in the flesh, but it is not so, for the flesh grows upon the
nail, though this infirmity appear not, to be a thing of great importance
(whereof the ancient writers have made little mention) yet is it a thing
greatly to be regarded. For many great personages, that live easily, and are
tormented with the gout, have also this grief in those parts: but the order to
cure them is this. First you shall cut the nail, on that part where it most
greeueth them; then take it away which you may do easily, without any great
pain to the patient: for the nail is already separated from the grieved
place. Thus when the nail is taken away, touch it with our Causticke, whereof
mention is made in our treatise of the plague. Let it so remain three days
together: the^ dress it every day, with Magno licore, until it be whole,
which will be in a very short time.

CHAP. XX. Of Erisipela, and the cure thereof.
THis disease (as experience shows) is caused of an hot and fiery moisture,
arising in the face, arms and legs; for where it is, the powers and pores
are stopped, that the said moisture, cannot have expiration, whereupon comes
tumor: as also a shutting and closing up of those pores, by means of the
ordinary anointing the^, with fats, oils, etc. or other cold things: a
common course used of common Surgeons. Against this there cannot be found a
more present remedy, then the spirit of wine, or Aqua ardens, or bathing it
with hot water: and if you wash the parts affected with our Quintaessence, the
powers will be opened, and it penetrateth and assubtilateth that humiditie,
causing it to come forth.

Note.
Also you shall find, that by drinking our Quintaessence, and anointing the
stomach with Oleumcerae, diverse are cured of a certain heat, retained in the
stomach.

CHAP. XXI. The cure of Wartes.
THere is an herb, called in the Italian tongue Herba di vento: in the juice
whereof, if you wet a cloth, and bind it upon the wartes, they will wear away
in short tune after.

The end of the first part of the Appendix.
THE SECOND PART OF THE APPENDIX OR ADDITION, UNTO THIS COLLECTION, containing
the use and virtues, of sundry vegetables, animals, etc. gathered out of the
Phisickes, of St Leonardo Phiorauante.
CHAP. I. Of the use and virtues, of Ebulus or Danewort.
TAke the buds of this vegetable, when they are young and green, To purge
phlegm.
perboile them in water, and make thereof a sallade, and give it unto those,
that have costiue bodies, and it will provoke them to the stool. Strengthen
the sinews.
It is an herb, very profitable for the sinews, it comfort the weak
parts, and preserves such, as are weak in the ioints from many accide^ts: it
purges phlegm, which (for the most part) causes debilitie of the nerves.
Whosoever uses to drink of a sirupe, made of the berries thereof, shall not
be troubled with the gowt, nor any disease. Prevent the gowte.

The general use.


in the articular parts. The seed dried, is profitable, against all
infirmities caused of humiditie.

CHAP. II. Of Elleborus niger, and the use thereof.
THe root of black Hellebore, To purge melancholy.
being dried and kept two years, may be safely used, without other
preparation, and may be ministered against any infirmity, that has his
original, of a melancholicke cause. Therefore it is most appropriate, against
the fever quartaine, and lunatike persons, vexed with melancholy.

CHAP. III. Of the use and virtues of the herb called Gratia Dei, a kind of
Geranium in English blew Storkes bill.
TAke of Gratia Dei, dried in the shadow, and beaten into sine powder, j,
Cinnamon j, cloves, j, wheat flower, lb j, orenges condite, j, make thereof a
past, with honey, and bake it in the oven with bread: but take great heed, Cure
of Scrophulae.
that it burn not. Of this you shall give j, to purge against many
infirmities: but above the rest against Scrophulae, against scabs, and the
white scall. For it euacuateth only the superfluous humiditie of the body, it
dries and is appropriate for such kind of infirmities. Note.
Howbeit you must note, that all soluble medecines are not fit, for one disease
or complexion: for chiefly and properly, Rubarb purges choler, black
Hellebore auoideth mela^cholie, Danewort dispossesseth the body of phlegm, and
this herb cleanses the blood. One medicine may work upon diverse causes.
Therefore every one has his peculiar property: though sometime either of
them, may work, upon more causes then one, yet not so properly or simply, but
by accident, and in regard of circumstances.

Provoke vomit.
Two drammes of the powder of this herb, drunk in wine, or broth, provoke
vomit and siege, and is very good for such as are lunatike. Fever.
It helps or at the least delayeth the extremity of the fever. It is good
against greefes of the stomach, and wind in the belly.

Putrified ulcers.
A decoction thereof made with ley, helps putrified ulcers, if they be washed
therewith: for as it purges the stomach, so it cleanses the sore, and heals
it quickly, if you wet a cloth, in the said ley, and apply it thereunto.

CHAP. IIII. Of Rubarb, and his virtues.
THe herb called, in the Italian tongue, Lappacia maggiore, or Rombice
domestice, is a kind of Rubarb, which among the learned Herbaristes is termed
by the name of Rharecentiorum: whereof j, when it is new will lose the body,
euacuate choler, as the Rhabarbarum does. Purge choler.
It is very good against oppilations: it purges the blood, and takes away
scabs.

You shall have, The correction or use.
a most precious medecin thereof: if you mix the green root, with honey,
cinnamon, saffron, ginger, and the powder of roses.

If you roast the root in the embers, Scrophulae.
and mix it with condited sugar it breaks the Scrophulae, and mundifieth
them, and heals them in short time. Some do mix it with the gum, called
Ammoniacum; and so do bring it into the form of an unguent, and apply it unto
the parts affected with Scrophulae.

CHAP. V. Of Tithymale, and his virtues.
GAther the herb Tithymale (called Spurge) in the month of May: take forth
the juice and mix it with sugar roset, or sugar violet, in fine powder: The
use.
then make of them both a moist past, and keep it in a glass, close stopped.

When you purpose to use it, minister two scruples thereof, in broth or any
other convenient sirupe. It purges without pain, helps al fevers that come
of heat: Fevers.
working not only by the stool, but provoking sweat also.

It resolves all continual and quotidian fevers, Grievous agues.
when the parties affected therewith be hot, and their sweat cold, yea though
they be brought very low, it will by Gods help deliver them of their
troublesome adversary.

Laureola does also move the body, by vomit and siege, Note.
but it may not be used in any continual fever or quotidian; because it will
inflame too much.

CHAP. VI. Of Soldanella, and his virtues.
THis herb grows, in sandy and salt ground, and is hot and dry. Dropsy.
It purges by vomit and siege, and is excellent against the dropsy, all
windiness, and unwholesome moisture in the body. Being taken in lozenges,
with Aromatico, Purge ill moisture.
the quantity of j, it sends forth all the noisome waterinesse, out of the
body, drying and heating those parts, in an excellent manner.

CHAP. VII Of Cyperus, and his virtues.
Passions or windy torments.
THe herb Cyperus, called in English Galingall, being put into new wine, gives
it an excellent good taste, and smell, prevailing against inward passions,
caused of wind. It is good for such as are bursten, for it resolves the wind:
if you take the powder thereof being stamped very small, and make a plaster
thereof, Rapture.
with other things appropriate thereunto, applying the same to the rupture, and
changing it once every day. Also if the patient do once in a day eat of the
root, he shall in short space be helped of that disease.

CHAP. VIII. Of Elder, and his virtues.
TAke the roots of Elder, wash them clean, and scrape them till you come to
the wood, stamp that substance, and take the juice, and strain it, boil it,
and scumme it well, and for every of the juice, Cool the stomach purge the
blood.
take one of Mel rosarum, and drink it, for it will cool the stomach, help
hot fevers quickly, and purge the blood.

CHAP. IX. Of the virtues and use of Tabaco.
The use.
TAke of the green herb and root lb iij ss stamp it in a mortar with a
little salt, then put it in a glass with vj. of the spirit of wine, and set
it thirty days to putrify in horse doung. Then distill it in Balneo, till
all the substance be come forth: and put therein as much Oleum sulfuris as will
make it tart. Then keep it close, and give thereof every morning a spoonful,
to any one affected with the fever, Fever.
and it will help him in short time.

If any man be affected, or greatly troubled with ulcers or scabs: let him
drink thereof every day one spoonful, Ulcers.
and wash the sores therewith, and in short time it will most wonderfully cure
them.

CHAP. X. Of sweet Margerom, and his virtues.
TAke sweet Margerom, and stamp it, and take of the juice, j. oil of bitter
almonds j, and j of Masticke, and snuff it up at the nose, three or four
mornings together: and anoint the head with oil of eggs. This purges the
head, of all pains, dissolueth tumors, Pain in the head.
quickneth the sight, and provoke sleep.

CHAP. XI. Of Persicaria, his use and virtues.
YOu shall understand, that this herb, does work (in a manner) against all
infirmities, most straungely to behold. For if you take the powder thereof, and
put it upon copper molten, it will in the proiection, become like gold, and
will draw it to a small quantity, and make it malleable, The chimicall use.
and soft like gold, except the color.

Also if you make a strong ley of the ashes of Persicaria, Another chimicall
use.
and therein boil yellow brimstone, it will draw out of it quick silver,
which is the Philosophers Mercury. This herb does also most notably preserve
a man from many infirmities, if one part thereof be taken whiles it is dry, and
our other part of Specie venetiane; being both of them well incorporate
together, and used in your meats.

CHAP. XII. Of man, and the medecines that are made of him.
MAn is a rational, or reasonable creature, whereof we have written at large
in our book called Phisica del Fiorauante. But here we will only write of
certain medecines, that may be made or derived from him: which are for the
ease, help and remedy of diverse infirmities which are in men and women. The
reason whereof is very good, for every like rejoices with, and helps his
like, and therefore man serves for man. The nature and quality of the parts
of man.

The fat.

The blood.


The fat of a man is (as every man knows) hot, and penetratiue, and
mollifying if you anoint the parts therewith, (where the sinews be hard) and
drawn together, or contracted, therefore it will quickly resolve them. I have
made the Quintaessence of man's blood, rectified and circulated, with the which
I have done most wonderful cures, for if you give thereof j, it will restore
those, that lie at the point of death.

It is most profitable, against those infirmities that are in the blood: for it
corrects the malignitie of the blood, and preserves it, as well as the
spirit of wine. If you put a little of it into an hogs head of wine* Purify
wine.
it will purify it, and preserve it a long time: more then any other thing
whatsoever. So that this Quintaessence, works more effects, for the cure of
great and dangerous infirmities then any other.

The liver of a man.
Also from the liver of a man, will be drawn by distillation, a water and an
oil. If the water be drunk every morning together, by the space of a month,
in the quantity of j, with ij of liuerwort water, it will recover such as are
half rotten through diseases of the liver, and has diverse other properties,
whereof I will not speak at this time.

Flesh of man.
From the flesh of man distilled, there will come forth a stinking water, and an
oil, which is most excellent, to anoint wounds withal, when they are badly
healed, and that there remain any hurt about those parts, that they are out so
sensible and pliant, (as they were wont to be before) this resolves them. And
it mollifieth and softneth all hardness of any tumor, of what original soever
it shall come.

From the forepart of a man's scull, Mans^^ll.
there is drawn by distillation, a water and oil, and a salt, which is most
profitably used, against the falling sickness.

Finally, from each other part of man, there are medecines to be made, for the
cure of sundry diseases in man, and woman, as you may also read, more at large,
in the spagiricke preparations of Josephus Quercetanus published in English by
John Hester Practitioner in the Spagiricall art.

CHAP. XIII. Of an hen, and the Physical use thereof.
SOme write, that the flesh of an hen, will dissolve gold, and that the bones
will calcine it easily.

Another told me, that the ashes of hens feathers, D^ss^lue and calcine gold.
being calcined white, does mundifie, incarnate and cicatrise ulcers.

Also there is made, A restoratiue.
an excellent restoratiue of an hen, after this manner.

Take a good fat hen, and pull her quick, and take forth the guts only,
and stamp her in a mortar. Then boil it, in xij, lb of fair water, with j of
salt, till lb viij be consumed. That done, pass it through a strainer, and
distill it in Balneo, till all the substance be come forth. Hereof you may
give, unto the sick at all times, with a little of a plain and simple Iulepe.
When you find any evil accident, in the belly, you must add thereunto, a
little oil of sweet almondes, newly made, (while it is warm) for then is it
one of the best restoratiues, that can be found out or divised in the world.

CHAP. XIIII. Of Eeles, and the medicinal use them.
MAny have used, the fat of an eele, against deafness, but to small purpose.
But if you will distill the eeles, with Aqua vitae, Against^ ^easnesse.
you shall have a most subtle oil, which does most excellently prevail,
against that infirmity.

Also if you boil the skins of the eeles, in strong ley until they be
dissolved, then strain it and boil it to a thickness: and it will be a most
strong glue for wood or other works.

Also if you anoint a corroding ulcer therewith it will greatly repress the
rage thereof and comfort it.

CHAP. XV. Of the Barbill, and to what use she serves in medecin.
Lose the belly.
IN the month of May the Barbill has eggs, which are of a soluble quality,
and of some those eggs being eaten; they shall be provoked to vomit.

The use and quality.
They have a quality contrary to other purgers they must be dried in the
sun, mixed with a little Sena, and the^ ministered in wine or water that is
sodden. When it has well wrought, the patients must eat good meat to nourish
them, and may drink wine, and (when they are disposed thereto) suffer them to
sleep.

CHAP. XVI. Of Bees, and their medecinall use.
BEes are of nature hot and moist, having a generatiue property. Sterelitie
prevented.

To quicken dead bees.


For if they be given to any barren creature they shall conceive in short time
after.

Also if yon lay dead bees in a dry place to putrify, wetting them sometime
with wine, they will revive again, though not as they were before, but they
will be much bigger and of an other form.

These bees if you bring into powder with as much Cantarides; boil them a
little with oil of Chamomill, Cause hair to grow.
and anoint any part where the hair is fallen away, and it shall quickly come
again, and in a short space, a most strange thing to behold.

CHAP. XVII. Of frogs, and their use.
THe skins of frogs being boiled and made into the form of a plaster with
wax and franckincense, Hot affluctions.
is very profitable for such as have any malign or troublesome accident about
their legs through heat.

The fat of frogs is a wonderful medecin against Fuoco sacro, or S.
Anthonies fire, S. Anthonies fire.
a disease happening unto children and others through the great heat that is in
their blood.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Centumpedes, called in English, Sowes.
IF you minister the powder of these creatures in wine, it has many excellent
properties, but chiefly, Stitch in the side.
it has been experienced, greatly to prevail, against the stitch in the side,
for it will help that grief presently.

If you burn the little crieking creature, called a Cricket, and minister the
powder thereof, in some Diureticke liquor, Provoke urine.
it provoke urine.

Mallows, Alkakengi, Centum nodi, Centumgrana, and the roots of Rapes: are of
like property, being handled and used according to art.

These are oftentimes found in standing pooles, and putrified waters, certain
small creatures, which are round like a cherry, having a tail and two feet,
which are in Lombardie called Comazz^. Take these, and distill thereof of a
water or liquor, Disolue Iron.
wherewith you may very soon consume or break iron: a very great secret
observed in nature.

CHAP. XIX. Of the resine or gum, called Tacca Mahacca, and the use thereof.
TAke thereof as much as you will, distill it in a retort of glass, and from
it there will come both oil and water. Of which I have seen diverse medecines
made, against sundry diseases. Anoint the belly, with this oil cold, when
you go to bed: Cruditie of the Matrix.
and it helps against the cruditie of the Matrix.

If the genitall part of the man be anointed therewith before the act of
generation, Help conception.
the woman shall be the more fit for conception: for by this means some kind
of sterilitie is taken away.

Pain in the head.
It helps and eases pain in the head, proceeding of a a cold stomach.

Help digestion.
It helps digestion, and resolves pain, throughout the body, in what part
soever, they shall come: specially, when they have their beginning of cold.

Wind in the stomach.
The water hereof, dissolueth wind in the stomach, helps digestion, provoke
urine, mitigateth all fevers that come of cold.

CHAP. XX. Of the gum Carrana, and the medecinall properties of it.
TAke it, and distill it in a retort with the yolks and whites of eggs, and
there will come forth oil, and water, the oil whereof will be black, and the
water red.

Chilblaines.
The water of Carranna helps Chilblaines, and all choppes or clefts in the
lips arising of cold in the winter.

Sore breasts.
It is a great ease, for the sore breasts of women, that give suck.

The oil works wonderful effects, Wo^^
in wounds of the head, arm, or legs.

Anoint a simple wound therewith, once or twice: Heal quickly.
and it will very speedily be healed.

Take a quantity of this gum, and mix it with as much of the seed of water
cresses, and the white of an egg, and make thereof a cerote, to apply unto a
rupture: Rupture.
wherewith it will in short time be healed, all other circumstances being also
observed.

CHAP. XXI. Of liquide Amber, and the medecinall virtues thereof.
TAke liquide amber, and distill it in a retort: and from thence, there will
come a red oil.

This oil is used, against all indispositions of cold, Cold and windiness.
and moisture, or wind.

The same heals scabs, and is good for wounds. Scabs.


If you anoint the stomach therewith, Comfort the stomach.
it will exceedingly comfort the same: for it is a thing incorruptible, and
like unto Balsamum.

The end of the Appendix unto the former Collection.

