A HISTORICAL Relation Of the Famous Siege of the Busse, And the surPrising of
Wesell. Together With the Articles, and points of Composition granted by his
Excellency the Prince of Orange to those of the Town.

And A Supposition of the state, and order of their garrison marching out of
the City. and some other additions hereunto annexed.

Written by H.H. quartermaster to my lord General Vere his Regiment.

Printed at Delph in Holland Anno. 1630.

To His honored friends, The Deputy, Minister, Treasurers, Assistants, and
Generality, of the right Worshipful Company of Merchant Adventurers residing
in Delph.
RIght worthy and much respected, The last April, when I went out of the Town
to the Army, I was engaged by promise to three of my friends among you; As
occasions offered, to aduertize you now and then, of our proceedings before y^
Busse, which according to my weak ability, I did perform. But seeing the most
part of you were eye witnesses at the siege, Saw our works, and approaches,
went to the very point, and into the galleryes, and sent some Cannon bulletts
into the Town, before it was given over, and since saw that glorious day
(which made amends for your ill nights lodging) when the Enemies garrison
marched out of it: And that having now more leisure for the refreshing of your
memories, I have recollected the parts of my letters then written to you, into
a whole and brief discourse Touching the siege of the Busse, and the
surprising of Wesell. I confess it is a grave story, and a brave subject, for
a far more eloquent pen then mine, to work upon, but considering my
employment in ^his siege and that truth and bluntness best beseemes a
soldier, I have ventered upon It to break the ye unto another. Such as it
is, It comes unto you from a soldier as a small retribution in acknowledgment,
of that great love and ^omfort he has found among you, and not to show him
self an ungrateful man beseeching you to accept of it with as free a heart, as
he Prese^ts it unto you: and to pardon what therein is amiss. Thus praying the
Almighty to enrich you with all his blessings both Spiritual and Temporal I
recommend you to his grace, and protection, and rest.

Yours, to do you a^^ accep^able service. Henry Hexham,

A Brief relation of the siege of the Busse And the surprising of Wesell.
AFter the happy Victory, obtained by that wise and valiant General Peter
Heyne, over the Spanish silver fleet, and the safe re^ume, of the West Indian
ships into the Netherlands* the Lords the States Centrall, and the Prince of
Orange, marking wisely herein the goodne^^ and providence of God, that, that
Neruus belli, which the king of Spain would have employed against them, was
now brought into the bowels of their country, took courage, resolved for the
field, and prepa^ations being mad^ and sen^ before, his Excel. to amuze the
Enemy, appointed our Rendevous at Skinck^-sco^c^ the 26 of April 1629. where
the companies being, come, expected further order from ye Prince*

On Tewsday then the 24 of April 1629, according to the new style, his Excel.
Sr Harry Vein, his Majesty's extrao^dinary Lord Ambassador, my Lord General
Vere* wit^ diverse other Lords and co^manders, set forward from ye (...) that
night lodged at Verceht: the next at Ar^h^m, whence (...) sent monsieur Wyts,
Sariant mayor General to Skincks-sco^^^ with this order, that the shipping
should ^ack about, and fa^^ down y^ stream to Nemegen. The wagons being
mustered (...) distributed to y^ companie^, the 2^: y^ Prince and hit train,
depa^ted from Ar^ham to Nemegen, and gave command, that the companies should be
drawn off from shipboard, and march alon^ by the town side to Mucker-heath,
where the Army qua^^red that night, under the heavens canopy, by the same token
rayned almost all that night.

On the morrow being the (...) his Ex^el ga^^ order that (...) the creek of
the day, at the first beating of his drum the soldiers should put on their
arms, at the second beating of a march, they should draw forth and be readi^
to ma^ch. Monsieur Percivall the quarter master General with the quarter
masters of every Regiment, and the captain of the pioniers went before to
prepare the way, by which the army should march, and so made a way through
closies and ditches t^ll they came to the Ma^e dyke, and then the army marched
along the dyke, till they came a musket shot beneath y^ Grave, where they found
a bridge laid ready over the Maze, and there passed over the bridge 56 troops
of Horse, and 286 companies of foot, whereof many were double, which marched to
the way y^ goes to the Busse, where the three Brigadoes of the Army, the Avaunt
guard, the Battle, and the Reere, were quart^red that night in a right line
upon the Heath, which made a goodly show, with the but ends of their pikes
sticking in the ground, in their ranckes and ^iles, and our Horse sodg'd on the
right hand of the Heath, at two villages called Reeke, and Schayck near unto
them.

On monday morning the last of April, the Army began to mo^ue again, at the
break of day, and that night marched to a Village called Hejwicke, where there
was a castle, which the enemy held, some two hours going from the Busse,
whether the quarter Masters riding before to quarter the Army, they lay pelting
at them, and some straglers; out of the loope holes of the Castle: but his
Exellencie sent them word by the Gentelman, which dwelt in the Castle, that
they should not play y^ fools too long in holding it out; for if they did, and
that they did force him to bring ordinance before it, he would beat it about
their ears, and that they were to expect no quarter, He summoned them once
more by his Trumpetter: yet for all that they held it out still, till they saw
the Avantgard of our army, come marching toward them, and then they yielded,
and cried peccaui, and sold to our soldiers, bread, butte^, bear^ cheese,
bacon, hens, and ducks, which was a good refreshmt to them. Count Ernest
coming up turned them out, and put some 60 of our ^irelockes into it, and so
the Army was lodgd that night in the fields, and meddowes by the river side
^alled the Aye.

The next day being May Day, the Army marched through a village called Gemonde,
where they passed a bridge over the Dummell, and the Army being marched to the
Heath his Exellencie made a halt, and broke his fast in a pesants house and
having broke his fast, took with him a thousand horse, and went to view the
ground at Vucht, where y^ Army should be quartered, the enemy not forgetting
now and then, to send us some Cannon bullets from the town, and sc^ne^s. After
his Exellencie had well viewed the ground, and found out the convenientest
places for us to quarter in: he ga^e order to the quarter master general, to
give to every quarte^ master his ground, and lodged himself in a Gentelmans
house at Vucht, called Heyms-house, and my Lord general Ver^, was lodged in a
house next unto him. Then the army wa^ parted, and were quartered thus, the
gardes, the English, the French the walloones, and the Lord of Diedens
Regiment, consisting of 13 4 companies of foot (besides horse) with his Exci^
a^ Vuc^t. The Scotch, the frizons, and some dutch Regiment^ consisting of 50
companies with Count Ernest at Flinton. Count William of Nassawe Governor of
Huysden with 35 companies at Orten, The Lord of Breadroods with ^6 companies
upon the side of the Petlar sconce. And Count Solmo with the Lord of Hemers
company and others at Eng^l^n for the safety of our shipping. And on the 11th
of May Monsieur Pincen came with 23 companies which attended the River, and
took up his quarter at Deuteren by Grubbingdonks Koy, and so in this manner
the Busse was girt about

On wensday the second of May, all the quarters being laid out, and every
Regiment and company having their ground given them, his Excie that afternoon
sent for the Commi^ Martin, and all the quartermasters, and there in his
chamber makes a calculation himself, how many spades, pickaxes, and showels
the Commis had in the quarter, which fell to be 31 to every single company, 64
to a double* giving with all express charge to the quarter masters, that the
next mornin^ betime they should begin to entrench their quarters, which was
done with such expedition, that the same night the trench was made up, and his
Excie toward evening riding ^long the line, to view the work gave thanks to
the Captains, quarter masters, and soldiers for their diligence therein.

The quarters then being defensible, as so many Bees to their hiues, so each
soldier brings something to the making up of his hutt. This being done his
Excie. rides about to view the ground for his out line. The line of
Circumvallation with ^ it Angels, was nigh 30 English miles in circuit. We may
take it thus, from the right side of the Damme, where the Dummell was stopped, it
ran along by General Cicill^ quarter and so to Coronell Harewoods, from thence
to the Walloons along the heath to the Milciort, and so down to the stone
gallows, then along from the V^chter heath, to De^rer^s. ^^om thence to the
Busse floote, and so along the men of (...) to Engelen, from Engelen to
Creui-ce^ur, and from thence on the other side of the Dieff^, down to Often to
Count William^ quarter, from th^nce to (...) to Count Ernest^ quarter and th^n
along by the Nu^^ cloistes, the little will, and Cou^-water, to the Lord of
Broadroode^ quarter, and so to the Vfroues sconce, from thence to Beskell
scon^e, and so to the Dam^e, where it met again.

It was admirable to see the vigllancie, and carefulne^ of the Prince* for
there was not a patch of ground, by which the Enem^ might have relieved the
Town, but it was most strongly forti^ied. ^ sconces, horne-works,
halfe-moones, redoubts and trauerses, as likewise the inner line against the
Town which for breuity sake I refer you to the Card. But that which was most
remarkable, and which Grobbingdonk lea^t drea^ied of, and which he ingeniously
confessed unto Lord of Hemes as he marched out of the Town, whereof the one was
the passing of the Hollands dyke by the spade over the drowned ^^nd by his Koy.
and so along to the Busse floor, wrought all by pesants which brought Earth
and brush in boatte, and in diverse places made this dyke, which was drowned
with water higher then to a man's middle: y^ other, the stopping of the Dummel,
which ouerflow'd and fed the monace round about the Busse, which water was
articifially carried and convayed round about our quarters, by two ditches over
the Heath, ^ one being 26 foot broad, and the other 36 foot over and 8 or
ten foot deep in diverse places, which discharged it self into the dround land
by Vleeme, and into the Busse floor.

But before his Excellency could make this Hollands dike gardable, upon the
fourth of May in the night, there ^^ipt into the town 600 soldiers from
Breda, which came by Vsee to Deuteren (where mo^s. Pi^ceus quarter was
afterward) and from thence wading up to the arm pices by the kerre sconce, got
into the town by Saint Iohne Pore. But on the 11 of May monsieur Pineen took
up his quarter by Grobbindonekes koye, and so stopped this passage for coming
thee wave any more.

The ou^ li^e then being finished, and a liour works made up and defencible
which lasted well nigh three weeks or a month, his Excellency then began his
approaches, every nation striving for his honor, as in Agamemuons army
before Troy. The first night ground was broken and two Redoubts made in the
way as ye go from Vucht to the little sconce. the next night we advanced a
stone east further, and made two other Redoubts with a crauerse between them,
there we and the french shook hands, and parted (...) with the (...) (...)
thelittle sc^nce, they with the Wallones and the lord of Diedens Regiment for
y^ great, till we met again at the ^^tel Sconce* yet notwithstanding having
broken ground some 200 p^ces further, his Excellency caused a five of
communication to be made betwixt v^ and them, and a battery in the midst of
it, that upon any occasion we might s^^ond one another. This breaking of
ground continewed with commanded men at 10. fts. a night, till we got within
half (...) shot of both sconces, and always as we got ground by winddings and
turnings: so we made gardes, batteries, traverse^, and blinds, for the
safeguard and defense of our men. And for the Approaches Capt: John de Bosch,
and M^ Humfrey we^e appointed Inginers for the English, Mont. Percival and his
son for the French.

The commanded men then being dischargd, and that itbeg^n to grow hot, by
reason of the enemies often shooting, the work masters ^^oke on the
approaches, and ^apt forward by degr^^^ for all the enemies shooting both with
ordinance and small shot, and still making guards, batteries, and blinds for the
security of our men, till we come to the water, which falls out of the Dummell
into y^ moate o^ y^ (...), making it a little Island, before we could come to
the moate it self, and as we advanced* so we drew forward our ordinance,
which playedvpon b^^h y^ the Sconces, til we come to the laying over of our
first gallery.

The French likewise advanced their works euerta^e making guards, batteries,
and blinds, till they got to the moate of the Horne-worke without the great
sconce, where they also began to lay over their first gallery.

The Lord of Breadroode made likewise approaches, upon the Petla^ sconce over
the morrace, which was very deep filling it up with ^arth and brush, till he
go^t within two or three rode of the counterscarfe of the Petlar sconce.

Count Ernest on Hinton side did tho like, by advancing his approaches, and
made his first battery of si^e half Canon, almost within musker shot of the
Town, still making guards, batteries, and blinds, as he go^ ground, till
became to the moate of their horne-worke, without the halfe-moone on that side,
and likewise til he was ready to put over his first gallery.

On his side was made a great battery of seven whole Canon and some half,
which played into the Town, and upon the ^kirt of the Town, between the
Ortener and Hi^t ^^^r Port. From this great battery, ran a line down to the
great earth^^ gallery, which was wrought over the morrace ^ or 8 foot deep,
with blinds and traverses, filled up with Earth, sod^^, and (...), till is was
brought within ten poules of the w^ll on that side of the Town. And from this
great battery ran a line of Communication down to Count Williams two batteries
upon the Ortener dike, which short likewise into the Town, and upon that Port.

There was likewise approaches made on Monfieur Pincens side, toward St John's
Port, to keep the ennemy in, and to make some Cross batteries to play upon
the Town, Vuchter Port, and halfe-moone, but by reason of the deepth of the
morrace he could not approach far, and thus much for the approaches in
general.

When we were fast, Count Harry of the Berke, musters up his forces, gives
them a months pay, and at length march^th with his army consisting of some
7000 horse and 20000 foot, and came and quartered at Sprang, Walwick, Druine,
and ^oone. And on the 27 of June, he marches from Vleeme to Cromford and
Helford, within an English mile and a half of our out line, and showing
himself our ordinance bids him welcome, and lets fly at his men, as they
marched toward their quarters, and being quattered in these two villages,
buzzes up and down, to spy out all advantages, where he might best relieve the
Town. And to am^ze v^ the more, on the 28 he marches with the gross of his
Army back again toward Vleeme, and while his design lay another way gives an
alarm in the night by Engel, and on monfieur Pincens side, and in the interim
sent a matter of 4000 horse, and foot, with 800 firelockes, each having a
leather bag of powder, to put them into the Town, between the Petla^ Sconce,
and Count Ernests quarter, and brought along with them spades, fagots and
plancks, to fall upon a horne-worke of ours not far from Coudewater: but
being discovered by our men in the night, which stood ready to receive them,
the alarm being given, they were beaten off, some of them, drowned, and others
being shot and wounded, retreated, and left some of their powder bags behind
them.

This failing, he had another design by the help of two treacherous pesants,
for the cutting of our Damme. The same night these pesants as their guides,
brought his men along the little dike, which runs from the Damme to Baxil by
y^ bores houses: but they in the night discovering general Cicills tent^ which
we^e newly set up, their hearts misgaue them, and they fai^ed that they had
mistaken their way, and so retreated without attempting it, part of a company
only having the guard at that point upon y^ dike, while the rest of the
companies were drawn to the line upon the Heath, they might ^astly have
effected it. Our mon in the morning discovering them, as they marched toward
Count Harrys quarters, thetwo half Canons which lay upon General Cicills
battery let fly at them, and flew some of them. But to prevent this, the next
day his Excie caused abund^nce of palisadoes to be driven into the dyke, and
made a battery, where they should have come on, of two pieces of ordinance, and
from thence to Berkell sconce, chayned boats together over the water before
the damme for the defense of it.

Count Harry of the Berke being then quartered at Buxill, Cromford, and
Helford, within an English mile and a half of our out line, we began to
come into action, and made the nights our days, and the days our nights,
expecting still his coming, which continued 23 nights together till he left
us. The companies of all Nations, beset the line of Circumvallation, some 200
paces distant one from another, round about the Army, and the horse standing
behind them in battle ready to receive him. His Excie and the king of
Bohemia (...) their train every night about midnight going the Grand Round, to
answer all alarums. The same night that he intended to put in these
firelockes, and their powder bags into the Town, and to have cut the damme,
and have let in a sea of water up on us, which was round about our trenches,
returning from Vleeme with the gross of his Army, he discovered himself
betimes in the morning, as soon as it was light, by the downs, and had laid an
ambuscado of mu^ke^teirs, in a ditch by trees, and behind the downs he made a
halt with his horse and foot, and sends out first some 10 or 13 horse to
entertain as kirmish with our horse, which had the out guard. The trumpets
sounds a charge, and our Canons roares from all the batteries upon the line, and
sent bullets toward their batt^lions, and among their horse that skirmisht. The
skirmish between our horse and theirs increased, and as the Enemy sent out
more horse from behind the ^ills, so we did the like from the fort, whereon
his Excie stood with the king of Bohemia. At last there came two or three
troop of horse to skirmish and change bullets on with another, and still our
ordinance giving fire among them, our horse charging them toward the four of
the downs, they feigned a retreat to draw on our horse within their Ambuscado.
And monsieur Maune a French Captain of a troop of horse, charging home his
horse from the Ambuscado was slain under him. The Enemy falls out again with
more horse, and takes this French Captain Monsieur Maune prisoner. The Duke of
Bullon seeing him thus engaged, charge with ^ troop or two more to reseu^
him, and while two of the ^^myes me^ were a disputing whose prisoner he should
be, our horse charges them again drives them to a re^re^^e, and they not
having time to carry their prisoner away, to end the dispute pistols him, and
so the Dake brought off his body. This skirmish continuing a while after
between our horse and their C^a^^ Harry marched away with his troops to his
quarters, and his Excie with a perspectiue glass, saw his Army and told their
co^llours. and when they were m^rcht away his Excie gave order that we should
be drawn off, and march to our quarter^ to our rest. Count Harry removing his
quarters from Cromford, and Helford, to B^xill, the English then beset the line
from the damme to the Vffrowe^ s^once, and from thence to the Lord of
B^e^droods quarter. And Count Harry at the last seeing it was impossible for him
to relieve the Town, leaving us, the companies were eased of this
extraordinary duty He marched toward the Grave, and his ordinance being
graueld and sunck into the ground, made a halt for a day or two to get them
off, which made us imagine he would have returned back again to us. But at
length he passed the ma^e by Mu^ker, and made as though he marched away, and
had nothing to say to Nemegen, but bethinking himself well, stole back in the
night with some of his forces to surprise it. The Burgers and soldiers having
intelligence of his coming provided for him, and were in a readiness upon the
wall to welcome him, and the alarm being silently taken, they gave fire from
the wall among his troops, and if a Cannonier could have but found the key of
a powder house not far from his half canon, where they should have, fal^e
on, they had paid him bette^, howsoever they carried off a wagon full of dead
bodies, and hurt men, and in the morning found many arms which they had left
behind, as Mr Pilgrim the service master of Nemegen told me, who was then
present with his musket upon the wall.

The Enemies Policy was now by way of diuersion, to raise us from the siege of
the Busse, and to that end sent the Governor of Ling, and Dulcken which was
the gouern^ur of Groll with certain musketeers and firelockes before, to y^
Isell to gain a passage, while Count Harry passes y^ Rhyne at Wesell, and
meets with the Emperors forces. The governor by the help of a ferry man's
son (who for his reward they afterward made Captain) got over the Isell at
Isellort Captain Dabbs and a Scotch Captain marched as fast as they could to
stop and hinder the enemies passage by sloopes over the Isell, but cam^ to late
notwithstanding he got up as many of his men as he could, and figh^ bravely
with the Enemy, in which sight, he himself, and diverse of his company were
flaine. The enemy being come over the Ysel falls to work as fast as they
could, to maintain, and make good their passage, till more forces came up to
them. Count Harry having the news off it, sent with all expedition the
Emperors forces horse, and foot to them. Ar^h^m was then in a pitiful fear,
and diverse of the best sort sled out of the town, which gave discouragement to
their fellow Burge^s, and caused those a great disorder. News came to the
Prince, that the enemy was passed over the Is^l at Yselo^t into the yellowe,
he presently sent forces out of our Army at several times, as first the lord
of Di^d^ns R^gi^et with diverse English, french, and scotch companies. afterward
count Ernest, Coronel Harewood, Lieutenant Coronel Pagnam ^or the English. and
Coronell Hanteriue for the French. Count Ernest coming to Arnham and finding
it much distracted, caused his drums to b^^te a proclamation, that those
Burgers which were fled and had abandoned the town should upon penalty of
confiscating their goods and lands return back again into the Town. Then he
guards and besets the B^row from Arnham to Skincksennce, and so to Nimogen over
which Coronell Har^wood, and Lieutenant C^ronell Pagnam commanded. And from
Arnham down the River to Rhyme and wagener over whom Coronel Hauteriue and Sr
John Ver^ commanded. The Enemy after they had ^howne themselves before Arnham
upon the hills, and made some incursions into y^ velowe, they took in a sconce
of ours between Do^sbarow and Zurphin, on the valow side by Spankeron, which a
seriant with small reputation upon the first summons gave over.

The Enemy finding this pla^e more Con^^nient removed his ^ridge and quarter
from Iselor^ and came thither, because it was a higher ground, and better for
his Army to lodge in, and there laid over his bridge, and drove in piles of
^ake before it to secure it from breaking or burning, and both on the velow^
side, and the county side at the ^^d thereof made strong force, and
entrenchments with seu^n points to defend it. And being thus get into the
ground and fortified, the Ba^^e of Mount Cu^uly who commanded the Crawa^^,
accompanied with Count Harry of the Berks soon mar^h^^ through the fear by a
narrow passage to A^^reford, and those of the Town after a Cannon sho^t or two
from the gallowe^ hill gives it over unworthily, whereas if they had held it
but two or three days (...) the Pence had s^^t to them, or I hang^r had ^^de
the enemy to forsake them, they had done better and gained more repu^ation.
Amerchard now being taken, there was likewise a (...) in Vtrecht, (...) of the
^ight of some of their chief men and Burgers. The Papists began in diverse
places to put up their heads and expected a day. The Lords the States general
themselves to give encouragement to those of Vtrecht in this perplexed time,
and to prevent further disorders, were feign to remove their council from the
Hagh to Vtrecht. And General Morgan in this distress, came happily out of
Denmark, and put in forces into Campen, Swoll, Deuenter and Zutphen* The
states began to fortify Vtrecht, and ran a trench along the river side that
goes from Vtrecht to the Fare. To be short, the Enemy being master of Amersford
many men's hearts began to fail them, and they hung down their heads like
bulrushes, you may likewise imagine, what heavy news this was in our Army, and
how bobbard the papists grew hereupon, witness two, y^ one who had given out,
that his Excel. was risen from the Busse, That the Enemy had beaten up the Lord
of Breadroods quarter, and had releiued ye ^owne, for which report, he might
very well have had his braine^ knocked out, and his house plundered by the
popularity if the magistrates had not wisely prevented it. The other after his
geering ma^er said to some of our Religion. Oh he geel zynnude Geux hate
broeck. His Excel. was much importuned by some to raise his siege, to hinder
the Enemies further incursions into the heart of their country, which he would
by noe means hear off: notwithstanding called a coancill of war upon it, and
took ye advise of his chiefs and Coronells. His Excel-knowing fullwell what an
infinite charge this siege had cost the land, and that his honor, and all ours
lay at y^ stake upon it, and so resolved to continue his siege, and to rest
upon the providence of God for the Euene? Whiles the Enemy was thus a
dominering in Amersford, firing, plundring, and rauaging the velow and had
intended another expedition for Hatton, Swoll, Campen and chose parts: Nowes
comes from heaven that Wesell was taken, ^his dashes all, and breaks the neck
of all their designs. The Lord shuts a door behind him, puts a hook in his
nostrill, and fetches him back with a whirre. The Emperors men and Crawats,
who had left their goods and riches in Wesell, swears by e^n hondert duysent
tonnen van gettapte duyvelen and thought ye there had been iugling between y^
Prince of Orange, and Count Harry his Cossin. The post which brought the first
news of it to them, was beaten, and threatened to be hanged for his labor. And
they made as much have as they could to be iogging from Amersford. The news
coming to our army it was so strange that the Prince himself scarcely
believed it, but at last breaks out into admiration, as it was reported, and
said, if it be so, it was merely the work of God, and not man's. And to us it
was as a dream, we could hardly give credit unto it, till it was thoroughly
seconded, and confirmed.

If it please you I will relate unto you, how, and in what manner it was
surprised. First, as a preamble thereunto ye have heard, how that the Enemy
against oath, and promise had shut up the great Church in Wesel, against those
of our religion, and for ^ooth to coulor this as commonly they do, they gave
the child another name: it was ^he Emperors doings ^verif they would pay a
round sum of money, they would open the church doors, and they should have
the liberty of their conscience and free exercise of their religion again.
This was only a trick to exhaust money from them, for they use to keep faith
no longer with Heretics, then till they find their advantages, according to
the maxim of the Council of Trent. But the righteous God, who is the revenger
of such persidiousnesse: as he heard the sighs and gro^ines of the children of
Israel, under the Tyranny of Pharaoh: so heard he also the Sobbs and prayers
of his afflicted servants in this Town, and sent them a sudden deliverance in
an unexpected time, by the help of two or three weak instruments (for he can
help with a few as well as with a multitude) from the spanish yoke, who had
bereft them of their spiritual Manna. To this end a special occasion then
presented it self by reason of a new Bulwark which was a making on the East
side of the Town, and lay open, and was only shut in with a palisadoe which
might easily be beasen down, as the Event hereafter showed. The undertakers of
this enterprise were Peeter Mulder, Richard Mulder his brother, and John
Rotleer, all three Burgers of Wesell, men of a mean Condition, but of a good
spirit and resolution, to perform that which they had undertaken. This Peeter
Mulder diverse times faining to learn to swim^, had pild the depth of the moate
on that side, and spying out all ope^tunities made a great Iron hammer, to
beat down the above said palisado. The time and place then being dessigned
on the 18th of August 1629, he went out of Wesell at one port some three
dowres before the shutting of the gates, and an Four after his brother
followed him and went out at another ^ort and John Rotle^r a little before the
shutting of the ports went out as a third port, least any thing should be
discouer^d, and to bring them news if al were w^l in y^ to^ne, and meeting all
three together in the dark at the place appointed, sell al three do^ne upon
their knees and implored the aid of the Lord of Hosts, to give them wisdom,
strength, and courage, to perform y^ which they had undertaken for the
deliverance of their fellow (...) and brethren, patiently attending the coming
of ^ Lord of Dioden ^ouernor^ of E^arick who ^reun^ Prince had the command for
the managing of this des^igne, About midni^^^ came unto (...) from (...) a
matter of sixteen hundredth foot (some ma^ke^iers others fir^lockes and half
pi^^^) and eight ^roops of horse. Before they went on, the Lord of Dioden to
do (...) man w^ong made them draw B^llets, who should first fall on* the
first b^ll^t then fell to captain (...) H^^gen^. The second to the Dr^^sa^d of
Bra^ort. The third to Mounsieur Die^^. the fourth to Mo^^sieur Market. And the
fifth to Monsieur Lawik each captain having 150 men under his command. Pe^ter
Mulde^* and hi^ two comrades goes on courageously before them as a forelorne
hope, giving courage to the soldiers, whose hearts began a little to misgiue
them, Eye car troop^ come thi^her, and that the Lord of Died^^* had ordered the
busi^esse thus, it began to be light, and they did imagine that it was not
practickable. The Enemy likewise, seeing the day bro^^^, and that it began to be
very fight, drew off these by-wat^ ^ from that place, and betook themselves to
their (...). But God who is the disposer of all warlike att^mpts, and gives
courage to men, at last our men felv^on the bulwark abou^said, and P^ter
Mulder (as is said going before breaks down the paliss^do with his hammer,
and makes an ^n^^anc^, the officers, and soldiers seconded him b^a^ely, and
enters the town on sunday morning the 19 of August 1629 a little before sun
^^sing, after the guard was dei^^ue off. And cutting of y^ two gards nets
adjoining to that place bare up stiff toward the m^rket place. The al^rum
was so sudden, that the enemie^ men running too and again to answer it,
knew not our men from their own. Captain (...), who was the first that entered
mets with some resistance under the Gonangen p^^t, (or prisoners gatehouse) and
there had thr^^ encounters with the enemy, hau^^^ but (...) with him, leaving
the r^s^ to keep open the en^rance, and to guard the corners of the streets
that the e^^mie might gath^^ (...) head to cut of his second behind him. In
the Inc^tim, Peter Mulder ran in all have to Vulcan the smith one of his
acquaintance, and knocked him up, and called to him, y^ down wa^ Geax, the smith
being much amazed at such a sudaine newe^ opened his sh^pp door, and they
taking his men, and the gre^t^st (...) he had, ran apace unto the Bru^nish
port broke of the locks, bars, and boults the^^of, and opend the gate* but
coming to the draw bridge was shrondly p^sse^gd a good while, before ^ a could
get down the chains of that bridge* but at the last (O the admirable
providence of God^^ (...) bullet from the bulwark which flankerd ^ bridge, as
Peter Mulder himself reported to his master at Amsterdam, and shot the chain
assunder, down goes the bridge the horse which stood before the port enters,
the trumpets sound tantara, they scowre the streets, and draws up in bataile
into the market place de cap en pied, with their pistols in their hands, The
Spaniards fled out of the Town to the sconces, our foot follows the horse,
besetts the wall, and possesses all their guards, breaks down their bridge,
which lay over the Rhyne, and which drove down the stream toward Rees, and
sets fire on some sloopes and punts, which were o^ the other side of the water.
The Sconces coming in upon composition. And the brunt being over, the
soldiers fell a plundring, got into the Spaniards shops: the officers houses,
and the bitterest Papists and Jews houses, Ransacks the cloisters, breaks
down the Images in the churches, and got an incredible boo^y. As Count Harry
of the Berk his plate, and chiefest baggage. Monsieur Count Cuculies money and
goods, The riches of diverse Coronells, horse and foot Captains, which ye
Emperors men and Crawats had got in the Germane wars, and left there behind
them for safety in their expedition into ye velow, To conclude y^ foot divided
the spoil, and the horsemen shated bags and barrells of rix-dol^ers by the
hattfulls. But that which was most remarkable (O just God!) that church, which
they had bolted up against those of the Religion, that very Sunday was made a
prison for their officers and souldirs till on the morrow they were sent
prisoners to A^nham, and the officers stood good for the ^ansom of 1042
soldiers, who the next day were set over the water with their wives and
children. There was six companies of Spaniards, and eight others of several
nations in the Town, besides some horse.

Three of the Enemies Captains were slain, and about 70 soldiers, and we
lost but nine in all. The names of the prisoners taken were these,

Francisco Lozano Governor, The chief kerteritz, Baron de liques, Captain la
Crous, Captain Burgos, Captain Ventos, The chief Bour, and Captain Bour,
Captain Nieuborow, Captain la Court, Captain Darimont, Captain, Cruyt,
Captain Velasco, Captain Bourri, Captain Perry Reformado, Galleron, Sariant
Mayor of the Town, Captain la Nove, Caro a horse Captain,, Rottelly you
Auditor, L' Espi cho Physician of the Hospital of Rhie^ berke, En^igne Callart,
Leiutenant B^itelle, Ensign Keteritz, Ensign Charles de Roye, Annihall
Semouetly, Sariant Mayor reformado, Hubart Wollart, Commissary of the musters,
F^rdinando wickell another Commissary of the musters, Christian Bollard,
Commissarie of ye victuals, Anthony Nimpha Alpher^es o^ Ensign reformado
Jerome de Dire, likewise commissarie of the victual Ian de Sadino Af^rus
re^ormado, Ian de contese do Alferus ref^rmado, Francisco Pelo, prouisional
Marshal, Fyl Bour Ensign, Pedro de Van^ercie lieutenante and official of the
masor Domo Lucas Ancie Ingineur, Matthew Tys, leiutenant to the horse troop of
Captain Stror^y, Henry Covet, Ensign Charles Wattle leiutenant reformado.
Benedid Jacob, leiueten^nt to V^l^s^os company A^thony Bele^. Ensign N^cholas
Alphen. Commissary over the victuals, Cha^pientier likewise commissary over
the victuals, Gabriell Sou^ely. marshall of a Regiment, and Baltazar Morret
Ensign. Besides all those prisoners, many small barrels of pistols and
Kix-dollors which was ^or the payment off their Army six and forty pe^ces of
ordinance upon the wall, and two without carrages lying in the market place,
and two in y^ magasine, two morters, Arms as Corselets, pikes, muskets and
firelockes, for to arm five thousand men, a thousand barels of powder, besides
all this, great store of meal, abundance of Corno, and other victuals and
provision^ for their Army. In fine this Town was seeds belli the magasin for
their war, which the Lord thus delivered into our hands. O Lord I cannot call
to mind this thy glorious work, or draw my pen from paper, but I must render
thanks unto thee, and sing forth thy praises with the rest of thy people. Thou
yt look down from heaven, and have heard the prayers of thy people: yea
even of that Town, which was a refuge to us in the days of persecution,
witness a Duchess of England* we may well ^ing with thy holy Prophets, We
have a string City, salvation will GOD appoint for w^lls and Bulwarks. Open
ye the gates that the King of glory may enter in. Let us the^fore put our trust
in the LORD, for ever, for in the LORD Jehovah is everlasting strength. He has
done marvelous things and his Right hand has g^t him the victory. Yea, the
LORD made that Church which was shut up against his faithful ones in this
Town, to be a prison for their enemies for the breach of their promise.

Therefore blessed be^ the LORD GOD of Israel, from euerla^ti^g, to
everlasting. Amen. Amen.

Having made this digression and Wesell being Geux, I return again to our
aproaches at the Busy, before we came to the laying over of our first
Gallery, there the Captain of his Excelencies guard got a dangerous shot in the
forhead, that he lost his Eye, Captain Omka^s a worthy Inginer showing his
body to open, was snapt of and slain with a firelock, and Captain Clarke
shot through both his legs, and having brought over our gallerie we could not
come to the moate of the little Sconce before we had beaten the enemy out of
two traverses and a point which came out of the Counterscharfein the form of a
half moon on our right hand next the Dummel, at the entrance of our Gallerie
over this first water on y^ left hand we had a battery upon which Coronell
Harwood was shot through his hat, my Lord of Oxford standing by.

The gallerie being over we began to sapp, and made a mine into the enemies
first traverse, that night which St Jacob Ashly commanded in the trenches
desirous of honor, he was appointed with some 60 pikes and musketeirs to fall
on after ye mine was sprung, and Captain Gouldwell as Eldest Captain to
second him, with more men. Before the mine was blown up he gave the Enemy an
alarm to draw them on toward our mine, and the mine being sprung fell on with
his men and beat the enemy to a retreat out of part of their trauerse our
men and the enemy giving fire bravely one at another a good while, but our men
lying opento the bulwark of the little Sconce, and their other traverse, were
feign to retreat again into the mouth of our Gallerie. This mine took not
well, but sprang rather backward then forward, and did more hurt to our own men
then to the enemies, casting a great deal of earth upon Sr Jacob Ashly
cinging him and brusing him, very shroudly upon his arm, As likewise Monsieur
Neal^ his Exelencies Inginer, broke his leg, and buried some of our soldiers
under the Earth which was blown up, and so came off with the loss of some
men. yet from this earth which was cast up out of the enemies trauerse, we
began to sap forward which the enemy seeing at last they quitted it, and so we
b^came masters of it, and getting a little more elbowe room, we advanced
forward to the moate of the little sconce, making gardes batteries and blindes,
till we came to the very brinke of it, where we began to put over our second
gallerie toward the point of the Bulwark on the left hand of the sconce,
having then made three or four batteries for the safegarde of our men and
gallerie, we battered the point of the Bulwark ^o, where our gallerie was a
putting over, that we made it almost mountable. And now and then casting some
grenades into ye sconces, that we made their hutts, sparrs, and dust, fly
about their ears.

Upon the 8 of July in the night the enemy Salli^d out of y^ great Sconce, upon
the French, but were soon b^^ten in aga^ne and a Lieutenant of the enemies,
which commanded was taken prisoner, and a Gent. of quality, and some 30 of them
slain and hurt.

The next day being the ninth of July, Mons. Chartil^us ^o^pany having the guard
in the french aproaches, fell upon the horn-worke without the great Sconce,
but the enemy not disputing it long quitted it, and retired to their
Counterscarfe where on the right hand, they cut it of, and made a small trave^se
in it, whence they gave fire with their musketeers and firelocks upon them, but
the f^ench having put their gallerie over the moate of the count^rscarfe they
came to the m^ate of y^ great sconce, where they put over their second
gallerie, into (...) false braye, on the left hand of their gallery the enemy
b^^ cut of their false bray* to hinder the workmen, and miners by giving fire
from a small traverse, upon them.

On the 17th of July about t^n of the clock the brush and ^agotts, were laid
from the end of our second gallery, o^^er the moate of the little Sconce. And
the french did the like over the moate of the great Sconce. Our soldiers pulled
down ^he pallissadoes under the foot of the Bulwark of the little Sconce, and
the same night began to make a mine into The Bulwark. The french that night
before the Lord of Diedens Regiment relieved them, had about with the enemy
upon the small trauerse, which they had cut off in their false-braye before they
drew off, and being relieved, the 18th of July about three of the clock in the
morning the enemy quitted their great Sconce, out of fear of being cut off,
because we were got over the moate of the little Sconce, and began to mi^e
into the Bulwark thereof, leaving wine, victuals, bear, a boy and a dog
behind them. The next night then being y^ 19th Coronel Harewood commanding, the
enemy likewise quitted not only the little Sconce, but also a trauerse out of
the moate of the great sconce next the town, which they might very well have
disputed, and thus the Great and little Sconces, with the travers were taken in,
upon the points whereof, his Excellency with all expedition caused batteries
to be made, which played into the ^owne, upon the Tenaille, Vuchterport, and the
half moon without it.

From this traverse on the other side of the moate o^ the little Sconce, we
began a new Sap toward another Traverse which they had upon the dike between
that and the Tenaile but the enemy seeing we approached ne^re unto it, quitted
it, and retreated to the Tenaile it self. my Lord General Ve^es company of
Schoonhouen with the rest of the companye^ which had the guard with them, having
sapt to the moate of the Tenaile, entertained a fight with the enemy a little
before they were relieved, and gave fire bravely upon the Tenaile, while two
floate bridges were laid over unto it and some musket basket^ set up, and that
they began a mine in the Tenaille. Our miners found much dificultie in making
this mine, because the foundation thereof was laid with willow Trees, and
roots, Acrosse one another, howsoever they pulled out some of the tree^ and made
a mine into it. That night the French relieved the English, (For the Sconces
being ours we then ran one line, and every nation relieved one another) and
the next day the mine being ready, the powder chamberd, and the train laid to
it: the French to wit, mo'ns. Chattillo^es company, and the rest having there
the guard, for their honor would fall on, to see if they could take in the
Tenaile, and beat the enemy out of it, well then about eleven of the clock the
mine being sprung the French Captains, volunteers and diverse other Gentlemen
of great quality, (though the mine made no great entrance, fell on valliantly,
but the enemy having drawn some men out of the Town maintained it s^outly,
and finding no means to e^ter i^, were driven to retreat back again, into our
works, with the loss of some 30 volunteers Gent. and soldiers slain and
hurt, and so the enemy maintained still their Tenaile.

The last day that the french had y^ guard, The Duke of Candale commanding, the
french desirous of a revenge, had a second bout with them, a little before they
were relieved to see if they could carry the Tenaile. Toward evening then
another mine being made and sprung, they fell on again, and came to the push
of the pike upon ye right Corner of it, and set up some musket baskets, ye
enemy laid about them, and thrasht ^^me of them with iron flailes, and
maintayne^ it stiffly. They gave fire bravely one upon another a good while; for
the space o^ hal^e an hour, but at last the French were feign to fall off
again, only this advantage was gotten during the fight, that they turned up
the Earth so upon the right corner of it, that they lodg^d two or three
musketeers almost in the top of it, from wh^nce a sapp afterward was begun, to
see if we could cut o^ the left corner, and so become masters of the Tenaile.

The French that night being relieved by the walloens and sapping forward from
the corner above said, the enemy marking it, quitted that night their Tenaile
to the walloens and retreated to their half moon. upon ye Tenaile his Excel.
made a great battery of nine half cannon, which beat upon both the bulwarks,
the port, and their half moon, without it. About this time a river which runs
from the Busse to Crevicoeur and so into the maze was stopped with a dame over
it, that noe water should come out of the maze, when it was high, too seed the
morrace, and the moate of the town. And heat his Excel. by an admirable
Stratagem, caused 34 mathematical mills to be set upon the browe of this
river drawn with horses, which drew up abundance of water from below, sucking
it up with funnells and casting it up dismissed it self upon the mills which
cast out abundance of water when the wind blew stiff and thus the water by
these mills was drayned out of the dround land and the moate, by certain
ditches and convayances to them.

On the tenth of August Grubbindunck in the night, sent out two soldiers with
leters from himself, and others in the town to the Infanta and their friends
at Brussells each of them having a pair of doves, which should be cast up, and
fly into the town with her answers back again, with express order from the
Governor of al Schouts, and Burgomasters of the villages in Brabant, to
furnish them with horse and Convoy to Brussells, but their hearts failyng them
and fearing to be taken by our men, in passing the line and watches, the one
Soldier being more wil^^ng then the other drew out his knife and threatened to
cut the others throat, if he would not go along with him to the Prince, and so
calling to our Sentinels, The guard received them in, and the officer that
commanded in the morning brought th^^ to his Excel. (The contents off these
letters were as it is reported) That, he could not hold out the Town above
three weeks, and that the Burgers for the saving of their goods, and lives,
and shunning of danger would force him to a composition, and therefore required
releife within that time, or else the Town would be lost, of all which the
Prince made good use.

To go on then the Tenaile being ours we began a new sapp, from the right
point thereof, toward the enemies half moon, without the Vuchter port,
running our aproaches by oblique lines, windings and turnings, till we came to
the very brinke of the moate, where the dummel falls into it making the moate
and it above 300 foot over, and ever as we got ground, so we advanced our
ordinance, made batteries gards, and blinds, for the safeguard of our men. There
began the first entrance of our gallerie into the moate to be put over into
the bullwarke on the right hand of the port. On both sides the entrance of our
long gallery, there were made for y^ defense of it, two batteries of two half
Cannon a piece, which beat upon the brick foundation of the bulwark and
likewise flankard our Gallerie on both sides. The ordinance likewise which were
planted upon the Tenaile. played upon the Bullwarkes on each side the Port, to
dismount their ordinance which shot upon the end of our Gallerie and of our
workme^ but the enemies ordinance were so suncke that we could not come at
them, till they made other batteries, yet our Ordinance from thence did so
batter and shatter ye Brickie linings of the Bulwark, on the right hand of the
Port, that it was made almost mountable before the Earth brush and blind were
laid over the moate from the end of our gallerie to the Bulwark it self.

From under this Tenaile was also a planke bridge laid over the Dummell, and a
blind made to get into the Vuchter eynt or Bleake field. In this patch of
ground were made blinds and batteries to dismount the enemies O^dinances, which
played upon our Gallerie and workmen, from the Bulwark on the left hand of the
Port, and a piece which they had sunk in their half moon. In this field also
we began to lay our second Gallery over to the right face o^ the Bulwark but
the enemies Ordinance from the bulwark on the farther side of the Port ^ackt
through and through it 8 or ten times and shot some of the posts thereof
assunder, at the entrance of It into the moate: yet at the last our baterie in
that field put them to silence, and an English Captain an excellent Cannonier
whose name I have forgot, dismounted their half Cannon. That day my Lord of
Oxford had the guard, by shooting just into the Port bole, after this our men
wrought more safely in both the Galleries. At the Entrance off our second
Gallerie was likewise made a guard for the defense of It.

Our long Gallerie being got some 30 or 40 joints or posts over the Dummell and
the moate, each joint being about 3 foot distant one from another, (And that it
was counted a good night and days work to fill up the moate and set up three
or four of them) The gards, batteries, and blinds being made higher an^ more
defencible for our men: On the left hand of that blind which ran to the
entrance of our long Gallerie into the moate, we begun a sapp forwards toward
the enemies half moon without the Port, making still Gards, and batteries for
our Cannon and morters, till we came to the very counter Scharfe of the half
moon, and so we beat the enemy out of It into the^r half moon, by the same
token Sarant Coxe of my Lord veres company of Sehconhouer who fell on with the
men was soundly thrasht with an iron flav^e for his labor, the counter scharfe
being taken in, a bridge was laid over the ditch of the half moon to get a
mine into the foundation thereof. In this sap, Captain Clarke made a lofty
guard, which was a very good defense for our men, especially to offend the
enemy, when they peept, or shot over out of their half moon, upon our
sappers and workmen.

On the 15th of August in the nig^t the enemy had a Stratagem in his head to
cut our Trench by the little mile, and Co^dewater, and so to have let in the
water upon our aproaches. to put this into execution, Grubbingdon^k sent out of
the Town some hundred and fifty fire locks, with Spades, which stole in the
night, between ye Petlar Sconce and Count Ernests quarter through the inward
line, where it was not ^inished, and came to the little windmill by our out
line, And there having laid an ambuscado of some of their firelocks in a ditch,
and behind some bushes fell to work apace, to cut our Trench some 30 foot
broad between the hornework and the Redoubts upon the line, not far from that
place where Count Harry of the Berks men would have attempted It before, but
part of Captain Broogs company having the guard in a Redoubt next unto them
gave ^ire, and the Alarm being given, our horse which had the Guard in a house
not far from thence came up to charge them, and giving fire likewise from that
Redoubt, they left their work and retreated back to their Ambuscado, leaving
some spads and a pair of old shoes behind them, and as they retreated gave
fire upon our horse men, and slew a corporal and hurt too or three more
besides. But by reason of the mor^ace and the ditche, our horses could not come
to charge them, neither durst out foot fall out of their gards, and so they
retreated back again into the Town some to English mile from the place where
they fell a cutting* Surely If they had stavd but one half quarter of an hour
longer or cut the gap not so broad, they had effected the business they came
for, because the water was not passing three inches lower then the top of the
Trench, and so should have let in an Inundation of water upon us.

On Satterday at night the 18th of August my Leiutenant Coronell Sr Edward Vere
had the command in the Trenches, and on sunday his Excel. who often times
ventered his person very much, came down to the Gallery, to se^ the approaches
a little before my Lieutenant Coronel was relieved. He went to show the
Prince the Works and the sapp. whiles the companyes being relieved were drawn
off as far a^ the little Sconce, my Lieutenant Coronel having shown his Excel.
thesap, and taking his leave of him, walking of with Sr Tho. Conway being a
tall man, came that unhappy shot through the blind and shot him behind in his
head, that It perished his brains, That night being brought up into his Hut in
ye quarter, He called upon the LORD, that he was his shield, his buckler, and
defense, and besought the LORD in mercy to pardon his sins in Christ, and that
he desired none in Heaven or Earth but Christ and his righteousness, and so
uttered many comfortable sentences sauouring of a gracious resolution, and with
in four days after It pleased GOD, to call him to his mercy, and so we lost
our Lieutenant Coronel, whose extraordinary valor Sufficiency, and complete
abilities for a commander, a^ ^he^ were well known unto us: so was his loss
exceedingly lamented by his Excel. and the chiefes of our Army.

My Lord General Vere, my Lord of Oxford, many Captains, officers,
voluntaries, and Gentlemen of quallity, who had bin at his funeral in Bo^mell*
returning home, that night our Regiment had the guard in the approaches, and a
civil worthy Gentleman of my Lords company of Dort, one Master Mullinax, that
bare my Lieutenant Coronels sword before his Corpse that day, going to see the
sap was the first that night which followed him the way of all flesh. My Lord
General Vere bestird himself, had all his officers and Gentlemen and
soldiers about him in a readiness, that upon the first occasion, If the enemy
had either Sallied out upon our sappers and workmen, or If they should have
attempted the firing of our Gallerie, they might have beat them in again,
Captain Rockwood of my Lords Regiment, as Eldest Captain executed my Lords
commands with valor and discretion, had his granado men at hand, and placed
diverse musketeers upon al flanks to play upon the enemy and to keep them
under, for shooting upon the end of out Gallene, and our workmen, and now and
then sent them some Cannon bullets which shot upon the top of their bulwark,
and upon their half moon, too keep them under, sometimes shooting A granado
into the Town and throwing hand grenades among them, into their halfe-moone.
Toward midnight the Enemy likewise did cast hand grenades upon our blind,
next unto their halfe-moone, and set fire on it, which brake out into a great
flame, but the vigilency of my Lord Gen^rall Vere was such, fearing that the
fi^e might take further, he gave order that some soldiers should take shouels,
and spades from the workmen, and cast earth and water upon it, which caused it
to s^ake, and had two or three granado men in a readiness there which paid them
with their own coin: but sure it was good that the wind blew South West, for
had the wind bin Northwest, and had blown stiff^, as it did, it had not only
endangered the firing of all our blinds, but also our gallery, which would have
hindered our approaches, and cast us a great deal behind hand. And so this
night and the day following our gallery, and works were well advanced. This
day Sir Harry Hungate got a mark of honor by a bullet which shot him through
his buffe Ierkin, and g^a^ed upon his flesh.

Before our Regimt had the watch again in the Approaches the gallery was well
advanced, and they got about three posts night and day. It was then my Lord of
Oxfords turn to Command who was made our Lieutenant Coronell in Sir Edward
Veres place deceased. The bridge being la^d over the ditch of the enemies half
moon we began to sapp, and logd in the left Corner of It* and made a mine
into It, we found It very hard mining into It, because of the tre^^ that lay
a cross in It. This evening there was discovered an engine upon a floate from
the furthest part of their half moon by the moate, which we presuposed they
had prepared for the firing of our Gallerie* to prevent this my Lord of Oxford
got a sloope, which was brought about toward our Gallerie, that on a sudden
tenn or twelve resolut soldiers with short swords and pistolls might chopp into
It, to ^inder the enemy from fastening any ^^re worke^ upon our G^llerie, which
the enemy perceiving left It unattempted. His Lord gave order likewise that our
musketeers from all fl^nkes should contineua^ly be playing, and our Ordinance
shooting upon the top of they^ Bulwark and their half moon to keep the
enemy from Peeping over, and giving fire upon our workmen. This night though
it was moon light the brush and faggots were l^yd over to the left hand of the
Bu^lwarke from the end of our second Gallerie in the Bleach field, and thanks
be to God but one man short in laying them over, as the Captain of the
Carpenter can witness, and an other souldie^ of Captain Skippons short which
stood Cencinell in our long Gallerie.

My Lord Crauen whose worth was known to us, and bounty to my Lord of
Wi^ble^ons comp^ny, this night and the day following watched with my Lord of
Oxford, the next night with my Lord Cicills company, and the third night with
General Morgans Regiment. my Lord of Doncaster and my Lord Fielding two noble
spa^kes trayled pikes under my Lord of Wimbletous compan^ and went down to the
approaches upon any service that was to be done, and exposed their bo^ies both
to danger and sickness. My Lord of Oxford an hour before he was resiened had
(...) with the enemy upon the left co^ner of their ha^f^ moon, and my Lord
Veres musketeers of Dort, coming up almost to the topp of the half moon gave
fire in the teeth of the enemy* and came to the push of pike through the blinds,
this startled them, and made them throw stones to us and cast hand granado^s
among-our men. but his Lord caused a soldier of Captain Roockwoods company to
cast 14 hand Grenades among them* in to their half moon, which made them
give back and Cry Guarda, Guarda, The Granados being burst, they Came up
again to the top of the half moon, with as much have as possible might be to
give fire upon our men* but my Lord caused musketeers to be drawn to the top
of our gards especially that of Captain Clarke which was high they gave fire
apace upon them, fetched some of them off which showed their heads, and bodies,
this piece of service being ended my Lord of Oyford being Relieved drew away to
our quarters.

On Count Ernests side the 19 of August the brush, and plancks were la^ed over
to their Horne-worke, and a mine made into it. This mine being sprung, the
Scotch, and the Duchess fell on courageously, and they and the Enemy gave fire
apa^e one at another for three quarters of an hour, our ordinance playing from
all batteries, as fast as they could charge, and discharge. In this time the
Enemy endured three assaults, with the loss of many men, as ^he Burgers
afterward reported who were present upon the walls, but the Enemy gave fire so
from y^ wall of the Town, and out of the greathalfe-moone, that our men not
carryi^g it were driven for that time to retreat into the mouth of their
gallery, and works, yet this advantage they got, they set up some musket
baskets, and lodged some men upon the right corner of their horne-worke, from
whence they began a sap, and made blinds toward their halfe-moone which after
another mine was sprung, caused the Enemy on y^ 21 of August to quit it wholly
to them, and so retired into their halfe-moone. In this sight, were flayne,
Captain Ramsey, and two days after a Dutch captain, called captain Hatton
who carried themselves very worthyly.

On the 23 of August we had a general thanksgiving, and a Triumph through out
the whole army, in acknowledgment of the great goodness of God, for the taking
in of Wesell.

The triumph was made in this manner following, first the musketteirs were
drawn off from all out guards (saving the approaches) and out of our quarters,
and placed along the inner line next the Town, some six foot distance one
from another. The pikes were drawn to the out line and out-guards, and the
rest stood by divisions in the quarters, eu^ry one of them having a wispe of
straw upon the head of his pike, to be set on fire, when the signal should be
given. The volley of musketteirs should begin at Crevi-coeur, where the
Princess lay, and so to Engelen, from thence along the men of war, and the
Redoubts by the Busle sloote, to Monsieur Pincens quarter, so to the French
line, the approaches, and then to us, from thence to the Lord of Breadroods
quarter, and so along to Count Ernests quarter, and so to Count Williams
quarter where it ended. Betwixt every volley, the cano^ which lay upon the
Batteryes of the out line, those which were drawn out of our quarters to the
heath by the stone gallows, and those which were in all the approaches should
be shot off. The signal was this, about ten a clock in the night, when a
granado was shot into the Town, then the first volley should begin, and the
wisps of straw upon the heads of the pikes, should be set on fire, All which
was done accordingly and made a brave show. The volly met with a stop at the
first, but when it came to the French line, to the approaches, to us, to the
lord of Bread^oods, to Count Ernest quarter, and Count Williams quarter it ran
well. Between the vollyes, there were above 3^0 pieces of ordinance from
Crevi-coeur, and roun^ about our army dis^^arged, those of the Town
acknowledged afterward, that shooting at once with so many ordinance out of our
approaches in o^ town did much amaze them. And then they began to believe
indeed that Wesell was Geux, though the governor by all mean^s labored to
conceal it from them, and thus much touching our Triumph for Wesell.

On the first of September Monsie^r Stakenbrock, Liuetenant General of the
horse, The Duke of Bouill ^n, with ten troops of horse, three hundred
firelockes, and diverse English, and french musketeers taken out of diverse
companies, an^ three half French canon toward evening were drawn ou^ of our
quarters, and marched that night to a small town and castle in Brabant called
(...), some six hours going from the Busse, where some 400 of the Enemies
Ward-gellers, or as we^ term them fresh water soldiers, taken on by those of
Flanders, who lay lurking there, to s^e if in the night they could have cut our
Trench, upon the out line, and let in the water upon us which stood without our
entrenchment. But his Excellency having intelligence of them prepared this
Camisado for them, they having advertisement by some pesants their friends, of
our men^ coming, stole away in the night, and trusted rather to their heels
then to their arms.

Yet they were not gone so far, but the Duke of ^ouillon with his horse
fetches them up, and round^ them in a morrace, and by a ditch, and charging
them, slew about 70 of them. The rest cried out for quarter, and because they
were such soldiers, the Duke was in a quandary, whether he should give them
quarter or not, but at last with much entreaty, he granted them quarter, and
took 160 of them prisoners, and brought them the next day to our quarters. In
the Castle they left behind them, four petars made of oken planckes, some five
inches thick, and the chamber or briche, lined with Iron. These should have
bin charged with powder and stones, to have bin discharged out of their sloopes
upon our Trench, and so having made a rupture in our live, have let in a sea of
water to have drowned, and overflowed all our approaches, these engines were
brought likewise in karr^ to his Excel. house in our quarters.

On the fifth of September, the Trench, and fagots being laid from the end of
our long gallery to the very foundation of the bulwark: the miners began a
mine through the brickes into it. but by reason the Enemy had sunck a piece from
the end of their halfe-moone, which shot just into the mouth of the mine, it
was hot being there, which made the miners schy, ye more because two o^ the
miners were slain, which had taken it on, in the very m^uth of the mine, and
could not be brought off, this ^assed fi^e ^aves till a blind was made from the
end of our gallery to the bulwark, and then there was found three soldiers of
my Lord General Veres company of Schoonhoven, to wit John Scott, William Lee,
and especially Richard Pristman, who was skillfull on digging, and
underpropping of Colepits in En^land, undertook it, and performed it well, and
this commendations one may give them, that it took the best effect of any
mine, which was ever sprung before the busse.

Well then on the tenth of September being monday, betime in the morning, Sr
Jacob Ashly Lieut^^ant Coronell to General Morgans Regiment, had the command
that night in the Approaches. And with much a do a mine was made in the
Enemies half moon before the Porr, ere the mine was spru^g he sent a Sati^^t
with six ^uskettiers to the top of the halfe-moone, to give the Enemy an
al^rum, to bring them on toward our mine, and then for fear of endangering
our own men, he was to retreat back again, all which was done accordingly.
The mine then being blown up, took but little effect, for the reasons above
said, and made no great entrance into their half moon. After this Sr Simon
Harecourts Ensign was commanded to fall up with some 30 musketeirs to y^ top
of the halfe-moone, and to give fire among the Enemy, which he did. The Enemy
stood it out a good while thinking to draw on our men to two of their own
mines which were to be sprung. Now the E^emies two mines being blown up, Sr
Jacob Ashly fell up, and gave order to Sr Simon Harebourt to fall into the
Enemies halfe-moone with 50 musketeers; and pikes more, with his Ensign, and
the 30 abouesaid. The Enemy disputing it a good while but at last Sr Simon and
his men beat them up to their entrance into their half moon by the moate
side, and there changed bullets one with another, and came to push of pike, and
after they had mayntained that place a pretty while, he drove them from thence
along^th moate side to a traverse, which was cast up some 60 paces from the
said entrance into the halfe-moone, where following them closse, and giving
fire upon them, at last they bid him farewell, and retreated into the Town by
Saint John's Port.

This being done he himself with his men made a stand at the entrance into the
half moon, where the Enemy stood it out till it began to be light, and till
our men were lodged in the top of the halfe-moone, in those places which might
most offen^ the Enemy, This was the first work, which was carried by force of
Arms, and really disputed. In this sight Sr Simon Harecourt was five times
thrust, and shot through his clothes, and yet it pleased God he came of well,
and with honor. After our men had taken in the half moon, his Eycel. came
down into the gallery, and gave extraordinary thanks to Sir Jacob Ashly, Sir
Simon Harecourte, and the rest of the officers and soldiers, which had carried
themselves so well, and rewarded some of the soldiers with money. And thus the
Enemy on our ^^de was shut up into the Town.

The same night came on Sir Harry Harbourd, Lieutenant Coronell to Coronell
Harewood, and relieved Sir Iac^b Ashly He brought with him for the relief, my
Lord General Veres company of Schoonhoven, Sr Harry Harbourds own company,
Captain Gouldwells, Captain Abrihalls, and Captain Nelsons, The gallery
being got over 91 posts, from the end ofit, the brush, and planckes, and a
blind was laid to the bulwark, and the mine being ready, the powder was
chamberd and the train laid to it: His Excel. as merciful as valiant (to try
what the Enemy would do) gave order to S^ Harry Harbourd, that on Tewsday
morning after the mine was spru^g in the Bulwark. Our men should fall on, and
though they should possess the Bulwark, and be masters of it: yet they should
retire into the gallery. The mine then being blown up took good effect, and
cast up a great deal of Earth and stones into the air, and shattred some two
rodds of our gallery in pieces, and made a breach mountable. After this Sir
Harry gave order that Captain Abrihalls Sariant (who was slain going on)
should fall up to the breach with his musketteirs, that Captain Nelsons
Lieutenant should likewise do the like with 30 men more to second the Sariant.
And Captain Gouldwell as eldest Captain to second them with the pikes from
the end of our gallery, all which was done accordingly our men falling up to
the breach, gave fire in the very teeth of the Enemy, our musketteirs giving
fire from all guards, and flanckes, and our ordinance thundering from all
batteries, did so amaze and startle them, that they quitted the Bulwark, and
retreated, where it was cut off to the skirt of the wall by the Vucht^^ po^t.
This being done our men stayed a pretty while upon the breach, till they had
discharged all their bandeliers and till that Sr Harry caused them (according
to his Excel. command) to recreate again into the gallery. In this fight was
shot through h^s thigh, a valiant and a worthy gentleman, one Mr Brown of
Coronell Har^woods company, who some three weeks aft^r dyed in the Busse. Our
men being drawn off, the Enemy came again to the breach, and cast up a little
defense of Earth, which the mine had blown up, and brush upon it, but our two
half Canon. which lay upon the right side of our entrance into the gallery,
beat the Earth and brush, which they cast up, abo^t their Ears, and shore of
the heads of the soldiers pikes, which stood there for the defense of their
workmen, this made a terrible ^larum in the Town, so that the Bells rang, the
women and children cried, the Burgers and the popish priests by flocks ran to
the Governor, and told him, tha^ ( aut ^unc aut runquam) it was time ^o lissen
to a seasonable, and an honor^b^e composition, for the safeguard of their
l^ues, and goods, we on the other side expected a day, and thought to have
^ansakt their baggs, and meet out veluets, and sa^tins by the pikes length,
but the Governor giving way to their request, taking hold of this occasion
strikes his sail, and came with the Bishop, Abbot, and diverse officers to the
para^et of the Vuchter po^t, there beat a parley: and so our war ceased. And
the Hostages being received and delivered on both side, ^hey began to pa^ley,
and commissioners being sent our, concluded the^e articles of composition
following, that the Town should be given into his Excel. hand on m^nday the 17
of September 1629. new style. Oh yt we cold therefore honor our God for this
victory with a holy life, and conversation, and that the consideration of this
his great goodness toward us might lead us to repentance. It is true O Lord
(as the pape said) that in this siege, thou have commanded the four Elements,
^ire water, Earth, and Air to fight and work for us. Thou art the God of the
faithful from Everlasting to everl^sting, Thy mighty and outstretched arm
has led us, thy guidance has traced us out the way Thy providence has
ouer-shadowed us, and thy merciful protection has preserved us through many
dangers O blessed is the man that makes thee his safe retreat, O Lord this
year thou have crowned our general (...) an Absolute victory, and have sent him,
his chiefes, and us home with honor, and there fore not unto us O Lord, not
unto us, but unto thy name gi^e glory for thy mercy and thy truth sake. Amen.

ARTICLES Granted by his Excie my Lord the Prince of Orrange, to the Governor
of the Busse, and the Captains, Officers and Souldi^rs there^n.
1 That the Governor of the Busse, with all the officers of war, and
soldiers of what quality, or condition soever they be; as well Horsemen, as
foot, none excepted: yea though they have abandoned the service of my lords the
states, and given themselves into that of the King of Spaines, shall go out of
^he town without any disturbance, or molestation with their arms and baggage;
The horse by the Sound of the trumpet, their Cornets displayed, armed
Complete, and their pistolles in their hands: The foot beating their drums,
their Coullers flying, their matches lighted at both ends, bullet in mouth, and
in rank and form, as they use to march in battle, with their goods. and
the safety of their lives to the town of Die.

2 They shall carry with them six pieces of Ordinance, and two morters at the
choice of the Governor, with all their train, equi page, and munition of
war, sufficient to discharge every one a dussen short.

3 They shall be furnished with horse; wagons, and their Conductours sufficient
to draw the ordinance and morters with all their train and Munition unto the
town of Die.

4 All munitions of war and of victuals appertaining to the King of Spain,
shall be delivered by such as his Excie shall appoint to this effect, saving
those victuals which were soul^ before the 12th of this month, when we began
to treat, which shall remain sold, without search or making inqui^y after
any man that has made any sail^ of them.

5 All officers and soldiers as well sick as hurt in the Gest ^ouse or in any
other place shall remain there till they have recovered their healths, and are
able to go away, giving them safe Conuoy and commodity to bring them their
Arms and baggage to the town of Die or Breda.

6 A Sufficien^ number of wagons and horse which the Governor shall require,
as well for his pert^cular service, as for the o^^iicers and soldiers to carry
their goods and Baggage to Die^st is granted them, comprehending therein all
the^e Arms: yea the soldiers of the garrison of the Town, absent sick,
dead, hurt or fled, and that the said wagons shall in ^oe case be visited.

7 Those which will desire to carry their goods and baggage to An^werpe shall
have boats without any charge to them, to bring them thither through Holland,
freed from all manner of taxes, toles, or impositions permitting them men to
look unto theie goods and baggage, which shall not be visited nor stayed in
any place, under an^ pretense whatsoever, but shall pass to Antwerpe without
disbarking themselves.

8 The Governor, Chiefs, officers military, Judges, soldiers, and all others
receiving pay from the King of Spain, as well Clergy men as Laye-men none
excepted, as also the widows and children, which have in the said Town any
houses, Inheritances, Rents, either upon the states of Brabant in these
quarters, or the Town, or upon houses or particular grounds, other goods
moveable or immovable, shall have the space and time of two years after the
^igning of this Treaty, to transport them, to sell them, to morgage them at
their wills, or otherwise, to dispose of their goods, and during the said time
shall enjoy their Rents, hyres of houses, fruits and goods got or to be gotten
of what nature and condition soever they be.

9 That the officers an soldiers of what charge or condition soever they be,
may leave their wives and children in the town^ and during this term of two
years may dispose of their goods moveable and immovable situated in the said
Town, or else where none excepted, without any confiscation or prize to be made
of them.

10 That the officers and soldiers, leaving their charg and service within the
time of two years, may freely return into the said Town, and enjoy this
Treaty as other Burgers and Inhabit^nts do, provided that first they give
notice thereof to his Excie or the Governor of the said Town.

11 Noe officers or soldiers goods or baggage shallbe arrested here for any
debts whether he goes out with the garrison, or being sick or hurt, or at his
going out when he is recovered.

12 The prisoners as well on the one side ^s on the other, of what Condition
soever they be, shall be set at liberty without paying of ransom, but only for
their dyer according to the taxation of the place.

13 That all the boot made by those of the Town as well before as during the
siege, shall not be restord back by them, but shall remain with them,

14 After the Articles of this Composition are signed, time shall be given to
the Governor of the Busse to send an express messenger to the serenissime
Infanta of Spain, with safe Conduct and assurance, to give her advice of what
is past, and it is to ^e understood that the Governor may do that the same
day as the articles are signed.

15 The Conditions being concluded, two days at the ^est shall be given to the
Governor, and soldiers to prep^^e themselves for their departure.

16 The time limited being expired the said Governor and officers do promise
to depart the garrison, to wit on M^nday next be time in the morning which will be
the 17th of this present month of September.

17 Yet to be understood that during the time of th^se two days noe m^n in the
town may come into the Army, nor those of the Army go into the Town, and
that for the avoydi^g of disorder, but every one in the mean while to keep
themselves in the trenches and fortifications, wi^h^ut making of any approach
or act of hostility, in assurance whereof hostages shall be given on both sides.

18 That before the garrison depart sufficient Hostages shall be given on his
Exe^e behalf, who shall march with the garrison Arms and baggage to Die,
and a counter change for them by the Governor, which shall remain in the
Army, till his Ezeios hostages and wagons be returned, and as soon as they are
come back his Excie will send their hostages with safe conduct and assurance
unto the Town of Die.

19 The Officers, Captains and others comprised in the first Article of this
Treaty, having any arms, boats, ^oopes or other preparations of war^e,
belonging particularly to themselves, may sell or transport them, without any
enquiry to be made about those which shall buy or carry them away.

20 There shall be noe restitution made of any horses, marchandises, wares or any
other goods sold or held for booty, nor noe man called in question about that.

21 Those of the garrison of Breda being in the Town, as well officers as
particular soldiers may return to Breda with the safety of their lives and
goods, as likewise shall be given to them a sufficient number of horse and
wagons and a hostage to-carry them and their goods thither in all assurance,
according to the tennor of the first Article as comprehended therein.

Given at the Camp before Busse the 14th of September 1629 and was signed P
Henry de Nassaw. A de Grobindonck. And beneath written.

By his Ezeles order ^ Iuniu^
And sealed with his Ezeles seal of Arms.



POINTS Agreed on by his ^xcilenc^ the Prince of Orange, and the Deputies of
the high and mighty Lords the S^ates General of the united provinces, to the
Ecclesiastickes, Magistracy, and Burgeses off the City of the B^sse.
1 First that all offenses, injuries, and acts of ho^tillity, committed happened,
and effectuated between this Town, and those of the united provinces, as well
from the beginning of these in restine troubles, Commotions, and wars, as
likewise during this siege, in what places, and in what manner soever, either
in general, or in particular, as well within, as without, are, and shall
remain pardoned, and forgot, and held as if they had never happened, so that at
no time any mention, molestation, pretense, suite or inquisition in law within
or without, for the causes above said shall be made, prosecuted, or laid to the
charge of the living or heirs of the dead, or also to any goods belonging to
them.

2 That the inhabitants of this ^owne shall carry themselves conformable to the
edicts of this land, enjoying the liberty of conscience, as they usually do
over all. And that all Eclesiasticall and clergy men, shall depart the Town
within the space of two months, behauing themselves in the mean while
according to the Edicts of the land, and may ^ake and carry along with them
their moueables, Images, Pictures, and Church ornaments.

3 The said Eclesiastickes shall enjoy during their life the reu^^ues and
fruits of their goods, in such places where they pay contribution, yet it is
to be understood, that the Eclesiasticall and pastoral goods shall fall to the
high and mighty lords the states general, who shall have the disposing of
them, as well for the profit of the Town as otherwise.

4 That the Nunns, and other Eclesiasticall women, may abide in the Town, and
shall be maintained during their lives out of the reuen^ues of their cloisters
yet remaining in the disposition of the high and mighty lords the states
general, whether they shall be accommodated in their cloisters, or provided with
other dwellings.

5 That also all the inhabitants of this town, as well Eclesiasticks, Nun^s, as
secular persons fled or otherwise, whosoever they be, bearing office in the
oath, government, and service of his majesty as soldiers or others, The
states of Brabant belonging to this town or not, their lives and goods shall be
preserved, as well in general as particular, if they contrary not the precedent
Article.

6 Also that this town with the inhabitants and burgers thereof, as well the
clergic as lay men shall be received and used in all gentleness and benignity
by the lords. the states General, henceforward to live in all friendship and
Concordance with the other united provinces and Towne^ to trade and traffic
one with another according to their ancient liberty as is fitting

7 That the high and mighty lords the states general and his Excie the prince
of Orrange, shall use and exce^cise in the said town, liberty, tertitories,
and jurisdiction thereof, for so much as they are annexed to the town, the
same right and jurisdiction as the Dukes and Duchesses of B^abant hitherto have
had, and to treat with this town so and in like manner at the capital towns
of Brabant are used to do.

8 That this town, Burgesses and inhabitants thereof, shall retain w^chin the
liberty of the said town, all their rights Customs, freedoms, exemptions, and
all other privileges, as well general as particular which they have enioye^
and poss^ssed a long time before the wartes, as well by water as by land within
and with out the town, as in Brabant, Golder^ad, Holland, Zealand, upon the
Ryhne, and other provinces places and rivers, as well taxes, toles of ^imber,
Ingebo^, the staple as oxen, and others none excepted, forasmuch as concerns
their lawful possession.

9 That the ruling and gouernm^ of the town, as well for the Administration of
justice, as in politic affaices shall continue with the magistrates, and the
three members of the Town, and that not other persons shall be promoted
thereunto, or chosen, but such as are ^atifs of the said town, or which have
received holy baptism there, or such others as the high and mighty lords the
states general shall think good to naturallize and qualify thereunto: Saving
that for this time the Government both in justice and policy, as well in
chief as subordinate Magistrates shall be absolute appointed and consti^u^ed by
his Excie and the deputyes of the high and mighty lords the states general.

10 That the town shall hold in their own government and disposition, all
their inhabitants, right of impositions, Fisheries ways, corn measure, and
monthly monyes, and all their rightes and revenues in the same manner, and as
they have hitherto enjoyed the disposition and ordering of them, provided that
they have right thereunto, and without preiudicing the other members of the
united provinces.

11 Those of the town shall keep still the residue of their victuals,
materials and other their common goods sold for the benefit, and the easing of
the town of charge, and preserved at the disposition of the abouesaid three
members, except the Ordinance, arms and other munitions kept for the Town,
which may not be sold.

12 That all Confraternities, Artilleries, gilds, and occupations, being at
this present in the town, shall remain in esse and keep their ^ncient
charters, ordinances, and priuilidges together with all their goods ready or
unready, and to this end in time to come the^ may be ordered by the said
confraternities, occupations, gi^ds, or sold or bought by them, and so to be
governed by the marshalls, headmen, and Rulers thereof for the common good, and
to dispose of them according to their pleasures.

13 That in the County of Holland, and other united provinces the tree Arms of
this town shall not be stamped or counterfeited, neither any the marks
belonging to the gilds, or occupations of this town, as the Cutlars, the
point-makers, and other hand crafts men, but that every one shall keept, and
use heir own propper mark, and that of the towns where the ^workemanship
(...) made. And that all gilds, and manifactures as also the Dyers and the new
yearly fayres procured during these troubles in the maioury of this cyty shall
cease, unless those of the maioury being heard thereupon touching their anuall
faires, otherwise shall be disposed of in all equity, by the high and mighty
lords the states general.

14 The Inha^itants of the Busse, and those in the country sitting under
contribution have granted them, and shall be entreated as the other good
inhabitants of the united provinces, as well w^thin the town as dwellers in the
plain country.

15 And for that which concerns the Rents, and lawful debts, made by the
three members of the cyty or their deputies, also ordained by the magistrate,
or accepted to be paid, as well during this siege as before whether they are
enrowled or sealed or not, the magistrate of the town, shall deliver over a
pertinent state, that the high and mighty lords afterward may in all eq^ity
dispose thereof.

16 And for the payment of them, and all other charges of the Town, the
present accises, impositions and other means of the town in future time shall
take their usual course, which may be increased or diminished by the three
members: yet so as they do not prejudice to the means which is raised for the
common weal.

17 That all acts, resolutions, decrees and ordinances made by the three
members or magistracy, forasmuch as they do not contradict the state or good
of the united provinces, also the sentences given in power of Judicature by the
Shriefes, as likewise all euiction of goods duly solemnized, situated, with in
or without this town shall remain in their force, and vigor, yet so as that
it be no prejudice of the interessed parties. neither upon the right of
appeal^, or reformation, if that belongs unto them.

18 That those which are at this present in the Magistracy, or have bin
heretofore, shall not be molested, nor troubled, because of the Acts and
Ordinances, granted by them for the distribution or payment of any money for
the Town, or other provisions made, neither shall also the receivers be called
to an account for any money that they have paid and received, not that the
Accounts of the abouesaid receivers, and other deputies of this town shall be
subject to any search or revision. As likewise all the Accounts given up by the
receivers of the Demaines, states of Brabant, receivers of licenses, Conuoyes,
and fortifications, shall continue as they are without any inquiry made after
them.

19 That the government of the table of the holy ghost, the great hospital,
the fabric of churches, orphane houses, lasories, and i^gs, mad men, and other
foundations of hospitalls for men and women, and the authorisation of the
Overseers, and directours of them' shall be conferred and given by the th^^r
members in conformity and according to the privileges of the city and as they
have been excercised heretofore.

20 That also the owners of winde-mills, and oyle-mills within this town and
the freedom thereof during this fiege, or which by former wars have bin
broken off, or shot down, or otherwise demolished, may build them up again in
the same places, without suing any new warrants for them, or to pay any other
rights, then those which they have used to pay heretofore, except the service
of the Land should otherwise require it.

21 That every Layeman of what condition soever he be, being in the oath and
service of his Matie of Spain, whether of the town or not, he shall be freely
permitted, after the surrendering to depart out of it with his family and goods,
and to this end may send for wagons, karres, boats or shipping out of
Brabant, Holland, and other Newtrall towns, without any of their persons,
goods, or the conductours of them, either going or coming shall be hindered,
molested, or troubled by the soldiers or fiscals, or any other, and that
without requiring any other pasport or consent but this.

22 Moreover the burgers departed out of the town, and such as are desirous to
dwell in the town, as likewise those which have bin in the service, oath,
military of his matle or not, and the heey^^ belonging to them, shall have
three years liberty ensuing that they may in all places, as well in the town,
liberty, and maioury thereof, sell, transport, change, barter their goods, as
they think good and fitting, or to have them received or administrated by such
as shall seem best to them, and coming to dye within or without the town,
during the same time, by will or without making of will, in such a case their
goods shall fall to their instituted inheritours, or to the next of their
kindred.

23 And those in the mean time, and during the aforesaid three years which
will go into the provinces and tounes, belonging to and under the obedience of
his Matie about their particular affairs may freely do the same four times a
year with the former, knowledge of the governor of whom they shall be bound to
require a pasport, which he shall give them, unless he has some just reasons
to the contrary: And at ^ end of these three years may make their abode in
this town or in other places where they pay contribution, where they shall
enjoy the same liberty, for to go, to pass and to traffic every where, for
the enjoying of the effect of this present treaty.

24 That noe other governor shall be appointed or made ^ver the Town, nor his
substitute, but one of the house of Nassawe, or some other Netherlandish lords
or vassals.

25 That the garrisons shall not enjoy any exemption or freedom of imposition
from the means of the town, but shall help to bear the accise, as other
inhabitants do.

26 That all persons absent, their wives and children, as well clergy as laymen
fled, shall be included, and comprehended in this treaty.

27 That all sick and hurt, at this present in the great Hospital or other
houses, either soldiers or others may abide therein, till they are thoroughly
recovered, or afterward to stay or to depart, as it pleases them, and to that
end shall be assisted with wagons, or carrs to carry away their baggage without
any impeachment.

28 All these Articles are approved, agreed unto ^y his Excie and the Deputies
of the high and mighty lords the states General, and accepted on by the
Ecclesiastickes, magistrate^ and Burgers of the said town, in power of their
letters of Attorney, in witness whereof we have signed hereunto at Vucht in the
Camp before the Busse the 14th of September 1629.

And was signed. F. Henry de Nassaw. Fr, Michael Bishop of the Bu^se. F.
Johannes moore Abbot o^ Berne^. Johannes Hermanus Deacon of the Busse. R. van
Voorne. R. van Greeneven. Blooff vande sloote. Henry Sumo^es. Peeter Huberts
Herialthuvel.


The Ratification.
The states general
Of the vnited-prouinces, having heard the Report of their deputies, afte^ the
fight, lecture, and examination of the points and articles above named, have
with ripe deliberation approved and ratified the same, as their highness and
mightines do approve and ratified them by these, promising to keep and
observe them, and cause them to be kept and obserueds according to the tenor
and form of them. Given in the Camp before the Busse ^he 14th of September
1629.

And was signed Hen. Ter Cuylen. Vt supra. and underneath was written.
By the order of the high and mighty lord the states general. signed. Corn-
Musch

And sealed with the seal of their highnesses and mightigesses



A Supposition touching ^he state of the enemies garrisson which marched out of
the Busse on monday the 17th September 1629 New style.
FIrst in the morning there marched out before the wagons some 50 horsemen and
as many firelockes, and musketeers. Of wagons and carts there went out about a
thousand, whereof two thirdes had sick and hurt soldiers in them, the others
sound men, which carried their Clergy, women, children and soldiers to look
to their baggage and goods, of these there were at the least 450 hurt, and
sick men, and ^s many able men, with those that sat upon the wagons, for some
times 20 of them marched before the divisions of the wagons, and some times
five or six of them went a foot, without arms by the wagons side* it was
thought that Grubbin douck in policy let so many men Go out without arms,
and upon the wagons to make us beeleeue he had but a weak Garrison.

About 11 of the clock came the Iesui^es and Priests, rvding upon wagons and
other monks and friars Going a foot, His Exellencie being Gone to dinner with
the King and Queen of Bohemia and the rest of the Lords and ladies, which stood
upon the battery in two of his tents. In ye mean while came Grobindonck the
Governors wife in her coach* who newly was come out of childbed accompanied
with her daughter Abbey-mounts wife, Captain of a horse troop, and her child
lying upon the nurse^ lapp in the forepart of the coach, General Morgan and
some other courts her and made her stay before His Exellencies Tent til he with
his train returned from dinner his Excelencie coming salu^ed her, and had
some sma discourse with her and taking his leave of her, she went hiway,

Toward evening came the Governor himself marching in the midst of his
troops he staid long because his Cannon was Grauel'd and sunk into the
Ground, that he could not draw them away; The night drawing on his Exellencie
sent him word by the Sariant Mayor General, that he would send them after him
on ye morrow or else send them to Antwe^pe by shipping,

He had ordered his men by three divisions, The first were the walloones,
consisting of four colors, being some 350 pikes, firelockes and musketeers.
The second five companie^ of Burgonians, having in their Cou^lores, the picture
of a woman h^ulding a child in her arms, and about some 400 men. Then came the
third and great division of high Duchess, matching, with 13 coullours, in the
midst of their pikes, containing a matter of 750 men. They marched in their
double open order at 12 foot distance between their rancks, as their manner
is, and had mingled many firelocks in the rancks of ^ musketeers. These three
divisions were a matter of some 1500 foot, with their officers. The Governor
matched out in the midst of them, ^etweene the Burgonians, and the high Du^ches
upon a white horse, and a russet Cassock and hose, with a red cross upon the
left lap of his cassock. And passing by the Queen^ of Bohemia as she sat in
her coach, he saluted her, and had some small speech with her, and so followed
his troop, After the foot were past, came th^ee troops of horse, which
brought up the Reere. The first was about 60 in number. The second seventy. The
third and last so^e ^0, all well mounted, well armed, proper men* with red
scarses about them. The number then of able men marching out in their several
divisions, and ranckes, being 12 coullours in all, and those that w^nt out with
the wagons before, may be supposed to bea^^out. -- 2000

The first troop of horse which marched out before ^ wagon: and the thre^
troops which brought up the Reere, to be a matter off. -- 300

Of sick, and hurt men, which went out with the wagons, and those which were
left behind in the ge^^-houses, and in the Town, some 700

In all 3000

It was credibly reported by some of the best Burgers in the Town, that during
the siege, there were slain offices, and soldiers, about 1500 men.

They had with them according to the Articles of Composition, three whole, and
three half Canon, with two morters, and thus much touching the sta^e, and
ordering of their garrison marching out. It rests now to speak of some things
in the Town.

First there was a mariner which climed up to ^he top of the weather cock of
Saint John's Church, and set upon it an Orange Tawny flag, his Excel. Colors,
for a memorial that the Town was Geu^.

There was found about the wall, some 5 a pee^es of Ordinance, whereof two or
three of them were half Canon, the rest brass and Iron pieces.

In the cross brethrens Cloister, There was an Image of Christ, and the Virgin
Mary, and the Bishop whose name was Gisbartus Masius kneeled between them,
laying the one hand upon the wounds of Christ: and the other on the pape^ of
the virgin Mary, holding up this latin verse in his hand. Positus in modio,
quo vt vertam vescio, bin^ pase^^ ab vul^ore. hi^^ lactor ab vbere.

Thus placed in midst, to turn I know not where,
for here is wounds, which yield me food, and there
I Am nursed from dug by her, with milkie Cheer.
But a plain Hollander in the time of Truce, to put him out of doubt, takes a
coal and wright^ under it. Ocharm^ Sot he^rt u lot God^, that is, O poor Sot
turn the^ to thy God.

In this cloister a while before the Town was given over, there was a moncke
in the chancill, sitting in one of the seats of the quire, and reading in one
of their masse-bookes about 12 of the clock in the night, we short a granado
into the Town, which fell just into the seat where he sat, more him, his
seat, and book in pieces, that scarcely they could find a mammock left of
him, only leaving the tincture of his blood upon the wall, for a memorial,
which is to be seem yet to this day.

Over S^ John's port was written in golden letters this latin verse. Hanc
portam, ^^uesquo tuos, arasque, foresque,
Custodi dilecte Deo Pa^^ome Iohanne^.
Take this Gate, Alters, Doors, thy Citizens.
(John) loved of ^OD our patron in defense.
But Silver Sr John, who had a mouth and sp^ke not, eyes and saw not, and
cares and heard not, and hands and felt not, etc. with other their images were
coffined up, and carried away upon wagons, but could not help them.

Over the gate of another cloister, was written this in latin Has n^ vadovia,
nisi dica^ ^ue m^^ia.
Do not Presume to go this way,
Unless thou do (Hail, MARY) say.


There was a strange shot happened in this siege. As in Ostend there was a Canon
bullet of the Enemies shot from the down battery, just into the mouth of one
of our canons, which lay upon the West bulwark charged, these two bullets
striki^g together, gave fire to the loose corns of powder, which were not
driven home, our Canon went of, and sent the enemy their own bullet and ours
back to them again: So before the Busse a soldier presenting his muster, to
give fire upon the enemy: the Enemy being quicker then he, shot first at him,
and shot just into the bore of his musket, part of the lead beating out at the
Tutch-hole, and so by the providence of God this soldier escaped a sco^ring.

A List Of our Noble men, Vollunteirs, and Gentlemen of our Nation, which bor^
arms and trayled p^kes at the S^e^e of the Busse, under the four English
Coronels companies, and first of th^se which were under my Lord General Vere
his first company Coronell of Dort.
My Lord Haughton. Sr Walter Erle^ Sr Roger Bartu. Sr Henry Hungate. Sariant
Mayor Grove. Captain Thelwall. Captain Wyborowe. Lieutenaunt Price.
Lieutenant Pomroy. Lieutenant Canson. L^eutenant Deemae. Lieutenant Kettleby.
Ensign Luttrell. Ensign Hammon. Ensign Weynd. Ensign Holman. Ensign
Grimes. Ensign Goldwel. Ensign Hudson. Mr: Winwood Mr: Gifford. Mr: Bvron.
Mr: Thvne. Mr: Brigman. Mr: Fariefax. Mr: Hotham. Mr: Stone. Mr: Pellard. Mr:
Bruster. Mr: Knevet. Mr: Langford. Mr: Wayeman. Mr: Absley. Mr: Rolt. Mr:
Knasborow. Mr: Cave. Mr: Williams. Mr: Powel. Mr: Homer. Mr: Vein. Mr: Wright.
Mr: Basset. Mr: Berry. Mr: Prat. Mr: Bonnington Mr: Bradshaw. Mr: Green. Mr:
Langdon. Mr: Hooe. Mr: Ansell. Mr: Hungerford. Mr: Crewell. Mr: Wilmore. Mr:
Cullum. Mr: Eslex. Mr: Mildmay. Mr: Polley. Mr: Maddocks. Mr* Humfreys. Mr:
Ellis. Mr: Banberie. Mr: Garling.
Of my Lord General Vere his second Company of Schoonhoven.
Captain Franscisco de Valrey. Captain Strasly. Lieutenant Turnour. Ensign
Quarles. Cornet Harbart. Mr Wrengham. Mr Bammham. Mr Weldon. Mr Norman. Mr
Sprye. Mr Ski^pon. Mr Coope. Mr Ha^ecourt. Mr Maycote. Mr White. Mr Hearle. Mr
Inglot. Mr Brown. Mr Copley. Mr Brimingham. Mr Rolt. Mr Guyn. Mr Chi^wood. Mr
Knightly. Mr Sanderson. Mr H^m^n. Mr Sedgwick^. Mr Wi^^ington. Mr Lee. Mr
Throgmorton. Mr Nancy. Mr King. Mr Williams. Mr Black.
Volunteirs of my Lord General Cicils company Vicount of Wimbleton,
Ieames Lord of Doncaster. Boswell Lord Feelding. William Lord Cra^^^. Sr:
Thomas Glemma^ Captain Henry Tyllie. Captain Butler. Caiptaine Lucan. Sariant
mayor Boules. Lieutenant Freeman. Lieutenant Caswell. Mr: Cicill. Mr.
Whitepole. Mr: Clyford. Mr: Tate. Mr: Butler. Mr: Symons. Mr: Itby. Mr:
Cheyney. Mr: Broadbank^. Mr: Courtney Mr. Downs. Mr: Footeman. Mr: Flood. Mr:
John Tate. Mr: Bois. Mr: Suck^ing. Mr: Flemming. Mr: Rice Powell. Mr: Haughton.
Mr: Hipsley. Mr: Appleyard. Mr: Ridloy, Mr: Vackell. Mr: Solwin. Mr: Danniel.
Mr: Colpher. Mr: Smith. Mr: Leg. Mr: Moynes.
Voluntets and Gentlemen o^ General Morgans company
Sr: Thomas Bland. Sr: Shefeld Clapham Sr: John Gofling. Mr: Fowler. Mr:
Mumford. Mr Io: Wither^. Mr William Withers. Mr Isaac Absley. Mr Henry Absley.
Mr Morgan, Mr Tiffin. Mr Elcott, Mr Garuis. Mr Read. Mr Andrews. Mr Booth. Mr
Merrick. Mr Martin. Mr Aldam. Mr Wo^ley. Mr John Ashley. Mr Williams. Mr
Turner. Mr Warret Mrs Ga^vis Wood Mr. Marshall.
Volunteers and Gent. off Coronell Harwoods company,
Captain Perkins. Captain Boules. Captain Low. Leiutenant Smith. Lieutenant
Gamish. Ensign Dolman, Ensign Morison Ensign Hering. Ensign Byron. Mr.
Snelling Mr Brown.
Gentlemen of quality.
Mr Cro^ts Mr Go^ger. Mr Saint John Mr Bareford, Mr Digby. Mr Moss. Mr Gilby.
Mr Lehunt, Mr Waller. Mr Ieffry^s. Mr Fleetewood. Mr Killegr^y. Mr Lambart. Mr
Knightly. Lr Bagshot. Mr Young. Mr Flemming. Mr Faith. Mr Boulton. Mr Stewtly.
Mr Ke^kwich. Mr Bendish. Mr Roe. Mr Rassell. Mr Carter.
Volunteirs and gen^lemen of Sr Edward Ve^es ^ompany deceased.
Lieu. Harewood. Lieu. Turbot. Mr Marshan. Mr Mandoe. Mr Gal^ope.
Of Captain John Cromwels company.
Mr Harry Cromwe^l. Mr Rochester Karre.
Officers, and soldiers slain before the Busse.
Of French. The Baron of Courtemer, and 8 captains more.. Of the Dutch Coronel
Pama, Monsieur Gren^e, Captain Omkaes, and Captain Ha^ton. Of English. Sir
Edward Vere Lieut Colonel, Capt. Roes lieut. and Cap. Byrouet. Of Scotch.
Captain Ramsev, lieut. Huns, my lord of Buckcloughs Ensign Of all nations
according to the list given up, about, 1600

