The HISTORY of That most famous Saint and Soldier of CHRIST JESUS St. GEORGE
of Cappadocia

Asserted from the Fictions of the middle ages of the CHVRCH and opposition of
the present.

By Peter Heylyn

Psalm: 116 v: 15 Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of his
Saints

London Printed for Henry Seyle and are to be sold at his shope the -- Tigers
head in Saint Paul's Churchyard 1631 Will. Marshall Sculpsit

THE HISTORY OF That most famous Saint and Soldier of CHRIST JESUS; St.
GEORGE OF CAPPADOCIA; Asserted from the Fictions, of the middle Ages of the
CHURCH; and opposition, of the present.

The Institution of the most Noble ORDER of St. GEORGE, named the GARTER. A
Catalogue of all the Knights thereof until this present.

By PET. HEYLYN.

PSALM. 116.15. Right precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his
Saints.

LONDON. Printed for HENRY SEYLE, and are to be sold at his Shop, the sign of
the Tygers-head in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1631.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE CHARLES, By the Grace of GOD, King of GREAT
BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc. Sovereigne of the
most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, called the Garter.
MOST DREAD SOVEREIGNE.
YOur Sacred Majesty being a KING, then, only in the hopes and expectation of
your people; vouchsafed to Grace me in the Infancy, and cradle as it were, of
mine endeavors. Your Majesty was then my choice: and I was prompted to devote
my self unto You, only upon the true renown of your Princely virtues. But
now I am no longer left at my former liberty. For since your Majesty has
pleased, so graciously to admit of me to your Service: it might be iust^ly
accounted an Apostasy from Duty, should I not consecrate my self, and all
that I am able, unto your Majesty's acceptance. Yet were I, as a Subject, bound
only in alleigeance, to your Majesty; yea were I borne an Alien to your
Majesty's Dominions: this present Work, (which here in all humility I
prostrate at your Gracious feet;) could not so fitly be addressed to any
other. It is (so please your Majesty) a Justification or Assertion of the
History of St. GEORGE the Martyr: whom some have so far quarrelled, as
either not to grant him, heretofore, a being on the Earth; or now, an
habitation only with the Feinds in Hell. St. GEORGE thus tainted in his Honor,
and in a word, dethroned from all his former glories; to whom should he
refer the hearing of his cause, but to your Majesty: the Sovereigne of that
most Noble and Heroicke Order, which in the first Foundation of it, was
entitled by his Name; and (as the times then were) committed to his Patronage.
Which favor if your Majesty vouchsafe him: this great and weighty cause,
unfortunate in such an Advocate; will yet be happy in the Judge. The only
Ruler of Princes, which has set a Crown of pure gold upon your Head; prevent
You with the blessings of his Goodness: and grant unto your Majesty, a long
and prosperous Life, here; and length of days for ever and ever. These the
continual prayers, of

Your Majesty's, Most humble Subject and faithful Servant, PET. HEYLYN.

TO ALL THOSE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS KINGS, PRINCES, and PEERS; Knights of the
Famous and most Noble ORDER of St. GEORGE, named the Garter.
Most Excellent KINGS, PRINCES, and PEERS.


IT is accounted an especial Honor in the GARTER; that it makes them, which
for their virtue and deserts are admitted of it, Companions even unto KINGS and
PRINCES. Those therefore, which are joined together in so strict a bond of
Unity, and made the same in a communion of all Noble qualities; far be it
from my thoughts to take asunder: or to select Particulars, out of a General
body, so united. The rather, because I now address my self unto You, in
commendation of a Cause; wherein your whole Fraternity, is engaged jointly. It
is almost Three hundred years, since that most excellent Order, never before
adorned, at once, with such and so many Noble spirits; was by the Founder of
it, Dedicated to St. GEORGE of CAPPADOCIA. A Saint, more than a Thousand years
before that Institution, crowned with Martyrdom: And ever since, continually
famous in the Church of GOD. Only some few of late, on what authority I know
not; have took upon them to discharge him, both of his place in Heaven, and
reputation in the Church. In which, though their opinions are so contrary, that
possibly there can be no agreement made between them: yet they agree together
to disgrace that holy Martyr: For by the first rank of them, it is undoubtedly
affirmed, that GEORGE the Martyr, so much honored in the Christian world, is
but a Counterfeit, a Larva; only some strange Chimaera, the issue of an idle
brain; one that had never any being on the Earth. The others, as
unquestionably, have made him in his life, a dangerous and bloody Heretic:
and since his death, a wretched Soul amongst the damned. On both sides, Satis
pro imperio. For this cause, it has often been one of my chiefest wishes,
that some of those, whose names are great for learning, and eminent in point of
knowledge; would undertake the vindicating of this injured Saint. But finding
none, that have as yet adventured in it: I rather chose to put my self upon
the task, than that Saint GEORGE should longer suffer in his honor, and this
Realm in him. The work, such as it is, next under his most sacred Majesty, I
consecrate to you (most excellent Kings, Princes, and Peers) and to the honor
of that most noble Order, whereof you are; and in defense of which you were all
engaged, at your several Installations. You celebrate St. GEORGE'S Feast, with
many stately and magnificent Ceremonies: you wear his image and representation
as your chiefest Ornament; you count it an especial honor, to be called his
Knights. I doubt not therefore, but St. GEORGE thus vindicated from the pens
and stomach of his Enemies, will find a gracious welcome to you: and that you
will be pleased for St. GEORGE'S sake, to entertain a favorable opinion both
of the Work and of the Author. In a full hope whereof, I do with all
Humility and Reverence, subscribe my self

The most unfainedly devoted unto your Noble and Heroicke Order, PET. HEYLYN.

Errata.
PAge, 18. line, 19. for all, read, almost all. Twice in the book, for See
Vsum Sarum, r. Sec. Vsum Sarum. Page 213. In the beginning of the Chapter, blot
out, Of the bodies of the Dead. Page 240. l. ult. for 30000. r. 300000. And
lastly, whereas it is reckoned (p. 314. l. 4.) as an ordinary habit of the
most noble Order of the Garter, to wear a Cloak with the Sun on the left
shoulder of it, in his full glory: Let the mistake be thus amended; A Cloak
with a device upon the left shoulder of it, compassing round the Garter, and
St. GEORGE'S Cross. Such other litterall Errors as occur in it, the Reader
may correct and pardon: these are the principal.

SYLLABVS CAPITVM.
PART. I.
The Preface.
(1) THe nature of Curiosity: (2) And pronenesse of the present Age, to new
fancies. (3) The opening of the cause in hand. (4) The Reasons which induced
the Author, to undertake the Patronage of St. George's Cause, and History. (5)
His resolution in it; and the manner of his proceeding. (6) The method of the
whole. (7) The Authors free submission of himself, and his performance, to the
wise and learned.

CHAP. I.
1. Three kinds of Imposture. 2. The first Author of Scholasticall or fabulous
Hi^^^rie. 3. The three ages of the Church in these later times. 4. Iacobus de
Voragine, the Author of the Golden Legend: his time and quality. 5. His
fiction of St. George's killing of the Dragon. 6. The remainder of that Legend,
continued out of Ovid. 7. The fable of St. George's Birth in England: 8.
Poetically countenanced by Edm. Spencer. 9. The Legend of the Dragon rejected
by the learned Romanists. 10. Defended by Geo. Wicelius. 11. The Scene thereof
removed from Afric, into Asia.

CHAP. II.
1. Of Heretics and their Original. 2. Their early practices to corrupt the
Gospel. 3. Their arts to countenance their cause. 4. Their plots discovered,
and condemned; by Councels, and by Fathers. 5. The injury done by Heretics,
unto the History of St. George. 6. St. Athanasius accused for Magic by the
Arians. 7. Of Alexandra, Diocletians wife in the Arian Legend. 8. The
indiscretion of some Church-Historians, in their choice of Argument.

CHAH. III.
1. A proposition of the two contrary opinions. 2. Calvin the first that ever
bid defiance to St. George. 3. Melanchthon misreported by the Papists. 4.
Calvin's opinion in it, by whom seconded. 5. Saint George by whom first made an
Arian Bishop. 6. The principal abettours of this last opinion. 7. No enemy
more dangerous to the Truth, than a great man's error. 8. An examination of the
Arguments drawn from the Canon of P. Gelasius. 9. And the Authority of
Cardinal Baronius.

CHAP. IIII.
1. A conjecture at those reasons which may make the History of St. George
suspected. 2. The Church of Rome too prodigal, in bestowing Divine honors. 3.
False Saints no prejudice unto the true. 4. The lives of Saints, how fabulously
and vainly written. 5. What might induce the Church-Historians, to that vein
of writing. 6. The undertaking of Aloysius Lippomanus, how well performed. 7.
The inter-mixture of vain Fables, no prejudice to truth of Story. 8. Of
Arthur, Guy of Warwick, and Sir Bevis. 9. Haereticall dreams and practices,
not able to bear down the truth. 10. An application of the whole unto St.
George.

CHAP. V.
(1) Undoubted truths the ground of fabulous reports. (2) The privilege of two
French Churches, and the Fables thence arising. (3) The Barons case of
Gascoygne. (4) St. George's killing of the Dragon, how ^arre it may be
justified. (5) The Portraiture of Constantine. (6) The Order of the Dragon, and
of St. Michael. (7) St. George how pictured commonly: and what it signifies.
(8) The memorable story of St. George's his Horse. (9) The picture of St.
George, how made a Fable: and by whom. (10) The entertainment of it in the
Church of Rome. (11) The Reformation of the Missall. (12) A final answer to
all those on the part of Calvin.

CHAP. VI.
(1) The whole story of George the Arian Bishop. (2) George Bishop of
Alexandria, not proved by Doctor Reynolds to be a Cappadocian. (3) The
Cappadocians infamous for their lewdness. (4) The life of George before he was
appointed Bishop. (5) His Butcherly behavior in that holy Dignity. (6)
Degraded in the Councels of Sardica, and Seleucia, (7) An (...) of Drusius, in
making George the Laodicean, to be the same with him of Alexandria. (8) The
strange effects of fancy and preconceipt. (9) George's return to Alexandria:
and the manner of his death. (10) George Bishop of Alexandria, never reputed
for a Martyr. (11) Shreds of the Arrian Legend, by whom patched on, upon St.
George's Cloak. (12) Sr. W. Raleighs resolution, in received opinions. (13) A
transition to the examination of Witnesses on St. George's side.

The second Part.
CHAP. I.
(1) THe Name and Etymology of GEORGE. (2) The Story of St. George by
Metaphrastes. (3) The time of that Author: and the reason of his name. (4) The
opinion of him in the Greeke-Church. (5) This Metaphrastes not the same with
Simeon the Schoolmasters. (6) The Country, Parentage, and first fortunes of
St. George. (7) The State of the Roman Empire at that time: and Persecution
then beginning. (8) The speech of George unto the tyrants: his torments, and
his death. (9) The manner of his death according to Friar Anselme; and the
English Story. (10) Fabulous histories of that nature, of what profit to the
reader. (11) A reiection of the residue in Metaphrastes. (12) Arguments Ab
autoritate negative, of what credit in the Schools.

CHAP. II.
(1) Magnentius mentioned in the former Story, what he was. (2) Vestem exuere
militarem, the meaning of it; and when used. (3) Lydda the Scene of this great
action; now called St. George's. (4) Malmesbury reconciled with other Authors.
(5) No executions permitted by the Ancients, within their Cities. (6) The
former Story justified, most of it, by Eusebius. (7) St. Ambrose testimony of
St. George, how certain to be his. (8) The time and Canon of P. Gelasius. (9)
The Story of St. George, why reckoned as Apocryphal. (10) The meaning of
Gelasius not to explode the Martyr with his History. (11) The Arrian George
not likely in so small a tract of time to be reputed as a Martyr. (12) A
Catalogue of the Authors cyted in this book, which have made honorable
mention of Saint George; as also of those Princes, Peers, and Prelates, which
have done him honor: digested in their times and ages.

CHAP. III.
(1) The state of learning in the Church, divided into two natural days. (2)
The time and learning of Venerable Bede. (3) His testimonies of St. George. (4)
Of Dacianus King of Persia, and who he was. (5) Persia taken, in some Authors,
for the Eastern Countries. (6) A reconcilement of the other doubts, touching
this Dacianus. (7) The Martyrologies of Vsuardus, Rabanus Maurus, and Notgerus.
(8) St. George how said to have converted many people. (9) The witness of
Vincentius, Iacobus, and Antoninus Florent. (10) Nicephorus Callistus; and his
evidence. (11) The suffrage of Sabellicus, Schedell, Bergomensis, and
Volaterran. (12) Of the Magdeburgians, and some other Protestant Divines. (13)
A recollection and application of the whole proofs.

CHAP. IIII.
(1) Four several ways used by the Church, to keep alive the memory of the
Martyrs. (2) The way of Martyrologies, how ancient. (3) The Roman Martyrologie:
and what it testifies of St. George. (4) Natale what it is, in the
construction of the Church. (5) The testimony given unto St. George in the
Greek Church. (6) St. George, why called Tropaeophorus. (7) Commemoration of
the Dead, how used in the Church primitive. (8) The depravation of the ancient
use of it in the Church of Rome. (9) The public service of that Church on St.
Georges day. (10) Arguments drawn from the Church service, of what validity.
(11) Saint George continually famous in the Church Christian. (12) And among
the Turks.

CHAP. V.
(1) The honor done unto the Dead, in the decent burial of their bodies. (2)
The relics of the Saints, of what esteem in the Church primitive. (3) The
care of Gregory of Tours to preserve his writings: and what he testifies of
St. George's relics. (4) What mention there is made of them in Aymonius, and
others. (5) Churches distinguished anciently by the names of Saints: and for
what reason. (6) St. George's Churches in Lydda, and in Ramula; made afterward
a Bishops Seat. (7) St. George's Church built by Sidonius Archbishop of Mentz.
(8) That mentioned in St. Gregory's Epistles. (9) St. George's Church in Rome;
the title of a Cardinal. (10) Churches erected to St. George in Alexandria,
and elsewhere. (11) Of Faustus Rhegiensis. (12) And the Pseudo-Martyr in
Sulpitius. (13) An application of the rule in Lerinensis, unto the business
now in hand.

CHAP. VI.
(1) St. George how he became to be accounted the chief Saint of Soldiers.
(2) St. George when first esteemed a chief Patron of Christianity. (3) The
expedition of the Western Princes to the Holy Land. (4) The Story of the
succors brought unto their Army by St. George. (5) Second apparition to them
at the Leaguer of Jerusalem. (6) The probability of the former miracle,
disputed. (8) An essay of the famous battle of Antiochia, by way of Poem.

CHAP. VII.
(1) The honors done by Kings, to others; of what reckoning. (2) Arguments
used by the Jews, in the defense of their Temple of Jerusalem. (3) Of
Monasteries dedicated to St. George. (4) St. George's Canons; a Religious
order. (5) St. George by what Kings honored anciently, as a chief Saint of
Soldierie. (6) The military Order of St. George, in Austria. (7) The German or
Dutch Order, called Sanct Georgen Schilts. (8) St. George's bank in Genoa. (9)
And his band, in Italy. (10) The Georgians why so called: and of the honor
done by them to our Martyr. (11) A view of several places denominated of St.
George. (12) A recollection of the Arguments before used in the present
business.

CHAP. VIII.
(1) St. George not anciently esteemed the Patron of the English. (2) Churches
erected to him here in England. (3) His apparition to King Richard, in the Holy
Land. (4) What may be thought in general touching the apparition of the
Saints. (5) And what in this particular. (6) St. George when he began to be
entitled particularly to the English. (7) The honors done him here, and among
the Irish. (8) The institution of the Noble Order of the Garter. (9) A brief
view of the chief Statutes of the Order. (10) St. George the Patron of it.
(11) Sr. W. Raleighs opinion touching the killing of the Dragon. (12) And of
them also, which desire to have the George Symbolicall. (13) A Catalogue of all
St. George's Knights of that most noble Order; until this present. (14) The
Conclusion of the whole.

THE HISTORY OF That most famous Saint and Soldier of CHRIST JESUS, St. GEORGE
of CAPPADOCIA; Asserted from the Fictions of the middle Ages of the Church, and
opposition of the present.
THE PREFACE.
(1) The nature of Curiosity: (2) And pronenesse of the present Age, to new
fancies. (3) The opening of the cause in hand. (4) The Reasons which induced
the Author, to undertake the Patronage of St. George's Cause, and History. (5)
His resolution in it; and the manner of his proceeding. (6) The method of the
whole. (7) The Authors free submission of himself, and his performance, to the
wise and learned.

(1) IT is a sad Complaint of Melchior Canus, that many of us in this more
neat and curious Age, do peevishly (to say no worse) reject those ancient
Stories, which are commended to us in the best and gravest Authors. Plerique
nostra hac aetate, Lib. 11. Cap 4.
perverse, ne dicam impudenter, res, quas esse gestas gravissimi autores
testati sunt, in dubium vocant. So he; and certainly, he spoke it not at
random: but as a man which well foresaw to what extremities, that restless
humor of leaving nothing undiscussed; and not so only, but leaving nothing in
the state we found it; at the last would bring us. For such the nature is of
Curiosity, especially if once attended with Self-love, and that unquiet
spirit of Opposition: that we are always watchful to pry into the passages
of former Times and Authors; and leave no path untrodden, how crooked and
indirect soever, which may conduce to the advancement either of our cause or
credit. By means whereof, as sometimes happily we do good service to the
Commonwealth of Learning, in the correcting of an Error: so for the most
part, we involue it in uncertainties, or broach new errors under a pretense
of canvassing the Old; or by denying credit to Antiquity, we only teach
posterity, how little credit may be due unto our selves.

(2) I say not this, to blunt the edge of any virtuous endeavors; nor to the
prejudice of those heroicke spirits, by whom so many of the ancient Writers,
which had been buried in their own dust, and made a prey to moathes and
cobwebs, have been restored unto themselves. Ill may I prosper in my Studies,
if I deny the least of due respects to them, to whose most fortunate and
painful travailes, we owe no less than to the Authors. Nor would I gladly be
esteemed a Patron, either of lazy ignorance, or of dull credulity: nor
willingly be thought to countenance those of the vulgar Heard, who run into
received opinions, as Calderinus, in Ludovic Vives, did to Mass. Eamus ergo
(said he) quia sic placet, in communes errores. Not so. I know it argue's a
degenerous and ignoble mind; barely and simply to submit it self unto the
tyranny of popular fames, or old traditions: not daring once to search into
them, to see at least some show of reason in our bondage. Much like those noble
Housekeepers, so much commended in the Country; who rather choose to have their
judgments questioned in giving entertainment unto all; than that their
Hospitality should be accused, in excluding any. Only I said it, a little to
take down, if possible; that height of self-conceit and stomach, wherewith
too many of us do affront those Worthies of the former days, and set our
selves against our Fathers. Which humor if it once possess us, in spite of
him that told us, nihil novum est sub sole; without regard of him that said it,
quia vetus est melius; we must have every thing as new and modern, as our
selves: new Organons for Logic, new modells of Divinity; scarce any thing
which has been hitherto resolved, either in Philologicall Theology, or in
Philosophy, no not in Ecclesiastical or civil History; not new, not altered.
The tendries and decisions of our Ancestors, grown as unfashionable, as their
garments: and if we please our selves in any thing, it must be somewhat which
is done according to the newest Cut: So, that were Martial now alive, Epigr. l.
5.10.
he might with good applause correct himself in that one passage of his
Epigram to Regulus; where he complaine's how much the latter wits were
disrespected, compared unto the former: he might I say, correct himself, and
read it thus: Hi sunt invidiae nimirum Regule mores,
Praeferat antiquis semper ut illa nova.
Such is the envy of the present days,
That only new conceits are worthy praise.


(3) That so it is, is more than manifest: how justly, and with what
disadvantage to reverend and sacred truth, might soon be made apparent by
looking over the particulars. (...), in the words of Aristotle. To scanne them
over all, Ethic^ l. 1. c. 4.
as it were infinite in it self; so were it nothing to the business now in
hand: unless to show, how much the truth has suffered, not only in our
present Argument, but in those also. Let those, whose full abilities in all the
rarities of Learning, have fitted them for undertakings of this noble nature;
adventure in this work: to make those ancient friends, Antiquity and V^ritie,
shake hands, and live again together. It is a burden worthy of their shoulders
only, and to them I leave it. For me it is enough, if in the least degree I
may be serviceable in this kind: to free one only captivated truth, out of
the Dungeons where of late it was imprisoned: if forth' encouragement of
others, I make it evident in this, quam magna veritas, how great the truth is,
and how mightily it will prevail. Not to stand longer in the entrance, my
purpose is to write in brief, the Story of that most blessed Saint and
Soldier of CHRIST JESUS, St. George of Cappadocia: and to produce such
testimonies in defense thereof, as all the Ages of the Church successively have
given him. No Saint in all the Calendar, the glorious Company of the Apostles
excepted only; scarce any of the Noble Army of the Martyrs, able to show a
cleerer title to the Crown of Martyrdom, or to produce more evidence to
justify his right unto that honor: and yet not any of that goodly Fellowship,
more ignobly handled; more shamefully discarded. For having in the general
vouche and confession of the Church, been reckoned with the Saints departed; a
Festival allotted to his memory, and Temples consecrated by his name: for,
having in the latter Ages of the world, been honored as a Patron of
Christianity; and of special credit and opinion with us here in England: we
now are taught a Lesson so exactly contrary, that fire and water cannot be at
greater difference. St. George, if they may be believed which say it, must now
no longer be conceived, as one that ever lived, or moved or had any being: or
if a man at all, a wicked man, an Arian. This they affirm for certain, and
they affirm it with such confidence: as if they meant to leav^ us nothing, but
this miserable choice; of two such fatal mischiefs, both dangerous and
extreme to choose the least. Pudet haec opprobria, nobis
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
Foul shame it were, should they St. George defy; And we stand mute, not able
to reply.

(4) A thing as I conceive it, dishonorable unto God, that those of his retinue
in the Heaven of Heavens, should at the suite of Curious and unquiet men, be
thus put under an Arrest, and so laid up for ever, in the Jail of utter
dark^nesse, or at the best, bound over to eternal silence and oblivion. A
thing, as I conceive it, injurious to the new Jerusalem; made poorer by the
loss of such a great and glorious Citizen: and to that blessed Corporation of
the Saints themselves, so to be baffled of their rights and ancient liberties.
Nor is it less to the dishonor of the holy Church, which hitherto has
reckoned him among the Saints; and as a Saint, given him the honor due unto
his name: nor to the Princes of this Kingdom, which have elected him the
Patron of their most noble Order of the Garter: or to those famous Peers, his
Knights, which every year do solemnize his Festival with many noble
Ceremonies; nor lastly, is it less to the dishonor of that High Court of
Parliament, who since the Reformation has thought it no impiety, to entitle
him S. George the Martyr. For in the first of Edward the 6. Cap. 14. etc. we
find a mention of the free Chapel of S. George the Martyr, situate in the
Castle of Windsore: and in the 5. of Queen Elizabeth, Cap. 2. the Feast of S.
George the Martyr is expressly mentioned; to inquire no further. Quod itaque
felix faustumque sit, etc. In the fear therefore of Almighty God, and to the
honor of the Saints, his blessed Courtiers; I have adventured to restore this
glorious Martyr to his place: not in the Heavens, from whence the powers of man
were never able to remove him; but in the good opinions of us men, from which
we have of late displaced him. And as my duty binds me next, in honor of the
Holy Church throughout the World, and to the glory of my gracious Lord and
Master, the service of my Country, the satisfaction of my Brethren; and for
the full content of that most noble Order, which I am sure hate nothing more,
than Superstitious Vanities: I have endeavored, that neither we become
ashamed of our St. George; nor he of us: Dij coepris aspirate meis.

(5) I know that in the prosecution of this Argument, I cannot choose but meet
with many prejudices: the names and dictates etc. of those reverend and famous
men, which have affirmed the contrary; the censures and rebukes of such, who
would have all things pass for current, which are found extant in their
Writings. But in the search of truth, we must not be afraid of names, or
censures. Luther had never ventured on the reformation of Religion: had he
been either frighted by the Names of Schole-men, or terrified by any of the
Bulls from Rome, or otherwise afraid of Opinion. Nor can I think it, more
unpardonable in me, to dissent from them; than first it was in them, to differ
from Antiquity. It was a noble saying of the great Philosopher, (...), ^th.
lib. 1. Cap. 6
That when we make a search for truth, we must have no respect of persons:
and thereupon we use it for a Proverb, Amicus Socrates, amicus Plato, magis
amica veritas. Truth is the maine of my inquiry, I have Antiquity to friend,
and the tradition of the Church, my Sanctuary. What should I fear in such a
cause, and so well seconded? Besides I cannot think, that ever those most
blessed Spirits now with GOD, to whom we stand indebted for so many helps in
Piety and Learning: did ever hope to have their writings reckoned, as
unquestionable. Sic institu^re maiores, Tat. de Mor. Germ.
posteri imitantur: This only was a privilege of the Apostles; that as they
Preached, so we also should bele^ue. If so, then as it is no injury unto them,
that we join with them, in an enquiry after Truth; which with such diligence
they sought: so neither, if we take another and a nearer way unto it; when we
perceive them, either through error, or infirmity, to have gone aside. Their
Names as often as I have cause to use them, I shall not mention without honor:
their words I shall lay down ingenuously, and as I find them; without censure:
Their reasons I shall examine modestly, and with due regard; such as their
persons do deserve. Those Authors, with whose weapons I have made choice to
fight this battle; I shall use also in the same manner: assigning every man
his time, giving to every one his due; not sparing those which make most for
me, if I find them faulty.

(6) My method shall be this. I know the Church of Rome too full of liberty in
framing of the Legends, by mixing Truths with Fictions, and suffering the
corrupt and dangerous tales of Heretics, to be wrought in, with both: has
given the chief occasion, that this our Saint, with others, have in these
latter days been brought unto their trial. First therefore, I shall make a
short relation of such unwarrantable tales, as are found of him in the Legend,
or set abroad by some late Fablers of our own; or obtruded on the Church by
heretics. That done, I shall report in their own words, the several
conc^its of them; who have endeavored to persuade us, that there was never
such a man, as our St. George: and next, of them, who have been diligent to
prove our Saint, V. Chap. 3. 6.
to be an Arian Bishop; a bloody Butcher (as one calls him) of the true
Christians. Not that I shall produce them all; but some only of the chiefest:
some five or six perhaps, of each of the opinions; Et magna partium momenta,
the founders and abettours. Their arguments, which are not many, I shall
quickly answer* proceeding so to such records, as yield most testimony to our
Saint: the time and manner of his Death, the honor done unto his Relickes, to
his memory; not only by the Church, but by the greatest Kings and Princes of
the Christian world. In which, I shall adhere especially to the plain words
and meanings of those Authors, whose authorities I urge, not wresting them
aside, or stopping of their mouths, when they speak not to my purpose. My
study is for truth, not faction. And if at any time, which is but seldom, I
shall take liberty to use conjectures in the explaining of some passage, which
else might give occasion of exception: I hope it will be said, that I am only
(...), ingenuously bold, not (...), audaciously presumptuous.

(7) The whole work, as it is consecrated, next under GOD, unto the service of
his most excellent Majesty, and of this flourishing Church whereof we are;
both which are principally interessed in this cause, by reason of the Honors
which they have conferred upon our Martyr: so from them chiefly, I expect my
censure; yet so, that I submit it also to the censure of all honest, learned,
and religious men; whom I beseech with all respective reverence, to pardon such
mistakes, if any be, which their more able knowledge shall discover to them:
and though they think not fit, to approve the work; to commend my purpose.
Those selfe-conceited ones, which are so stiff (as King Harry used to say) in
their new Sumpsimus; and whose opinions hang upon another sleeve, not to be
taken off with reason: I leave unto the jolly humor of their singularities.
Against such men, I am resolved to entertain the resolution of Mimnermus, as
he has thus expressed it: (...)
(...).
Rejoice my Soul: though some offended be
And speak thee foul; others will cherish thee.


(6) I cannot but be conscious to my self, that there are many things omitted,
in this following Discourse; which might add further luster to the cause, and
vindicate St. George's honor with the more applause, and satisfaction. Yet I
must say withal, that nothing is omitted in it, which either my memory could
prompt unto me, or which by diligent inquiry into all kind of Authors, which
I thought likely to afford me any helps; might possibly be met with. If any
one, who shall vouch safe to cast his eye upon it, will please to let me know
wherein I am defective; and give me such directions, as may be serviceable to
the perfection of this work: I shall with joy and thankfulness accept them;
and willingly make known, by whom I profit. Which if they do; and that they
would be pleased so far to grace me, is in the chief of my desires: I doubt
not but St. George will be again as high in our opinion, as in the Times
before us, most affected to his memory. This, as I then should happily presume
of; so I despair not of it now: submitting, as before I said, my self and my
performance, unto all honest, learned, and religious men; and to them only. As
for the rest, O di profanum vulgus, and arceo.


CHAP. I.
(1) Three kinds of Imposture. (2) The first Author of Scholasticall or
fabulous History. (3) The three ages of the Church in these later times. (4)
Iacobus de Voragine, the Author of the Golden Legend: his time and quality.
(5) His fiction of St. George's killing of the Dragon. (6) The remainder of the
Legend, continued out of Ovid. (7) The fable of St. George's Birth in England:
(8) Poetically countenanced by Edm. Spencer. (9) The Legend of the Dragon,
rejected by the learned Romanists. (10) Defended by Geo. Wicelius. (11) The
Scene thereof removed from Afric, into Asia.

(1) THat excellent though unfortunate Sir FRANCIS BACON, created afterward
Lord Verulam, and Vicount St. Albons; in his religious Essays, thus informs
us. There are (says he) three forms of speaking, which are, as it were, the
style and phrase of imposture: By the first kind of which, the capacity and
wit of man is ferter'd and entangled; by the second, it is trained on, and
inveigled; and by the third, astonished and enchanted. The first of these, he
attributes unto the Schoolmen: the last, to those which trade in mysteries
and parables. The second is, of them, who out of the vanity of their wit, (as
Church-Poets) do make and devise all variety of Tales, Stories, and examples;
whereby men's minds may be led into belief: from whence grow the Legends, and
the infinite and fabulous inventions and dreams of the ancient Heretics. So
that we see two several diseases, or corruptions of Story rather, to proceed
from one and the same Fountain, Vanity of Wit. though after, they have
diverse ends, and different purposes: the purpose of the Legend, being to
advance the reputation of the Saint; the project of the Heretic, to make the
Saint a countenance and Patron to his Cause. With each of these diseases, the
Story of our Saint, and many others also of that glorious Company, are deeply
tainted: the Heretics, inserting such passages into their Histories, as might
persuade the world to think them of their party; the others laboring so to
describe their lives and passions, as might procure unto their shrines, a
greater measure of Devotion and attendance. The one of these, an effect only
of a superstitious Piety, the other a design of a malicious cunning.

(2) And first beginning with the Legendaries, which of these two Impostors are
the last in time, and least in danger; they took beginning from one Peter,
surnamed Comestor: the Author, as his friends do style him, and as himself
inscribe's his work; of the Scholasticall History. But they which look upon
his Writings with the eye of judgment, and not of blind Affection; have thought
it fitter to bestow upon him that Character, which I have somewhere read of
Herodotus: and to entitle him, Fabulosae Historiae Patrem, the Father and
Original of all those fabulous Tales and Legends, which at this day are so
frequent in the Roman Church. Sure I am, that Bellarmine has given him this
Censure, that he inserted into the sacred Stories of the Bible, many things out
of vulgar glosses, and profane Authors; not rarely mingling with it uncertain
and unprofitable Fables. De Script. Eccles.
Scripsit autem (says he) inserens verbis sacris multa ex glossis, and ex
prophanis Auctoribus; and non raro admiscens incertas Historias. He lived and
writ about the year 1150. which Age, with that that followed, may most
deservedly be entitled Fabulous.

(3) For as the learned Varro called the first Ages of the world, before the
Flood, (conceive it of Deucalion) (...) obscure, because of the ignorance
thereof; and those which were before the first Olympiad, (...) Fabulous,
because of those so frequent Fables of the Gods and Goddesses, in them
delivered; but those that next succeeded them, (...) Historical, the writings
of it beginning now to be worthy credit: so is it also in these latter Ages of
the Church. There was a time, In Chronol.
which Bellarmine does call Infelix seculum, a time of ignorance and darkness:
which lasted from the year 900. unto the year 1100. or thereabouts. There
also was a time, which we may properly call (...), of Fabulous; delighted only
in the miracles and apparitions of the Saints; with other matters of that
nature: the fruits of superstitious fancies. And last of all, when learning was
revived by Petrarch, and his endeavors seconded by Fl. Blondus, Aeneas
Sylvius, Picus Mirandula, and others of that time and Country; the Church may
justly style her Acts and Monuments, Historical, and true: the knowledge of
the present times, having expelled the ignorance of the first Ages; and
discovered the fabulous vanities of the other.

(4) Not to search further in this Argument, let it suffice that we have found
the first Father of the Legendaries, in the Western Churches: nor is it to be
doubted, but that he had a fruitful issue, in an age so prone to Superstition.
Of these, the man of greatest Fame, was James Archbishop of Genoa, in Italy; a
native of that Country: his surname, De Voragine, so called in the opinion of
Helvicus, quasi Vorago esset Bibliorum, propter crebras allegationes; because
he was so great a Student in the Holy Scriptures, so frequent in quotations.
Philippus Bergomensis, and Possevin since him, will rather have it to be de
Viragine, a little Village in the territory of Genoa, the place of his
Nativity. Oraeus, in his Nomenclator, places him, ad Annum 1278. Helvicus, in
the year 1280. And Bergo^mensis ten years after, Anno 1290. None of them
differing from the truth, though from themselves. The last of these, give's him
the commendation both of Eloquence and Learning: and Vossius makes him, in his
work de Latinis Historicis, to be the first Translatour of the Bible into the
Italian language. His works were many, and of good opinion in the Church: but
none of equal credit with the History, which he collected of the lives of
Saints. Himself intituleth it, Historia Lombardica; called by the people, for
the excellency thereof, (as it was then conceived) the Golden Legend. A book
in the esteem and judgment of those times, of high desert: how ever now the
learned Papists have rejected it with shame enough. L. 4. ad Page 131 Page 251.
b.
There is (says Master Harding in his Detection) an old Moathe-eaten book,
wherein Saints lives are said to be contained; certain it is, that among some
true stories, are many vain fables written. De Tradend. discipl. l. 2.
And Lud. Vives give's him this censure for a farewell, that he was homo ferrei
oris, plumbei Cordis; some also add, Animi certe parum prudentis and severi; a
man of litlewit, and less judgment, a leaden heart, and a brazen forehead.

(6) Of him, V. Chapt. 5.. 9.10.
and of his Legend, more hereafter: and for the present, let us look upon him,
in his so memorated Story of St. George, and of the Dragon. He begins it thus.
Georgius Tribunus, genere Cappadox, pervenit quadam vice in Provinciam Lybiae,
in civitatem quae dicitur Silena: iuxta quam Civitatens erat stagnum instar
Maris, in quo Draco pestifer latitabat; flatuque suo ad muros civitatis
accedens, omnes inficiebat: quapropter compulsi cives duas oves quotidie 'sibi
dabant, ut eius furorem sedarent. Cum ergo iam oves pene deficerent, inito
consilio ovem cum adiuncto homine tribuebant. Cum igitur sort omnium filij and
filiae consumpti essent, quadam vice, filia Regis unica sort est deprehensa,
and Draconi adiudicata, etc. Once on a time (for so we will begin it) St.
George of Cappadocia, a Colonel or a Tribune of the Soldiers at that time,
came to the Country of Lybia, and to the City of Sisena, (A City, as Don
Quixote said of his Kingdom errant, that is not to be found in all the Map.)
Near to this Town, there whs a Lake as big as any Sea, God bless us; and in
that Lake a deadly Dragon, which with his breath did poison all the Country
round about him: and therefore the poor people were compelled, God help em,
to give him every day two sheep, to keep him quiet. At last, when all their
sheep were spent, alas poor people, they were compelled to give him every day
one sheep, and one man or one woman with it, to make up the number. And then
when almost all their Sons and Daughters had been eaten, at length the
cruel and unlucky lot fell upon the Kings Daughter, her Fathers only Child,
and her mothers blessing. It was a sorry house I warrant you, but who could
help it, the poor Lady was drawn forth into the Fields, and stripped of all
her gay attire, and bound unto a stake, and ready for the foul Feind that was
to eat her. etc.

(6) So far the Story, or the Tale rather in the Legend: the rest of it for
the more variety, we will make bold to borrow out of Ovids Metamorph. who in
his Perseus and Andromeda, has very perfectly expressed the Progress of the
fiction, so perfectly, that were the names changed, and the occasion altered;
we might with good reason affirm it for the same, as indeed it is. But thus
the Poet: Quam simul ad duras religatam brachia cantes
Vidit Abantiades; Metamorph. l. 1.
nisi quod levis aura capillos
Moverat, and tepido manabant lumina fletu,
Marmoreum ratus esset opus, etc.


This, and the rest that follows, thus rendered by Sir George Sandys, by whom
this Author is translated, even to the wonder and the envy of his Reader.

Whom when the Heroes saw to hard Rocks chained,
But that warm tears from charged eye-springs drained,
And light winds gently fanned her fluent hair,
He would have thought her Marble. Ere aware
He fire attracteth; and astonished by
Her beauty, had almost forgot to fly.
Who lighting said, O fairest of thy kind,
More worthy of those bands which Lovers bind,
Than these rude gyves; the Land by thee renowned
Thy name, thy birth declare, and why thus bound.
At first the silent Virgin was ^fraid
To speak t^ a man, and modestly had made
A vizard of her hands; but they were tied:
And yet abortiv^ tears their Fountains hide.
Still urged, lest she should wrong her innocence,
As if ashamed to utter her offense;
Her Country she discover's, and her name,
Her beauteous mothers confidence and blame, etc.
When, as a Gally with fore-fixed prowe
Rowed by the sweats of slaves, the Sea does plowe:
Even so the Monster furroweth with his breast
The foaming Flood, and to the near Rock pressed;
Not farther distant than a man might fling,
A way-inforcing Bullet from a sling.
Forthwith the youthful issue of rich showers,
Earth pushing from him, to the blew sky towre's.
And as Jove's bird, when she from high survaie's
A Dragon basking in Apollo's Rays,
Descend's unseen; and through his necks blew scales
(To shun his deadly teeth) her talons nails:
So swiftly stoopes high pitched Inachides
Through singing air; then on his back does seize;
And near his right sin sheathes his crooked sword
Up to the hilts; who deeply wounded, roared.
Now capers in the air, now dives below
The troubled Waves, now turns upon his foe:
Much like a chafed Boar, whom eager hounds
Have at a Bay, and terrify with sounds.
He with swift wings his greedy chops avoyde's,
Now with his Fawchion wounds his scaly sides.
Now his shell-rough-cast back; now where the tail
Ends in a Fish, or parts exposed t'assaile.
A stream mixed with his blood the monster flings
From his wide throat; which wets his heavy wings.
Nor longer dares the weary Youth rely
On their support. He sees a Rock hard by;
There light's: and holding by the Rocks extent,
His oft-thrust sword into his bowels sent.
The shore rings with the applause that fills the sky.
Then came the aged King and Queen with joy
To greet him Conqueror, whom now they call
The Savior of their house, and of them all.
And up the Lady came freed from her chains;
The cause, and recompense of all his pains.
So far the story out of Ovid. The rest that follows in the Legend, is the
baptizing of this King, his redeemed Daughter, and his people: which done, and
some instructions left among them, for their better progress in the faith; he
commended them to God.

(7) This Fable of the Dragon, as it was very gracious with the people of those
times; so did it quickly spread abroad: and in the close, when others did
neglect it, became a principal Pageant in that doughty History of the seven
Champions. The Author of which Pamphlet, to the no small advancement, as he
takes it, of the English name; has made him to be borne of English Parentage,
and of the royal blood. His Father, the Lord Albert, Lord Steward of the
Kingdom; his Mother Daughter to the King; his birthplace, Coventrey: this
last most probable, for like a Coventrey man, he did his best at first; in his
so dangerous an encounter with a burning Dragon in the Land of Egypt. Marked at
his birth (forsooth) with a red bloody Cross, on his right hand; a golden
Garter, on his left leg; and a red Dragon on his breast: but even as soon as
borne, conveied from thence by Caleb, an Enchantresse of the Woods, and there I
leave him.

(8) To this Relation, of his being borne of English Parentage, our admired
Spencer, although poetically, does seem to give some countenance: where he
brings in his holy Hermit, heavenly Contemplation, thus laying to St. George,
the Red-crosse Knight, his Parentage and Country.

65.
I wot (quoth he) thou spring'st from ancient race
Faery Qu. l. 1. cant. 10.
Of Saxon Kings, that have with mighty hand,
And many bloody battles fought in place,
High reared their royal Throne in Britain land;
And vanquished them unable to withstand.
From thence a Faerie thee unweeting re^t,
There as thou stepst in tender swaddling band:
And her base Elfin brood, there for thee left,
Such men do changelings call, so changed by Faeries theft.
66.
Thence she thee brought into this Faerie Land,
And in an heaped furrow did thee hide;
Where thee a Ploughman all unweeting fond,
As he his toil some teame that way did guide;
And brought thee up in Ploughmans state to bide,
Whereof Georgos he thee gave to name:
Till pricked with courage, and thy forces pride,
To Faery Court thou come to seek for fame;
And prove thy puissant arms, as seems thee best became.
(9) But to return again unto the Legend, according as in those times it was
commonly received; we have it almost word for word in Antoninus Florentinus.
Summa Histor. part. 1. tit. 8.. 23.
Who though in other of his stories, he is conceived to give too much credit to
popular reports: in this particular he has played the part of a Relatour only,
not (...) approover of the Fable. For in the Close he tells us, that this the
Legend of St. George, is reckoned by Gelasius inter apocryphas Scripturas; For
many passages therein which may well be doubted, ut de Dracone interfecto, and
filia Regis per eum liberata, etc. as for example, this his encounter with the
Dragon. Much also to this purpose Raphael Volaterran, who flourished in the
time of Pope Iulio the second, ( anno viz. 1506.) to whom his Work is
dedicated. S. Georgius Martyr, genere Cappadox, Tribunus Militum sub
Diocletiano merebat. Draconem maximum in Africa exercitum terrentem, solus Deo
^retus dicitur interemisse: quae tamen Historia in Niceno Concilio, inter
Apocrypha est habita. St. George the Martyr, by birth a Cappadocian, was under
Diocletian, one of the Tribunes of the Soldiers. It is reported of him, that he
killed a great and dreadful Dragon in the Land of Africa: which Story
notwithstanding, is in the Nicene Council (he means the Canon of Gelasius,
made in a Council of 72. Bishops) reputed as Apocryphal. Where we may note,
that only his so memorated conflict with the Dragon is exploded, but not his
Martyrdom, or being.

(10) Only Wicelius, of as many as I have seen, endeavors to make good the
Tale, by reason. A man of good abilities in Learning, and, as we may conjecture
by his writings, no furious Papist: however it has pleased Balaeus, Cont. 3.
c. 38.
to give him that unworthy ^itle, of Papisticus adulator, a Popish Parasite. He
in his Hagiographie or History of the Saints, written, as it appears by his
Epistle Ded. in the year 1541. does argue thus. Gentilitas persuasa fabulis
poeticis, credidit quicquid fingebatur de tauro Marathronio, and apro
Caledonio, belluis terrae exitiosissimis. Veru quando nos omnipotentiae divinae
fortiter gesta omnia religiose adsoribimus; nil erit absurdum, Draconem Lybicum
abs Deo per dextram Christiani equitu e medio sublatum, ne plus damni inferret
miseris mortalibus. In Georgio.
The Gentiles (says he) induced thereunto by poetical fictions only did
willingly believe the stories told unto them, of the Caledonian Boar,
destroyed by Meleager; and of the Marathronian Bull, which was slain by Hercules.
What error is it then, or what absurdity, if we which attribute all noble Acts
unto the mighty hand of God; if we (I say) believe, that God destroyed this
Lybian Dragon, by the valor of a Christian Champio^? So he. His argument, we
see; is drawn a posse Dei, from the power of God, which no man questioned; and
wherein the business is mistaken; the scruple being, not what might possibly
be done by God, in the extent of power; but what was done in truth of Story.
Sr. W. Rawleigh, V. part. 2 Chapter 8.. 10.
in his most excellent History of the World, seeme's somewhat to incline this
way, but of him and his conceit, in a place more proper.

(11) Thus have we spoken hitherto, of an African, or Lybian Dragon; for so it
is reported in the Legend, and in those other Authors whose testimonies we
have used: but we must now remove our Scene, and carry the whole story with us
into Asia. How this was done, or by what means, I am not able to determine:
unless perhaps those Spirits, (for I dare not call the^ Angels) which
translated the dwelling house of the blessed Virgin, out of Asia into Eurpe; to
make some satisfaction for that injury, conveied the story of this Dragon,
out of Africa into Asia. Sure I am, that they of Syria and Palestine, are very
confident, that the Dragon was their Countryman; and that St. George
encountered him in the Plains of Libanus, near unto Berytus, now Barutti, a
chief Town of Syro. Phoenicia. Thus witnesses Ludov. Patritius, Cap. 3.
in the first book of his own Travels, speaking of this Berytus. Nihil ibi
memoratu dignum praeter id quod incolae memorant, locum viz. vetustate exesum,
squalentemque ubi autumant D. Georgium Regis filiam ab immanissimo Dracone
asseruisse, etc. We found there nothing worthy note, but an old ruinous
Chapel, built in the place, where, as they say, St. George redeemed the Kings
Daughter, out of the very jaws of a dreadful Dragon. So he: and he begun his
journey anno 1504. or thereabouts, during the Reign of EMANVELL King of
Portugal; to whom, at his return to Lisbone, he addressed himself.
Adrichomius in his Description of the holy Land, anno 1589. goes more
particularly to work, and makes the place to be, as before we said, the
Feilds of Libanus, between the Rivers of Zidon and Adonis. Where in his Map of
Aser, we have the pictures of the Dragon and the Knight, in a fearful
skirmish: and in his text he tells us, that the place is by the Natives called
by the name of Cappadocia (it being, we must think, the birthplace of S.
George's glories:) and that St. George there killed the Dragon. Number. 9.
In hoc loco, qui ab incolis Cappadocia appellatur, non long a Beryto,
memorant inclytum Christi militem D. Georgium, Regis filiam, etc. as he there
has it. In memory of which exployt, there was a Castle, and an Oratorie, built
after in the same place, being consecrated to Saint George: and the whole
Country thereabouts, to this day called St. George's Valley. If this suffice
not for the removing of it into Asia, Page 68.
we may read in Mr. Seldens notes on the Poly-Olbion, that he is pictured in
his Knightly form at Beryth a City of Cyprus (he means questionless of Syria)
with a Dragon under him, and a young Maid kneeling to him. An Argument no
doubt, whereby the people make themselves believe, that the great Dragon was
killed within their borders: even as to justify the Tale of our Sir Bevis, and
his Page the Giant Ascapart; the people of Southampton, have placed their
portraitures upon their gate.

But of the Legend, and those unwarrantable Fables thence arising, we have
spoke enough. Only me thinks this their exact and punctual pointing out the
place, of this great duel, brings in my mind, what I have somewhere read of
the blind Senator Montanus. Who being once at Supper with the Emperor
Tyberius, highly commended the great Mullet, which he heard say, was set
before them on the Table; and showed how fair it was, how fat, how it filled
the Charger, how it lay: and ever as he spoke, he turned his face, and pointed
with his finger to the higher end of the Table; whereas indeed, the Mullet was
a great deal below him.

CHAP. II.
(1) Of Heretics and their Original. (2) Their early pract^ce^ to corrupt
the Gospel. (3) Their arts to countenance their cause. 4. Their plots
discovered, and condemned; by Councels, and by Fathers. (5) The injury done by
Heretics, unto the History of St. George. (6) St. Athanasius accused for
Magic by the Arians. (7) Of Alexandra, Diocletians wife in the Arian Legend.
(8) The indiscretion of some Church-Historians in their choice of Argument.

(1) I Have now done with the first kind of Imposture, conversant about the
History and lives of Saints, the last, as before I said, in time, and the
least in danger. That only did intend, to dispose the mind to entertain
ungrounded Fables, doubtful traditions, and unwarrantable fictions; whereby it
might be raised unto a constant liking of those parties, commended to it in
those Fables, fictions and traditions. But this that follows, endeavors
principally to infect the understanding, and to prepare the will, to
countenance that cause which themselves support: infu^ing into every part and
Section of their writings, some secret venom, which the unheedfull Reader may
swallow unawares. That (as I said before) an effect only of superstitious
Piety: but this, a treacherous design of malicious cunning. A cunning even as
old as Heresy it self: Heresy I mean as now we take the word, for a
malicious and stubborn opposition to the truth, delivered to us in the holy
Gospel. I say as now we take the word, for if we take it accordingly as it
has bin used in ancient Authors, we have not only Heresies in Christianity,
but even in Iudaisme, in the Law of Mahomet, and in Philosophy both natural
and moral But take it as it is at this time used, and we refer the first
original thereof, to Simon Magus, (...) the first begotten of the Devil,
Epistol. ad Tral.
as Ignatius calls him. Out of his mouth came those unclean and filthy
spirits, like to the Frogs in the Apocal. which came out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophets: even the spirits of Devils working miracles.

(2) No sooner came this (...) this Generation of Vipers forth into the world;
but they presently began to do the will of him that sent them: making as many
as they could, which went upright in the way of Gods Commandments; at first to
halt and stagger between two opinions; and at the last, to forsake the living
God, and turn to Baal. The Devil when he was his own Agent, in his attempt
to seduce our Savior; assaulted him with Scripture, saying, It is written: and
these his children must needs also have a Scriptum est, the better to set off
and relish their temptations. Only the Devil of the two was the more
ingenuous: for he produced the words of Scripture, as they were in the sacred
Covenant, though with an ill intention: but these besides an ill intention to
seduce, will both corrupt that Scripture which they had amongst them, and
devise a new. In their attempts to corrupt the Scripture, they proceeded
somewhat leysurely; yet with more haste, as the saying is, than with good
speed: for such a vigilant eye the watchmen of the Church did keep upon them,
that they were instantly discovered. Marcion, as Epp^hanius tells us, Har. 42.
had altered and perverted some passages of holy Writ; but all observed by that
good Father. So had the Arians corrupted in one place the Gospel of St. John,
to make it serve their purpose: L. de S. Sp. c. 11.
but this was noted (as himself informs us) and restored by Ambrose. In their
designs to devise new Scripture, they began more early, but with like
success: so early and so impudently, that they obtruded their most damnable
inventions upon the Church; during the lives, and some of them, under the names
of the Apostles. Of which sort among others, were the Prophecies of Enoch,
whereof and of the rest, St. Austin gives this censure: De Civ. Dei, (...). 15.
Vnde illaqua sub eius nomine proferuntur etc. recte a prudentibus iudicantur
non ipsius esse credenda; sicut multa sub nomibus and aliorum Prophet arum, and
recentiora sub nominibus Apostolorum, ab haereticis proferuntur, quae omnia sub
nomine Apocryphorum, etc. Of this sort also were the Gospels of Bartholmew, and
Nicodemus; the Protoevangelium, attributed to Saint James; the Preaching and
Itinerarie of St. Peter, the travailes of St. Paul and Thecla; with others of
that rank and quality: not to say any thing of Barchabas and Barchob, and
other Prophets of that nature, added unto the old Testament by the Heretic
Basilides. All these, and their associates of the same making, by the
decreetall of Pope Leo, of that name the first, not only forbidden to be read,
but sentenced to be abolished, and adjudg'd unto the fire. Apocryphae
Scripturae quae sub nomine Apostolorum multarum habent seminarium falsitatum,
non solum interdicendae, sed etiam penitus auferendae, atque ignibus tradendae
sunt. So he, Can. 15.

(3) Nor were these ancient Heretics excellent only in their stratagems to
deface and falsify the ancient writers; but also in those more neat and
subtle projects which they had among them to countenance and enlarge their
cause. For certainly we may affirm it of the Heretics, that as they are the
Children of this World; so they are wiser in their ways than the Children of
Light. A clear example of which Aphorism, we have in those of the Arian
Faction, which holding longer, than any other of that dangerous nature in the
Church; could not but be supported with a greater cunning. Of this kind was
their accusing of their Contraries of Magic, and Sabellianisme; their strict
Confederacies and Combinations, to ruin those that held against them; their
artificial plots to draw on others, to maintain their party; their curious
choice of instruments, whereby to compass their intents. Thus did they join
together, in the several Councels of Antioch and Tire, Secrat. Hist. Eccl. l.
1. cap. 19.
to destroy the Orthodox Professors. Thus did they win upon Constantia (a
woman of no kindred with her name) by one of special sanctity in the
appearance: and by her means, Ib. ^^p. ult.
prevailed upon the noble nature of her Brother Constantine. And thus by
sending Poast the same engine, which had wrought upon that Lady, to signify
the Emperors death unto the eldest of his Sons; and to deliver him his
Fathers Testament, which was committed to their trust: they did not only work
upon him to support their cause; but to stickle in it. So true is that of
Canus, (although it may be truly verified of him and his: ^. 11. c 5.
) Haereticorum diligentiam and industriam mirari satis non quco. Omnia quippe
illi susque deque miscent, ut viri pictate insignes, praesertim si Reges and
Imperatores sint, ipsorum parts f^visse videantur.

(4) But to proceed, what luck soever the Heretics of former ages had in
their plots and stratagems upon great persons; they found it otherwise in such
other of their courses, as came within the cognizance and censure of the
Church. They had as we have said already, divulged their damnable errors,
under the Names of the Apostles; but this discovered, and their writings judged
unto the fire, by Leo. The Manichees had many Dreams and divelish fancies of
their own, which they imputed also to some one or other of those blessed
Spirits: but this detected by St. Austin. Ipsi antem (viz. Manichaei) legunt
Scipturas apocryphas, quas etiam incorruptiss^imas esse dicunt, etc. So he, in
his discourse against Adimantus. Nor did they only labor to corrupt the
Doctrine of the Church: but the Stories also of those times and of the former,
were made to speak such language, as might be most availeable unto their
cause and purpose. And not so only, but by confounding the false Legends of
their partisans, with such as had been Saints indeed: they gave occasion to
the Church, that either by suppressing of their Stories, the memory of the holy
Martyrs might be ruined with them; or else, out of a pious care to preserve
the one, the memory of the other might likewise be continued* But herein their
device miscarried also: the Fathers of the Church, distinguishing as well as
possibly they could, the Tares and Wheat; gathered the one into their Barn,
and left the other to the mercy of the flames. Thus the sixth Synod holden in
the year 680. at Constantinople. Can. 63.
(...) (...). Viz. The holy Synod does ordeine, that those false Martyrologies
which have been written by the enemies of our Religion, be no more published
in the Churches; but that they be delivered over to the fire, as dangerous
writings, which disgrace the Saints of GOD, and lead men over to Infidelity.
And as for those which either entertain them, or conceive them to be true; let
them be Anthema. So far the Synod.

(5) We have been busied all this while, in laying our foundation: It is now
time that we proceed unto the building. A matter with the which I could not
well go forward, till I had shown in general how diligent the Heretics of
all ages; and in particular the Arians, have always been in gaining credit to
their cause. Of which a cleerer instance cannot easily be found, than their
depraving of the story of our blessed Saint, St. George the Martyr: by
mingling with it, some passages of special note, occurring in the life of an
Arian Bishop of that name, their George of Alexandria. A thing that we affirm
not casually and upon conjecture; but by such Arguments as are well able to
evict it. For in a Council of 72. Bishops held in Rome, Council. com. 1 edit.
Pet. Crabbe. p. 993.
under Pope Gelasius (he began his Popedom in the year 492.) it was
complained, that the Acts and Monuments of the holy Martyrs, ^b infidelibus aut
dicta superflue aut minus apt scripta essent, quam rei ordo postulat: had
been collected by Infidels or Mis-beleevers, with less integrity than so
great a business did require. And after in particular it was determined, that
the death and Martyrdom of one Quiriacus and his Mother Iulitta, St. George,
and diverse others, had been writ by Heretics. Quiriaci cuiusdam, and Iulittae
Matris eius, Georgij item, aliorumque buiusmodi passiones, ab Haereticis
conscriptas perhiberi. Of all which Histories, both of the latter, which
particularly are expressed; and of the others, intimated at large and in
general terms; it was then resolved, that they were not to be read in
Churches: Ne vel levius subsannandi occasio oriretur, that so there might be no
occasion in the Church of contempt and laughter.

(6) One special circumstance which might persuade those Reverend fathers
there assembled, to conceive thus of it; and which may well confirm us in that
sentence; is a great conflict which our Martyr is reported to have had, in the
Arian Legend, with a most notable Conjurer or Magitian. His name was
Athanasius; and his undertaking, this; according as we have it in Vincentius.
Tunc videns Dacianus, Sp^^. Mist. l. 12. Cap. 128.
quod eum poenis superare non posset, diu quaesito, and tandem invento cuidam
Mago, dixit, Christiani magicis artibus tormenta ludisicant. Respondet
Athanasius Magus, si arts eius superare nequivero, reus ero capitis. Educto
ergo de carc^re, dedit ei calicem plenum veneno, etc. When after several
torments, which had been cruelly applied unto St. George, the President (or
Proconsul) Dacianus, saw that he was not able to make him yield to his
desires; nor yet deprive him of his life; he called unto him a certain Magitian
whose name was Athanasius, and said unto him, that sure the Christians had some
arts to delude their torments: who presently replied* that he would undertake
upon the forfeit of his head, to over-match him in his own cunning. This said,
and the blessed man of GOD brought out of Prison, he gave unto him, a Mazer
full of deadly poison: which instantly St. George (not yet a Martyr) making the
sign of the Cross upon the Cup, drank it off without further danger. Upon a
second experiment in this kind, but of a more dispatching mixture; the fond
Magitian gives him over, and is accordingly beheaded. This is in brief, the
substance of the story in this passage: in which who is so blind that sees
not, a full description (though in Clouds and shadows according to the use of
Heretics) of that great trial which Athanasius had against the Arian George
of Alexandria? For we are perfectly informed by all the Ecclesiastical
Historians of those times, that holy Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, being by
violence degraded from his See; and George the Arian succeeding in his place:
there was a Combination of that party, to establish the possession of the one,
in the death and ruin of the other. For the facilitating of which great
design; it was resolved that Athanasius, in a Council to be held at Tire,
should be accused of Sorcerie: as also for the murder of one Arsenius (whom
they had hid out of the way;) and for the cutting off his arm, to use it in
his Magical and divelish Incantations. By means whereof, (however it pleased
GOD that Athanasius did marvailously acquit himself of both the crimes:) I say
by means whereof, this just and innocent man, has been traduced in Heathen
writers, for a Magitian, and for a man exceeding skillful in their Art of
Augurie. Ammian, Marcel. l. 15. c. ^.
Dicebatur^n. ( viz. Athanasius) fatidicarum sortium fidem, quaeve augurales
portenderunt alites, scientissime callens, aliquoties praedixisse futura. So
Amm. Marcellinus.

(7) Of the same medley is their Tale of Alexandra, Dioeletians Lady, though in
it self a little more perplexed; and not so easy to unriddle. The story is at
large reported by Simeon Metaphrastes, toward the end of his History of
George; and is this in substance. At such time as St. George had suffered many
of their torments, and even wearied his Executioners; this Lady Alexandra (like
Pilates wife in the holy Gospel) persuaded with her Husband, not to have any
more to do with that Righteous man. This drew her into suspicion with the
jealous Tyrant, as one that favored somewhat of Christianity: and thereupon
she was committed. But after, seeing with what a noble constancy, that blessed
Saint continued in the profession of his Faith; she declared her self a
Christian, and was forthwith had out of Prison, to her Execution. Our venerable Bede reflects a little upon this Fable in his Martyrologie, T^m 3. p. 408.
where speaking of our Martyr, he tells us this of him, Plurimos etiam ad fidem
Christi convertit, simul and Alexandriam uxorem ipsius Datiani (for so he
calls him) usque ad Martyrium confortavit. Nicephorus Callistus, reports this
passage differently from those before him; L. 7. Cap. 15.
as viz. that by his earnest prayers to God, he restored the Empress
Alexandra, which had long been dead, from the powers of Hell and of the grave.
Reginamque Alexandram iamdudum defunctam oratione sola; ab inferis revocavit.
What this should aim at, is as before I said, not altogether so easy to
unriddle, as the former. I read indeed, that Alexandria one of the principal
Cities of the Roman Empire, and at that time the Queen of Afric, revolted
from that State (prompted unto it by the factious plottes of one Achilles) at
the first entrance of Diocletian on the Throne. For which, as many of the
chiefest of them were deservedly put to death; so was the whole City in no
small danger to be utterly destroyed. So witnesses Eusebius. (...). This I
have read I say, and this may well agree with Diocletians putting his Lady
Alexandra to the sword: but then it has no reference unto our Martyr, who had
not any intercourse with the affairs of that tumultuous City. We therefore
must conceive it, that under this Cloud and Parable, the Arians have involved
the state of Alexandria, under George their Bishop. A City which he found
devoted to the memory of their godly Prelate, Athanasius, and therefore dead
to him, and to the Arian party: This City he restored (as they would have us
think) unto a right and lively faith; by his continual prayers and preaching.
A City, which when himself was by the fury of the people, led unto his
death; he boldly comforted, and established in the grounds of saving knowledge:
so far, that for Religions sake, they were even ready to render up their
lives, and to suffer with him. The first of these reflects upon the Fable, as
it is related by Nicephorus; the later, as it is intimated in the words of
Bid. As for the execution done upon that Lady, in the report of Metaphrastes,
it has relation questionless, to that great wrath conceived against this
City by Julian the Apostata, for their tumultuous killing of their Bishop whom
he greatly favored. A wrath so deeply rooted, that had he come with life and
honor from his Persian expedition; he might perhaps have turned his forces
upon them.

(8) This I conceive to be the meaning of the Arian Legends in this passage:
wherein (as also in the former) I could have gladly wished, that those who have
delivered to us the lives and stories of the Saints; had saved me harmless,
from the least occasion of conjecture. I mean, if those which have committed
unto memory the sacred Monuments of the Christian Church; had not so mingled
truth with falsehood, light with darkness, unwarrantable Tales, with Stories
undeniable: and in a word, confounded, as it were into one mass, the Temple of
the living God with Idols. It therefore was an excellent caveat of Melchior
Canus to his Historian, Lib 11. cap. 3.
that he should neither canvasse over idle Pamphlets, nor give belief to old
wives Fables: Nec prius lecta auditave describat, quamea prudenti atque
accurato iudicio expenderet ac seligeret; nor put down any thing into the body
of his History, before he had examined it, whether or no it were agreeable to
truth. For the defect of which, both judgment in the choice, and industry in
the examining; as he does seem to touch a little at Beda, in his English
History, and Gregory in his Dialogues: so does he fall more freely on
Vincentius and on Antoninus Florentinus. Vtrumque horum non tam dedisse operam
ut res vera^ certasque describerent, Ip. l. 11. cap. 6.
qu^m ne nihil omnino praeterirent, quod scriptum in schedulis qubuslibet
reperiretur. It seems (says he) to be the chief design of those two
Authors, not so much to register things true and certain; as not to leave out
any thing which they had seen recorded. As for Iacobus in his Legend, wherein
the Arian fable of the Magitian Athanasius, and that old weather-beaten fiction
of the Dragon; are made up together: we may affirm with reason; that he
concluded with himself, to set down nothing faithfully in the whole Story of
St. George, but his name and Country.

CHAP. III.
(1) A proposition of the two contrary opinions. (2) Calvin the first that ever
bid defiance to St. George. (3) Melanchthon mis-reported by the Papists. (4)
Calvin's opinion in it, by whom seconded. (5) Saint George by whom first made an
Arian Bishop. (6) The principal abettours of this last opinion. (7) No enemy
more dangerous to the Truth, than a great man's error. (8) An examination of
the Arguments drawn from the Canon of Pope Gelasius. (9) And the Authority of
Cardinal Baronius.

(1) THus have we shown, how St. George has suffered even a second
Persecution: how he is made a Martyr, not in his person only, but in his
History. Yet all that has been spoken of him hitherto, is but an easy
Purgatory; in reference to that Hell which is to follow. For if the Legend did
belie him, it only was (as they conceived it) to his greater credit: or if the
Arians mingled any of their leaven with his story, it was to keep alive in
him the memory of a stout Champion of their own; to shroud him under the
protection of our blessed Martyr. But now St. George must either poast away
unto the Land of Faeries; and there remain for ever, with other the Chimaeras
of an idle head: or which is worse, be laid for all eternity in the pit of
horror, with Heretics and Atheists. The only favor which this our curious
and quicke-sighted age, can possibly vouchsafe him; is to affirm it by his
friends, that he had never any being on the earth; for if he stand to that, it
is concluded by his enemies, that without hope of Bail* or any mercy of
mainprise; he must be in Hell. Durus est hic sermo. This is a hard saying, who
can bear it?

(2) And first beginning with those enemies of his, which are most favorable
to him; we find how they resolve it, that there was never any such man, as St.
George the Martyr. I say which are most favorable: for as it is far better
to be well, than simply to be; so is it a more fortunate and blessed state, not
to be at all, than to be always miserable. A founder this opinion had of as
large abilities, as ever the French Church enjoyed, since the time it enjoyed
him. So says incomparable Hooker. A man whose bare assertion is by some
thought of greater credit than proofs and reason in an other. But we that are
not sworn unto him, exempt him not from possibility of error. This were not
to cry down the pretended privilege of St. Peter's Chair; the cause of so
much mischief in Christian Church: but to translate it to Geneva. He in his
third book of the Institutes of Christian Religion, does justly and with good
reason tax the Papists, for attributing to the Saints those honors, which are
due only unto CHRIST. In which abuse (says he) they have so far proceeded,
that now our Saviors Intercession is conceived unprofitable; unless
Hippolitus, Ch.. ^0.. 27.
or George, or such like counterfeits, concur with him. Nil eos Christo
reliquum facere, qui pro nihilo ducunt eius intercessionem, nisi accedant
Georgius, aut Hippolitus, aut similes larvae. So he, and this is (...) a great
deal of resolution in a little Language. Now lest we should mistake our selves
in this word Larva; the learned Doctor Raynolds tells us, De Idol. Eccl. ^ l.
1. c, 5* s. 20.
that his meaning in it is, Georgium similesque nunquam extitisse, that neither
George nor other Saints of that condition, had ever any being. And this
construction he affirms out of Canisius the Jesuit, in his fifth Book de
Maria Virgin. where he upbraids it unto Luther, Calvin, and Melanchthon, that
they had left St. George no place nor room in nature. Certe Canisius Iesuita
agnoscit hanc fuisse Calvini mentem, in Larvarum nomine, quum ait, Nobilissimo
Martyri Georgio, Lutherus, Calvinus, Melancthon alijque Sectarij, nec inter
homines, nec in rerum natura locum reliquum faciunt. So far the Doctors
Commentary upon Calvin's text.

(3) But here I must digress a little, to remove a block which else would
trouble me. For if that Luther and Melancthon, as by Canisius it appears, and
Bellarmine does also say, were of this opinion: then have we done them wrong,
to cast the honor of their voyage and discovery, upon another. A thing in
which I think the Iesu^tes misreport them of set purpose: that so their
victory, in case they could obtain it, might be thought the greater. In
Luther I can meet with nothing in this Argument at all: and in Melancthon as
good as nothing to the purpose. All he affirms is this, that they (the
Papists) have in an imitation of the Gentiles, assigned unto particular Saints,
particular employments: making St. Anne (she was the Mother of our Lady) the
Patroness of Riches, and St. George the GOD of Soldiers. Haeret and hic error
apud doctos, Apol. Aug. ^o^f. art. de Invoc. S.
(these are his words) quod singulis Sanctis certae procurationes commissae
sunt; ita ut Anna divitias largiatur, Georgius tu^atur equites, etc.
Haepersuasiones plane ortae sunt ex ethnicis exemplis. This is all, and this I
verily believe the learned Papists, will not stick at: sure I am, the Church
of England, no enemy unto St. George, has said as much, and was never
quarell'd for it; in the most excellent Homily, against the peril of
Idolatry. What (says the Homily) I pray you, be such Saints with us, to whom
we attribute the defense of certain Countries, but dij tutelares of the
Gentiles, etc. Yea every Artificer and Profession has his special Saint, as a
particular God: as for example, Scholars have St. Nicholas, and St. Gregory;
Painters, St. Luke, etc. Neither lack Soldiers their Mars, and so forth. Thus
are the Romanists affected toward Luther and Melancthon; as old Rome was to
Carthage: apt to believe what ever gulls were raised upon them, Vellcius
Patere. lib. 2.
though in themselves unworthy credit. Idque magis quia volebant Romani
quicquid de Carthaginiensibus diceretur, credere; quam quia credenda
afferebantur. So the Historian.

(4) But to proceed, the next of special note which has rejected this our
Martyr, is Chemnitius; by birth, a German; by profession, a Lutheran: who in
his examination of the Trent doctrine, (writ in the year 1565.) and in his
scanning of the 25. Session of that Council, Page 140.
entitled, de veneratione Sanctorum, thus has it. Quin etiam multos
Pontificij Sanctos venerantur, qui nunquam vel vixerunt, vel in rerum natura
fuerunt, ut Georgium, etc. viz, that those of Rome do worship many Saints,
which never lived upon the Earth; as George and others. So he, and so Chamier a
French man, in his first Tome of Controversies lately published. Who in his
Index points us unto his second book, and sixteenth Chapter, with these words;
Georgius Cappadox fictitius; Tom. 1 l. ^. cap. 16.. 25.
St. George of Cappadocia, a fained person. And in his text he tells us, that
the Papists have transformed the faith of CHRIST, into the superstitions of the
Gentiles: appointing Catharine, in the room of Pallas; St. Christopher, for
Atlas; and St. George, for Perseus. Papistas Christianam pietatem in Ethnicam
Idololatriam transformasse, remque ipsam servasse mutatis nominibus: Catharinam
viz. pro Pallade, Christophorum pro Atlante, Georgium pro Perseo nominantes. To
which three foreigners, we will adjoyne three of our own; all of them able
men, and of great credit in their several ages. And first I will begin with
Mr. Perkins, who affirms it thus. Idol. of the last times, vol. 1. p. 682.
St. George on Horseback, was in former times a representation of our Savior,
who vanquished the Devil for the deliverie of his Church. Now this, and the
like pictures of mysteries, were in process of time reputed pictures of
Saints: and are worshipped at this day of many, as they have formerly been,
for the Images of Saints indeed. To which assertion of our Perkins, In Le^ico
poetico
it may be Stephanus alludeth, saying; Theologi nonnulli existimant fictitium
esse nomen (Georgium) sub quo veteres Christi, Ecclesiam a Satanae tyranide
liberantis, imaginem, and passionis meritum proposuerunt. The next in course of
time (for so I have of purpose ranked them) is the Reverend Doctor Boys, Gosp.
on the a Sunday in Le^t
late Deane of Canterbury. The Romish Church (says he) has Canonized many for
Saints, who can be no better than Devils, etc. So the Papists adore Papias a
Millenarian Heretic; Becket, a great traitor; Sanders, an open Rebel: and
others who were neither Saints in Heaven, nor men on earth, as St. Christopher,
St. George, etc. And in another place. -- For it is doubted, and by Papists of
best note, whether there were any St. George, St. Christoper, Sunday after
Easter.
St. Catharine; Cardinal Bellarmine confessing, that the Legends of these
three Saints are uncertain and Apocryphal, according to the censure of Pope
Gelasius. And last of all, in a Sermon of his on the fifth day of November, --
An Idol, as St. Paul affirms 1. Cor. 8. is nothing: ergo, the Papists in
worshipping St. George, which is nothing, commit abominable Idolatry. To make
an end, we will conclude and shut up all with that of Dr. Cracanthorpe, in his
defense of the Church of England, against the calu^nies of that desperate
Renegado, M. Antonio de Dominis: who speaking of the gross and palpable
idolatries of Rome, agrees in this particular, with those that went before
him; though in a different language. Nihil de eo dico, Cap. 60.. 10.
quod pro Sanctis figmenta saepenumero vestra colitis, and invocatis S.
Georgium, S. Christophorum. Mihi vide. Non Sancti, non vel homines isti fuere,
sed allegoriae, and symbola. They were not men (says he) but allegories, as it
were, and symbols. Which last he labors to confirm, out of the testimony of
Baronius; where he defends against Iacobus de Voragine, Annot. in Romans Apr. 2,
that our St. George, as he is commonly described in picture, is to be counted
rather Symbolicall, than Historical. Picturam illam S. Georgij, qua eques
armatus effingitur, etc. symboli potius, quam Historiae alicuius opinor esse
expressam imaginem. Thus the Cardinal.

(5) Thus have we showed, how, and by whom, St. George, whom for so many Ages
the whole Church reckoned for a Saint: is accounted no body! And well it were,
had not the Church more shamefully deceived her self, and hers; than in the
placing of an Idol in their Rood-lofts, for the people to fall down and
worship. But in the next place, we shall see it laid unto her charge; that she
has made them worship, not an Idol, not a vain fiction; but even a wicked
Tyrant, a most damnable and bloody Heretic. Calvin at first took an occasion
to except against St. George: and there was presently enough of those who out
of reverend affection which they bare unto the man; did without more ado,
concur with him in the same opinion. And so it stood until the year 1596.
when Doctor Raynolds published his so learned and celebrated work, entitled
De Idololatria Ecclesiae Romanae. A man, to speak no less of him, than in
truth and verity he has deserved, of rare abilities, a walking Library;
(...) in the words of Aristotle, and absolutely accomplished in all the parts
and ways of learning. This great and famous Scholar, considering with
himself, how little likelihood there was, that the whole Church should be so
generally well devoted unto the memory of one, that had no being; especially so
many Authors, of which his infinite reading could inform him, concurring in
the mention and report of such a Martyr: could not see well, how that conceit
of Calvin's might any longer be supported. Yet loath withal, to loose that
excellent advantage, which might accrue unto the maine of his Design, from
that Imposture; if it should fall out to be so: he rather chose to make Saint
George an Arian Bishop, in which devise he thought he should receive good
countenance from Antiquity; than fall upon the former course, which he
conceived unwarrantable. His reasons are derived first from the reverend
authority of Athanasius and Greg. Nazianzen, L. 1. ca. 5.. 20.
by whom it is reported, how George by birth a Cappadocian, and an Arian by
profession, was by Constantius the Emperor, installed Bishop of Alexandria:
and being slain in a Commotion or uproare of the people, was by some
afterward reputed as a Martyr, though undeservedly; as it appears (says he)
in Epiphanius. His words are these. Namque Apol. de fuga, and Apol. ^. Ep.
adsoiitar vit. ageutes, and ad ubique Orthod.
Athanasius and Ora. in laud. Ath.
Greg. Nazianz. testantur Georgium Cappadocem, hominem improbum, haereticum
Arianum, malum genere, peiorem animo, cum militari manu and satellitibus
Alexandriam, a Constantio missum pro Episcopo eius urbis se gessisse. Amm.
Marc. lib 22.
Qui cum ab Ethnicis crudelissime sub Iuliano Apostata, peremptus esset,
cadaverque eius igne crematum, and cineres in mare proiceti, ne honorifice
tanquam Martyr a Christianis sepeliretur a nonnullis postea pro Martyr coli
coepit, immerito, ut eos redarguens docet Haeres. 76.
Epiphanius. vertumamen coli coepit. After (says he) his Acts and passion,
being composed and published by his Sect^ries, found such applause and
entert^inment: that the whole Church both E^st and West thus trump'd and
baffled by the Heretics; assumed their George into the number of the holy
Martyrs. Immo si accuratius animadvertatur, etc. patebit universalem Ecclesiam,
id est, orientalem and occidentalem, ab Arianis delusam, Georgium Arianum pro
Martyr coluisse. For further proof of this, he tells us of Pasicrates Apud
Surium de probat. S. Hist. Tom. 2,
and Metaphrastes, of Hist. part. 1. tit. 8. c. 1.. 23.
Antoninus, and Specul. Histor. l. 22. c. 131.
Vincentius, that they make mention all of them, of that great skyrmish which
our Martyr had with Athanasius a Magitian: and that he is, by them and others,
said to be borne in Cappadocia; In Martyrol. 9. Call. Maij.
as was also George the Arian. Add hereunto, that Beda makes him suffer under
Dacianus King of Persia, a Prince that had no less than seventy Kings at his
Command; and that the Arian Legend cyted in Baronius, does also report it, save
that the under Princes are there numbered to be seventy five: Sed unum est
idemque somnium; but this (says he) is but the selfsame Dream, a little
altered in the telling.

(6) The way thus opened by a man of that esteem, as Doctor Reynolds always
carried; and the opinion countenanced by such variety of learning, such
multiplicity of allegations: no marvel, if without further question, it found
a willing entertainment: Not at home only, but in all parts abroad, where the
Idolatries of Rome were talked of, L. 9. Cap. 21.
and disproved. And first, we have Polanus, in his Syntagma Theologicum,
printed anno 1606. so well affected in the cause, so well devoted to the
judgment of that learned Doctor, that he is loath to change the words: for
thus he has it. Lib. 9. cap. 21.
Georgius ille Cappadox, quem Romanenses pro Sancto colunt, fuit homo improbus,
haereticus Arianus, malus genere, pejor animo, qui cum militari manu and
satellitibus Alexandriam a Constantio missus, pro Episcopo cius urbis se
gessit. Qui cum ab Ethnicis sub Iuliano Apostata crudelissime peremptus esset,
cadaverque eius igne crematum, and cineres in mare proiecti; a nonnullis postea
pro Martyr coli coepit, sed immerito: ut eos redarguens docet Epiphanius. This
he, and this the very same with that which was before recyted. Which in almost
the selfsame words, was before him repeated by the learned Iunius in his
Animadversions on the Cardinal; published in the year 1600. both of them
drawing from the same Fountain. The next in course of time, the Reverend Peter
Moulin, late Preacher to the Church in Paris. He in his answer unto Card.
Peron, in the defense of our most excellent Sovereign now with God; has one
whole Chapter with this title: viz. Quelle asseurance l' eglise Roman a que
les Saints qu' elle invoque sont vrayement Saints; L. 9 C. 5.
What good assurance those of Rome can have of this, that those Saints which
commonly they worship, were Saints indeed. And there we read it, Combien
absurd est la fable de St. George combattant a cheval contre un Dragon? Chacun
scait que les ennemis de St. Athanase l' accusoyent d'estre Magitien, et que
son ennemi capital fut George Arien, lequel empiera son seige. Don't appert que
ce George estoit un Heretic Arien. How foolish and ridiculous (says he) is
that old Fable of St. George on Horseback, encountering with the Dragon. Every
man knows that the enemies of St. Athanasius accused him of Sorcerie and
Magic; and that his capital enemy was George the Arian, which intruded
himself into the Church of Alexandria: whence it is evident, that this their
George can be no other, than that Arian Heretic. The reason is, Car sa vie
dit qu' ill a eu des grands combats contre le Magitien Athanase: because his
Legend tells us, that he had many bickerings with the Magitian Athanasius.
After him follows Dr. Primrose: who in a Letter to my Lord of Exeter now
being, and extant in a little book entitled the Reconciler, touching the
visibility and being of the Roman Church; does thus express himself, and in
these words. Nay as Calvin said truly, CHRIST, in the Roman Church, is hardly
known amongst the Saints: of whom some be in Heaven, as the Apostles, etc. and
some in Hell, as St. George an Arian Heretic, and bloody Butcher of true
Christians. So he: and this is contrary to the proverb, short and sour. We
will conclude this rank with Dr. Hakewell, in his Examination of the common
error, touching the decay of nature. The first whole Chapter of which work is
employed in this, that there are many of those opinions which are commonly
received both in ordinary speech, and in the writings of learned men; which
notwithstanding are by others either manifestly convinced of falsehood, or at
leastwise suspected justly of it. And in particular. In History
Ecclesiastical (says he) it is commonly received, Sect. 3.. 3.
that St. George was an holy Martyr, and that he conquered the Dragon: whereas
Dr. Raynolds proves him to have bin both a wicked man, and an Arian, by the
testimony of Epiphanius, Athanasius, and Greg. Nazianzen. And Baronius
himself in plain terms affirms, Apparet totam illam de Actis Georgij
fabulam, fuisse commentum Arianorum; It appears that the whole story of St.
George is nothing else but a forgerie of the Arians. Yet was he received (as
we know) as a canonized Saint through Christendom; and to be the Patron, both
of our nation, and of the most honorable Order of Knighthood in the world.

(7) So far the Doctor, who in the entrance of his Work, and almost the
first words of it, has given us an especial Item out of Pliny: which and the
words that follow, I shall here transcribe, that so his own sword may be
turned against him, and against those also, both of the same and the other
party. Thus he begins. Nec alius pronior fidei lapsus, quam ubi rei falsae
gravis Author exttiit, says Pliny, Men do not any where more easily err,
than where they follow a guide, whom they presume they may safely trust. They
cannot quickly be persuaded, that he who is in reputation for knowledge and
wisdom, and whose Doctrine is admired in weighty matters; should mistake in
points of lesser consequence: the greatest part of the world being fed rather
with the names of their Masters, and with the reverend respect they bear their
persons or memories; than with the soundness and truth of the things they
teach. Wherein that of Vadianus, is, and ever will be verified, Magnos
errores, magnorum virorum autoritate persuasi, transmittimus; We deliver over,
as it were by tradition and from hand to hand, great Errors, being thereunto
induced by the authority of great men. So he; and certainly there could not
any thing be spoken more unto the disadvantage of himself, and of all those
also which have declared themselves against St. George; the Leaders of each
several side excepted only. Calvin, a reverend man, a man whose Doctrine we
admire in weighty matters: and shall we think he is mistaken in points of
lesser consequence? Reynolds, a learned man, a man in Reputation both for
Knowledge and for Wisdom; and can he also be mistaken? Nothing less. Honesta
potius esse vitia, quam turpem Catonem: We rather must believe that truth is
falsehood, than that such able men, so much advanced in the opinion of the
world, should maintain an Error. So dangerous a matter is it, for men of
great esteem and credit in the ways of learning, to maintain an Error;
because their affirmavits, are by the greater part of men, received without
examination.

(8) But it is now time, that we return unto St. George, whom we have left
alone to make good his party, against these several Squadrons: both which
already have defied him, and are now very eager for the battle. And
questionless, we might expect a bloody day, could they agree among
themselves: for here is Ephraim against Manasses, and Manasses against
Ephraim; but both together against Judah. And though we might according to the
ordinary course of War, preserve our selves entire, and lie aloof in
expectation of the issue; while they contend and fight it out among themselves:
yet we will do our best to give each party satisfaction, though we despair
to make them friends. I say to give each party satisfaction, which may soon
be done: there being but one argument, more than the credit of their Leaders,
alleged on either party. Of these the one is brought on the behalf of
those, which hold St. George to be a fiction, or non ens; out of the Canon and
Decree of Pope Gelasius: the other, on their side which make our S. an Arian
Bishop, out of the writings of the famous Cardinal Baronius. These we will
answer first, reserving such as may be urged on the behalf of Calvin; and have
already been alleged by Doctor Reynolds; to their several times and places.
And first it is alleged by the late Reverend Doctor B^ys, that Bellarmine
confesses that the Legend of St. George is uncertain and Apocryphal,
according to the censure of Pope Gelasius. In this I will not take upon me to
be Bellarmines Attorney. ^^de (...) Sanct. c. 20.
Aetatem habet, he is old enough: Let him in Gods name be his own Advocate,
and answer for himself. A thing to which he may be easily entreated, and
therefore makes reply, that true it is, some of the stories of the Saints are
both uncertain and Apocryphal. What then? Yet notwithstanding it does not
follow thereupon, that therefore there were no such Saints. Resp. Sanctorum
quorundam historias Apocryphas esse, and incertas; non tamen propterea Sanctos
ipsos nunquam fuisse. As for the censure of Pope Gelasius, we grant indeed
(says he) that he has noted, the story of St. George which was then extant,
to be Apocryphal: but we must also tell you, that in the very same Decree
and Canon, he does afford Saint George all due and pious honors. Quocirca
Gelasins Pontifex Historiam Georgij (quae tune exstabat) inter Apocryphas
numerat; and tamen ipsum S. Georgium colendum esse affirmat. So Bellarmine: and
how this testimony of his, out of the Canon of Gelasius, may be produced to
the discredit of Saint George; V part. 2. chap. ^.. 8.9.10.11.
is, I confess, above my reason. But of Gelasius, and his Canon, more
hereafter; when we produce them on our party.

(9) The other argument, is on their part, who make St. George an Arian Bishop;
drawn from Baronius, in his Annotations on the Roman Martyrologie, Apr. 23.
And I may well say it is drawn from him, for even a blind man may perceive,
that it came not from him willingly, no nor naturally neither. Baronius
himself (says Doctor Hakewell) in plain terms affirms, Apparet totam
illam de Actis Georgij fabulam fuisse commentum Arianorum, It appears that the
whole story of George, is nothing else but a forgerie of the Arians. What
then? Might not Baronius himself be deceived? And shall we cast away a Saint
to please a Cardinal? For granting that Baronius himself said it, yet was it
only the opinion of Baronius; and other men, as good as he, have said the
contrary. But certainly Baronius himself tells us no such matter: I am sure
he means it not. Not means it I am sure: for had he thought the whole story
of St. George, only to be a forgerie of the Arians; he would not then have
took such pains, to reckon up so many Authors (as he there does) in whom
there is such honorable mention made of our blessed Martyr: Nor does Baronius
himself say so, absolutely, and with relation to the whole story of Saint
George: but only relatively, in reference to one particular passage, inserted
by the Arians into his History. The process of the whole is this. The
Cardinal makes mention of the Decree and Canon of Gelasius, wherein the
History of George the Martyr is r^ckoned as Apocryphal: and thereupon goes
on to tell us, what pains himself had taked in search of that exploded story
so branded by Gelasius. At last (says he) tumbling about the Vatican, I found
a certain History of St. George full of prodigious lies, and such as have not
any likelinesse with other miracles. Annotat. in R. Martyrol. Apr. 23.
Insunt praeterea illic quaedam accepta ab haereticis atque Gentilibus; ut
conflictus ille Georgij cum Athanasio Mago. Alludit nimirum impius author ad
Georgium Arianum Episcopum invasorem sedis Alexandriae, etc. Athanasium enim
Magum ab Arianis appellatum, Acta conciliabuli Tyrij satis docent. Besides
(says he) there are some passages therein, borrowed no question from the
Heretics, as how that George should have great bickerings with the Magitian
Athanasius: the impious Author questionless alluding unto George of
Alexandria, and that extreme hatred which he bare to holy Athanasius; whom in
the Conventicle of Tire, they accused of Sorcery. Thereupon he inferres, ex
quibus sane apparet totam illam fabulam de actis Georgij fuisse commentum
Arianorum. Construe me this, and we shall find Baronius himself no enemy
unto St. George; but only to the Arian Legend, which was extant of him. Thus
have we seen how much Baronius himself has affirmed; though not in such
plain terms, as we expected: what Dr. Reynolds proves we shall see hereafter.

CHAP. IIII.
(1) A Conjecture at those reasons which may make the History of St. George
suspected. (2) The Church of Rome too prodigal, in the bestowing Divine
honors. (3) False Saints no prejudice unto the true. (4) The lives of Saints,
how fabulously and vainly written. (5) What might induce the
Church-Historians, to that vein of writing. (6) The undertaking of Aloysius
Lippomanus: and how well performed. (7) The inter-mixture of vain Fables, no
prejudice to truth of Story. (8) Of Arthur, Guy of Warwick, and Sir Bevis. (9)
Haereticall dreams and practices, not able to bear down the Truth. (10) An
application of the whole unto St. George.

(1) THus are we come at last to the maine shocke and fury of the battle:
wherein if our success be answerable to the beginnings, we need not doubt,
but that St George may keep his place in the heaven of glories. A matter which
I have less cause to fear, because I find not here, in the first place,
either authorities or reasons, set to charge upon me. Only a single name, and
a bare assertion, stand ready to defend it self, and make good the day: as
Scaeva once opposed himself in the defense of Caesar's trenches, against the
whole force of the Pompeians. A name, I must confess, which I gladly honor:
and doubt not but there was, as he conceived it, reason enough to justify and
confirm his saying; although he pleased not to express it. Yet give me leave
to say, that it is Reason and Proof chiefly, which ennobleth and commends an
Author: and not the greatness of his Name, or confidence of affirmation. Et
quanquam in autore satis rationis est, ratio tamen quemlibet magnum autorem
facit; as we read it in Velleius. I say, I doubt not, but that Reverend and
famous man who first declared himself openly, and in terms express, against
our blessed Saint and Martyr: did not oppose himself against an History so
generally received, as this; without some reasons, which might incline and
moove him to it. Which reasons since it has not pleased him to deliver to us
in his writings: we will make bold, as near as possibly we can; to conjecture
at them. A work of no great difficulty unto any, who has the least
acquaintance with the affairs and passages of the Roman Church, as they then
stood; when first the Story of St. George was called in question. I conceive
it thus. The Romish Legends, and not those only, but even the public service
of that Church, had made St. George, just like to Perseus in the Poet, in
killing of a monstrous Dragon; and freeing of a Lady, sole Daughter to a King,
from his unmercifull cruelty. Those stories also, which reported of his Death
and Martyrdom, had in them (as it might be thought) many gross and notable
absurdities: as that he suffered under I know not what Dacianus, King of
Persia, a Monarch that had under him no less than 70. tributarie Princes,
though others have it, under the Emperor Diocletian, this Dacianus being then
President, or (as it were) Proconsul. Now being so that they agreed not with
themselves; and that there never was, at or about that time, a King of Persia
of that name, and greatness of command; nor any such like action to be found
in true antiquity, as his encounter with the Dragon: This might occasion, and
not without good reason, that the whole History became suspected; and
therefore that S. George might fairly be dismissed out of the Calendar. Add
unto this, that shameful liberty which the Man of Rome had took unto
himself, of Canonizing Saints, and ordering the dignities and powers of
Heaven; and that profuse and lavish prodigality, wherewith he did confer
the divinest honors on unworthy persons, and sometimes such as had no being:
and we shall quickly see, that Calvin had some reason, why he reputed our St.
George among his Counterfeits or Larva's; though, as before I said, it did not
please him to express it. These are, as I conceive it, the reasons of
especial moment: and these we can as easily conjure down, as we raised them
up.

(2) And first, not to say any thing of that arrogant liberty assumed by them
of Rome, in making Saints; nor of those many Ceremonies, which they use in that
solemnity; both of them borrowed from that so famous (...) of heathen Rome,
whereby their Emperors were enrolled among their Gods: not to say any thing of
these, it is not to be questioned, but that the Church of Rome has been
exceeding prodigal of that greatest and most heavenly honor. We (know
indeed) that innocent and pious Christianity in the first times, registered
those as Saints, and those only, which had confessed their Faith in CHRIST,
even to the death; and lost their Lives in testimony of a good Conscience: or
else had otherwise nobly deserved of their common Mother, by their pains in
writing, or assiduitie in Preaching; in the defense of Sacred truth against the
growth of Heresy. But afterward the Church of Rome, advanced into the room
of Christ; and equal in her own conceit, unto all that was called God, if not
above: proclaimed them also to be Saints, which had contested in her quarrels,
how unjust and treacherous soever. So that the most rebellious sort of
Subjects, became at last most capable of this high Honor; the greatest which
that Church could possibly usurp: if at the least, their opposition which they
made against their Prince, might seem to tend to the advancement of
Ecclesiastical liberty. Of which strange rank of Saints, (not to name
Anselme, Dunstan, or the rest before them) was that stout Rebel Becket, in the
former times: Clement, that killed the King of France, and Garnet of the
Powder Plot; both Sainted, though not solemnly, in the present. Nor was the
Church of Rome excessive only in this kind, to such as might plead merit in
the Catholic cause, forsooth: but even to those, of whose existence any time
upon the earth, there is not any the least ground or possibility. Witness St.
Longesse or Longinus, the name (as they persuade us) of that Soldier, that
pierced our Saviors side: which is indeed not any thing but a very Spear, (in
Greek (...)) composed into a name. And next to him, St. Loy, the Patron, if
you please, of Cattaile; which is indeed, only two nails, (the name derived
from the Greek (...)) two of those nails conceived to have been used about
our Saviors crucifying.

(3) All this we grant, and this is nothing to the prejudice of our St. George.
The Popes have been too prodigal in bestowing that divine and heavenly title.
What then? Therefore shall they which were exalted to that honor, in the
common suffrage of the Church, before the Popes usurped this power; be
presently degraded? This were no equity. Far be it from us to do after this
manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: and that the righteous should be
as the wicked, that be (I say) far from us. This was the Argument of Abraham
in the behalf of those few good and godly men which were in Sodom: and such an
argument it was, that God Almighty (could not, I will not say, but sure I am
he) did not answer; but by yeeelding to it. Hector Boethius, and the Author of
the British History, have made a Catalogue of diverse Kings, which I persuade
my self had never any being, unless in their conceits that made them: and
yet it cannot be denied, but there are many passages in both those stories
worthy credit; and many Kings, whose acts and beings are not questioned. It was
an Heavenly Justice in Almighty God, not to destroy the righteous with the
wicked: but to be willing to reprieve that great and populous City of Sodom,
from destruction; for the sake only of ten just and virtuous persons. How
unjust therefore were our judgment, only because of some few Larva's,
counterfeit Saints, as we may call them: to prejudice so many of the true and
real, as curiosity or spleen may call in question.

(4) A second circumstance which makes the story of St George suspected, is,
that his life has in it many vain and gross absurdities; and some such
actions fathered on him, as might far better in appearance, sort with a Saint
in Ovid, than in the credit and belief of holy Church. An accusation, which we
will not plead to, unless in saying guilty; nor will the learned Papists
traverse the enditement: So that we have on all parts, confitentem reum,
Detradend Discipl. L. 5.
a plain confession of the fact. The learned and judicious Vives plainly tells
us, with what great grief and sorrow he did commonly complain unto himself;
when he considered with what care and faithfulness the acts of Hanibal and
Alexander were committed to posterity. At vero Apostolorum, Martyrum, denique
Divorum nostrae religionis, maximis tenebris fere ignorari: When in the mean
time, the Acts of the Apostles (understand those written by Abdias Babylonius,)
those also of the Martyrs, and other Saints acknowledged in the Christian
Church, were even quite lost amidst the dark and cloudy fogs of ignorant
Superstition. Much also to this purpose the Complaint of Melchior Canus; L. 11.
Cap. 6.
an honest man as I conjecture, if ever any was of the Dominicks Order.
Dolenter hoe dico, multo severius a Laertio vitas Philosophorum Scriptas, quam
a Christianis vitas Sanctorum; longeque in corruptius and integrius Sueto nium
res Caesarum exposuisse, quam exposuerint Catholici, non res dico Imperatorum,
sed Martyrum, Virginum, and Confessorum. I speak it to my grief (says he)
that the Philosophers have had their lives more perfectly digested by Laertius;
than the Saints theirs, by Christians: and that Suetonius has recorded the
lives and actions of the Caesar's, with more integrity; than we have put in
writing, I say not those of Princes, but even of Martyrs, Confessors, and
sacred Virgins. Nor does he stop here, but tells us presently of those fabulous
and idle writers; Ecclesiae Christi cum nihil vtilitatis attulisse, tum
incommodationis plurimum: That they not only brought no profit to the Church;
but a full measure of discredit. A thing which might be easily exemplified in
their St. Christopher, St. Dennis, Hippolitus the Martyr whom before we spoke
of; and in whom not, that ever fell into the hands of any of the Legends: but
what need further proof when we have confession?

(5) Three things there were, which might induce the writers of these dark and
superstitious times, to prosecute this vein of writing: not to say any thing
of that which is objected commonly, viz. that they intended only, aut
quaestum, aut errore^, either their own profit, or the peoples ignorance. Of
these, the first might be a purpose, pious in the opinion of that age, by
setting out the Histories of the Saints, with fained miracles, and wonders
which they never did: to gain unto their shrines more multitudes of people,
and a greater credit, and perhaps a noble emulation. And this in imitation of
those ancient Heroes among the Gentiles, who therefore did derive their
pedigree from Heaven, that so they might more constantly be prompted to
Heroicke undertakings. Vt eo modus animus humanus veluti divinae stirpis
fiduciam gerens, De civit. Dei lib. 3. cap. 4.
res magnas aggrediendas praesumat audacius, etc. As St. Austin has it out of
Varro. Possessed with which conceit, they so composed the lives and actions of
the Saints, as Xenophon his Cyrus, or as Virgil his Aeneas; though somewhat
more incongruously: not so much writing what they did; as what they thought
most proper for such Saints to do, and what they wished were done. Nam quae de
Sanctis Scripta sunt, De trad. D^scip lib. 5.
praeter pauca quaedam, multis foedat a sunt commentis, dum qui scribit
affectui suo indulget; and non quae egit Divus, sed quae ille egisse eum
vellet, exponit, etc, So Vives in the place before alleged. The second was a
kind of indiscretion in the choice of argument; while such as only meddled in
the Histories of the Church, chose rather to collect together, what ever fables
or prodigious Acts had been reported: than that they would be thought to leave
out any thing, which they had met with in discourse or reading. This we have
touched at once already; nor will I more insist upon it, Loc. q. supr.
than in relating that of Canus: viz. Gravissimos aliquando viros, praesertim
in prodigijs describendis sparsos rumores excepisse, and scriptis etiam ad
posteros retulisse. The last might be a purpose, to relate such passages, with
which they saw the common people well affected; and which had found already
some good acceptance with the Vulgar: who for the most part are delighted with
strange reports, and matters above ordinary apprehension. Canus loc. Com. lib.
11. cap. 6.
Signa itaque nonnulla and prodigia Sancti quoque memoriae prodiderunt, non quo
ea libonter credidissent, sed ne deesse fidelium votis viderentur. And in the
words immediately before, Quod vulgus sentiebant non tantum ea facile miracula
credere, sed and impense flagitare. So that we may affirm it well of those
Church-Historians, (Church-Poets, as my Lord of St. Albons rightly called them)
what the Commedian tells us in his Prologue, of himself.

Poeta cum primum animum ad scribendum appulit
Terence in Andria.
Id sibi negotij credidit solum dari;
Populo ut placerent, quas fecisset fabulas.
Thus Poets when they first their minds apply,
In loo^er verse to frame a Comedy.
Think there is nothing more for them to do,
Than please the people which they speak unto.
There is another reason, which perhaps might well be added; which is, these
large and eloquent Orations made in the annual commemoration of the Saints
departed: Decad. 1. l. 8.
whereby their Acts and virtues were set forth by all the strength of Oratory.
This Livie makes to be a cause, why the precedent acts of the noblest Romans
came so corrupted to his hands: and this we may apply in our present argument.
Vitiatam memoriam funebribus laudibus reor, falsisque imaginum titulis; dum
familia ad sequaeque famam rerum gestarum, honorumque, fallente mendacio
trahunt. Where we may note, that one occasion also was, false images, or
rather false inscriptions on their Images: the flattering deceits of Pictures
and the Carver: Inde certe singulorum gesta, and publica monumenta rerum
confusa, nec quisquam aequalis temporibus illis scriptor, quo satis certo
autore stetur. So the Historian.

(6) To remedy this mischief, in which the Church and Saints had so long
suffered; it was given out, by Aloysius Lippomanus then Bishop of Verona, that
he would undertake the lives and stories of the Saints; and write them so, as
both the Church and they might be free from scandal. L. 11. C. 6.
This Canus tells us, was exceeding hotly talked of at the Trent Council: but
withal he tells us this, Sed hanc m^hi adhuc videre non licuit, That it never
was his luck to see it. Had he been yet alive; he might perchance have seen
what Lippomanus has performed: but how far short of his own boasts, and the
great expectation of the world; is easy to be seen by any of his readers. He
has indeed done somewhat in it; De Script. Eccl. in presb. Ach.
and Bellarmine his friend, (who styles him vir gravissimus, a Reverend man)
affirms that he has done it ex probatis aut horibus, out of approoved and
trusty Authors. But certainly Chemnitius has more nearly hit the mark than
any other: by whom we are informed, that all whjch had been done by Lippomanus
in this argument, Exam. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25.
was but the publishing of the former Fables of the Legend, under the names of
ancient writers; bestowing on them only a new dress, and a fairer Title Page.
Cumque aureae quondam Lombardica historiae fabellae, toti jam mundo foeleant;
novo artificio sub praetextu quasi veterum and Graecorum, eadem fabula a
Lippomano and Surio (this Surius has scarce done any thing but bettered
Lippomanus in his method) quam antea propter actores explosam putant, rursus in
theatrum adfertur. So he; nor could the truth it self have spoke more truly.

(7) By this we may perceive, how great a room uncertain, and sometimes
profane relations, have taken up in Ecclesiastical History: that part thereof
especially which treats of the Lives and Acts of Saints and Martyrs. A thing
which might the more be wondered at, if the affairs of State, and secular
occurrences, had not a little also of the same leaven, In Proem.
molded with the^. Livie assures us, that the affairs of Italy, before the
walls of Rome were laid, Poeticis magis decora fabulis, quam incorruptis
rerum gestarum monumentis tradebantur; Were more set out by fabulous
traditions, than any warrantable evidence of truth. Gellius is bold to give
Herodotus, whom Tully calls Historiae Patrem, Noct. At. l. 3.
the style of Fabler, (Fabulator): Fl. Vopiscus more tartly, as more generally,
neminem Historicorum non aliquid mentitum esse; that there was never any
History without some falsehoods. What then? Is therefore all false which we
find in Dionysius of the Kings of Alba? Or shall we think that Xerxes, and the
other Persian Kings never made any expedition into Greece? Or that no credit
may be given unto profane and civil stories? This were a course, not only to
make question of the times before us, whether that we had Grandfathers or not,
or any Ancestors: but also to instruct posterity to make like doubts of us,
and of those public actions which are now upon the stage. Aeneas is not
therefore to be thought a Knight of Faery Land, the issue of an idle brain, a
fiction or Non ens; because the Poets has expressed him, with some additions
more than real. Nor may we think, that there was never such a Town or Seige
as that of Troy; no Priamus, no Agamemnon, no Achilles: because the Father of
the Muses, Homer, has made more of it in his most accomplished Poem; than may
perhaps agree in all the parts and members of it, with the truth of story. It
is reported by St. Gregory of Tours, Hist. l. 1. c. 30.
that Dionysius, Bishop of the Parisians, the now St. Denis of the Frenchmen,
as I take it, did suffer Martyrdom under Decius: B. Dionysius Parisiorum
Episcopus, diversis pro Christi nomine affectus poenis, praesentem vitam gladio
imminente finivit; as he there has it. This I persuade my self we may
believe without much danger, although we give at all no further credit to the
Legend: where we are told how far he ran after his Execution, having his
head between his hands. And we may well believe that Simon Air was Major of
London; that Crispin and his brother Crispianus were both Martyrs, which is
true in story: although we credit not those things which are reported of them,
to the honor of the Gentle-craft forsooth, in idle Pamplets. But what need
more be said? He that condemns the Histories and lives of Saints, because of
some untruthes which are extant in them: may by the same reason, call in
question all antiquity; and make some scruple, whether or not; there ever was
a time called Yesterday. Denomination according to the rules of Logic, takes
after the more sound and excellent parts, of the thing to be denominated: and
therefore we should rather judge those stories to be true, because of many
certain truths; than reckon them as false, because of some suspected
falsehoods, which are noted in them.

(8) For proof of which, and that the intermixture of vain fables ought not
to be a prejudice to the truth of story; we cannot meet with more fair
instances, than here at home. Polydore tells us, that the British Bards and
Chroniclers had made their Arthur, not much unlike Orlando, one of the twelve
Peers so much talked of: the stories of them both, equally fabulous and
foolish. De hoc (Arthuro) propter ingentes pariter corporis vires, Histor.
Angl. l. 3
atque animi virtutes, posteritas ea ferme praedicavit, quae de Rolando memoria
nostra apud Italos decantantur. And to that purpose Malmesbury, Hic ille est
Arthurus de quo Britonum nugae hodicque delirant. Caxton has made a volume of
his noble Acts, L. 1. de gestis Angl.
and of the Acts of his so memorated Knights of the Round Table; collected out
of all the vain reports which the world made of him. And in the Spanish
Romances it is delivered, that after his great battle fought with Mordred, he
was turned into a Crow, and that he is expected daily by his people: and that
for this cause England is so full of Crows; it being of a truth (say they)
that since that time no Englishmen durst ever kill them. What then? Shall we
conclude that therefore there is nothing true of Arthur; that therefore there
was no such man? This were to vilify the credit of our best Historians, who
tell us of twelve notable and famous overthrowes which he gave the Saxons. This
were to frustrate altogether that ample testimony given of him by the Monk of
Malmesbury aforesaid; who calls him the support and stay of his expiring
Nation. Dignus plane (says he) quem non fallaces sominarent fabulae, Lot. ut
supp.
sed veraces praedicarent historiae: quippe qui labantem patriam diu
sustinuerit, infractasque civium mentes ad bellum acuerit. The like may also be
affirmed of Sr. Guy of Warwick, who^ in our English Pamphlets we have made
enamoured of a fair Lady named Phillis, for love of who^, (or rather upon
whose displeasure) he became a Knight. adventurer; famous in foreign Countries for
his brave exployts against the enemies of our Religion: not to say any thing of
the Dun-Cow of Dunsmor^-heath; and others of that nature. And yet for certain,
such a man as Guy there was, a noble Champion of the English, against their
enemies the Danes: and of eternal memory for his fight and vanquishment of
the Giant Colebrond. This Camden testifies, and with him others of our
Antiquaries; no friends to fond traditions and ungrounded Fables. Thus have
they also dealt with Beavoyse Earl of Southampton at the coming in of the
Normans. Camden in Belgi^*
Vir bellica laud florentissimus, as Camden calls him, A man of rare abilities
in the arts of war; and one that gave the Normans a great overthrow in the
batta^le of Cardiffe, anno 1070. Yet look upon him in those idle Rhythmes
which are extant of him, his many victories upon the Saracens; his prosperous
loves with the Lady Iosian the Soldans Daughter; his fight with Ascapart, and
entertaining of him for his Page; his good Horse Arundell, from whence the
ancient Castle of that name, must need be called so; and other such like
follies: and then what shall we find in the whole story but infinite
absurdities? So true is that of Camden, Dum Monachi fabellis fictis, and
commentitijs, [ Beavo^ium hunc] sudarunt celebrare, fortissima eius facta
crassis occultarunt tenebris. And to this purpose Milles, in the Catalogue of
Honor. This is that Beavoys of Southampton, whose valor was so great, that
the Monks thought they could not extol him sufficiently unless they besmeared
his praises with fictions and Fables.

(9) As little able are the vain dreams and practices of Heretics to bear
down the truth; as are the fictions of the Legendaries, or such traditions as
have found acceptance with the vulgar. It is conceived that Peter's travailes,
or the Itinerarium Petri ascribed to Clement, was composed by Heretics:
certain it is, that it is branded in Gelasius Canon, for Apocryphal. Yet
questionless this were an Argument not worthy any answer, but contempt and
laughter; should any hence infer, that therefore St. Peter never crossed any
Seas, or made any journeys, for the enlargement of the Faith. Pope Leo, the
first and best of that roaring name, was by the Arians said to favor their
opinions; and in the golden Legend it is reported of him, that indeed he was
inclined, at least, unto that party: but I should reckon him of more Faith,
than Charity, that would believe it on such weak and faulty grounds. In like
manner. The Fathers of the sixth Council of Carthage, Jewels answ. to the
Reply. Art. 4. Sect. 6.
among whom was Saint Austin, found by much industry and search, that they of
Rome, for the advancement of their pride and affected tyranny, had falsified
the Canons of the great Council held at Nice. Should therefore they have
publicly abjured that famous Council? Or judge the whole Heretical, because
one passage of it was corrupted? This had been such a manner of proceeding, as
might have made those Reverend Fathers, for ever odious; and their memories
condemned in all public monuments. They therefore made inquiry at Alexandria,
and Constantinople, for the true Canons of that Council: and having found them
out, without impeaching in the least manner, the honor of that famous Synod;
returned such answer to the Pope, as his fact deserved. This also ought to be
our method in the examining of Stories; not to suspect, and much less to
condemn the whole, because of some one part corrupted and unsavorie: but
rather to cut off the part infected, and to cast it from us, ne pars sincera
trahatur; that so it be no prejudice or danger to the rest of it, which
continues sound. So shall we perfectly make good that saying of St. Paul
commended to us in this present business by Gelasius: viz. Omnia probate, etc.
Try all things, but hold fast that only which is good.

(10) To draw unto an end, and to apply this whole discourse unto the present
argument; we conclude it thus. We grant St. Longesse and St. Loy to be
false, and counterfeit, (not to say any thing of those, who are suspected
only, but not so well convicted of the like intrusion:) and that the Pope has
been too prodig^ll of those Celestial honors, of which he has usurped a
disposing power. But this, as I conceive it, no prejudice unto St George, who
was acknowledged for a Saint before the Popes usurped that lawless power of
doing any thing in Heaven: before those Counterfeits had any place, in the
common Calendar. We grant that many of the lives of Saints, are fabulously and
vainly written; and that scarce any of that sacred company has suffered more
extremely in the ordinary Legends, than our blessed Martyr. But yet we cannot
yield, that therefore there was no such man, because his Acts are misreported.
Were this an argument of force, we must not only empty Heaven of many of its
Saints: but must correct our Chronicles, and raze out many of those famous
Princes, which are mentioned in them. How much more equal is the resolution of
Du Moulin, R^s^^. au. Card. Peron* lib. 7. c. 5.
touching St. Francis of Assise, in Italy, the Founder of the Friers-Minors,
called vulgarly Franciscans: which is, that he does verily believe that such a
man there was, though in his Legend many things are attributed to him, void of
sense. Nous ne doutous point, que Francoys d' Assise, inventeur et patron de
l'ordre des Cordeliers, (so the French call them) n' ait es^e. Mais sa Legende,
et les Chroniques de St. Francoys, lui attribuent mill actions destitues de
sens commun. So he, and these his words are next in order unto those, where
he accuses our St, George of Arianisme: from which, by this his own rule and
(so soon did he forget himself) we may most easily acquit him. And last of
all, we grant that many of the lives of Saints have been abused by
Heretics; and that St. George has suffered from them in his History, as
much as any: but yet we must not yield, that therefore that is only true,
which Heretics have trifled of him. It is confessed by Doctor Reynolds, one
of the greatest adversaries of St. George, that many of the Saints had been
thus injured; and that Gelasius therefore might more easily be couzened, in
giving credit to the Story of this our Martyr. De Idol. R^m. lib. 1. cap. 5.
At vero progressu temporis passio Georgij a sectatoribus eius composita,
multos sic fefellit, vt Gelasius etiam, tametsi fraudem hanc olfaceret, ipsum
putaret nihil ominus sanctum fuisse Martyrem: nec sine probabili ratione,
quandoquidem aliorum qui very Sancti extitissent, passiones, similem in modum
ab haereticis mendaciter scriptae essent. If so, then either was Gelasius a
very dunce, that could not see so far into the couzinage of his own times,
as Doctor Reynolds: or else St. George was most unluckie, to have his Story
only questioned; and all the rest, no less suspected, pass for current.

CHAP. V.
(1) Undoubted Truths the ground of fabulous reports. (2) The privilege of two
French Churches, and the Fables thence arising. (3) The Barons case of
Gascoyne. (4) St. Georges killing of the Dragon, how far it may be
justified. (5) The Portraiture of Constantine. (6) The Order of the Dragon, and
of St. Michael. (7) St. George how pictured commonly: and what it signifies.
(8) The memorable story of St. Georges Horse. (9) The picture of St. George,
how made a Fable: and by whom. (10) The entertainment of it in the Church of
Rome. (11) The Reformation of the Missall. (12) A final answer to all those
on the part of Calvin.

(1) THus have we made reply to such general arguments, as might be urged on
the behalf of Calvin, against the Story of St. George: as namely, the vain
and fabulous tales which are frequent of him, and extant in his Legend; the
dreams, and practices of heriticks, by which the lives of Saints have been
corrupted; and that unlawful power which they of Rome have so abused, in
filling of the Calendar, with wicked men, and fained persons. We next descend
to that particular exception, which is made against him; viz. That so much
celebrated act of his encounter with the Dragon: which being not upon record
in true antiquity, has made some think, that Perseus in the Poet has only
changed his name; and by the change, possessed a place among the Saints. To
this, we have already answered in the general: and in particular, reply; That
true indeed it is, no such exploit of his, and the encounter with the Dragon,
is to be found in true antiquity. Yet we must say withal, that true
antiquity does give us such a ground of this report: as may perhaps a little
qualify the boldness of the Legendarie, though not quite excuse it. The tale
of Perseus, has some good ground in truth of Story; although expressed
Poetically, and with liberal additions: so also has the Fable of Medusa, and
her enchanting hairs; than which almost nothing less probable. What fiction
more unlikely than the tale of Phaeton; and that great conflagration of the
world by his presumptuous undertaking of his fathers Chariot? Yet Bergomensis
and other Authors of good credit do report; That under an Egyptian King so
called, a great part of the world was destroyed by Fire, and such a general
heat and drowth upon the rest, Vt neque quas posset terris inducere, nubes,
Tunc habuit; nec quos, coelo dimitteret imbres.
That Jove for wasted clouds did seek in vain,
To shade, or cool the scorched earth with rain.


In like manner, as dealt the ancient Poets with such passages of Story, as
were most serviceable to their purpose: So dealt the Legendaries, which are
Church-Poets, with the lives and history of the Saints. Some thing there was
which they had heard of, which might occasion them to ramble from the truth;
and please themselves in their own inventions: wherein as commonly the people
reported fabulously of true matters; so they, the Legendaries, extolled those
fables, as a truth.

(2) Two fairer instances of which, we can hardly meet with, than two
especial privileges of two Churches in the realm of France; and the vain
Fables thence arising. At the first entrance of a new Bishop into the
Byshopricke of Orleans, he has a privilege of setting free any one prisoner
of the Jail; for what great crime soever he does stand committed. A privilege
conferred upon them, (as Du Chesne has told us) first in the person of St.
Aignan once Bishop of this City; for his exceeding pains and care in the
defense thereof against Attila the Hunne. But if we will believe the people,
and the ordinary Fables which are grounded on it; we must take it thus. At the
first entrance of St. Aignan into the Town, he made request to Agrippinus then
Governor, that for his sake he would set open all the Gaoles, and release the
Prisoners: Vt omnes quos pro varijs criminibus poenalis carcer detinebat
inclusos, insui introitus gratiam redderet absolutos; says the latter story.
Upon denial of this suite, a stone falls presently upon his head; from whence
none knew: but as it was concev'd, from Heaven: wounded and terrified wherewith
he grants the Bishop his desire, is suddenly made whole; and ever since the
Custom has continued in full force and virtue. Andre du Chesne Antiq. l. 7.
c. 2.
In like sort: the self same Privilege was granted by King Dagobert, the
first (he began his reign, anno 632.) unto the Canons of the Church of Nostre
Dame, in Roan of Normandy: and since confirmed by his successors. A privilege
confirmed upon them, (as that age and the rest that followed were prone to
superstitious bounties) in memory of St. Romanus, whose Festival is here
observed with all solemnity upon the 23. day of October; not long before,
Archbishop of that City. But if we will believe the people, and the common
fables, we must take it thus. There was a poisonous Dragon, which had done
much harm unto this Province; whom they had tried by many means to make away,
but none prospered. At last, St. Romain, then Archbishop of Roan, accompanied
with a Murderer and a Thief, whose lives were forfeit to the Law; undertakes
the enterprise. Upon the first sight of the Dragon, the Thief according to his
nature, stole away: the Murderer more hardened in his trade, goes forwards
with him. To make short work, the Dragon lays aside his fury, and patiently
submits himself unto that godly Praelate: who binding him about the neck with
his stole (or tippet) delivers him unto the murderer, and leads him prisoner
unto Roan. This wondrous accident is said to happen on an holy Thursday: and
that St. Audoin or Owen who next succeeded in that Church, in memory thereof
obtained this privilege, that from thence forwards the Chanoins of Our Ladies,
should every holy Thursday have the releasing of any Murderer, (whom themselves
would choose. I say of any Murderer, Thieves not being capable at all of any
mercy: because (say they) the Thief which was to have attended in that
service, stole away.

(3) So far the story, as I was told by mine Host at Roan: but for the
privilege it is still in practice, and famous by a great and memorable trial,
not long since happening: related to me by a Gentleman of good account, and a
practitioner in the Parliamentarie Court in that City. The case is this. Not
much above some twelve years since, a Nobleman of Gascoigne took occasion to
kill his wife; which done he fled into Normandy: and having first acquainted
the Canons of the Church of Nostre Dame with his desires; put him self to the
sentence of the Court, and is adjudg'd unto the Wheel. Ascension day
immediately coming on, the Canons challenged him for theirs: and the chief
Judges, according to the custom, caused him to be dilivered. But on the other
side, it was pleaded by the Normans, that the benefit of this privilege,
belonged only to the Natives of that Province: and they pleaded with such
violence, that the poor Baron was again committed to his irons; till the Qu.
Mother had wooed and won the people, pro ea saltem vice, to admit of his
reprivall.

(4) This story of St. Romans Dragon, in which there is no passage true,
conducts me on, unto St. George; of whose encounter with the Dragon there may
be somewhat said, to qualify the matter; thought not to justify it
altogether. For by the Dragon if we understand the Devil, that old malicious
Serpent. Epistola ad Tral.
((...), as Ignatius calls him;) and the combat betwixt our blessed Martyr and
that Monster, those many snares and baits, which by the Devil were provided
to intrappe him: we may soon find, how and in what respect, St George his
fighting with the Dragon may be justified. An exposition of that fabulous text
occurring in the Legend, not forced unnaturally: but such as does agree, as
with the truth of story; so also with the words and meanings of some Authors,
which have written of our Martyr. Certain I am that Metaphrastes in an
Encomion or Anniversarie Oration, made in the memory and commendation of our
Saint; does not allude unto it only, but affirms it. For thus that Author,
speaking of those several baits which had been laid for the inveigling of
this blessed man of GDD; the Kingdoms of the world, and the glories of them,
the frowns and anger of the Prince, the terrors both of Death and tortures:
speaking I say of these, and how that all of them, and other the devises of
that old Serpent, were by that noble Champion frustrate and deluded; he
concludes it thus. Licebat igitur videre astutissimum Draconem, adversus carnem
and sanguinem gloriari solitum, elatumque and sese efferentem; a juvene illo
uno illusum, and ita despectum atque confusum, ut quid ageret non haberet. So
he, and this may also seem to be intended by Hermannus Schedell, in his work
entitled Chronica Chronicorum: where he does join together the Martyrdom of
our St. George, and his encounter with the Dragon; both as it were one act or
undertaking, Et velut alter Curtius Romanus, Aetas sexta, Page 240.
vel Codrus Rex Atheniensium, pro patriae liberatione sese internecioni ad
Draconis occisionem, and martyrij tolerantiam, dedit: as he there has it.

(5) For further proof of which, and that this exposition on that fabulous
text, as before I called it, is not unnaturally forced, but suitable unto the
truth of story; and in all likelihood agreeable to their intents, who gave the
first hint, and occasion to the fables in the Legends: let us behold awhile the
portraiture of Constantine the Great, erected in the same figure in a manner;
and to the same intent and purpose. Of him we need not make report, how great
a victory he had against that enemy of mankind, in his promoting of the
faith; and ruining those Heathenish Temples, consecrated to impiety and the
Devil. After which glorious conquest, Eusebius. d^ vita Constant. l. 3. c. 3
and the establishing of true Religion in all the quarters of his Empire; (...)
etc. he caused his portraiture to be erected up on high, in a fair table for
that purpose, and at the entrance of his Palace, that so it might be obvious
to the eye of every Passenger. Over his head the Cross, that venerable sign
of man's redemption: and underneath his feet, that great and working enemy of
man, the Devil, cast down into the lowest deeps; under the figure of a
Dragon. (...). The r^ason why he caused himself so to be portraited, to show,
no doubt, how great and notable an overthrow he had given the Devil: but why
he made the Devil in the likeness of a Dragon, was in allusion
questionless, unto the Scriptures, where he is called a Serpent; and in the
Revelation, more particularly, a Dragon. So witnesses Eusebius in the words
immediately following, (...) (the Devil) (...).

(6) To the same purpose also, and on occasion not much different, at the least
as he conceived it; did Sigismund the Emperor, an King of Hungary, erect and
order of Knighthood, which he entitled, Of the Dragon. He had been fortunate
in many several battles, against the greatest enemies of CHRIST, the Turks:
and he had also labored with much diligence to ruin and suppress the
Hussites, the greatest enemies of the Roman Church then being; whereof he was
Protector. This last not only by persecutions privately, and force of arms
in public: but by procuring the two Councels of Basil and Constance, to be
assembled; where the poor Hussites were condemned, their cause unheard, and
the chief Patrons of their cause adjudg'd unto the fire. Proud of his
fortunate success in these great enterprises, he instituted this his military
Order of the Dragon; so called because his Knights did bear for their Devise,
a Dragon falling headlong: pour tesmoigner que par son moyen le Schism et l'
heresy, Page, 1460.
dragons devorans de la religion, avoyent 'este vaincus, et supplantez. And
this (says he that made the book entitled Les estats du Monde, translated
since by Grimston) to testify that by his means, the Dragons of Heresy and
Schism, which otherwise (no doubt) had destroyed religion and devoured the
Church; were vanquished and suppressed. Much like to this in the Device, is the
French Order dedicated to Saint Michael, instituted by King Lewis the 11. not
long after, Anno viz. 1469. Unto the collar of which Order, there is fastened
the picture of St. Michael the Archangell, combatting with the Dragon of the
infernal Deepes: aureaque imagine S. Michaelis draconem infernale^
prosternentis, De origi^e Monach. l. cap. 59.
pectus insigniente. So says Hospinian. But this in reference rather, to the
encounter of St. Michael with the Dragon, in the Apocalypse.

(7) With these the portraiture of Constantine abovementioned, and the two
military Orders of St. Michael, and the Dragon: St. George, as he is commonly
expressed in picture; holds good proportion and correspondence. His picture
as in the present times, we use to draw it; but ab initio non fuit sic, it was
not thus from the beginning. For I have read it in the life of Theodorus
Syceotes, commonly called Archimandrita, or Chiefe-Abbot; borne in the time of
the Emperor Justinian: that then St. George was only pictured as a fair young
man, richly arrayed, and of an hair somewhat inclining unto yellow. For so
Elpidia does describe him, in the relation of her dream, to this her
Grandchild Theodorus: if at the least we may take this or any thing upon Surius
word, Tom. ^. in vi^a Theod. Archim. p. 737.
who fathereth this discourse upon one George, a Priest, the Scholar of this
Ahbot. Videbam, fili mi dulcissime (these are old Grandams words) adolescentem
valde formosum, splendidis vestimentis ornatum, aureaque fulgentem coma; and
illi similem, quem pro S. Georgio in eius historia cernimus. Thus was he
pictured anciently. But in the middle times, he was presented to the common
view, more like a man at arms, mounted upon a lusty Courser; a young maid
kneeling by him, and a fierce Dragon thrust through with a Spear, gasping for
life: just as we see him painted, (but there is no mention of the young maid)
on our common Signe-posts. A picture which in the darker and more ignorant
times, was thought to represent that story, which was then published in the
Legend: and which, since it has bin otherwise resolved by the learned of both
parties, that it did only represent some mystery or allegory; has not a
little exercised their wits and fancies. Chap. 3.. 5.
Perkins will have it (as before we noted) to be in former times a
representation of our Savior, who vanquished the Devil for the deliverance of
his Church: in which conceit of his, many Divines have closed in with him,
which we then noted also out of Charles Stephanus. Baronius does conceive it,
to be the picture of some state or Country, petitioning (according to the
custom of those times) the aid and helping-hand of so great a Saint, In
Annot. ad To. Mart. Apr. ^3.
against the violence of the Devil. In virgino n. illa typus exprimitur (more
maiorum) provinciae vel civitatis alicuius, quae adversus diaboli vires tanti
martyris imploret auxilium. Villavincentius and Hyperius have applied it to the
civil Magistrate, whose principal endeavors ought to aim at this; that they
defend the Church, from the covetous tyranny of the Oppressor, the old
Serpent. Dr. Reynolds, as he preferres this last conceit, before that of
Baronius: so does he seem to prize his own, both before this, or any other.
With him, the meaning of the emblem (or picture Emblematicall) must be this:
that all true Christians whom the Apostle calls Gods husbandry, might learn
hereby how much it does concern them to make war against the Dragon; and to
destroy him with the sword of the Spirit. Praelec. in Apocr. 155.
Vt sciant omnes Christiani, quos (...) Dei appellat Apostolus, 1. Cor. 3.
militandum sibi adversus draconem Apocal. 12. eumque Dei gladio confodiendum.
So he in his praelections on the Apocrypho: and the same words almost repeated
in his book de Romans Idololatria. L. 1. ^. 5.. 22.
For my part, I rather choose (for why in such variety, may not I also assume
the liberty of conjecture) to make it, at the least in part; historical: as
being thus contrived of purpose, in those times, and by those men, which most
affectionately were devoted to our Martyr; to publish to posterity how bravely
he refell'd the Devil, how constantly he persevered in the profession of his
faith; the whole Church praying with him, and kneeling (like the Virgin, by
him, in that holy action) that GOD would give him strength subdue that enemy,
the Dragon.

(8) How long the picture of St. George has been commended to us in this
Knightly form; I cannot easily determine: only I will be bold to say that it
is not very modern, or of small standing in the Church; as may be gathered
out of the History of Nicephorus Gregoras. This Author was by birth of Greece,
Bellarm. de Script. Eccl.
and wrote the History of that declining Empire: beginning at the year 1200,
and ending it anno 1344. about which time it is conceived, that he was gathered
to his fathers. In the 8. book (he wrote eleven in all) there is a memorable
story of St. George's Horse: which for the rareness of it, and that it is so
proper to the cause in hand; it shall not grieve me to relate, nor any Reader
to peruse. Primo quadragessimae Sabbato, cum postridie orthodoxorum Imperatorum
and Patriarcharum proclamanda esset memoria; tum quoque Theodorus Logotheta
generalis, a vespera ad nocturna sacrailla de more accessit. Media vero sub
nocte, me astante and (...) audiente, quidam ab Imperatore adest, novum illi
nuncium apportans, etc. On the first Saturday in Lent, the Commemoration of
such godly Emperors and Patriarchs as had departed in the Faith, being the
morrow after to be solemnized: it pleased the Lord high Chancellor Theodorus,
(for so on the authority of Meursius in his Graeco-Barbara, I think good to
render (...): I say it pleased him to be present with us, according to the
custom at those night-watches. About the time of midnight, I standing near
him; and harkning to divine Service; a Messenger in all the have came to him
from Andro* the Elder, then our Emperor; telling this strange news, and
desiring his opinion. But now (says he) when as the Soldiers of the Guard, [
Milites Imperatorij] were going to their rest; there was a fearful neighing
heard so upon the sudden, that it made all of us amazed; the rather, because
there were not any Horses then about the Court; all of them carried in the
evening far off, unto their Stables. This tumult not yet quieted, another
noise of the same kind, but greater than the former; was heard unto the
Emperors Chamber; who presently dispatched a Servant to inquire into the
matter. The servant did as was commanded, Sed nihil audivit aliud, nisi ab equo
in quodam palatij pariete ante victricis deiparae sacellum, quem Paulus
olimpictor praestantissimus effinxisset, D. Georgium pulcherrime sustinentem,
esse editum, etc. The servant did as was commanded, but heard no other noise
than what did seem to him, to issue from the picture of a certain horse,
bearing St. George upon his back: which Paul the famous painter, had long
since painted on that part of the pallace-wall, which is close by our Ladies
Chapel. This is (says he) the message which I am commanded to deliver; and
to acquaint you also, that his Majesty desires your present counsel. Ad haec
Logotheta iocatus, Gratulor tibi (inquit) Imperator futuros triumphos, etc.
quibus auditis, At tu quidem inquit Imp. isto responso exhilarandi mei gratia
usus, rem ignorare visus es: Ego autem dicam tibi. Nam ut patres nostri nobis
tradiderunt, equus iste alias ad eundem modum hinnijt, cum Baldwinus Latinorum
Princeps, a patre nostro pulsus, urbem amissurus esset. The Chancellor
repairing upon these summons to the Emperor, found him exceedingly disquieted:
and therefore sportively accoasting him, I do my Liege said he, congratulate
those noble tryumphs, which the lusty neighing of St. George's horse portend
unto you. To whom the Emperor replied, It seems my Lord, that you of purpose
to compose my thoughts, and make me merry, will not take notice of the matter:
but I am able to instruct you in it. For I have heard upon good credit, that
this same picture of an Horse, neigh'd formerly, as now it did: just when that
Baldwin Emp. of the Latins in Constantinople, was beleagured by my Father; and
the City taken. So far the story. All we will note from hence is this, that
Baldwin mentioned in the History, began his Reign anno 1227. and that St.
George, both in his time, and long before, was painted mounted on his Horse;
which is as much as I desire for my present purpose.

(9) Saint George thus pictured, either by way of Hieroglyphicke, as some
conceive it; or of Historical representation, as I rather should conjecture:
it was not long before the vulgar (...) as Aristotle calls them; had improoved
it into a Fable. And now St. George must be ennobled for the killing of a
Dragon, which he never saw; and ransoming of King Nemo's Daughter, for in the
Legends there is nothing told us of his name. Just as upon the post-fact, the
Normans framed that doughty tale of St. Romanus and the Dragon; or those of
Orleans, the no less memorable story of Saint Aignans Stone. Which being so,
the people thus affected, by reason of those pictures, which did then commonly
express Saint George; and the composers of the Legends willing to countenance
those fictions, which were already of good credit with the people; it came to
pass, that not these only of the vulgar; but even the best and wisest, as the
times then were, ran headlong on the same Error. The rather, because the
Author of the Legend then in most esteem, was not of ordinary rank: a man of
special eminence for his Works and Learning; Archbishop of a chief City in
Italy, and of good credit for a long time together in the Court of Rome! I
mean Iacobus de Voragine, whom in this case, the Cardinal Baronius justly
blames, for making that an History, or a Fable rather; which was in all
Antiquity, intended only for an emblem. In nullis enim quae recensuimus S.
Georgij actis antiquis, Annotas in Romans Mar. Apr. 23.
quicquam legitur eiusmodi, ( viz. the killing of the Dragon, etc.) sed a
Iacobo de Voragine absque ulla maiorum autoritate, ea ad historiam referuntur,
quae potius in imagine illa typum exprimunt, etc. All I shall add is this
(which may perchance be else objected) that De Voragine did frame his Legend,
according to the common fame, and the expression of St. George in common
Pictures: and not the pictures made according to the fancy and tradition of
the Legend. For it appears out of Nicephorus abovementioned, that this our
Martyr had been pourtraied in this fashion, some space of time before the
Latins were expuls'd Constantinople; which happened in the year, 1260. Whereas
Iacobus de Voragine began to be of credit, at the soonest, Anno 1278, and as
it is conceived by others, not till the year 1290. which before we noted.

(10) But to proceed, the Legend thus composed, and by such a man, and so
agreeable unto the humor of the people; no marvel if it found a willing
entertainment in the public service of the Church: so that in tract of time
the Legend or historia Lombardica, for so the Author calls it; became a
principal part in the Roman Breviarie. Bona Breviariorumpars, In Epist.
Dedica^.
quod quidem ad lectiones matutinas attinet, ex L^mbardica desumpta est, licet
verbis paululum immutatis. So says Wicelius: and we well know how justly he
might say it, as in the general, so also in the particular of St. George. For
in an old Book, which I have long had in my custody, entitled Horae B.
Mariae, Secundum, vsum Sarum: We have this History of St. George, and of his
Dragon, thus framed into an Antheme: and as it there appears, appointed to be
sung on his public Festival; the Antheme this.

O Georgi Martyr inclyte,
Te decet laus and gloria,
Praedotatum militia;
Per quem puella regia,
(Existens in tristitia,
Coram Dracone pessimo)
Salvata est. Ex animo
Terogamus cord intimo,
Vt cunctis cum fidelibus
Coeli iungamur civibus,
Nostris ablutis sordibus:
Et simul cum laetitia,
Tecum simus in gloria;
Nostraque reddant labia
Lauds Christo cu^ gratia.
Cui sit honos in secula.
George, holy Martyr, praise and fame
Attend upon thy glorious name;
Advanced to Knightly dignity:
The Daughter of a King, by thee
(As she was making grievous moan,
By a feirce Dragon, all alone)
Was freed from death. Thee we entreat
That we in Heaven may have a seat;
And being washed from every stain,
May there with all the Faithful reign:
That we with thee together may
Sing gladly many a sacred Lay;
The gracious throne of Christ before,
To whom be praise for evermore.
(11) So was it in our Ladies Horarie, or horarium, according to the use of
Sarum; and so no question in other of their public Service-Bookes: until the
reformation of Religion, began in Germany by Luther, made those of Rome
bethink themselves; and make some necessary reformation also, in such
particulars as were most scandalous and offensive. A reformation not only of
their manners, which since the difference began, have been strangely mended;
nor of their Doctrine only, which since the opposition, has been wonderously
altered and refined: but also of their Breviaries, of their Missals, and other
parts of their public Liturgies. A matter first attempted, at the beginning
of the breach, by Pope Clement the seventh: who using in it the assistance of
Franciscus Quignonius, Wicelius in Epist. dedicat.
(he was then Cardinal of Santa Croce) left in them only the histories of
some few Saints of either sex, of which there was less scruple; casheering
all the rest, which gave occasion of offense. Vnde non imprudenter fecit
Clemens [Sept.] Pont. Romans adiutus opera Franc. Quignonij, qui historiolas
Sanctorum vtriusque sexus, cum Christo in paradiso conregnantium, succincte
iuxta and erudite describi, inque Romans Breviarium inseri curavit: Omnem
calumniantibus ansam amputans, qui fabulas non historias in Templis recitari
clamitabant. As mine author has it. Afterward, a more exact and perfect
reformation of the Missall and the Breviarie, was resolved upon in the
Trent-Councell; together with an Index to be made, of all such Books, as were
thought fit either to be prohibited; or noted, with a Deleatur. But by the
hasty breaking up of that Conventicle, (for so the French King called it in his
letters to the Prelates there assembled) the whole business was referred unto
the Pope: by his unerring spirit to be determined and concluded. Sess. 25.
Prope finem.
Praecepit S. Synodus, ut quicquid ab illis (to whom the matter was committed)
praestitum esset, Sanctissimo Romans Pont. exhibeatur: vt eius iudicio atque
autoritate terminetur, and evulg^tur. So was it done accordingly: the Missals,
Breviaries, Rituals, Pontificals, Catechismes, Diurnals, and all the several
Horaries, Officiums, and such like Manuals belonging to our Ladies service;
being corrected first by Pope Pius Quintus, and after recognized by Clement, of
that name the Eight. By which we may perceive, that all things were not right
in the Church of Rome; how ever they pretended that the Protestants did clamor
of them without cause: they being at the last compelled, though with as little
noise as might be, to make a Reformation both in Doctrine and in manners; as
also in their common forms of public service and performance.

(12) And now what is there else, which any one of Calvin's party, any of those
which have denied St. George a being; can further question? It is alleged by
Doctor Cracanthorpe, to prove St. George to be non ens, an idle Fiction; that
even Baronius does confess it: and for a further proof, Baronius is produced
to tell us on his knowledge, Picturam Georgij qua eques armatus effingitur,
etc. That viz. the ordinary pictures of Saint George have more in them of an
emblem, than an History. What then? Baronius does conceive St. George so
pictured, as we see him commonly (and as we see him in full stature, with his
brave Horse and the fierce Dragon, in St. Sepulchers in Paris;) to be an
emblem, a Symbol, or an Hieroglyphick. But yet Baronius does not think that
St. George himself was an Hieroglyphick only, or an emblem. This is an
argument, much like that other which we met withal before; wherein Baronius
himself must testify against himself, that the whole story of St. George,
was nothing else but a forgerie of the Arians: whereas indeed he spoke it
only of one passage of it, which by the Arians had been thrust into his
History. And this may also be replied to Doctor Boys, who tells us twice for
failing, how roundly Cardinal Baronius had taken up Iacobus de Voragine, for
his leaden Legend of St. George. If they or any other for them, have more to
say; it is as I conceive it, that Article as yet not answered touching
Dacianus; and the apparent contradictions which are between our witnesses, in
this particular. Which argument or exception rather, we doubt not but to
satisfy with as much case as these before it: when we have taken out our
Commission for the examination of witnesses on our party, in whom such an
apparent contradiction is suspected. In the mean time, I think we may with
good assurance of these men's quietness hereafter; turn our whole strengths
upon that adversary which has done us greatest injury. Even upon them, who
seem to censure Calvin as too meek and modestly disposed, in so great a
quarrel: and think St. George not wronged enough in being thought No man, the
issue of an idle brain; unless he rather be esteemed a wicked and ungodly
man, a bloody Arian. Calvinus itaque moderatissime agit adversum Pontificios,
ubi de Georgio quem invocant, ita loquitur, quasi nullus unquam, L. 1. cap. 5.
non quasi impius extitisset. Thus Dr. Reynolds, whose resolute assertion, and
the proofs thereof, are next to be examined.

CHAP. VI.
(1) The whole Story of George the Arian Bishop. (2) George Bishop of
Alexandria, not prooved by Doctor Reynolds to be a Cappadocian. (3) The
Cappadocians infamous for their lewdness. (4) The life of George before he
was appointed Bishop. (5) His Butcherly behavior in that holy Dignity. (6)
Degraded in the Councels of Sardica, and Seleucia. (7) An (...) of Drusius, in
making George the Laodicean, to be the same with him of Alexandria. (8) The
strange effects of fancy and a pre-conceipt. (9) George's return to
Alexandria, and the manner of his Death. (10) George Bishop of Alexandria,
never reputed for a Martyr. (11) Shreds of the Arian Legends, by whom patched
on upon St. Georges Cloak. ( 12) Sir W. Raleighs resolution in received
opinions. (13) A transition to the examination of Witnesses on St. George's
side.

(1) IT was, as I conceive it, a wise and necessary course of Casca, a Roman
Citizen, to publish by the common Crier, his Name and Pedigree: wherein he
gave the people notice, that whereas Casca was the name of one of those, which
had conspired the death of Caesar; for his part, he neither was the Traitor
nor any of his kindred. The reason of which action, he thus gives in Dion,
(...), Hist. Romans l. 44. Id. lib. 47.
Quod Cinna nominis causa occideretur: The like device to this, is in the same
Author, reported of one Varro: and this device must we also now make use of,
in our present business. For such was the most barbarous demeanor of one
George, once an intruding Bishop in the Church of Alexandria, a furious Arian,
and bloody Butcher of the true Christians; and so extremely odious is his name
become in the ears and hearts of all good people: that we which love St.
George, must by the common Crier, and public Proclamation, make known his
parentage, and acts, and sufferings. Otherwise it will be with him, as it was
with Cinna; and he shall suffer for those impious sins and cruel
misdemeanors, which were done many years after his transmigration to a better
life. This therefore we resolve to do in St George's cause; but not this
only. For we will first relate the whole History of George the Arian, his
Country, his exploits, and manner of his Death; in which how little is there,
which may have the least resemblance unto the Story of our Martyr. That done,
and Doctor Reynolds sufficiently answered, as I hope it will appear, in the
mere prosecution of the Story: we will proceed unto the Birth, and parentage,
and constant sufferings of St. George; and to those testimonies after, which
all the Ages of the Church, not one excepted, successively have given him.

(2) And first we must begin with the Birth and Country of this Arian Bishop,
which Doctor Reynolds does affirm with greater confidence than proof, to be
in Cappadocia. For thus he closes up his Disputation in this present
argument, Ceterum cum Georgius quem ecclesia Orientali^ and Occidentalis pro
Martyr colit, De Idol. Romans Lib. 1. c. 5.. 22
fuerit Cappadox; ne^ ullius Georgij Cappadocis, ut Martyris, nisi Ariani,
mentio ab ullo idoneo autore fiat: vel ista circumstantia demonstrat Georgium,
non Sanctum, sed Arianum Martyrem fuisse. In which we have these two
conclusions; first, that the Arian George was a Cappadocian; and next, that
never any George of Cappadocia, was reputed for a Martyr, but George the Arian:
both these, I say, with greater confidence than proof. For I persuade my
self, that neither he, nor any else of his opinion, has prooved it hitherto,
that George the Arian was by birth a Cappadocian: sure I am, that the
testimonies of Athanasius, and St. Gregory Nazianzene, which are produced unto
this purpose, do not prove it. Which that we may the better justify, we must
take notice by way of anticipation, that George the Arian, was of a very fickle
and fugitive condition: not fixed in any place, (as we shall see anon) until
he was appointed for the Sea of Alexandria. This noted, we proceed unto the
testimonies alleged from Athanasius, according as we are directed in the
Doctors margin: beginning first with that, in Apol. de fuga sua; Athan. Tom. 1.
page 704. Edit. gr. la.
where we read it thus. (...). About the time of Lent, (says he) came
George to Alexandria, sent for, by them which swayed the Court, out of
Cappadocia: who here improoved those vices, which he there had learnt. This
is I think no argument of any force, because that George was sent for out of
Cappadocia, to prove that he was therefore borne there: and therefore on unto
the next, which proves as little; save that the Latin is more favorable than
the Greek. Page 944.
For in the Latin, translated by Pet. Nannius, we read it In Epistola ad
vbique orthodoxos, thus: Et station praefectus Aegypti public literas proponit
in speciem edicti, quibus declarabat, Georgium Cappadocem natione, pro
successore mihi datum. But in the Greek, we find it only as before; (...),
that George, new coming from Cappadocia, was by the Governor, declared his
Successor: Thus do we read in his Epistle, Ad solitariam vitam agentes,
(...): Page 860.
That Gregory was sent to Alexandria, and Auxentius unto Millaine; both out of
Cappadocia. Yet never was it thought, that therefore either of them were
natives of that Country. In Apolog. secunda, which is a third place quoted in
the margin, we meet with nothing to the purpose: only Pole Julius
complains in an Epistle to his fellow-Byshops, touching Athanasius, Page 748.
(...), etc. That Gregory, an alien to the Town of Alexandria, and unknown
amongst them, was made Bishop. The Latin here, in steed of Gregory, reads
George; which cannot stand with truth of Story: Pope Julius being dead almost
six years, before this George was made the Bishop of that City. But let it
be, that the Greek copies are corrupted, yet is it but a simple reason, to
affirm that George was borne in Cappadocia, because he was an alien, or a
stranger to the Alexandrians.

(3) In that which follows, we have some show of proof, at least; which was
not to be found in that before. For in the Epistle ad Solitariam vitam
agentes, beforementioned, St. Athanasius calls him, Page 861.
(...), a man of Cappadocia: and Gregory of Nazianzum, that Countriman,
Monstrum Cappadox, ex vltimis terrae nostrae finibus oriundum, A Cappadocian
monster, borne in the furthest parts of all our Country. Indeed St. Gregory so
calls him in the Latin copies, translated by Bilius; which makes the matter
somewhat plain: but look upon the Author in his own language, and then it
will appear, to be no such sufficient evidence, as was pretended. For there
we read it thus, Orat. 21. p. 382. Edit. O. L.
(...), etc. Now this (...), which is translated, Oriundum, Borne; and
whereupon the proof, such as it is, is altogether founded; ought rather, and
more agreeably, to the nature of the word, to be rendered, Impetu se ferens,
running with haste and violence. For who so ignorant in the Greek tongue, but
knows (...), to be so construed; and that it is derived, ab (...), impetus:
and so (...), etc. must be only this; That George, a Cappadocian monster (as
he calls him) came with a violent swinge, even from the furthest parts of all
the world, to seize upon the Church of Alexandria. But notwithstanding this,
yet he is here called (...), a Cappadocian monster; and Athanasius calls him,
(...), a man of Cappadocia: this we confess, but so, that it affords as
little to the proof in hand, as any of the former. For both those passages,
are there spoken, as proverbiall kind of speeches, then in use: the lewdness
of the Cappodocians being so infamous, that it grew into a Proverb, to call a
lewd and wicked man, a man of Cappadocia. Erasmus reckons Portentum
Cappadocium, as a common Adage, Eo quod Cappadocum gens improba and flagitiosa
esset: and for a proof thereof, reflects upon this place of Gregory. Thus
Cicero, speaking of Cesonius Calventius, Orat post reditum.
calls him, a Cappodocian; Elinguem, tardum, inhumanum, neglectum, Cappadocem,
etc. And Freigius in his Annotations, gives this reason, Cappadoces enim male
audijsse, ostendit proverbium. The proverb which he mentions, in proof of
such their infamy, is that in Suidas, viz. (...): Id est, There are three
Nations worse than others, beginning with the letter K. Cappadocians, Cretans,
and Cilicians. And presently he adds, I know not whether to the same purpose,
(...). The same thing, Purch. Pilgrim. Lib. 3. c. 15.
by a Learned man of our own nation, thus noted, The lewdness of the
Cappadocians grew into a Proverb. If any were enormiously wicked, he was
therefore called a Cappadocian. So that the style of homo Cappadox, given him
by Athanasius; and that of Monstrum Cappadox, repeated out of Gregory, by
Socrates, and others; and out of them by Geo. Cedrenus: was fastened on him for
his long abode in that Province, and immediate coming thence; especially, he
having learnt so much (as it appears by Athanasius) of their bad conditions.
Nor is it strange, that Homo. Cappadox, and monstrum Cappadox, should be here
used proverbially; rather to signify the bad conditions of the man, than his
Birth or Country: considering that, fides Attica, and fides Punica, Gracum
ingenium, and tenebrae Cymmeriae, with many others of that kind; are commonly
so used, in the best Authors. Well then, it is not prooved as yet by Dr.
Reynolds, that George the Arian Bishop, was by birth a Cappadocian: whether
there were no other George of Cappadocia acknowledged as a Martyr, but this
George the Arian; we shall see hereafter.

(4) But for his Country, not to waste longer time in it, L. 22. cap. 27.
it is affirmed for certain, by Amm. Marcellinus, who lived about those times,
and whose report may well be taken in this case: I say it is affirmed by him,
in express terms, that George of Alexandria was borne at Epiphania, in the
Province of Cilicia. In Fullonio (the old Books read it in Fullio, and
infulio, but mended by Gruterus, out of the autographon of Faucherius) natus ut
ferebatur, apud Epiphaniam Ciliciae oppidum, auctusque in damna complurium,
contra utilitatem suam, reique communis, episcopus Alexandriae est ordinatus.
So Ammianus: and this is more express, than any thing that has been hitherto
produced, to make him borne a Cappadocian. For his conditions St. Gregory of
Nazianzen tells us, Orat. 21.
that he was (...), a man of a bad kindred and worse qualities, (...), etc. Not
any way ennobled in his knowledge, nor affable in his Conversation; no not so
much as making any show of godliness, or cloaking his ^mpieties with fair and
specious pretexts, but apt to any bold attempt; and a most proper iustrument to
disturb the common peace. In his beginnings, a most base and servile Parasite,
the common fly that sucked at every Table: so fitted for that office, that all
his words and actions did seem to have no other end, than filling of his
belly. His first preferment, was an O^fice of all others the most base and
sordid, (...). The Caterer forsooth, or Provisor general of Hogs-flesh for the
army. In which, he bare himself so faithlesly, so much unto his own desire
of filthy Lucre; that at the last even he was forced to take himself unto his
heels: and as the custom is of Vagabonds, never to tarry long in any place;
until at last he settled in the Church of Alexandria. (...). And here (says
Gregory) he left off his roaguing, and began his Villainies. But yet we must
not think that he was made a Bishop per s^ltum, as the Lawyers say; not taking
in his way, others, the inferior orders of the Church. For Athanasius tells
us, Ap^^^l. de fuga ad Constable. prope ^^nem.
that he had before been made a Priest; and that he so demeaned himself in
that holy Calling, that he was forthwith deposed from the Ministry. (...),
etc. But struggling in those factious and distracted times, against the Rulers
of the Church, he was restored not long after. And being of the Emperors
Religion, who then was wholly addicted to the Arian party, and of a subtle
head withal, for the dispatch of great affairs: he was conceived to be the
fittest fellow, to succeed Gregory the Arian Bishop of Alexandria; who had
before displanted Athanasius. So Sozomen relates, L. 3. ^. 6.
that he was settled in the room of Gregory, (...). As being active in his
ways, and a stout Champion of tne Sect.

(5) George thus appointed Bishop, was put into possession of the Church of
Alexandria by a choice band of Soldiers, sent by Constantius the Emperor for
that purpose. His behavior, answerable to his entrance, violent and bloody:
and such as was not long dissembled. (...), etc. as it is in Athanasius. He
made his entrance in the holy time of Lent, Vbi supr. p. 704. Ed. gr. lat*
and presently after the end of Easter-weeke, there was no other tidings to be
heard in Alexandria, than violently casting of the sacred Virgins into prison,
committing of the Suffragan Bishops unto the custody of the men of War,
forcible spoiling of the Houses of Widows and of Orphans: and other
misdemeanors of this barbarous and hostile nature. (...), etc. But in the
Week immediately after Whitsontide, the people [(...)] upon some solemn
Fast, gathered themselves together in the Churchyard to their Devotions; not
tarrying in the Church, because they had no heart to rec^ive the holy
mysteries, with George their Bishop. This coming to his knowledge, he
presently sent out unto Sebastia^, then Captain of the Garrison, and by Sect a
Manichee; to arm his forces, and repair to his assistance. (Where by the way,
I marvel, and that not a little, that they which made St. George, an Arian,
because of the identitie of names: have not made St. Sebastian also an
Heretic of the Manichees, on the same reason.) Upon this message Sebastian
hasted with his band, and even upon that sacred day (it was a Sunday) made an
assault upon the people in the place. The professed Virgins were brought unto a
flaming fire, and threatened death; in case they would not yield to the
condemned Opinions of the Arian Heretics: Such of them as continued constant
in the Faith, being immodestly dispoyled of all their garments; and buffeted
so cruelly upon the face, that long time after, it was a matter of some
difficulty, to know who they were. No less than forty men were violently, and
after a strange manner torn in pieces: the rest more mercifully dealt withal
and banished. Athanas. ut supr.
(...), etc. As for the bodies of the slain, they would not give them to their
friends and kindred, that so they might be honestly buried; but kept them
privately at home, the better to delight and satiate their eyes with that
bloody spectacle. So true is that of Photius, that George had wrought such
barbarous and horrid cruelties in that poor City: (...): In Athanas.
That even the greatest persecution raised by the Gentiles, might in comparison
hereof be reputed merciful.

(6) Such being his behavior both before and after; it is not to be wondered
at, if the Church took special notice of it: the rather because of
Athanasius, so unjustly dispossessed, and persecuted by the Arian party.
Constans at that time Emperor of the West, and brother to Constantius; an
Orthodoxe professor, and well inclined to holy Athanasius; summoned a Council
of the Bishops of his Empire, at Sardica a City of Illyricum, anno 351. where
among others, some Bishops of the Britains were assembled. In this Council,
the Nicene Creed being first verified and confirmed; the cause of Athanasius
was debated: whom by their general suffrages they acquitted of all crime; and
by definitive Sentence degraded among others, George the Arian, from the
Dignity of Bishop. Apol* ut supr.
O (...); as in Athanasius. Not long after, followed another Synod; holden at
Seleucia, a Town of Asia the less; anno 358, or thereabouts: wherein this
Alexandrian George, was again degraded. The Fathers here assembled, intended,
as it seems some mitigation in the points of Controversy then on foot, and
therefore did declare our blessed Savior, to be of a like Substance with the
Father, though not the same. So that the difference now was only in a letter,
though such a letter as made the difference but little less: The Nicene Creed
pronouncing CHRIST to be (...), of the same Substance; and this affirming him,
to be only (...), of the like substance. To which decree, this George, a
peremptory and stubborn Arian, would not yield: For which, with other matters
proov'd against him, he was sentenced to be degraded. I say with other
matters prooved against him, because we read in Sozomen, that they of Egypt
had accused him in the Council of rapine, and such other contumelious crimes:
Lib. 3. cap. 6.
(...). As that Author has it.

(7) In this Seleucian Synod, was present also another George, Bishop of
Laodicea, a City of Syria: an Arian also, or one at least which did not favor
the Homousians, for so they called them. (...). Socrat. lib. 1. Cap. (...).
So Socrates. But yet, it seems, a peaceable and quiet Arian: one who not
only willingly subscribed unto the Canons of that Council; but also made
himself head of a party against George of Alexandria, in the behalf and
cause of Cyrill of Jerusalem. This Cyrill being a learned and a godly Bishop,
Id. lib. 2. cap. (...). Gr. 31. Lat.
had a cause dependant in that Synod; and those which were professed and
peremptory Arians, did purpose to depo^e him: that so there might be room to
settle in Jerusalem, a Prelate of their faction. But on the other side, there
was no want of such, who though they loved him not for his Opinions, which were
true, and Orthodoxe; did yet admire his learning, and respect his person:
Hereupon the Council was divided into two parts or factions: whereof the one
was governed by Acacuis Bishop of Caesarea, and George of Alexandria; the
other, by this George Bishop of Laodicea, and Sophronius of Pompeiopolis. And
after the determination of the Council, there is this mention of him in the
same Author; that he did doubtfully declare himself in the points of Doctrine
then questioned: sometimes abetting the Decrees of the Seleucian Synod; Ib.
cap. 36. Lat. (...) Gr.
and sometimes more inclining to the opinions of the Arians: (...). Which being
so, I do the rather wonder at a strange mistake in the learned Drusius, who
makes this George the Laodicean, to be the same with him of Alexandria. For in
his Notes upon Sulpitius Severus, In Hist sacra.
ad Page 149. he has it thus; Georgius Laodiceae Episcopus, Cappadox,
Arianorum (...): and afterward, ad Page 156. Georgius Alexandriae Episcopus a
Constantio constitutus, cum prius fuisset Episcopus Laodecenus. Which words of
his, first make the Laodicean George, to be of Cappadocia; and afterward
translate him to the Church of Alexandria: but neither rightly. An error, into
which it is not possible almost, so great a Scholar should be drawn aside,
by specious shows, and a similitude, or rather an identitie of names.

(8) But such for certain is the quality of fancy, and of preconceipt, that
it does frame and fashion all things like it self: just as those men, whose
eyes are tainted with the yellow jaundise, conceive all Objects which they meet
with, to be yellow. When once Pythagoras had formed the apprehension of his
Scholars, to entertain these principles, Diog. Laertius in Pythag.
viz. (...), etc. that unity was the beginning of all numbers; that numbers
were the original of points, and lines, and plain figures; and these the
Parents of the Elementary bodies, (...), etc. out of which bodies, the whole
world was animated and contrived: when he had formed I say, their apprehensions
to these principles, than which not any thing more foolish and absurd in
nature; it was not possible to alter them in their opinions. And so affected
also were the Epicurcans, unto those (...) and that (...), Id. in. Epicut.
taught them by their Master, and out of which they were persuaded the whole
world had been compacted. So is it also with these men, who having taken a
conceit against George the Arian, and his butcherly proceedings: think
presently that every George they meet with in discourse or reading, must be of
Alexandria. On this conceit, first Dr. Reynolds confounded George the Arian,
with St. George the Martyr: and after, Drusius confounded George the Laodicean,
with George the Arian. There is another George B. of Alexandria too, Biblloth.
c. 96.
mentioned in Photius, as the Author of a book concerning Chrysostom: (...),
But who he was, (says he) and in what time he lived, I am not certain. I
wonder some or other has not resolved the doubt, and made him also George the
Arian: that so we might have had a whole mess of Georges, and all but one.

(9) But to return unto my story. No sooner was the Council of Seleucia
ended, but George prepared himself for his return to Alexandria:
notwithstanding that he stood degraded by the Sentence of that Synod. It seems
he was a man, not to be daunted either with complaints or Censures: for
presently on his return he fell upon his former courses; plaguing as well the
Gentiles, as the Christians, Sozo^. l. 4. c. 16.
which would not be in all points of his Opinion. By means whereof, and by his
insolent carriage toward those of the better sort, he became at last to be
generally hated: the rather, because he was suspected to be a Tale-teller, an
Informer; and that he did ill Offices between them and the Emperor: L. 22.
cap. 28.
Multos exinde accusans apud patulas aures Constantij, ut eius recalcitrantes
imperijs, as in Marcellinus. The occasion of his death is diversely related. Our
Ecclesiastical Historians agree jointly, that the Emperor had given him
license to convert the Temple of Mithras, or the Sun, which had been long
time out of use, into a Christian Church; and that the Christians finding in it
such heaps of slaughtered bodies, which had been offered to that Idol*
exposed them to the public view, thereby to make the irreligion and impiety
of the Gentiles the more odious. Netled with which, they fell together on the
Bishop, whom before they hated; and slew him in the place. By Ammianus
Marcellinus it is thus related, that passing once by the goodly Temple
dedicated to the Genius, it may be of the Roman Empire; with many of the
people, according to the custom, waiting on him: Flexis ad adem ipsam
luminibus, quamdiu ( inquit) stabit ho^ Sepulchrum; Vbi supr.
casting his eyes upon it after a scornful fashion, how long (said he) shall
these old ruins continue undemolished. Upon report of which, the Gentiles
furiously enraged, and hearing presently upon it, that their Governor was
newly dead: they greedily apprehended both the occasion, and the opportunity,
not quieting themselves, till they had torn the man so hated, into almost a
thousand pieces. On both sides, it is well agreed of in the maine and
substance; though differing a little in the circumstance: both parties, as well
the Christians as the Gentiles, testifying this; that as his life was bloody,
so his death was shameful.

(10) I have the more at large related, the whole History of this bloody
tyrant; because we may the sooner see, how little probability there is in
this, that he should ever steal into that credit in the Church, as to be
reckoned for a Martyr. We do not doubt to make it evident anon, that our St.
George was honored as a Saint and Martyr, in the time of Pope Gelasius, it may
be, during the life also of St. Ambrose. Suppose we then, that George the Arian
suffered death, anuo 361. about which time St. Ambrose flourished, though not
yet a Bishop; and that Gelasius entered upon the Church of Rome, anno 492. Let
this I say be granted, or let it only be supposed: and shall we think it
possible, that in so small a tract of time, if not the same time, the Church
should be so much mistaken, to honor such a barbarous and bloody Tyrant for a
Saint? This is, me thinks, not likely: and I must crave some longer time,
before I dare believe it. But George (say they) was by the Arians reckoned for
an ho^y Martyr. What if he were? Shall we conceive the Church to be so
careless of her self, and in her purest times; as to afford him room in her
common Calendar, and Martyrologies, upon the commendation of the Arian
Heretics. I doubt it much. But what if we should make denial to this (...),
and say that George the Arian was not reputed for a Martyr; no not by those of
the same party? If we should say so, I see not yet, what might be justly
said against us. Certain I am, that Epiphanius says, he was no Martyr, and
he reasons thus. Haeres. 76. page 912. Ed. gr. lat.
(...); etc. But some perhaps will say, was not this George a Martyr, that
suffered these things of the Gentiles? Yes verily says he, had he endured
those miseries in testimony of the Truth; or had that cruel death betide him,
through the malice of the Heathen, for the confession of his Faith in JESUS
CHRIST: (...), then had he been indeed a Martyr, and that a chief one.
Certain I also am, that Amm. Marcellinus has recorded, that his accursed body
being first torn in pieces, was afterward consumed with fire: and all the
ashes of it raked up together by the people, and cast into the Sea. And this
they did, lest else they might be recollected, and a Temple built in honor of
them: even as we see it done (says he) to others of the Christian religion,
who suffering grievous torments, and dying in a constant perseverance in their
Faith; are by that Sect entitled Martyrs. Id metuens (says he) ne collectis
supremis, Lib. 22. c. 29.
aedes illis exsiruerentur, ut reliquis; qui deviare ^ Religione compulsi
pertulere cruciabiles poenas, ad usque gloriosam mortem intemerata fide
progressi, and nunc Martyrs appellantur. So then, it is affirmed by
Epiphanius, that he was no Martyr; by Marcellinus that his ashes were all cast
into the Sea, that so he might not be reputed as a Martyr: and therefore by
what good authority it may be proov'd, hereafter, that he was reckoned for a
Martyr; we are yet to seek. Which being so, I cannot choose but marvel, how
Epiphanius is produced, by Doctor Reynolds first, and after by Polanus, as a
reproover of I know not whom, some certain Quidams, for worshipping the Arian
George as an holy Martyr. Haeres. 76.
For in the place alleged, that Reverend Father writing against the Anomaei,
tells us this of them, that their Founder was one Aetius, promoted to the
Dignity and Office of a Deacon, by that George of Alexandria, who was so
cruelly torn in pieces by the people. Which told, he brings in that objection,
which might perhaps be made in the defense of Aetius, by the Anomaei; that
George by whom their founder was made Deacon, had suffered for the Gospel: and
thereunto he makes that answer, which before you read. Not one word more than
this, touching the Arian George his being reckoned a nonullis, for a Martyr:
and therefore we must leave both this, and the Veruntamen coli coepit, which
comes after, to his bare assertion.

(11) The rest that follows in that elaborate work of Doctor Reynolds, is a
Collection of those several shreds of the old Aria^ Legend, which have been
patched by diverse men, upon Saint George's Cloak. The conflict between him
and Athanasius the Magitian, extant (says he) in Metaphrastes, and Pasicrates;
as also in Vincentius and Antoninus: together with the Fable or the Persian
Dacianus, first made a King by the Arian Legendaries; and after so reported in
the Martyrologie of Bid. To this we have already answered, I mean unto the
first part of it, in our third Chapter: Nor will we now repeat it. Only it
may be not omitted, that there is nothing to be seen at all of Athanasius, in
the Legend written by Pasicrates, who calls himself St. George's servant: and
that Antoninus, however he relate the passage, somewhat briefly, does not yet
give that Reverend name unto the Sorcerer. Which modesty I also find, and I
much wonder at it, in Iacobus de Voragine. The other Tale of Dacianus, first
taken up by Bid, and not unlikely out of some ancient Legend of the Arians;
and after by Rhabanus Maurus, Notgerus, and with some difference, by
Vincentius, de Voragine, and Antoninus: this tale I say, and what may be
replied in their excuse by whom it is related, we shall defer until we come
to produce such evidence, as speaks on our side. As for the Empress
Alexandra, the wife of Diocletian, so say Pasicrates, and Metaphrastes; of
Dacianus, as it is In Beda, Rhabanus Maurus, and Notgerus: seeing she is not
brought to testify against us, and that already she has been examined in
our in our third Chapter; we do discharge her of the Court. If there be any
thing behind unanswered, it is that all our Authors generally agree, that
George our Martyr was by birth a Cappado^ian: huc accedit quod suum utrique
Georgium Cappadocem fuisse aiunt, De Idol. Romans l. 1. cap. 5.22.
as he has it in his arguments against ns. This we affirm. What then: Can any
hereupon conclude, that therefore George the Martyr, must needs be George the
Arian: because this latter is conceived (conceived I say, not prooved) to be
borne in Cappadocia?) Then either must all Cappadocians be of that sect, or
else all GEORGES at the least, which were of Cappadocia; which were ridiculous
to say, and no less foolish to beleve: neither the name, nor Country
heretofore accused, as more devoted to that Heresy; than any other of their
fellow-names, or neigbour Nations So truly said Lactantius, Adeo argumenta ex
absurdo petita, ineptos habent exitus. But of this argument, if so it may be
called; a little is sufficient.

(12) To end this tedious disputation, (for I will borrow both the resolution
and the words of Sir Walter Raleigh, Part. 1. l. 2. cap. 23.. 5.
in a case of equal controversy,) I hold it a sure proof in examination of
such opinions as have once gotten the credit of being general, so to deal, as
Pacuvius did in Capua with the multitude, finding them desirous to put all the
Senators to death. He locked the Senators up in the State-house, and offered
their lives to the peoples mercy, obtaining first thus much, that none of them
should perish, before the Commonalty had elected a better in his place. As fast
as any name was read, all of them cried out instantly, Let him die: but in the
substituting of another, some notorious vice of the person, or baseness of his
condition, or insufficiency of his quality; made each new one that was
offered to be rejected. So that finding the worse and less choice, the further
and the more they sought, it was finally agreed, that the old ones should be
kept for lack of better. Melch. Canus l. 11. cap 5.
To which the resolution of an Englishman, we will adjoyne this Caveat of a
Spaniard: Sine ergo plebem, probabilissimam opinionem, praesertim quae penitus
insedit and inveteravit, cum maioribus suis retinere.

(13) Thus have we done our parts in the defense of St. George's History, so
far as it concerned the beating down of that strong opposition which was
made against him. Our next care is to justify his story, out of such monuments
of Learning and Antiquity, as may for ever keep it free and fearlesse of the
like assaults. In which I have directed my discourse, according to the
observation of Lactantius, and the method of the Ancients. The observation of
Lactantius, that in the search of knowledge, and pursuit of wisdom, we first
do labor to discover that which is false; and after to instruct our selves in
that which is the truth. Instit. Divin. l. 1. cap. ult.
Primus sapientiae gradus est, falsa intelligere, secundus vera cognoscere: And
as his observation was, so also was his method. For in his first of
Institutions, having detected the vanity of the Gentiles, in their Idolatries,
and impious worship of such a Heard of GODS: in the four last, he leads them
in the way of Truth, the way of perfect Knowledge and true Religion. This also
is Saint AVSTINS method, in his most excellent work De civitate Dei: a work
of which we may affirm, that all the treasures of Learning both human and
divine, are amassed in it. Their reason is, ut refutatis ijs, quae veritati
videntur obstare, rectius asserere possimus veram religionem, and Dei cultum.
This also is the method of ARISTOTLE, of AQVINAS, and of whom not? And thus it
also is, in our present business. We have already satisfied such arguments,
as were made against us, and thereby overthrown those Works and Ramparts
raiz'd by our Adversaries: We now proceed to strengthen and confirm our own.
Or else we may be justly subject to that scoff, which by the same LACTANTIVS
is put upon ARCESILAS; Nae recte hic aliorum sustulit disciplinas, sed non
recte fundavit suam. Which that we may the better do, we will repose our
selves a little, till we have taken out Commission for the examination of
Witnesses, on Saint GEORGE'S side: Concluding here the first and most
adventurous Part of this Discourse, this partem (...); as they use to call it.

The end of the first Part.
THE HISTORY OF St. GEORGE, asserted, etc. The Second Part.
CHAP. I.
(1) The Name and Etymology of GEORGE. (2) The Story of St. George by
Metaphrastes. (3) The time of that Author: and the reason of his Name. (4) The
opinion of him in the Greeke-Church. (5) This Metaphrastes not the same with
Simeon the Schoolmasters. (6) The Country, Parentage, and first fortunes of
St. George. (7) The State of the Roman Empire at that time, and Persecution
then beginning. (8) The speech of George unto the tyrants: the torments which
he suffered, and his death. (9) The manner of his death according to Friar
Anselme; and the English Story. (10) A reiection of the residue in
Metaphrastes. (11) Arguments Ab autoritate negative, of what credit in the
Schools.

(1) We are now come unto the latter part of St. George's History; a part
wherein we shall find many friends, and few enemies: for now we are to deal
with those, that speak for us; and will not stick to justify the Story of
this blessed Martyr, upon their oaths. But first we will dilate a little on
his Name, lest else mistaking there, we may perchance have all our process
overthrown; and this we will the rather, because the name does seem to carry
with it, the Osse or Omen of good luck; and in a manner did presage him for a
Martyr. The Name of GEORGE, not to proceed in it more Grammatically, is
originally Greek: derived' (...), which is; To till the Earth, or to play the
Plough-man. It signifies an Husbandman; and therefore Suidas does expound the
name by (...), a Tiller, or labourer of the Earth. So Camden, in his Remains,
George, gr. Husbandman, the same with Agricola: and thereunto the famous
Spencer thus alludeth in the words before recited; Faery Qu. l. 1. Canto. 10.
There thee a Plough-man all unweeting found,
As he his toil some teame that way did guide,
And brought thee up in Plough-mans state to bide;
Whereof GEORGOS he thee gave to Name, etc.


To this the learned Doctor Reynolds has alluded also, as before I noted;
where he informs us, That all true Christian people, ( Quos (...) Dei
appellat Apostolus, 1. Cor. 3.) whom the Apostle calls GODS Husbandry, ought
to make war against the Dragon, mentioned in the Apocalypse. But this
allusion or conceit, noted before him, by George Wicelius, In S. George.
in these words. Esto tu quicunq, censeris Christianus, Georgius; idque
reipsa. Pater enim Coelestis (...) est, inquit Evangelista: Nos huius mystici
Agricolae (...) sumus, sicut ait Apostolus. Be thou (says he) whoever thou
art that art called a Christian, be thou a GEORGE: and not in Name only, but
in very deed. For as we have it in the Gospel, Our heavenly Father is an
Husbandman: And we, as the Apostle tells us, are Gods husbandry.

(2) But of the Name enough. The Story of our Martyr, we have made choice to
borrow out of Simeon Metaphrastes. For notwithstanding that we find the
History set down at large, by others of the later times; and that not few of
those that went before him both in time and learning, have touched at it: yet
we have taken him to speak first for us, to open as it were, our Bill;
reserving all the rest as seconds, to make good his assertions. I know we might
with greater glory, and more seeming show of Antiquity, have cast this burden
upon him, that calls himself Saint George's servant, Pasicrates by name: the
first which did commit to writing, the Death and Actions of St. George; and one
(if such a one there was) which might relate the Story with most assurance, as
being always with him even unto his suffering. But since the credit of
Pasicrates, and of the story written by him, depends only on the word of
Metaphrastes, who ascribes it to him: We may as well immediately report it out
of Metaphrastes; in whom there is not any thing omitted worth our reading,
which is found extant in the other. Of whom, and of the time in which he
lived, and that opinion which he carries in the world, we will speak a
little: because we have made choice of him, to declare first for us; and it
concerns us, not to have our business opened by a man suspected, by one of no
esteem and credit with the learned. When that is done, we will not beg you to
believe him any further; than in Sir Walter Raleigh's judgment, we may give
credit unto Annius and his Authors: namely so far, as others writing on the
same Argument, concur with him; and justify his words as warrantable and
historical.

(3) And first, the Age in which he lived, is diversely reported. Bellarmine on
the credit of Baronius, Descrip. Eccl.
has placed him in the middle of the ninth Centurie; John Vossius in his Book
De Gr. Historicis, Lib. 2. cap. 26.
has ranked him in the year 1060! Oraeus Volaterran, our learned Jewel, and
Helvicus, make him a babe of yesterday; a writer of the fourteenth Centurie, no
older. Of this last computation more hereafter: the other two, being the worst
of them, more probable than this; though but one true. These two both built
upon the same ground, the time of Michael Psellus; and therefore if we can
resolve upon his time, we have found the other. By Bellarmine it is affirmed
that Psellus was alive, anno 850. Michael the third* together with his Mother
Theodora, then ruling in the East: which Psellus made a funeral Oration in the
praise of Metaphrastes. This last acknowledged to be true by Vossius; but then
he tells us, and that upon the credit of Cedrenus, that Michael Psellus, (...),
as that Author calls him, was Tutor unto Constantinus Ducas, who began his
Empire in the year 1061. But in the sifting of the business, it may perhaps
appear, that Vossius is not led to this by any argument, more than his own
opinion. Non negare possum (says he) ijs temporibus ( viz. sub Mich. 3.)
vixisse quendam Michael. Psellum; Iu^^ quo supra.
nam id aperte testatur Johannes Curopalates: sed nego istum nobilem illum esse
Philosophum, cuius permulta hodieque supersunt. He cannot choose but grant,
that Michael Psellus flourished in the time of Michael and Theodora: but that
this was the Michael Psellus whose writings are still extant, this he denies.
So then, it being so far granted, that Michael Psellus was alive, according
to the time assigned by Bellarmine; we will according to that computation
resolve of Sim. Metaphrastes, that he flourished in the ninth Centurie. When we
see better reason to enforce the contrary, we shall not think it any shame,
to alter our opinion. As for the name of Metaphrastes, it was given our Author
in reference unto a work of his, touching the Lives of Saints and Martyrs:
which lives he had collected with indefatigable industry, out of several
Authors, himself retayning the sense and matter of them, but otherwise
delivering the Stories in words more proper and expressive. So witnes^eth
Aloysius Lippomanus in his Preface; Ideoque and Metaphrastae nomen fuisse
adeptum: (...) enim Graece, Latin est Scripturam aliquam dilucidioribus
verbis, sensu tamen and materia retentis, interpretari.

(4) This work thus brought together, became of good esteem and credit in the
Eastern parts: the reputation of the Writer, and the opinion had of his good
performance in that kind, co^curring both together, to further the admission of
it in their Churches. For of the man himself, it is affirmed by Lippomanus, In
Praefac.
that by the Grecians he is honored as a Saint: the 27. of November, being
assigned him for his Feast Day. Psellus, a man of special quality himself,
has played the Panegyrist in his commendation: and therein added to the fame
of Metaphrastes; Adeo bonum est laudari a laudato viro. And not he only, but
all the Fathers of the great Council of Florence, the greatest in the later
Ages of the Church; have magnified his Name, and extolled his Learning. For
vouching him and his authority, in that great point, De filioque then debated;
he is summoned thus: Imprimis ergo Sim. Metaphrastes vestris in Ecclesijs
celebarrimus, Council. Flor. Anno 1436.
accedat, etc. Sess. 7. But what need more be said than that of Theod.
Balsamon, in his Commentaries on the Canons of the sixth Synod. For there was
great complaint made in that Council, how hideously the lives of Saints were
falsified by Heretics;. 6.
which 63. Canon, together with the resolution of the Fathers, we have recited
in the second Chapter of the former part of this Discourse. Hereupon Balsamon
takes occasion to congratulate the felicity of the Church, in those latter
times; and to commend withal, the pains and excellent performance of our
Author, in that Argument. Magna itaque B. Metaphrastae agenda est gratia, qui
martyricas pro veritate fossas, non sine multis laboribus and sudoribus
repurgavit, and exornavit; ad Dei laudem, and S. Martyrum perennem gloriam. So
he, or rather his Translatour: for I have not the original now by me.

(5) Bellarmine gives this note of him, De Scrip. Eccl.
and the note is good: Videri aliquas historias Sanctorum, additas a
posterioribus; That many Histories were added to the work of Metaphrastes, by
some of lesser standing; those namely which were added to the Catalogue of
Saints, after the death of the first Author. Which note of his, together with
the testimonies of Balsamon, and Psellus, do most abundantly refell their
error, which make him such a Puisne: and in part also satisfy it. The first
of those, that did disparage thus our Author; Raphael Volaterran: and in him
we read it thus. Lib 19. p. 234. lu. S.
Simeon Constantinopolitanus ludi magister, circiter annos abhinc 200.
composuit Graece Metaphrastas. Id est, Sanctorum vitas, quae singulis mensibus
proprie leguntur, habenturque in Bibliotheca Vaticana. I thus translate it in
the words of Bishop Jewel, This Simeon Metaphrastes, whom Mr. Harding calls
a greek Writer, Art. 14.6.7.
was a poor Schoolmasters in Constantinople, and wrote Saints lives, which
may well be called, The Legend of lies, and lived Two hundred years ago, and
not above. Thus has Helvicus placed his Simeon Constantinopolitanus, in the
year 1306. which was two hundred years exactly, before the time of
Volaterran: And so Oraeus in his Nomenclator, Simeon Metaphrastes,
Constantinopolitanus, scripsit de vitis Sanctorum, Sec. 14. So they, but this
can nothing prejudice our Simeon Metaphrastes, extolled so highly by Michael
Psellus, who lived, in their account which speak the least, Anno 1060. so
highly praised by Balsamon, who wrote about the year 1191. above an hundred
years before this Scoole-master was talked of. Likely it is, this
Schoolmasters, might add those Lives unto the work of Metaphrastes; which by
the Cardinal are noted to be of later date, and a less standing. And this I
think the rather, because Nicephorus, who lived then with this Schoolmasters,
if such there was; has told us touching Simeon Stylites, the latter of that
name, how that one Simeon Magister (Some Schoolmasters perhaps) had written
of him; but not so learnedly as the occasion did require. Hist Eccles. Lib. 18.
cap. 14.
Ea huc vsque (de Sim. viz. Stylite) sermon omnium celebrantur; a Simeone
Magistro, quanquam non ita docte ut magnitudo rerum postulavit, conscripta. But
be he what he will, and even as ignorant as a Pedant may be in nature, it is no
matter: certain I am, he cannot be that Metaphrastes, so much famed by
Psellus, Balsamon, and a whole Council; not that, whom we have chosen to
report the story of St. George, and is now ready to relate it.

(6) Of Metaphrastes hitherto. We now proceed unto the story, which he tell's
us, thus. Georgius in Cappadocia, non obscuro loco, e Christianis parentibus
natus; in vera pietate iam inde educatus fuerat. Hic cum ad pubertatem nondum
pervenisset, patrem in certamine pietatis egregis pugnantem amisit; e
Cappadociaque cum matre in Palestinam, vnde erat oriunda, se contulit: vbi
multae illi possessiones, et ingens erat haereditas. Ob generis igitur
nobilitatem, cum iam et corporis pulchritudine et aetate ad militiam aptus
esset; Tribunus militum est constitutus. Quo quidem in munere, cum virtutem
suam in bellicis certaminibus, seque strenum militem ostendisset; Comes a
Diocletiano constitutus est, antequam christianus esse cognosceretur. Cum autem
eo tempore matter e vita discessisset, maioris cupidus dignitatis, maximam e
divitijs sibi relictis partem accipit, et ad Imperatorem profectus est. Tunc
annum vicessimum aetatis annum impleverat. So far the words of Metaphrastes,
which I have therefore here put down at large, because it is the ground work
of the whole business. I translate it thus. St. George was borne in
Cappadocia, of Christian parents, and those not of the meanest quality: by
whom he was brought up in true Religion, and the fear of God. He was no
sooner past his Childhood, but he lost his father, bravely encountering with
the enemies of Christ: and thereupon departed with his afflicted Mother into
Palestine, whereof she was a native; and where great fortunes and a fair
inheritance did fall unto him. Thus qualified in birth, and being also of an
able body, and of an age fit for employment in the wars, he was made a
Colonel. In which employment he gave such testimonies of his valor, and
behaved himself so nobly: that forthwith Dioclesian, not knowing yet that he
was a Christian, advanced him to the place and dignity of his Council for the
wars: (for so on good authority, I have made bold to render Comes in this
place and time) About this time his Mother dyed: and he augmenting the
heroicke resolutions of his mind, with the increase of his revenue, did
presently apply himself unto the Court and service of his Prince; his
twentieth year being even then complete and ended. This is the first part of
St. Georges history, according unto Metaphrastes. In affirmation of the which
I will add only for the present, a roll or catalogue of such, which make St.
George to be by birth a Cappadocian; which is the thing first doubted. As viz.
The Martyrologie of the Greek Church, Vincentius Bellovacensis, Nicephorus
Callistus, Iacobus de Voragine, The Breviarie of the English Church, See Vsum
Sarum, Edward the third of England, in his Charter of the Foundation of the
Church in Windsore, Antoninus Florentinus, Hermannus Schedell, Phil.
Bergomensis, Ralph Volaterran, the Magdeburgians, and Oraeus: twelve honest
men, besides their foreman; and true most of them; besides all those of the
Romish party also, which are peremptory in it. The several places, and the
words therein alleged, unto this purpose; we shall see hereafter. Which being
so, I cannot choose but wonder at the boldness of one Friar Anselme, Descript.
terr. Sanct. apud. Cauis. antiq. lecti^.
of the Order of St. Francis; who makes St. GEORGE a Native of Palestine, or
Syria: and tells us that the house in which he was borne, is still standing;
and called commonly St. GEORGES De Acon versus orientem (these are his words)
ad quinque Leucas occurrit Casale quoddam, quod S. Georgius dicitur; quia ibi
natus fuit: and situm est inter montana in Valle. But more I marvel at Sir
Walter Raleigh, that on such weak and shallow grounds should so report it.
Five miles (says he) from Ptolemais (which is the same with Acon) toward the
East, is the Castle of St. GEORGE, where he was borne; the Valley adjoining
bearing the same name. This last indeed we grant, that there is such a Valley,
and that it is so called; and that there is a Castle and an Oratorie in it,
consecrated to our Martyr. Yet this, not in relation to his birth, which none
besides themselves have thought on: but on as weak and faulty grounds, his
conflict with the Dragon, said by the Natives to be slain by him in this
place; which before we noted from PATRITIVS, and ADRICOMIVS, in the latter end
of our first Chapter.. ult.


(7) Before we travail further in the Story of St. GEORGE, we must a little
look upon the state of the Roman Empire: governed by Diocletian, in the East;
and in the West by Maximinian, surnamed Herculius. For Diocletian being made
Emperor by the Army, upon the death of Carus; and finding that the burden was
too weighty for him to sustain alone; he joined unto him in that honor, one
of his Fellow Soldiers, this Maximinian: reserving to himself the Eastern
parts, at that time daily wasted by the neighboring Persians; and sending his
Copartner into the West, where the Barbarians of the North and Western
Marches, were no less troublesome. But things not rightly yet succeeding to
their wish; as well to keep in quiet that which was peaceable, as to regaine
such Provinces as had been lost: they took unto themselves two CAESAR'S (for
so the next Successors were then called;) viz. Galerius Maximinianus, and
Constantius Chlorus. Of these the latter was by his Parentage and birth, of
Illyricum, and by AUGUSTUS MAXIMINIAN employed in Britain, which was then
revolted: The other was of Dacia, a neighbor by his Country unto Diocletian;
by whom he was sent out Commander of his Armies against the Persian. Those
thus engaged in the common service of the State, and the affairs thereof in
better order than before: the Emperors now out of action, converted all their
force and fury on the Christians; whom they afflicted with the greatest and
most savage Persecution of all others. For now not only some part or other of
the Church, was harassed and depopulated; but all at once a prey unto the Sword
and Tortures of the public Hangman: no corner of the Empire so far distant
from the Seats Imperial, wherein there was not havocke made of Gods beloved.
Hist. lib. 7.
Interea Diocletianus in Orient, Maximinianus in Occidente, vastari Ecclesias,
affligi, interficique Christianos praeceperunt: quae persecutio omnibus fere
anteactis diuturnior, and immanior fuit. So PAVL OROSIVS, briefly, according to
his manner.

(8) The Persecution thus resolved on, and begun already in the Court and
Seats Imperial: and not so only, but warrants granted out unto the Officers
and Rulers of the Provinces, to speed the Execution; and that done also in a
frequent Senate, the Emperor DIOCLETIAN there himself in person: St. GEORGE,
though not yet Sainted, could contain no longer, but thus exposed himself
unto their fury, and his own glory. For thus it follows in the Story. Cum
igitur primo statim die tantam in Christianos crudelitatem animadvertisset, etc
Omnem pecuniam and vestem celeriter pauperibus distribuit, etc. and tertio
Concilij die, qua Senatus decretum confirmandum er at, etc. ipsi omni foi
midine reiecta, etc. in medio consessu ste tit, and in hunc modum locutus est.
Quousque tandem O imperator, and vos Patres Conscripti, furorem vestrum in
Christianos augebitis* legesque adversus eos iniquas sancietis? etc. Eosque ad
eam quam vos an vera sit religionem ignoratis, eos qui veram didicere
compelletis? Haec Idola non sunt dij, non sunt inquam. Nolite per errorem
falli. Christus solus Deus est, idemque solus Dominus in gloria Dei patris. Aut
igitur vos item veram agnoscite religionem, aut certe eos, qui illam colunt,
nolite per dementiam vestram perturbare. His verbis attoniti* and inopinata
dicendi liberate perculsi, oculos ad Imperatorem omnes converterunt, audituri
quidnam is ad ea responderet, etc. When therefore GEORGE, even in the first
beginnings, had observed the extraordinary cruelty of these proceedings, he
presently put off his military abiliments, and making dole of all his substance
to the poor: on the third Session of the Senate, when the Imperial decree was
to be verified, quite void of fear, he came in-the Senate House, and spoke
unto them in this manner. How long most noble Emperor, and you Conscript
Fathers, will you augment your tyrannies against the Christians? How long will
you enact unjust and cruel Laws against them? Compelling those which are
aright instructed in the faith, to follow that Religion, of whose truth your
selves are doubtful. Your Idols are no Gods, and I am bold to say again, they
are not. Be not you longer couzned in the same error. Our Christ alone is God,
he only is the Lord, in the glory of the Father. Either do you therefore
acknowledge that Religion which undoubtedly is true: or else disturb not them
by your raging follies, which would willingly embrace it. This said, and all
the Senate wonderfully amazed at the free speech and boldness of the man; they
all of them turned their eyes upon the Emperor, expecting what he would
reply: who beckoning to Magnentius, then Consul, and one of his special
Favorites, to return an answer; he presently applied himself to satisfy
his Princes pleasure. Further we will not prosecute the story in our Authors
words, which are long and full of needless conference: but briefly will
declare the substance of it, which is this. Upon St. Georges constant
profession of his Faith, they wooed him first with promises of future honors,
and more fair advancements: but finding him unmovable, not to be wrought
upon with words, they tried him next with torments; not sparing any thing which
might express their cruelty, or ennoble his affliction. When they saw all was
fruitless, at last the fatal Sentence was pronounced against him in this
manner; that being had again to prison, he should the following day be
drawn through the City, and beheaded. Reclusus ergo in carcere, Vincent. spec.
Hist l. 12.128.
sequenti die tali sententia damnatur* ut per totam Civitatem detractus, demum
capite puniretur. Which Sentence was accordingly performed, and GEORGE invested
with the glorious Crown of Martyrdom, upon the 23. day of April, Anno Domini
nostri 290.

(9) For this the year and day of S. GEORGE his death, we shall have proof
enough hereafter; of the day chiefly in the Martyrologies, and of the year
thereof in several Histories. Proof also store enough for this, that he was
beheaded: in which particular, all Authors which have descended to particulars,
agree jointly. Only the old Franciscan, Friar Anselme, whom I lately
mentioned, will have him end his sufferings in a flaming fire, De script. terr.
Sanct. ut supr.
at Rama in the Holy Land. For so it follows in his text. In Beryth autem
occidit draconem: in Rama autem, quae distat a Jerusalem per 20 miliaria,
fertur fuisse combustus. It Is well they are so linked together, his Martyrdom
by fire, and his encounter with the Dragon; being both of them of the same
medley. I had almost forgot the doughtie Author of the Seven Champions. Who
as he makes the first achievement of Saint GEORGE, to be the killing of a
burning Dragon in the Land of Egypt, whereby he saved from death the Princess
Sabra: so does he make his last, to be a dangerous combat, which he had with
a poisonous Dragon upon Dunsmere Heath; wherein the Dragon lost his life, and
the poor Knight returned to Coventrey, his own City, so extremely wounded,
that he shortly after dyed. And yet the foolish Author tells us expressly in
his Title, that there we have the true and certain manner of his Death. But
as good luck would have it, he left behind him to comfort his afflicted
people, no fewer than three Sons: and one of them, a matter of no common
knowledge, was GVY that famous Earl of Warwick; the other two being preferred
to place in Court.

(10) To return then to METAPHRASTES, (for we will hear him speak no
further of St. GEORGE:) we now dismiss him, to relate the rest that follows,
unto them that dare believe him. We have already shown you, how hideously the
Heretics had falsified the lives of Saints and Martyrs, to countenance their
cause: and with what little choice of argument the Church-historians had
compiled their Martyrologies, and Acts Ecclesiastical. Both observations
verified in the story of our Martyr, and the collections of this Author. For
in the rest that follows, we have the Arian tale of George and Athanasius the
Magitian; together with the strange Conversion of the Empress AREXANDRA: both
which before have had my blessing. These intermingled with the horrible and
most unsufferable torments which are there said to be applied unto our Martyr:
so great, so far above the strength of nature to endure; that we must needs
reject the very naming of them, as things so short of Truth, that in the
greatest charity they may not be reputed possible. And for the close of all, a
cheat or couzning trick of his, put by him on the Emperor: whom he
persuaded after many of his torments, that he was now content to sacrifice
unto the Roman Idols. Which done, the Church made trim, the Priests in
readiness, and many of the people gathered there together to behold the
alteration: he calls upon the LORD, and presently upon his prayers, down came
a fire from Heaven; by which both Temple, Priests, and many of the people, were
consumed. This last, accounted as an Error (or a Fable rather) in the common
Legends, by Antoninus Florentinus: who guessing at some reasons for which the
passion of St. GEORGE was judged Apocryphal, Summa histor. part. 1. tit. 8..
13.
makes this for One, Quod Daciano dixerit, (for so he calls him) paratum se
Sacrificare, si faceret populum ad Templum congregari; quo facto, oratione
eius, igne coelesti totum Templum etc. concremavit. This last accounted also
one of the principal excesses of this Writer, in the composition of his
Stories; and for that noted by the Cardinal in his censure of him.

(11) These passages in Metaphrastes we admit not in our Story; and therefore
leave the proof thereof, to such as think they may believe them. But for the
rest, we doubt not but to make it good by witnesses of special rank; and
many of them of authority undeniable, in points Historical. The rest, I mean,
which is of principal moment, and most necessary to the cause in hand; as viz.
his Country, and Martyrdom in general; the manner of his Death, the time and
place of it: all these we doubt not to make good, by such variety of Evidence,
and strength of testimony, as may suffice to make the Story free from all
further question. But for the greatness of his Parentage and Fortunes,
together with his Honorable place about the Emperor: this we will take upon
the word of Metaphrastes, until we find some evidence not yet discovered,
which can prove the contrary. Nor shall it be sufficient for any of the adverse
party, to say, that no such circumstance may be found in Eusebius, who largely
wrote the Story of that last and greatest Persecution: no nor in Bid which
mentions him; nor in Vincentius or Antoninus, both which are large enough in
the expression of his History. For we know well enough that Argumenta ab
authoritate negative, are shamefully exploded in the Schools of Logic: that
the argument would be ridiculous, should any one conclude, that all the
Silvian Kings reckoned in our Chronologies, are to be rejected; because so
many Writers of the history of Rome, have spared to name them. I know indeed,
in points of Faith and Moral duties, we may resolve it with the Fathers, Non
credimus quia non legimus; and therefore I restrain my self to Cases of this
quality: and that no further, till I see evidence of reason to convince me of
an Error; where proof of testimony fails. Which ground thus laid, we will
proceed unto the justification of the history in METAPHRASTES; so much thereof
as we have taken, and is most material. But we will first make clear our
passage, in the removing of one doubt, and commenting a little upon one
memorable circumstance therein; the better to explain the meaning of the
Author, and content the Reader: and having pointed out the scene of this great
Action, descend unto our evidence.

CHAP. II.
(1) Magnentius mentioned in the former Story, what he was. (2) Vestem exuere
militarem, the meaning of it; and when used. (3) Lydda the Scene of this great
action; now called Saint George's. (4) Malmesbury reconciled with other
Authors. (5) No executions permitted by the Ancients, within their Cities. (6)
The former Story justified, most of it, by Eusebius. (7) St. Ambrose
testimony of St. George, how certain to be his. (8) The time and Canon of
Pope Gelasius. (9) The Story of Saint George, why reckoned as Apocryphal.
(10) The meaning of Gelasius not to explode the Martyr, with his History. (11)
The Arian George not likely in so small a tract of time to be reputed as a
Martyr. (12) A Catalogue of the Authors cyted in this Book, which have made
honorable mention of Saint George; as also of those Princes, Peers, and
Prelates, which have done him Honor: digested in their times and Ages.

(1) THree things there are then, which are to be dispatched, before we come
to the producing of further Evidence on our party: viz. A doubt to be
remooved, a notable circumstance to be explained; and the designment of the
place or scene of this great Action. Of these the doubt to be removed, is that
particular passage touching Magnentius, said then to be a principal Favorite
of DIOCLETIAN, and at that time Consul: and this may well be called a doubt,
because in all the Consular tables, which I have searched and seen; I cannot
meet, during the whole Empire of Diocletian, a Consul of that Name. But if we
can find out the man; I hope we shall agree with case enough about his being
Consul: and for the finding out the man, we must make two enquiries. My first
enquiry is, whether Magnentius there mentioned, might not be he, which
afterward slew Constans, Son unto Constantine the Great, and took unto
himself that part of the Roman Empire, which Constans then commanded. To make
this probable, (for we aspire no further) we must first understand, that
Diocletian when he associated Maximinian in the Empire, did take unto himself
the name from IVPITER; the other his from HERCULES: Aurel. Victor. de Caesar.
c. 39. 2.
the one, being thenceforth called, Diocletianus Iovius; the other Maximinianus
Herculius. But not content with this, to make their memory in these adjuncts,
more eternal; they raised two several Companies of selected Soldiers, whom
they called Iovij and Herculij. Of these selected Companies Magnentius was at
that time Captain or Commander, ( Comes Herculiorum and Ioviorum, he is called
in the Latin story:) when he made slaughter of Prince Constans: and
therefore not unlikely, but he may be the Favorite of Diocletian, mentioned in
Metaphrastes; and by him raised unto this honor. If any thing may be objected
against this, it is, that if Magnentius were at that time Consul, when Saint
George was made a Martyr: either he had been dead, before the murder of the
young Emperor Constans; or else too old to undertake such enterprises. Of his
decease before that time, I think there can be nothing proov'd; unless by
way of possible conjecture. And for his age, allowing him for twenty, anno 290.
when our Martyr suffered, about which age, and sooner, many had been advanced
upon special favor, to that Dignity: and it will then easily appear, that
he could be no less than 80. years of age, at his usurping of the Empire.
This I confess for true, but yet I must affirm withal, that age is hardly
able to keep under, either ambitious desires, or noble resolutions. For
Bretannion, who at the same time with this Magnentius, assumed the purple
habit in the Countries of Pannonia, was exceeding ancient: and in the later
days, Venieri, Admiral of the Venetian Fleet, in the great Battle of
Lepanto, was close upon fourscore; yet of that haughty Spirit that he
contested with Don John the Spanish Admiral, even to a Challenge for the
Field, who then was in the prime and gallantrie of his youth. A greater age
than this, was that of Andreas Auria, Admiral to Charles the fifth; who lived
till 94. no less: and held unto the last, a man of notable undertakings, and
of brave performance. And if we look on former times, we find that most of
Alexanders great Commanders, attained unto the age of 80. years, or not much
short of it; and yet contended with each other, even till their latest gasp of
breath, for the sole Empire, and chief Sovereignty of Greece and Asia. So
stirring is the fire of glory and ambition, that it will kindle and inflame the
coldest appetite of age. Our next inquiry is, whether the name be not
mistaken in the Author, or the Translatours, for Maxentius. Which if it may be
granted, as the mistake is very easy: then will it be a matter of far less
difficulty than before. For who so little conversant in the Histories of those
times, but may remember, that Maximinianus Herculius had a son so named; and
that upon the death of Constantius Chlorus, he was proclaimed Augustus, and
saluted Emperor by the Praetorian bands at Rome. An honor he enjoyed not
long; being first undermined by his own Father, the old tyrant; and after
slain, with the discomfiture of his whole forces, at the Milvian bridge near
Rome, by Constantine the Great. Now if it may be granted, that the name may
possibly be mistaken; as we see daily worse mistakes, in the editions of the
best Authors: how easy is it to believe, that this MAXENTIVS, the son of the
one Emperor; might be made Consul, and in especial favor with the other? But
then it is objected, that we meet not with his name in any of the
Consular-Tables. This we affirm, and yet withal that notwithstanding this,
Maxentius might be Consul. For besides the Consuls Ordinary, appointed for
the year, whose names only occur in the public Tables: there was another
sort of Consuls, called Consuls honourarie, appointed only for a Month, and
sometimes longer, as it pleased the Emperors. Of this See Dion. A custom
taken up, upon the end of the Civil Wars, Cum helli civilis praemia
festinari coeperunt, as it is in Tacitus: when now the Emperors had many men
to gratify, and could not speed them all in ordinary Course. Of the which
kind of Consuls, Maxentius might be one; so also might Magnentius, though we
find nothing of them in the common Calendars. Of this kind also might there be
some other Consul of the latter name; although no further mention of him in
the Histories of that age and time.

(2) The circumstance to be explained, is that St. George before he came into
the Senate, put off His military abiliments! A circumstance not expressed
rightly in the Author, where we find only vestem pauperibus distribuit, that
he distributed his garments to the poor; and therefore have rather chosen to
express it in the words of Vincentius: where it is said, that having made a
dole of all his riches, militarem vestem exuit, he put off his military habit,
and so addressed himself to speak in the behalf of his poor brethren. Which
putting off his military habiliments, is not, as I conceive it, only (nor
perhaps at all) the disroabing of himself of his soldiers coat, or cassocke:
but rather the abandoning of his military or Knightly belt; the honorarie
mark of his well-deserving. For in the times of the Roman Empire, it was a
custom of the Prince, to honor such which were of greatest merit, with a
degree above the rest: which was performed by investing them with a military
belt or girdle; the Ensign of a Knight. This was called, Cingulo militiae
honestare: and hereunto it is alluded by St. Chrysostom, in his 26. Homily on
the Corinthians, viz. (...). Let none (says he) which is an Officer, presume
to come before the Prince, without his belt, and other military habiliments.
This military belt thus given, was an engagement of the party so invested,
unto the service of the Prince: and that in terms so near and close, that
such as had received the faith, and made a conscience of their ways, used
commonly to cast it from them; because of the incompatibility, that was
between their holy profession, and that Knightly order. A matter frequent in
the use of it, in the times of Persecution; in such especially, who could not
patiently conceal their holy callings, and dissemble their Religion. The
meaning then is this, that George no longer willing to continue in the service
of the Emperor, unto the hazard of his Soul, enounced his order: and being so
degraded, went up into the Senate; no longer now a Soldier of the Emperor; but
of JESUS CHRIST.

(3) As for the Scene, or Stage, on which this great and famous Tragedy of St.
George was acted: it is generally said to be in Lydda, a Town of Palestine, in
the Tribe of Ephraim. A Town made famous by St. Peter, who there, virtute
Christi non sua, Acts, 9.33.
restored Aeneas to his health; Who had kept his Bed eight years, and was
sick of the Palsy. Known also in the Writers both of former and of middle
times, by the name Diospolis, or the Town of Jupiter; because that Idoll-god
was there worshipped. In this Town, that St. George received the Crown of
Martyrdom, is evident out of the testimonies of those several Authors, which
have made mention of our Martyr: whose words I shall defer until the next
Chapter, where they are produced at large. Two only proofs I have made choice
of for the present. First, that his sacred body was there reverently entombed,
by the devout and pious inhabitants thereof: his Sepulcher being there extant
to be shown, even in the days of Will. of Tire, Hist. bell. sacri, l. 7. cap.
22.
about the year 1180. For so he testifies himself, In hac urbe ( Lydda
viz.) usque hodie egregij Martyris Georgij gloriosum Sepulchrum ostenditur; in
quo secundum exteriorem hominem in Deo creditur conquiescore. Next, that in
latter times, the Christians hereabouts, call it St. George's: the other names
thereof not to be found unless in Authors, or old Mappes. So witnesses Jacob.
de Vitriaco, Hist. Hiorus. cap. 57.
who lived about the year, 1240. that Lydda civitas, quondam Diospolis
appellata, nunc ad S. Georgium nuncupatur. Both circumstances, that of his
burial, and this other mentioned last, together, in old Friar Anselme:
Des^ri^^. ^err. Sancta.
quarto miliario a Modyn est Lydda, civitas qu^ Diospolis dicitur, in qua
corpus B. Georgij testantur fuisse; and S. Georgius vulgo dicitur. Shall we
have more? Roger de Hovenden in his Annals, Part Post. in Richard. 1.
recyting there the names of such great personages, as dyed in the Christian
Camp at the seige of Ptolemais; gives us among the rest three Bishops; viz.
N^vus Episcopus de Acon, Episcopus de Baru^h, Episcopus de S. Georgio. For at
that time, the Christians had made this Town a Bishops Seat; V. cap. 5.. 7.
as we shall see hereafter.

(4) Only in such a general consent of Authors, Will* the Monk of Malmesbury
does seem to differ from the rest: who seems to make the Scene hereof to be
Rama, Hist. de Reg. Angl. l. 4.
or Ramula, a little City not far distant. Ibi a dextra dimittentes maritima,
pervenerunt Ramulam, civitatulam muro indigam, B. Georgij, si famae credimus,
martyrij consciam: We came (says he) leaving the Seashore on the right hand,
to a little City, unwall'd, known by the name of Ramula; guilty, if we may
trust report, of St. GEORGES Martyrdom And hereupon perhaps it is, Vt supr.
that Friar Anselme, who as before we noted, has made St. GEORGE to end his
days in a burning fire; has chosen Rama for the place of Execution: his ashes
being afterward transferred (sd. he) to Lydda, and there buried. To reconcile
which difference, we must conceive that these two: Cities were not very far
asunder; and their Feilds or Territories close together: so that an action done
in one, without great error might be reported of the other. Cap. 8.28.
St. MATTHEW in his holy Gospel, tells us of a miracle done by our Savior, in
the Country of the Gergezens: whereas St. LVKE and MARK affirm, that it was
the Country of the Gadarens. Yet may it not be therefore thought, that the Holy
Spirit is at difference with it self; God forbid: nor that we should conceive
the Gadarens and Gergezens to be the same; which is not so. But rather we must
reconcile the places thus, according to the truth of story, and the situation
of the Country; that the two people mentioned in the Gospel were conterminous:
their Towns at no great distance, and their fields bordering one upon another.
Therefore that miracle, done in the fields between them both; might without
any wrong or error, be made good of either.

(5) To make the reconciliation more exact, and the case more parallel, we
must also note, that with the ancients there was nothing more unlawful, than
to put any man to death within their Cities. Thus in the state of Rome, the
Vestall Virgin having committed fornication, was buried quick within the
Campus Sceleratus; and other malefactors thrown headlong from the Tarpeian
Rock: both situate without the Town. So also had the Thessalians a place of
Execution, from the praecipice of an Hill, which they called the (...) or
Corvi: from whence arose the Proverb, (...), Away with him to the Gallows.
Thus the Jews also, when they crucified our Savior, led him out of their
City to Mount Calvarie: and thus St. LVKE reports it in the Execution of St.
STEPHEN, Act^ 7.
that they cast him out of the City and stoned him. A custom which continued
long, even till the times of Persecution were all past: and of the which, our
public Gallows which we see every where without our Towns, are some
remainders. Which being so, no execution in those times permitted in their
Cities; it must needs be, that our St. GEORGE did suffer in the open fields.
Which granted, it will then appear that Malmesbury might not unjustly say of
Rama, or (as he calls it) Ramula, that it was guilty of, or rather had a hand
in Saint Georges death; though in the general voice of Writers, it be affirmed
of Lydda: because the fields were common, or close adjoining, and the Towns
but little distant.

(6) These matters thus dispatched, we now proceed to verify the former Story
out of the words of such as have concurred with Metaphrastes in the maine and
substance. And first we will attempt to justify the whole narration out of
Eusebius; whose countenance herein, will I am sure be worth our seeking. And I
would gladly know what part or circumstance there is in all our History, for
the defense whereof, we may not use his testimony. L. 8. c. 21.24.
Is it, that any Cappadocian was adjudg'd to suffer for the Gospel? He tells
us there, that one Seleucus, Julian, and others of that Country, received the
Crown of Martyrdom, during the Persecution raised by Diocletian. L. 8. cap.
21.19.12. etc.
Or is it that the Persecution ever did extend to Palestine? He has a Chapter
at the least, of such as suffered in that Country. It is not, I am sure, that
any of the military men abandoned their advancements, or yielded up their
lives, to testify how little they esteemed them in comparisen of CHRIST. Hist.
Eccles. l. 8. c. 4.7.
For this he has expressly, that many of them, when the Persecution first
began, did willingly forsake their honorable Offices; and some their lives:
(...). Nor can it be that that the Imperial edict did not extend to such as
were of his retinue, and did belong immediately unto his person. For in the
same book he mentions Dorotheus and Gorgonius, (...), with many more of
Caesar's household. We grant indeed, that no such name as that of George*
occurres in all that Author: but we affirm withal that he confesses it an
infinite and tedious business, to recount the names of all that suffered, or
capitulate those several torments they endured; and therefore purposely omits
them. L. 8. ^.^^6.
(...), etc. as he there has it. So then, Eusebius does affirm that
Cappadocia had its Martyrs, that the Persecution raged in Palestine, that it
extended to the military men, and to those also that attended in the Palace;
and lastly that it is impossible to tell the names of all that suffered. Put
this together* and it will amount to this; that George one of those many
Martyrs whom Eusebius could not name, a Cappadocian by his Country, a Soldier
by profession, and one that waited in the Court; was put to death in Palestine
by torments not to be expressed, because he constantly continued in the Faith
of CHRIST.

(7) In the next place we have the testimony of St. Ambrose, if at the least,
the words be his: a Reverend Father of the Church, and a chief ornament
thereof, who dyed about the year, 397. The words are these: Georgius Christi
miles fidelissimus, dum Christianismi professio tegeretur, solus inter
Christicolas intrepidus Dei filium confessus est: Cui tantam constantiam gratia
divina concessit, ut and tyrannicae potestatis praecepta contemneret, and
innumerabilium non formidaret tormenta poenarum. Id est. George the most
faithful Soldier of JESUS CHRIST, when as Religion was else every where
dissembled, adventured boldly to confess the name of GOD: to whom it pleased
the Lord to give so much of Heavenly grace, that he not only scorned the
tyrants, but contemned their torments. This I find cyted by Hermanus Schedel,
in his Chronica Chronicorum; and out of him by Bergomensis; since by Molanus jn
his Annotations upon Vsuards Martyrologie: Iacobus de Voragine relyeth also, in
one passage, on the authority of Ambrose; so does Vincentius, and Antoninus
Florentinus. The treatise out of which his testimony is avouch'd, is by them
called, Liber praefationum; In Georgio.
not now extant. Wicelius, who does also build on the authority of this
Reverend Father, says that the book is long since perished* so perished, as
it seems, that there is nothing left of it, but the name, and some scattered
remnants. Whether St. Ambrose, were or not, the Author of that treatise; I
cannot easily determine: because in Possevin, I find no mention of this tract,
who yet has took upon him, to marshall all the Works of that excellent man,
even those also which are lost. Yet on the other side, his testimony vouched by
Authors of that antiquity, as those before recyted; assure me at the least so
far, that such a work was in their times, received as his. Add unto this,
that Vossius reckons him with the Latin Historians, D^l^t Histor. part. 4.
c. 3.
in his late book of that argument; as having writ the lives of many of the
Saints: of Theodora namely, of St. Celsus and Nazarius, of St. Gervase and
Protasius, and as the Papists say, of Agnes. Which being so, I must crave
longer time, before I shall reject these words, ascribed unto him, or not
esteem them true, and worthy to be credited: though not so fully, as to build
upon them altogether.

(8) But of our next witness, there is less doubt, and a larger testimony;
though in his words we meet with somewhat which requires a Commentary. A
witness which has been examined on the adverse part already, where he was
able to say nothing: I mean Gelasius Pope of Rome, and his so memorated Canon.
This Pope began his Papacy, Anno 492. and dyed in 96. some four years after.
About his time, and long before it; the Heretics had busily employed
themselves to falsify the public Acts and writings of the Church: which thing
they had effected so according to their wish, that now it was high time to have
a careful eye upon them; or else it may be, they might have grown too potent
to be easily suppressed. For this cause, Pope GELASIUS having assembled 72. of
his neighbor Prelates unto Rome; did then and there, with their advise and by
their diligent assistance; contrive a Catalogue of all such dangerous writings,
as were thought fit to be rejected: giving to those which they accounted true
and orthodoxe, the place and honor due unto them. Which Canon, since it is
alleged against us, thereby to overthrow the History of our St. GEORGE; we
will in this place bring into the open view, as much of it as concerns the
business now in hand: that so we may encounter them with their own weapons.
The Canon is as follows. Pet. Crabbe. Conc. tom. 1, p. 993.
Gesta S. Martyrum qui multiplicibus tormentorum cruciatibus, and mirabilibus
confessionum triumphis, irradiant; quis ita esse Catholicorum dubitet, and
maiora eos in agonibus esse perpessos, nec suis viribus sed dei gratia and
adiutorio universa tolerasse? Sed ideo secundum consuetudinem antiquam,
singulari cautela in Sancta Romans Ecclesia non leguntur, quia eorum, qui
scripsere, nomina penitus ignorantur; and ab infidelibus idiotis superflue vel
minus apt, quam rei ordo fuerit, scripta esse putantur: Sicut cuiusdam
Quiriaci, and Iulittae matris eius, sicut Georgij, aliorumque passiones
huiusmodi, quae ab haereticis perhibentur conscriptae; propter quod (ut dictum
est) ne vel levius subsannandi occasio oriretur, in S. Romana Ecclesia non
leguntur. No^ tamen cum praedicta Ecclesia, omnes Martyrs atque eorum
gloriosos agones, qui Deo magis quam hominibus noti sunt, cum omni devotione
veneramur. So far the very words and letters of the Canon.

(9) By this it does appear, that as the Saints in general, so also
particularly St. GEORGE, had been abused and counterfeited in his Story: in
the close of the same Canon therefore, it is reckoned as Apochryphall; as were
a great many others of the same temper. The reason why it was so reckoned, is
by our latter writers diversely related. Raphael Volaterran makes it to be
rejected, only so much of it, as concerns St. Georges combat with the Dragon:
which also is assigned by Antoninus, amongst other causes; but by neither
rightly. For in those times, and many hundred years behind them, the fable of
the Dragon was not so much as thought of in the Church Christian. Histor. Lomb.
in S. Georgio.
Iacobus de Voragine more nearely to the truth, Ex eo quod Martyrium eius
certam relationem non habet: because the story of his death is told us in most
perplexed and uncertain manner. In Calendario n. Bedae, etc. For in the
Calendar of Bid, we find (says he) that he was martyred in Diospolis, a Town
of Persia; in others, that he lies buried in Diospolis not far from Ioppe:
In some that he did suffer under Diocletian and Maximinian, Emperors; in
others, under Diocletian King of the Persians; no less than 70. tributarie
Kings being in presence. Somewhat, I say of this was rightly aimed at by this
blind archer: but Bid is brought in by him somewhat too early, as being a
Post-natus, scarce borne within two centuries of years succeeding. But what
need more conjectures, or what use indeed is there of any: since the same Canon
which has decreed the History of George (then extant) to be Apocryphal; has
also told us, that it was generally believed to have been writ by Heretics.
This is enough to make the History of any S. suspected* and Apocryphal: and
that it was so written; may easily appear by that which was related in it
touching Athanasius, and the Empress Alexandra; not to omit that terrible
massacre which by a cheating trick, he made of many of the people, branded by
ANTONINUS, as before we noted.

(10) Hitherto have we spoken of GELASIUS Canon, and nothing all this while,
which may redound from thence to St. GEORGES credit. Nothing indeed in that
which has been spoken hitherto, because we were to lay our ground, before we
raised our building. But that now done, and the full meaning of the Canon duly
pondered: it will appear for certain, that though Gelasius taxed the story
of St. GEORGE as dangerous and Apocryphal; yet he has done the Saint himself
all due respects, and confirmed him to us. This I did note before ou^ of the
words of Bellarmine, V. chap. 3..8.
in a reply to Dr. Boys; who needs would have both Bellarmine and Pope Gelasius
speak for him, in making our St. GEORGE to be a mere Chimaera, or thing of
nothing; which God knows they never meant. This I say, we did note before from
Bellarmine: but now we note it out of Gelasius himself, and the very letter of
his Canon. For having told us, that the actions of many of the Saints were writ
by Infidels, or rather Misbeleevers; and in particular that the passion of St.
GEORGE was composed by Heretics; he states it thus: that notwithstanding
this, he, and the Church with him, did reverence all those sacred Martyrs, and
their glorious sufferings for the Truth; known better unto God, than any of
his people. Nos tamen cum praedicta Ecclesia, omnes Martyrs, atque eorum
gloriosos agones, qui Deo magis quam hominibus noti sunt, cum omni devotione
veneramur: So says Gelasius. So says Gelasius, and that we do not mis-report
his meaning, is easy to be seen, by the concurrent suffrages of Beda,
Antoninus, Hermannus Schedell, Bergomensis, Notgerus, and Vsuardus; all which,
as we shall see in the next Chapter, do so conceive it. But we might well have
said this labor. For Doctor Reynolds also cannot but acknowledge, Dr. Reyn.
de Idol. Romans l. 1. c. 5.. 21.
that without further question, Gelasius did believe Saint GEORGE to be an holy
Martyr; although he found the story had been writ by Heretics: Gelasius
etiam, tamet si fraudem hanc olfaceret, ipsum putabat in hilominus sanctum
fuisse Martyrem. If so, then I persuade my self it were much safer to give
credit to Gelasius, who lived so near the time of St. GEORGES suffering; than
any Doctor, of what eminent rank soever, above a thousand years below him. To
bring the matter nearer home, Gelasius in that Canon, has reckoned as
Apocryphal, the Itinerarie of St. Peter, the Acts of Paul, and Thecla; the
Recantation of Adam, Origin, and Cyprian; and many others. What then? Shall
therefore we conclude, that Peter never travailed, or that there never was a
woman of the name of Thecla; or that St. Cyprian, or Origin, or Adam never
recanted their impieties and errors? Nay, we conclude from hence, that
questionless St. George is to be reckoned as a Martyr; because the story
only is condemned, and not the Saint; just as we may resolve that there was
such a noble Prince as Arthur; because the Monk of Malmesburie has told us,
how much his famous deeds were over-acted by his Country men, the Brittons.

(11) For certainly had there been any meaning in Gelasius to have exploded
the Martyr, together with his History; he might as easily have done it, as have
spoke the word. He might, I say, have done it with as much ease, as have spoke
the word, by adding only this of Doctor Reynolds to the Canon; Loc. quo supr.
Fuit enim hic Georgius homo improbus, haereticus Arianus. This had for ever
been enough, to have made his memory as odious, as his Story was suspected:
and to have razed his name, not only out of the public Calendar, but out of
the good opinion of all honest men. Nor is it to be thought, that George the
Arian Heretic could be so cunningly inserted into the Calendar, and pass so
currantly among the Saints; so soon upon his most deserved, though cruel
execution: the Church especially keeping an eye so watchful over them and
their designs; that all their practices were as soon brought to light almost,
as they were conceived. For from the death of George unto the Popedom of
Gelasius, are but 130. years or thereabouts; too scant a time to have his
Villainies forgotten, and himself reputed for a Martyr. Likely indeed it is,
that if the Arians had prevailed, they would have given their George a
principal habitatiion in the Heaven of glories; above Eusebius of Nicodemia,
or Maris, or Theognis; and perhaps next unto their founder Arius himelfe. But
that, the Christian Church should in so short and small a space, rank him
among the Saints; this I can hardly be persuaded: unless perchance we may
believe, that in the same times she could condemn the Heresy, and adore the
Heretics. I know it was a frequent custom with the ancient Romans, to honor
and adore the Gods of those many nations which themselves had vanquished;
Religionibus servire victis, Minut. Felix.
and captivas eas post victorias adorare, as Octavius in the Dialogue. But this
they did not on mistake, or any couzinage put upon them by the vanquished
Nations. No. It was only on a superstitious conceit, that having in their
City all the GODS whose people they subdued; and placing them in their most
rich and sumptuous Temples: they might by their assistance, the better bring
the residue of the world under their subjection. Sic dum universarum gentium
sacra suscipiunt, etiam regnare meruerunt: So says Cecilius in the same
Author. Not to say more, I think it as impossible altogether, that in so small
a tract of time, if at all ever, the Arian George should be reputed for a
Saint, amongst the Orthodoxe Professors, now victorious: as that our Reverend
Praelates Cramner, Latimer, and Ridley, should in an equal space of time, be
taken into the Roman Martyrologies: or that their Henry Garnet, James Clement,
or Nicholas Sanders, by them honored, should be accounted Martyrs in the
Churches Protestant; in case that either side prevail and suppress the other.

(12) To bring this Chapter to an end, it is the last of Doctor Reynolds two
Conclusions, Nullius Georgij Cappadocis ut Martyris, De Idol. Romans l. 1. c. 5..
22.
nisi Ariani, mentionem ab ullo idoneo auto re fieri; that never any GEORGE of
Cappadocia was reputed as a Martyr, in any Author worthy credit, but George the
Arian. In general answer to which general challenge, I have thought good,
before we further labor in particular proofs; to draw together in a Table,
the names of all such Authors cited in this work: by all of which St. GEORGE
is reckoned as a Martyr; by many of them said to be of Cappadocia. Most of
them, I persuade my self worthy of credit: and the ornament of the age in
which they lived. Yet lest, their affirma^^^ should be questioned and
controu'ld by our choycer judgments; I have took care to mingle with them,
such famous Princes, and Prelates celebrated for their goodness, as have done
him public honors: all which I have digested according to their several
times and ages, in the form that follows.

The Catalogue.
374 SAint Ambrose, if at the least the work be his. 492 Gelasius Pope of
Rome. 515 Childebertus R. Francorum. 527 Iustinianus Imp. Procopius
Caesariensis. Sidonius Archbishop of Mentz. 570 Venantius Fortunatus. 596
Gregorius Turonensis. 600 Greg. 1. Pont. Romans 660 Hildericus R. Austrasiae. 698
Cunibertus R. Longobard. 730 Beda Venerabilis. 752 Zacharias Pont. Romans 774
Paulus Diaconus. 812 Vsuardus Monachus. 835 Rabanus Maurus. 837 Aimonius
Monachus. 850 Simeon Metaphrastes. 912 Notgerus Monachus. 963 Nicephorus Phocas
Imp. Constable. 975 Tribunus Mevius, D. Venetorum. 996 Hedinge, Ducissa Bavariae.
1005 Henr. 2. Imp. Germ. 1043 Ioh. Euchaites, Ep. Orient. 1070 Geo. Cedrenus.
1074 Rob. D' Oyley nob. Anglus. 1098 Godfrey of Bouillon. 1120 Robertus Monach.
1130 Gulielm. Malmesburiens. 1141 Gualt. Ep. Augustae Vindelicorum. vulgo
Auspurg. 1180 Gulielm. Tyrius. 1250 Vincentius Belvacensis. 1273 Radulphus Imp.
Germ. 1282 Iacobus de Voragine. 1305 Nicephorus Callistus. 1330 Niceph.
Gregoras. 1344 Edwardus 3. R. Angl. Thomas de Walsingham. 1354 Ioh.
Contacuzenus Imp. Constable. Idemque nob. Histor. 1390 Froissard. Author Fasciculi
temp. Anselmus Frat. Francisc. 1410 Iustinianus Patr. Ven. 1411 Sigismundus
Imp. Germ. 1445 Antoninus Florentinus. 1448 Fredericus Imp. Germ. 1472 Bapt.
Platina. 1484 Coccius Sabellicus. 1488 Maximilianus 1. Imp, 1490 Hermannus
Schedell, author Chronicorum. 1494 Phil. Bergomensis. 1499 Bapt. Mantuanus. 1506
Raphael Volaterranus. Ludovicus Patritius. 1550 Seb. Munsterus. Polydorus
Virgilius. Hist. Magdeburgica. 1571 Michael ab Ysselt. 1593 Comus Ep. Alexand.
Suffragan unto the Patriarch Hospinian.
All these, besides the public Martyrologies both Greek, and Roman: besides
also the public Liturgies of those Churches; the learned men, all of them of
the Romish party; and many of the Churches of the Reformation, whose names
would fill a Catalogue. If among these we have not one of credit, neither
Author in his relation, nor Prince nor Prelate in their actions: hard is our
hap, and let the adversaries have the honor. But what one rank of these have
said, and what the rest have done in St. Georges honor: we shall now see, in
their several places.

CHAP. III.
(1) The state of learning in the Church, divided into two natural days. (2)
The time and learning of Venerable Beda. (3) His testimonies of St. George. (4)
of Dacianus King of Persia, and who he was. (5) Persia in some Authors, taken
for the Eastern Countries. (6) A reconcilement of the other doubts touching
this Dacianus. (7) The Martyrologies of Vsuardus, Rabanus Maurus, and Notgerus.
(8) St. George how said to have converted many people. (9) The witness of
Vincentius, Iacobus, and Antoninus Florent. (10) Nicephorus Callistus; and his
evidence. (11) The suffrage of Sabellicus, Schedell, Bergomensis, and
Volaterran. (12) Of the Magdeburgians, and some other Protestant Divines. (13)
A recollection and application of the whole proofs.

(1) THere is an old tradition that the world should last 6000. years, and no
longer: two of them before the Law; two under it; and two, after. Which though
it has not been exactly true, of the two first, and that the third is
doubtful: yet the conceit is tolerable; and for as much of it as is past,
somewhat near the computation and account of time, recited in it. We will be
therefore bold, to take for granted, that the Christian Church is of two
thousand years continuance: which granted or supposed, we will resemble it, or
the state of learning rather in it, unto two natural days* each, of a
thousand years, apeece: and this the rather, because the Lord has said, that
in his sight, a thousand years are but as one day. The first of these, we take
to have begun even at the first rising of the Sun of Righteousness: and for
the morning of it* allow the first three Centuries, even till the time of
CONSTANTINE. The noonetide watch thereof, we make to be of three Centuries
ensuing: of which, and especially the first, the Magdeburgians give this
censure, Cent. 4. c. 4.
Habuit haec aetas si quae unquam alia, plurimos praestantes and illustres
doctores. And certainly there never shined more glorious lights in the house of
GOD, than in those ages: the Sun of learning being then in the very height, and
Zenith of it. Long it continued not in that full glory, till it declined into
an evening; to which we do allot the two next ages: when as the beams thereof
grew low, and the light obscurer. And now at last we are benighted, even
covered over with a Cymerian darkness of ignorance; a darkness no less
gross and palpable, than that of Egypt. Chronol.
Bellarmine call's it, Seculum infelix, in quo Scriptores illustres nulli,
nulla Concilia; A most unhappy age, wherein were neither famous Writers, nor
frequent Councels. Sabellicus as rightly, Ennead. 9.
mirum est, quanta omnium bonarum artium oblivio, per id tempus mortalium
animos obrepserit: a prodigy it was to see, how general forgetfulness of all
good literature, had at this time invaded and possessed the minds of men.
Which night continued, till the year 1050. those writers which we meet with
from the year 850. until then, as they were few, so were they but as a few
smaller Stars in the darkest midnight. This night once past, the dawning of
the second day at last appeared; and we extend the morning of it even to the
first beginning of the last Centurie: in which there was at first a struggling
between light and darkness; but afterward the light of learning got the
better, and by degrees made way to usher in the second noone-tide. Which second
noone-tide we begin about the year 1500 and hitherto it has continued: the
light of learning never shining with more perfect glory, than at the present.
How long it will continue thus, is above our knowledge: Praefat. in scho.
Mathem.
but as it is, we may almost affirm with Ramus; Maiorem doctorum hominum and
operum proventum, seculo uno vidimus, quam totis antea quatuordecem maiores
nostri viderant. One age has brought us forth more worthy works, and famous
Writers, than all that went before us.

(2) If it be asked, to what use serves this observation: we answer that it is
to this. First, that it may appear, that never any age has been so void of
learned, or barren of good men; that is not able to produce some testimony of
good credit, in the behalf of GEORGE the Martyr. Next, that in all times we
expect not, either an equal number of witnesses; or equal parts, in such as
are produced to give in evidence: but that we look for them, and judge of
them, according to their times and ages. Already we are past the noonetide of
the first of these two days: in which referring other of our witnesses to
their proper places; we have made use of Ambrose only, and Pope GELASIUS. In
the next place and time, we meet with Venerable Beda, who died about the year
734. A man that saw as clearly, as any whomsoever, that lived in any part of
the whole evening: and one who for the excellency of his endowments, and
piety, obtained that adjunct. Camden entituleth him, In Brigant.
the singular glory and ornament of England: and Malmesburie affirms more
fully, that he was one, more fit to be admired than praised; who being borne
in the extremest corner of the world, did yet enlighten all of it, with the
beams of his learning. Hist. de regib. Angl. l. 1.
Vir erat (says he) quem mirari facilius, quam digne praedicare possis: qui in
extremo natus orbis angulo, doctrinae corusco terras omnes perstrinxerat. Whom
lest we should suspect, as partial in his praises, we have a German Poet thus
speaking unto Britain.

Camden. in Brit.
Quid? tibi divinumque Bedam (doctissimus olim
Dum varias unus been qui cognoverat arts)
Debemus. The sense imperfect, but thus to be conceived* Britain to thee,
divinest Bid we owe,
Who did alone all parts of learning know.


(3) The witness being such, his testimony will be taken with less scruple:
the rather, because there is not any thing of his which has been justly
questioned, but his English History; as having in it more of the miracles so
common in the peoples mouths, than may be well allowed of. But even that piece
also, Ganus l. 11. c. 6
modeste and circumspecto iudicio, is censured sparingly, and with great
temper. His testimonies of St GEORGE are two: the one of them in his
Martyrologie; the other in his Ephimerides. Tom. 3.
First in his Martyrologie, on the 23. of April; or in the Latin Computation,
on the 9. of the Calends of May, we read it thus. Natale S. Georgij Martyris,
qui sub Daciano Rege Persarum potentissimo, qui dominabatur super 70. reges,
multis miraculis claruit, plurimosque convertit ad fidem Christi: simul and
Alexandram uxorem ipsius Daciani, usque ad Martyrium confortavit. Ipse vero
novissime decollatus, martyrium complevit; quamvis gesta passionis eius inter
Apocryphas connumerentur Scripturas. Id est. The Passion of St. GEORGE the
Martyr, who under DACIANUS the most mighty King of Persia, Lord of no less
than seaventy tributarie Princes, was famous for his miracles, and for
converting many to the faith of CHRIST; of which, the Empress Alexandra the
wife of Dacianus, continued constant in it even unto the death. This GEORGE, at
last beheaded, received the Crown of Martyrdom: although the Story of his
Passion be reckoned as Apocryphal. And in his Ephimerides, on the same ninth
of the May-Calends; thus: Nona docet Fortunatumque and Achillea iunctos.
Hac etiam invicto mundum qui sanguine temnis,
Infinite a refers Georgi sancta Trophaea.
This ninth day does of Fortunatus tell,
And of Achilles, joined together well.
And of thee George who did the world neglect,
And holy trophies in thy blood erect.


(4) The first of these two testimonies, as it affirms the Death and
sufferings of St. GEORGE: so are there in it, some things which require a
favorable Reader, and others which deserve to be rejected altogether. Of the
last rank, there is the fable of the Empress ALEXANDRA; of which we have
already spoken in the first part and second Chapter: an old remnant doubtless
of the Arian Legend, exploded by Gelasius. That of her Husband Dacianus, if it
encounter with a favorable reader, without offense may be admitted: although
perhaps derived out of the same original. Derived (I say, out of the same
original perhaps) because I find it in Baronius Annotations on the Roman
Martyrologie, April, 2^.
that the Arian Legends made their George to suffer under Dacianus King of
Persia: only the difference is, and that not much, that there the tributary
Kings are five in number more, than here in venerable Bede. This Doctor
Reynolds uses as a closing argument, to prove our Saint to be the Arian
GEORGE of Alexandria: and this our selves alleged in the behalf of Calvin, to
show what cause he had, to make St. GEORGE a Counterfeit, or Larva. The
process was, that there was never at or about that time a King of Persia of
that name, and greatness of Command; and that this Dacianus is in other of our
Authors, made to be President or Proconsul, under DIOCLETIAN: therefore in
likelihood, our Authors not agreeing, and no such King as he in nature; the
whole Story of St. George is false and forged. This is the maine of all that
may be said against us, touching Dacianus: and this I say a favorable Reader
may admit without offense. For proof of which, we must look back a little
on the condition of the Roman Empire, at the time of Saint Georges sufferings:
The East parts of it governed, as before I said, by Diocletian; and the West by
Maximinian. These two, the better to direct and manage the affairs of State,
had took unto themselves two Caesar's: whereof the one was named Galerius
Maximinianus, assumed by Diocletian; and under him Lieutenant General, or Lord
President of the Eastern Countries. Now this Galerius Caesar, was by birth a
Dacian: and afterward Successor unto Diocletian, in all those parts that he
commanded. That he was borne in Dacia, is affirmed by St. Hieromes Latin
copy of Euseb^us Chronicon; where thus we read it: Galerius in Dacia haud
long a Sardica natus, that he was borne in Dacia not far from Sardica. That
he succeeded Diocletian in the greatness and extent of his Command, (after
that he and Maximinian had surrendered up the Empire;) is a thing so plain in
Story: that no man conversant in the Historians of those times, but exactly
knows it. Hereupon we infer, that probably this Dacianus mentioned in the
Story, was that Galerius Maximinianus, who afterward was Emperor; and had the
Eastern parts, all of them, of that Empire, under his subjection. And this we
do the rather fancy to be probable, because denominations taken from the
birthplace of their Princes, were not accounted novelties among the Romans.
For Adrianus, w^e well know assumed that name from Adria, a Town of Italy,
where he was borne. Aurel. Victor. Ei^tome cap. 39.
And not to seek for more examples, we find that Diocletian, borne in a Town
of Dalmatia, called Dioclea; added this termination to the place of his
Nativitie: that so his name might be more plausible among the Romans, whose
governance he had then undertaken. Add hereunto that this Galerius was always
a most bitter enemy of the Church of CHRIST, which he had persecuted from^ his
youth: and then perhaps he may more easily be believed, to be this DACIANUS.

(5) But here it may be questioned, how Dacianus, admitting that he were the
same, with Galerius the Dacian, can be supposed to be a King of Persia:
considering that the Persians had at that time, a Prince of their own royal
stock, known by the name of Narses, who dyed about the year 307. To this we
answer, that Venerable Beda spoke according to the manner of the times, in
which he lived: wherein the Persians, having subdued the Roman forces, were,
and had so been long before, the absolute masters, of almost all those
Countries, which Galerius once commanded. Which being so, the East parts of the
Roman Empire under the command of the Kings of Persia; and in particular, the
Holy Land, where Lydda is, being in their Dominions: those Countries did in
common speech, pass by the name of Persia. Just as at this day we call those
several parts of the Turkish Empire, once members of the Assyrian, Greek, and
Roman Monarchies, by the common name of Turkey: or as we call all Eastern
Churches, the Greeke-Church; because they have communion at this time, with the
Patriarch of Constantinople. So Bellarmine does call the Cardinal Bessarion, a
Grecian, De script. Eccl.
borne at Trabezond; Bessarion, natione Graecus, patria Trapezuntius etc. as
he there has it: whereas the Town of Trabezond is far enough from Greece,
in the heart of Cappadocia. So also William of Tire, does call all those within
the Land of Palestine, were enemies unto the Faith, and then possessours of
that Country; by the name of Persae. And so the Monk of Malmesbury, showing
the difference between the East and Western Nations; has told us, that the
Occidentals being more stubborn and impatient of the yoke, have often changed
their Masters: whereas the Eastern people being more dull and womanish, have
been continually the Vassals of the Persians. Hist. de Reg. Angl. l* 4.
Romanum denique imperium prius apud Francos, postea ad Teutonas declinavit:
Orientale semper (understand him of the latter times) apud Persas durat. Which
note of his, could not be true, if taken of the Persians, as the inhabitants
only of that Province commonly called Persis; the Saracens having before
expelled the Persians, and themselves being in the time of Malmesbury, chased
out of these Countries by the Turks: therefore we must conceive that the name
of Persian, was a common appellation of the Eastern people. Add hereunto that
Lydda or Diospolis, where St. GEORGE did suffer, is said in almost all our
Authors, to be a Town of Persia; although well known to be within the Tribe
of Ephraim, in the Land of Palestine: and there as we have found out Dacianus;
so it may favorably be granted, that we have shown some reasons, why he is
called King of Persia; or rather in the Authors Phrase, King of the Persians.

(6) Let this be also granted; yet what can be replied to this, that Dacianus
is there made the Lord of seaventy tributarie Kings: or what can be produced to
reconcile those Authors, which make him not an Emperor; to these which do
affirm it? This I suppose we may make good, without much difficulty. We read
in Scripture that Ahasuerus King of Persia, Esth, cap. 1.
had under his Dominion no fewer than 127. Provinces: most of which were first
subjected by the Greeks; and after by the Romans. We read also in Tacitus,
how ordinary a thing it was, De vit. Agric.
in the height and pride of the Roman greatness; Habere servitutis instrumenta
etiam and reges: to suffer Kings in many of the conquered nations, and to
employ them as their engines, thereby to bring the people into greater bondage.
Put this together, and we shall see no inconvenience to ensue, if we should
peremptorily affirm, that under the command and empire of Galerius Dacianus,
sole ruler of the Eastern Countries; there were no less than 70. tributarie
Kings and inferior Princes. As for the pretended disagreement, which i^
observed between our Authors; we do thus reconcile it. viz. That those which
make him President, or Leiutenant general under Diocletian; speak of him, as
he was at the time of our Martyrs suffering, Commander of the Imperial
armies, and the designed successor; and a chief agent in the Persecution. But
Venerable Bede and those which call him King, report him as he was in power,
though not in title; or rather call him King by way of anticipation: just as
the Italian shores in Virgil, are called Lavina littora, before that name was
given unto them; because in short time after in honor of Lavinia, they were so
denominated. Now, why the story should be written of Galerius, by the name of
Dacianus; or why the sufferings of our Martyr, imputed* rather unto Dacianus,
than to Diocletian: this I conceive to be the art of those, who even whilst
both the tyrants lived, committed it to writing; that so they might decline the
envy of their undertakings, and not incur the high displeasure of the
Persecutors. This, as I said before, may by a favorable Reader be admitted,
without the least offense to truth; and much unto the credit of the Venerable
Author. If any think the contrary, and that this passage of the Persian
Dacianus, must needs be reckoned as a fragment of the Arian Legend: I shall not
strive with any other force, than that of probable conjectures to persuade him
to it. When I perceive no hope to make him otherwise conceited, I then must say
to him, of Bid; as Bellarmine, of Damascenus, in the case of Falconilla: that
he, though otherwise an understanding man, did take the passage upon trust* not
much solicirous to dispute the grounds of it, or to search it thoroughly. Sed
fieri potest, quamvis alioqui vir doctus and prudens, De script. Eo^l.
ut istis narrationibus facilem fidem habuerit, neque de veritate earum
investiganda fuerit sollicitus. If any reason thus, the story is perplexed, and
full of intricate difficulties, and therefore nothing in it true, or therefore
there was no such Martyr: how infinite are the Saints that must be degraded,
whose stories are no less perplexed than this of ours; though never quarreled?

(7) This difficulty over, we now proceed unto the further examination of our
witnesses; beginning first with those which are the first in time. All of them
Authors also of the same kind, viz. of Martyrologies; and two of them guilty
of the same obscurity, or error, which we find in Beda: Quis enim viam
rectam teneret errante Cicerone? as Lactantius has it. The first of those is
Vsuardus, one of the Scholars of Alcuinus, who flourished in the year 812.
and at the suite of CHARLES the Great composed his Martyrologi^. Martyrologium
satis accuratum and celebre, qu^ multae Ecclesiae vsa sunt. A piece of good
esteem, and great diligence, and therefore used in many Churches. So says the
Cardinal. Loc. quo supr.
The evidence which we receive from him, is this. 9. Call. Maij. In Persid^,
civitate Diospoli; passio S. Georgij Martyris, gloriosi ante-signani, clarique
miraculis: cuius gesta passionis, et si inter Apocryphas numerentur Scripturas,
tamen illustrissimum ei^s martyri^m inter coronas Martyrum Ecclesia Dei
venerabiliter honorat. Upon the 23. of April St. GEORGE the Martyr, that
glorions leader, but more famous by his miracles, did suffer in Diospolis, a
Town of Persia: the story of whose Passion, though reckoned as Apocryp^all,
does nothing prejudice the truth and glories of his Martyrdom so celebrated in
the Church. In the next place, we have the testimony of Rabanus Maurus,
Archbishop of Mentz, who lived about the year 835. Vir aeque doctus and pius,
A man (says Bellarmine, and certainly his works affirm no less) both
learned and religious. His testimony is the same with Venerable Bedes, viz.
Nativitas S. Georgij Martyris, qui sub Daciano etc. Only he ends it thus,
Cuius vitam and passionem scriptam legi, that he had seen the life and death
of George in writing. What copy of his life and death this was, I cannot say:
likely it is that it was one of those then common, which had been darkened and
falsified by the Arians. In the next place we have the Martyrologie of one
Notgerus, extant in the 6. Tome of Canisius Antiquae lectionis, as also was the
former. The Author of it, dyed about the year 912. and was a Monk of Sengall,
or Monasterij S. Galli, a place among the Switzers. His evidence compounded
equally out of Bid, and Vsuard; the first part taken from the former; the
conclusion, from the latter: himself inserting this only in the middle
between both; that after many inexpressible torments, being at last beheaded,
he perfected that glorious work, by the effusion of his blood. In Perside,
civitate Diospoli passio S. Georgij Martyris, qui sub Daciano Rege Persarum
potentissimo, qui dominabatur supra 70. Reges, multis miraculis clar^^t,
plurimosque convertit ad fidem Christi, etc. hitherto out of Bid. Ipse vero
post multos and inauditos agones novissime decollatus, Martyrium s^um sanguinis
effusione consummavit. Then follows out of Vsuardus, Cuius gesta Passionis
etsi inter Apocryphas, etc. as before we had it.

(8) In these the testimonies of Bid, Rabanus Maurus, and Notgerus, we find
it mentioned of St. GEORGE; Plurimosque ad fidem Christi convertit, That he
converted many to the Faith of CHRIST. Specul. histor. lib. 12. c. 128.
And answerable hereunto, Vincentius Belvacensis, Ad eius praedicationem
credidit. S. Vincentius; That by the Preaching of Saint George, St. Vincent who
received the crown of Martyrdom in Spain, received the Gospel. Which
doubtless must be understood of private reasonings, and friendly conference,
with those whose souls he chiefly tendered: not by the way of any public
Ministry, wherein he never was entrusted. And certainly the Faithful of the
times Primitive, especially during the heat of Persecution; did much promote
the holy Gospel by such private and domesticke means, if I may so call it:
passing from house to house, and from man to man; so to bring Peace unto the
one, Salvation to the other. Wherefore perhaps Cecilius calls the Christians
generally, In Minutio.
Latebrosam and Lucifugam nationem, in publico mutam, in angulis garrulam: A
sly and corner-creeping kind of people, active in private places, but still
and quiet in the public. It seems, that some not well acquainted with the
calling and condition of our Martyr, have made him very famous in the arts of
Preaching: as one that first converted the Armenians and Iberi, now called
Georgians. For Michael ab Ysselt a Low-Countrey-writer, telling what Honors by
that people are afforded to St. George; relates it thus: Cur vero tanto in
honor habeant D. illum Georgium, causam nonnulli afferunt, quod ille primus ad
fidem Christi Armenos Iberosque convertisset. (...). 1577.
But whosoever those nonnulli are, that so report it, they are no question in
an error: there being in the Ecclesiastical historians, another and more
likely means of their conversion; on which this Michael does reflect in these
words that follow; Licet alij illud cuiusdam puellae miraculis and virtutibus
tribuunt.

(9) In the next place we have the suffrage of Vincentius, Bishop of Beau-vein
in France, Anno 1250. A man of that deep learning, that the great Schoole-man
Thomas Aquinas is supposed (and Bellarmine can hardly save him harmless in
it) to take a great part of his Prima secundae, and secunda secundae, word for
word, out of the first and third books of this Vincents speculum morale. He in
the 12th. book of his speculum historiale, does report the story, Cap. 128.
thus: Sub persecutione Daciani (in diverse passages before, he call's him
Dacianus Praeses) venit de Cappadocia Georgius miles, Qui videns Christianorum
augustias, erogatis omnibus quae habebat, militarem vestem exuit, et indutus
vest Christianorum, in medium sacrificantium se obiecit; atque in conspectu
omnium exclamavit dicens, Omnes dij gentiu^ daemonia, Dominus autem coelos
fecit. Cui statim Dacianus ira repletus, ait, Qua praesumptione vel dignitate
hoc audes, vt deos nostros daemones esse dicas? Dic tamen unde es, et quomodo
vocaris: qui respondit, Christianus sum, Georgius vocor, genere et militia
Cappadocus: sed cuncta deserui, vt liberius Deo coeli servirem, etc. During the
persecution raised by the President or Lieutenant general, Dacianus; came
George a Cappadocian Knight into the Court. Who seeing into what miserable
streights the poor Christians were driven, making a doale of all he had, put
off his military or Knightly habit; and manifesting that he was a Christian,
he rushed into the midst of the Idolaters: and in the hearing of them all,
cried out, that All the deities off the gentiles were but devils, and that it
was the Lord only which had made the heavens. To whom the President, With what
presumption, or upon confidence of what high dignity, do thou affirm, that
our gods are devils? tell us thy name, and whence thou art. Who presently
returned this answer: I am (says he) a Christian; my name, George; my
country, Cappadocia, and there of honorable rank: but I have willingly
abandoned all, to serve the God of heaven with greater freedom, etc. And in
the close of all, martyrizatus autem est in Perside, civitate Diospoli: he
suffered in Diospolis, a city of the Persians, on the 23. of April. To this
agree's in the maine of it, Iacobus de Voragine^ Georgius tribunus, genere
Cappadox, etc. George one of the Tribunes, by birth a Cappadocian, etc. The
next that follows, is that doughtie story of the Lybian Dragon: which told
he closes in with the relation of Vincentius. The like does also Antoninus
Florentinus: Pars 1 tit. 8.. 23.
of both which I have spoke already. Only the last has noted, that the
history of George is reckoned as Apocryphal; not that he was no Martyr, but
that there are some passages there scarce worthy credit. Ponitur autem Legenda
cius inter Apocryphas Scripturas, non quin vere Martyr fuerit pro confessione
nominis Christi, sed propter quaedam quae notantur in ea de veritate dubia. V.
Part 2. chapter 1. 12. and chap. 2.. 10.
Which passages, I also have observed already. To end this section, the book
entitled Fasciculus temporum, written by a Carthusian Monk of the 14th.
Centurie; and printed in the year 1476. by Conradus Hoemborche: ad Annum 291.
page 33. does rank our George among the Martyrs of that year, between
Pantaleon, and Iustus.

(10) The witness next to be examined is of Greece, Nicephorus Callistus: who
lived about the year 1305. Andronicus the Elder, then reigning in
Constantinople, to whom he dedicates his book. Who being sworn and examined,
Hist. Eccl. lib. 7 cap. 15.
says as follows. Eisdem quoque temporibus (the time of DIOCLETIANS fury)
Georgius ille magni inter ceriatores istos nominis, Hist. eccl^^. l. 7. cap. 15.
and agminis Martyrum Coryphaeus, laborum pro Christo toleratorum veros fruetus
percepit. Hic in Cappadocia [ natus,] adhu^ adolescens, forma praestanti, and
qui nondum primani produxisset lanuginem; fortissime certaminibus pro Christo
perferendis, martyrium obijt. Captus enim quod in daemones acriter invectus
esset, Imperatorumque impietatem derisisset; supra naturae captum perquam
acerbos sustinuit cruciatus. Nam post carcerem and vincula, ungulae acutae cum
excepare, mox calce ardenti est a^^stus: fidiculisque rursum d^stractus,
mucronibus membratim disiectus, plurimisque alijs poenarum ma^hi^i^ attritus;
gener^sam animi constantiam, firmumque mentis suae propositum, satis
declaravit. Ad ^aec etc. The rest that follows is of the Empress Alexandra;
and of I know not what Glycerius and his Ox. Tandemque ut virum decet, gladio
percussus, ex ha^ vita migravit. About these times (says he) the so much
celebrated GEORGE, chief of the Martyrs of that age, received the recompense
of all his sufferings for his Savior. Who being borne in Cappadoce, (for so I
read it) as yet exceeding young, of special beauty, and his beard scarce
budding; did nobly undergo, the weight and pains of Martyrdom. For being
apprehended for inveighing against their Idols, and scoffing at the irreligion
of the Emperors; he suffered such extremity of tortures* as was above the
strength of nature to endure. After a long imprisonment, and his legs even
cramped with irons, he was first pierced and harrowed, as it were with the
sharpest nails. Afterward being scorched with burning lime, and put upon the
rack, and all his members severally hackt and hewne with swords: he perfectly
declared his noble constancy, and invincible resolutions; and at the last,
being beheaded, he departed out of this life into a better.

(11) But to return unto the Latins, in the next place we meet with Coccius
Sabellicus, Vir valde eruditus, a learned man (says Bellarmine) a man of great
integrity, says Vives. He lived about the shutting in of the 15. Centurie, and
gives this testimony of St. GEORGE, that he was Martyred at Diospolis, Ennead.
7. l. 8.
a City of the Persians, during the Persecution raised by Diocletian. Passus
est eadem tempestate Georgius Martyr in Perside apud Diospolin. In the same
time and age flourished Hermannus Schedell, Doctor of Physic in the
University of Padua; the Author of the book entitled Chronica Chronicorum,
printed at Norimberge anno 1493. Act. 6. p. 240.
His evidence is this. Georgius Cappadocus, Tribunus and verus Christi miles
hoc tempore. Cum venisset de Cappadocia in Persiam, civitatem Diospolin, velut
alter Curtius Romanus, and Codrus Rex Atheniensium pro patriae suae liberatione
sese internecioni, ad draconis occisionem and martyrij tolerantiam, dedit.
Quippe interfecto Dracone, post eculei extensionem, totiusque corporis
lacerationem, et viscerum effusionem, nec non aliorum tormentorum perpessionem,
ad ultimum, martyrium capitis abscissione complevit. Cuius gesta etc: as before
in Vsuardus. St. George of Cappadocia, a Tribune, and a faithful Soldier of
JESUS CHRIST, about this time suffered: who coming out of Cappadocia into
Diospolis, a City of the Persians, like Curtius in the state of Rome, or Codrus
King of Athens, exposed himself to death, in the destroying of the Dragon, and
his suffering of Martyrdom. (of this see somewhat, Part. 1. Cap. 5. Sect. 4.)
For having killed the Dragon, after he had been put upon the rack, his body
torn in pieces, and the effusion of his bowels, with diverse other miserable
tortures; at last he finished his course by the loosing of his head. Philippus
Berg^mensis, an Austin Friar, who lived about the sametime, and made a
supplement unto this Chronica of Schedels, repeates the story in the same
words: save that he adds et salis confricationem, the chasing of his wounded
body with salt, unto the residue of his torments. And in the last place
Volaterran, of whom we have already spoken, affirms this for us, Georgius
Martyr, genere Cappadox, Tribunus militum sub Diocletiano merebat: St. GEORGE
the Martyr, a Cappadocian by his Country, served as a Tribune of the Soldiers
under the Emperor DIOCLETIAN.

(12) And now at last we come unto the Protestant Divines, from whom we may
expect small favor; considering what leading men already have declared against
us. Yet is St. GEORGE so confident of the exceeding truth and justice of his
cause; that he despaires not to find friends, even amongst them. And first
Illyricus, the founder of the stiff or rigid Lutherans, as they use to call
them; and a chief Author of that Ecclesiastical History, which we call the
Centuries; composed by him and other famous men of the City of Magdeburge, in
Saxony: is fully for us. For in the 4. Centurie, and 3. Chapter which is de
Persocutione, St. GEORGE is reckoned among other Martyrs of that time, out of
Fasciculus temporum: and in the 12. Chapter of the same Century, entitled de
Martyribus; more copiously thus. Celebris inter Martyrs eius temporis, etiam
Georgius fuit; natione Cappadox, adolescens in daemonas gentilium acriter
invectus erat, etc. as it follows in Nicephorus, whose words and testimony
is there cyted. A proof, as I conceive it, not to be questioned: considering,
what bitter enemies the Authors of this History, do always show themselves
against the Superstitions of Rome; how greedily they take occasion, as much as
possibly they can, to advance their own cause, and cry down the Papist. What
now, if to the Father of the stiff and peremptory Lutherans; I should here
add Melancthon, the founder, as they call him, of the moderate, or Lutherani
molles? Sure if I did, I should not mis-report him, either in his words or
meaning. For when he tells us, in the place before examined, V. Part. 1. c. 3.
Sect. 3.
that the Papists make St. Anne the Patroness of Riches, St. GEORGE the GOD of
Soldiers, and Sebastian a defense against the Plague; Vt nempe Georgius tueatur
equites, Sebastianus pestem arceat; etc. he does without all controversy,
affirm St. GEORGE to be a Saint; no less than either St. Sebastian, or St.
Anne; which neither Calvin, nor any one since him, have ever questioned. To
draw unto an end, take here the testimony of Oraeus, in his Nomenclator; a
Lutheran perhaps, but sure I am, no Papist: who rightly has distinguished
those three Georges, which the so famous Doctors, Reynolds and Drusius have
confounded. We read it thus. Georgius Episcop. Laodicenus, Lit. G. p. 64.
Arianus, secul. 4. Georgius Alexandrin. haeret. Arian. anno 356. and lastly
Georgius Cappadox et Martyr, 289.

(13) To sum up all, we have here proof sufficient, that GEORGE the Martyr,
was by birth of Cappadocia: the thing affirmed to be so, by Metaphrastes,
Vincentius, de Voragine, Antoninus, Hermannus Schedell, Bergomensis, and
Volatterran, among the Latins; and by Nicephorus, of Greece; and by the
Magdeburgians, and Oraeus, among the Protestants. More proof of which there is
to follow. His suffering, for the time of it, generally is reported under
Diocletian, as the chief Persecutor; in whose time he was made a Martyr; in
terms express, by Metaphrastes, de Voragine, Volaterran, and the Greek
Martyrologie as yet to come; implicitly and in ordinary count of time, by
Nicephorus Callistus, Fasciculus temporum, Sabellicus, Hermanus Schedell,
Bergomensis, the Magdeburgians, and Oraeus. And under DACIANUS, or GALERIUS
rather, as a chief instrument of DIOCLETIANS cruelty; by Bid, Rab. Maurus,
Notgerus, Vincentius, de Voragine, and Antoninus. The year thereof, limited
more particularly, by the Fasciculus temporum, ad ann. 291. and by Oraeus, to
the year 289. to which we will adjoyne Baronius, who places it in his Annals,
and so reports it in his Annot. on the Calendar; ad ann. 290. A difference not
observeable. And last of all, the day thereof assigned upon the 23. of April.
(9. Kal. Maij.) by Venerable Bede, Rabanus, and Notgerus; as also by
Vincentius, and Antoninus; and by the Martyrologies both Greek and Latin, not
yet produced; the manner of his death being affirmed also, by the loosing of
his head, by Metaphrastes, Bid, Rabanus, and Notgerus; by Vincentius, de
Voragine, Nicephorus, Antoninus, Schedell, and Bergomensis. Which being so; we
may the better and with more justice, apply the old complaint of Canus, Lib.
11. cap. 4.
to the business now in hand, Si namque in duorum ore vel trium firmum stat
omne verbum, cur adversus hanc legen^, plurimis testibus rem tandem olim gestam
contestantibus, fidem Theologus abnegabit? Since GOD (says he) has told us,
that out of the mouth of two or three Witnesses every word shall be
established; with what pretense of reason may a Divine oppose this Law, and not
give credit unto many witnesses, affirming all together the same History. For
our parts, so confident are we that our cause is just and true; that if the
adversaries of St. GEORGE, are able to produce one single testimony, out of
any ancient Author or out of any Author borne before the time of CALVIN, to
make good their affirmavit: we will forsake our colors, and revolt to them.
But I am bold to say, they cannot. For had the thing been possible, the
learned Doctor Reynolds, who spared no labor in the search, would have
produced it.

CHAP. IIII.
(1) Four several ways used by the Church, to keep alive the memory of the
Martyrs. (2) The way of Martyrologies how ancient. (3) The Roman Martyrologie:
and what it testifies of St. George. (4) Natale what it is, in the
construction of the Church. (5) The testimony given unto St. George in the
Greek Church. (6) St. George, why called Tropaeophorus. (7) Commemoration of
the Dead, how used in the Church primitive. (8) The depravation of the ancient
use of it in the Church of Rome. (9) The public service of that Church on St.
Georges day. (10) Arguments drawn from the Church service, of what validity.
(11) Saint George continually famous in the Church Christian. (12) And among
the Turks.

(1) THus have we drawn together the suffrages of such which either positively
have affirmed, or Historically related any thing, of St. George the Martyr. In
which we find sufficient proof, as of his Country, so of the time, and day,
and manner of his death: and that so punctually, so agreeably both to their
foreman and themselves, that never any Jury agreed bett^r on a Verdict. This
done, we now address our selves, to make inquiry of the Church, (...), The
pillar and the ground of Truth, as Saint Paul calls it: to learn of her, what
she has practically done in St. Georges honor. For, to the positive
affirmations of some men in St. Georges cause, and the historical relations of
some others; if we can also get the countenance and practice of the Church:
we then may have some good assurance, that no man will hereafter stir
against us. Now in the practice of the Church, we may observe four ways or
courses, whereby she has continually endeavored to keep alive the memory of
the blessed Martyrs: in none of which she has been wanting (such is her
tender care and respect of him) unto our St. George. The first of these, is the
common Martyrologie, or Calendar; in which their Names and Passion, briefly,
but unto all eternity, are registered. The second is, by giving them some
special place in her public Liturgies: The third, by recollecting up their
Relics, and laying them with all due honor, in some place fit for them. And
last of all, the calling of such Temples by the names of these most blessed
Spirits; which she had solemnly erected to GODS special service, and
Consecrated to his honor. How much the Church has done in all and every one
of these, to keep the memory of Saint GEORGE the Martyr, alive and
flourishing; we shall best see by taking of them, every one in their several
Order, and speaking of them in particulars.

(2) Beginning with the first, we find it on Record in Tullie, that in the
very first beginnings of the Roman State, it was the Office of the chief
Priest, or Pontifex Max. to keep a Register of all public occurrences; and to
preserve them in some tables openly, that so the people might peruse them. Ab
initio rerum Romans (says he) usque ad Publ. Mutium Pont. Max. res omnes
singulorum annorum mandabat literis Pontifex Max. efferebatque in album, De
Oratore lib. 2.
proponebatque tabulam domi, potestas ut esset populo cognoscendi. Which Office
discontinued in the time of Publ. Mutius, was afterward revived by Julius
Caesar, in his first Consulship, being at that time chief Bishop of the
Romans. An institution of especial use and service in that state, as also in
others: there being not a greater spur to virtue and Heroic undertakings,
than an assurance that the Fame of our atchievments and well-deserving shall
not be buried in the same grave with us, and perish with our bodies. For
certainly the care both to live virtuously, and (if occasion so require) to dye
noblely, must needs be much augmented in the minds of good and honest men: when
once they know, that their performings shall not be folded up in silence; but
openly presented to the eyes and ears of all the people. Upon which grounds,
it was the custom of the faithful in the first times, and specially of those
which were for place and power mo^^ eminent amongst them; to commit to public
memory, the sufferings of all them, which had confessed the faith of CHRIST in
the midst of tortures; and continued constant in it even unto the death. Not
that they thought, to add thereby unto their glories, who now were glorious in
the Heavens: but by preserving in continual remembrance, their infinite
indurances, for the truth and testimony of Religion; to make the remnant of
Gods people, yet alive, more apt to run that course; and so to run it, that
at the last they might attain an equal guerdon. Of which kind of memorial
or public Register, is the Epistle of the Church of Smyrna, extant in the
fourth book of Eusebius History; that of the Lugdunenses and Viennoys in the
fifth; and lastly, that also of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, in the sixth
and seventh of the same Author.

(3) Of this kind specially (I mean in reference to the first times of
Christian Religion) were the two public Martyrologies of the Greek and Latin
Churches. The first original of which, not to look further, and perhaps fare
worse; may be referred most probably unto Anterus, Bishop of Rome, about the
year 238. at what time Maximinus, having first killed his master Alex.
Severus; made havocke of the Church of GOD. Of him it is recorded, that he
first caused the Acts and Passions of the blessed Martyrs to be diligently
sought out, and enrolled by the public Notaries in the common Registers of the
Church: lest else their memory might be determined with their lives. Anterus
primus statuit (says Platina) ut res gestae Martyrum diligenter exquisitae a
notarijs scriberentur: conscriptas recondi in aerario Ecclesiae mandavit; ne
una cum vita, been agentium memoria aboleretur. As for the Roman Martyrologie
now extant, as we may well conclude, that it was built upon that groundwork
or foundation of Anterus: So we can ill affirm for certain, by whom the whole
structure, as we now see it, Epist. l. 7. cap. 29.
was raised and perfected. Only we find in one of Gregory's Epistles, that
then the Roman Church had upon register, the names almost of all the Martyrs,
and a memorial of their Sufferings; digested as the Martyrologies now are,
according to their proper days: the time only of their passions, and the
place thereof assigned in them; but little of the circumstance, and manner of
their deaths. Nos pene omnium Martyrum, distinctis per dies singulos
passionibus, collecta in uno codice nomina habemus, etc. Non tamen codem
volumine, quis qualiter sit passus indicatur; sed tantum dies and locus
passionis ponitur. Which book or register here spoke of, as it has much
resemblance in the form and substance of it, with the Roman Martyrologie now
being: so we may happily resolve, that it is the same; augmented only in the
addition of such Saints, as in the times succeeding have had place, (and some
of them unworthily) in the common Calendar. This Martyrologie, thus ancient, as
it may be well supposed, upon the Three and twentieth day of April, gives us
this testimony of our Martyr, viz. Natalis S. Georgij Martyris, cuius illustre
martyrium Ecclesia Dei veneratur. The Passion of St. George the Martyr, whose
blessed martyrdom is in the Church of GOD, in especial honor. And this
briefly and in a word, according to the use and nature of a Martyrologie.

(4) I have here rendered the Natalis in the Text, by the English word of
Passion: because, as I conceive it, however it be used in other Authors, yet
it must so be taken in the construction of the Church; which did not use to
solemnize the Birth days of the Saints, but the days only of their
departure. For they conceived it rightly, that the birthday of a Christian,
was his entrance into Glory by the gate of Death: and that the worldly-minded
man reputed that to be the day of his Nativity, by which he entered into life.
And therefore Origin has noted of the Christians of his time, and of the times
before him; That they esteemed the day of Birth to be an entrance into anguish
and temptation: but celebrated with a solemn Feast, the day wherein their
friends and brethren were released from sin and bondage. Nunc nos (says he)
non Nativitatis diem celebramus, Lib. 3. in Job.
cum sit dolorum atque tentationum introitus: Sed mortis diem celebramus,
utpote omnium dolorum depositionem, atque omnium tent ationum effugationem. Nay
in his eighth Homily upon Leviticus, he affirms for certain, that never any
of the Saints did solemnize their Birthday with good chee^^ and festivals: and
not much after, Soli peccatores super huiusmodi Nativitate laetantur; That
only wicked men did so observe it. Much also to this purpose that of St.
Bernard, in his Epistle to and against the Canons of the Church of Lions* who
had presumed to introduce into the Church a new festival, The Feast of the
Conception of the blessed Vigin. The Church (says he) has by a sp^ciall
exception, Epist. 174.
kept as holy, the Birthday of our Savior: of whom the Angels did affirm
unto the Sheepe-heards, that his Nativitie was tidings of great Joy unto all
the people. Caeterorum autem non Nativitat^m sed mortem Sanctorum, i^dic^t and
praedicat pret^o^am. But for the rest (says he) the Church has taught us,
that not the Birthday of the Saints, but the day rather of their dissolution,
is accounted precious. In which no doubt, he did allude to that of DAVID;
Right precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

(5) If we cross over into Greece, and ask what Honors they afford unto
St. GEORGE, in their public registers: we find the Church there little less
devoted to him, than it is at Rome. For thus Wicelius has observed for us;
Veteres Graecos recensere in diario sub finem Aprilis, In Georg^^.
(...): That the Greeks anciently in their Diarie or common Almanacke, about
the end of April, did celebrate the memory of St. GEORGE, and SABAS, as the
Saints or Patrons of Military men. Which Saba (to note it by the way) has a
place also in the Roman Martyrologie, on the Four and twentieth of April: and
is there called Ductor militum, a Captain or Commander. But not to stand alone
upon the credit of Wicelius, we have the Greek Menologie, (for so they call
it) thus speaking of him: and in the day agreeing with the Church of Rome.
Baron. Annot. in Rom, Mart.
Memoria Sancti and Gloriosi and Magni Martyris Georgij ^^gnomento
Tropelophori. Fuit genere Cappadox, passus sub Dioclet^an^ Imper. Id est, This
day is celebrated in memorial of that most holy, glorious and great Martyr,
George; surnamed Tropelophorus; a Cappadocian by his Country: who suffered
under Diocletian. In which we find two circumstances which add much unto him
and his honor; a surname, and an adjunct. The adjunct is, that he is here
styled Magnus Martyr, the great Martyr: and not here only, but in diverse other
passages of Greek writers. For Metaphrastes gives this title to the Story of
him, Vita S. Georgij magni Martyris, The History of George the great Martyr: So
also does Pasicrates. So also Comus, the Suffragan of Amba Gabriel, Patriarch
of Alexandria, does call Saint GEORGES Church in that City, Ecclesiam S.
Georgij magni Martyris, the Temple of George the Great Martyr. But of this
Comus, more anon, in the next Chapter.

(6) The surname added in the Greek Menologie, unto Saint GEORGE; is, as
Baronius reads it, Tropelophorus: for which he is by Mr. Seldom, in his
Titles of Honor, Part. 2. cap. 11.
justly taxed; it being plain (says he) that it should rather be,
Tropaeophorus. For proof of which, he has produced a testimony out of John
Euchaites, who flourished in the time of Constantinus Monamachus the Greek
Emperor, about the year 1043. Which Euchaites, being at that time a Bishop of
the Greek Church, writing unto the Emperor abovenamed, thus calls St. George
the Martyr: (...)
(...).
The chief and President of war; the same
Who from an Ensign does derive his Name.


And in another place, speaking as to St. George; (...), Illustrious
Standard Bearer: for so the word Tropaeophorus, properly does signify. This
name or adjunct if you will, noted before by George Wicelius also, In Georgio.
to have been attributed to Saint George, by the later Grecians; as well as
that of the great Martyr. Et hodie D. Georgij celebritas apud Graecos, prae
caeteris perquam eximiae est; Appellant autem cum (...) and (...), id est.
Vexillarium* or Ancient. In reference to which, no question but he has the
title of Antesignanus, in the Martyrologie of Vsuardus? and that of Signifer in
Monk Robert; and in Mich. of Ysselt; of which two last, we shall see more
hereafter.

(7) The second way or course, whereby the Church in ancient times endeavored
to preserve alive, the memory of the blessed Saints and Martyrs; is, as before
we said, by giving them some special place in her public Liturgies. For since
that CHRIST has not been only manifested great in himself, but great also
and glorious in his Saints; the days of whose departure are to the Church of
CHRIST, as are th'inauguration days of Kings and Emperors, unto their people:
therefore especial choice being first had of them, there were some certain
times annually selected, to meditate upon our Savior glorified in them;
together with a form of praise and prayer, answerable to those times. In both
which circumstances, both that of time selected for this service, and of the
service destinate unto the time; the Church proceeded with exceeding
tenderness of care, and soundness of advice. That so for every purpose, there
might be a time and season: and that the office or devotions of the time, being
fitted to it; it might be opus diei in die suo. This was the Commemoration of
the Dead, in those pious times in use; before that commendable institution
became defiled by superstition, and as it were polluted with Idolatry. Of
which we have this testimony of St. AUSTIN: Honoramus sane memorias eorum
tanquam Sanctorum hominum Dei, De civitate Dei, l. 8. cap. 27.
qui usque ad mortem corporum pro veritate certarunt. Will you the reason of
it? It is (says he) that in the times of such solemnity, we may both glorify
our GOD which has given such gifts unto men; and by the annual reviving of
their memories, we may the better be excited unto an imitation of their
virtues. For so it follows in the place, Vt ea celebritate Deo vero gratias
de eorum victorijs agamus: and nos ad imitationem talium coronarum, eorum
memoriae renovatione adhortemur. So then it seems the Church proposed unto her
self, in her public Commemorations of the Dead, two several ends: one, that
GOD might be praised in his Saints; the other, that the noble and pious
actions of the Saints, may be a pattern unto us, to learn the better how to
serve him in Righteousness and Holiness all the days of our lives. For if
the life and death of the Saints is precious in the sight of God: how precious
should it be accounted in the eyes of all Gods people, that both the one and
the other should be carefully remembered; especially upon the day and time most
capable of such remembrances? And on the other side, how is it possible that
the recital of their Christian lives and godly deaths, should be so often
sounded in the ears of the more loose and dissolute men: and not provoke them
at some time or other to cry out with Balaam, O that I might die the death of
the Righteous, and that my end might be like his! Just so, the Tropheyes of
Miltiades, startled such noble resolutions in Themistocles: and so did
Alexander emulate the glories of Achilles, recited in the works of Homer. For
which cause also, and thereby to indeere the memory of the Saints departed,
with and amongst Gods servants: it was the custom of the Church, besides her
public mention of them in her ordinary Liturgy; to suffer anniversarie
panegyricks to be made in praise of such of them, as had notably deserved it.
Sic and defunctis praemium, and futuris dabatur exemplum; as Minutius has it.

(8) Afterward, when the conceits of men, were raised unto a wonderful
admiration of their virtues; and thoroughly possessed with this, how near a
place they held in the opinion and esteem of Almighty GOD: it was not thought
enough to commemorate their graces; unless we made some further use of their
esteem with their Creator, in gracing our petitions. The rather, because the
Church had generally, and truly taught, that these celestial Spirits now with
God, did constantly commend unto him, the flourishing estate and safety of his
Universal Church: yea and some also of the faithful in particular, so far
as possibly by revelation from their GOD, or any other means what ever; they
might be made acquainted with their several wants. Which once conceived, as
many times an ill use may be made of a sound doctrine; it was supposed to be a
soloecisme in the way of piety, not to commend our prayers and desires unto
them. Until at last, as there is seldom any medium inter summa and
praecipitia, no stop in tumbling down an Hill before we come unto the
bottom: the Saints in Heaven against their wills, and besides their knowledge,
became the only mediators between God and man, in point of intercession. And
this the process of the Trent-Councell, in drawing up the Article of the
Invocation of the Saints: Sanctos una cum Christo regnantes orationes suas pro
hominibus Deo offerre; Sess. 25. cap. 2.
and therefore, bonum^ atque utile esse simpliciter eos invocare, and ob
beneficia a Deo impetranda, etc. ad eorum orationes, opem, auxiliumque
confugere. This said, we may more easily conjecture, what kind of Commemoration
Saint GEORGE is like to find, in the Roman Liturgy.

(9) Let us look then upon the Liturgy of the Church of Rome, and we shall
find it very copious in St, GEORGE'S honor: the Liturgy of Rome as it is now
corrected, and purged of almost all those Legendarie Fables, which before gave
occasion of offense and laughter. And herein certainly we find the Service very
solemn; scarce any festival there celebrated with more variety of prayer and
divine offices. I will touch only at some principal passages thereof: taking
along with me yet the full course and method. The entrance or Preparatorie,
this. Protexisti me Deus a conventu malignantium: Alleluiah. A multitudine
operantium iniquitatem. Alleluiah. Thou have defended me O GOD from the
Congregation of the evil doers. Alleluiah: and from the multitude of them that
work iniquity, etc. Then follows this Prayer. Deus qui nos B. Georgij
Martyris tui and meritis and intercessione laetificas, concede propitius, ut
qui tua per eum beneficia poscimus, dono tuae graiiae consequamur. O GOD, which
by the merits and intercession of St. GEORGE thy blessed Martyr, do rejoice
our Souls, grant we beseech thee, that those benefits which by him we crave,
may by the favor of thy grace be given unto us, through JESUS CHRIST our
Lord. The Epistle taken out in part, out of the second unto Timothy, and the 3.
Chapt. Where the Apostle tells him, that he had known his doctrine, manner
of life, purpose, faith, long suffering, charity, patience; Persecutions and
afflictions, which came unto him at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; out of all
which, the LORD delivered him, etc. The Gospel taken out of the 15. Chapt. of
St. JOHN, Ego sum vitis vera, I am the true Vine, etc. The close of all is
this, after the whole Mass ended, which they call the Postcommunion: Supplices
te rogamus omnipotens Deus, ut quos tuis reficis sacramentis, etc. Almighty
GOD, we humbly beseech thee, that we which are refreshed by thy holy
Sacraments, may by the intercession of thy blessed Martyr George, serve thee
hereafter in all godly motions, etc. To which the Liturgy of the Church of
Rome, I will here add a Collect of the old Missall, (See Vsum Sarum:) which
piously interpreted, has nothing in it savouring of Superstition; and is
withal more proper to St. Georges story. Viz. Offerimus tibi Domine solenne
sacrificium pro veneranda S. Georgij mart. tui passione, deprecantes clementiam
tuam, ut per haec S. S. mysteria antiqui hostis tentatamen te triumphante
vincamus, et aeternae remunerationis praemium te largiente sequamur. We offer
unto thee O LORD the solemn Sacrifice (of praise and Thankesgiving) for the
death and passion of St. George thy Martyr; beseeching thy divine clemency,
that by these holy mysteries, we may in thee subdue the manifold temptations of
our old enemy the Devil, and be rewarded by thy grace with life eternal. The
first of these two Prayers taken out of the Roman Missall, I find also in the
Breviarie, the Diurnum, and the Officium B. Mariae Virginis: so copious is that
Church in the memorial of our Martyr.

(10) I doubt not but it will be here objected, that we are driven to hard
shifts, when we are feign to repair to Rome; from thence to prove St.
GEORGE'S Saint-ship. This we expect to hear of, and are ready to reply, that
this is hardly worth objecting. For here we draw no argument to prove how
lawfully St. GEORGE may be invoked; or that his intercession may be used, for
the more quick dispatch of our affairs in the Court of Heaven. Only we note
from hence, that anciently, and in the purer times of the Roman Church; St.
GEORGE was constantly commemorated, and in his proper course; as a noble
Martyr. Upon which ground, which in it self is good and commendable, if they
have built, out of their own, Wood, and Hay, and Stubble; a dangerous and
erroneous practice not warrantable in the Church: I hope, without offense, it
may be lawful for me, or any else, to make the profitablest use out of their
errors; and to verify the truth and goodness of the ancient practice in this
case, out of the faulty and erroneous corruption of the present. For I
persuade my self, that in points only of Historical faith, we may rely in
part upon their public Liturgies: and that we may conclude, that surely such a
Saint there was, as GEORGE, or MAURICE, or SEBASTIAN, or the rest there
honored; because I find them in the Missall, and the Breviarie; no man of
this or any age, having as yet informed me, that they have lately been
inserted into the books of Common-Service. Nay, as in nature, there must be
first an habit, before we can admit of any privation: and that in things
corrupted, we must suppose a true and real being of that thing, thus fallen
into corruption: so we may well infer, upon a view of the corruptions in
their Liturgies, that certainly there was some excellent use at first, of such
a ceremony, or such an institution; how ever that the foul corruptions of the
present have polluted and defiled it. I would not wish me thinks, an argument
of more validity to prove the act of kneeling at the Lords Supper, to be of
good Antiquity in the Church of Christ: than from the adoration of it (or of
the Host rather as they call it) exacted in their Rituals; which is, no doubt,
a superstitious, if not idolatrous corruption, of that ancient and reverend use
of Kneeling. Nor would I choose a fairer way of disputation, to justify the
honorable estate of the married Clergy, against the clamours of the Papists;
than to return upon them, that in the public service of the Church of Rome,
it is reputed commonly, though falsely, for a Sacrament: which false conceit of
theirs, is a corruption only of the just and pious meaning of the Fathers; who
therefore did extol it in the highest measure, the better to beat down those
Heretics which had disgraced it. More might be said in affirmation of this
manner of proceeding; had I now either place or leisure. At this time only
this, that I should more rely in matters merely Historical of being, upon
the Liturgy of Rome, which certainly is not contrived upon no other ground,
than lies and Fables: than upon any man's bare word which says the contrary; or
such weak arguments as are not able to conclude the matter controverted. And
so far I dare go with Canus; conceive me still in matters of this quality:
Lib. 11, cap. 5.
Nullas huiusmodi rations, ab antiqua patrum traditione quam communis
ecclesiae consuetudo, in divine officio, hymnis, antiphonisque confirmavit;
potuisse me movere.

(11) Which being so, and that St. GEORGE had anciently his proper time and
place of Commemoration, how ever now that laudable and pious custom be
degenerated: we may affirm more confidently, that he has been continually in
especial credit with the Church. In the Greek Church we find him on record in
their public Calendar; where they have honored him with the title of (...),
or the great Martyr. Annot. in R. Mart* Apr. 23.
Baronius tells us, that this Saint is very famous in the Countries of Galatia;
In Galatia celebris fuit eiusdem Sancti memoria: more generally Wicelius,
Celebritas D. Georgij apud Graecos prae caeteris perquam eximia est, that he is
honored more than any of the rest among the Grecians. Ioh. Euchaites a Greek
Bishop has given an honorable testimony of him: and Cyrus Theodorus, (of
whose time and quality I am yet to seek) has played the Epigrammatist, upon
his portraiture cut in white stone; (...), as the title has it. Add hereunto
Hierax, one of great power in the Greek Empire, upon his reconciliation with
Contacuzenus; gave him in token of his future faith and loyalty, L. 3. cap. 91.
St. GEORGE his picture: Imaginem praeclari Mart. Christi, Georgij, fidei suae,
sinceraeque erga Imperatorem voluntatis, pignus quoddam dedit. The thing
related by the Emperor Contacuzenus himself, in his book of Histories, first
published under the name of Christodulus. As for the Church of Rome, there is
no question to be made of her good affection. Her Missals, and her testimony
of him in the Martyrologie; expressly say it. Nor need there any more be added,
unless perhaps it be worth noting, that Vergerius Bishop of Iustinople in the
Seigneurie of Venice, was called in question for his life: Exam Conc. Trid.
Sess. 25.
Eo quod in Concilio Trident. Georgij Legendam sibi non per omnia probari
ostenderet, as Chemnitius has it; because he had declamed against some
passages of the Story of Saint GEORGE, in the Trent Council. As for the
Churches Protestant, we find the Lutheran Doctors many of them, very
favorable; and how we stand affected to him here in England, we shall see
hereafter. Which general agreement of the whole Church, and so many famous
parts of it, in the honor of our Martyr; may well be used as a reply to Doctor
Reynolds: De Idol. Romans ^. 1. cap. 5.. 21.
who makes this answer to the Cardinal, that George indeed may be accounted
famous in the Church, and his memorial celebrated; but so as was the memory of
Catiline, ab hominibus audacissimis, domesticisque host^bus, only by Ruffians,
and by common enemies unto the State. If Bellarmine mean otherwise, in saying
Georgij memoria semper fuit celeberrima; he tells him plainly that he lies.
But I will not meddle with their quarrels.

(12) To go a little further yet, it will be found upon good search, that not
the Christians only have had Saint George in special honor: but that the
rude and barbarous Turks, seeing it seems, how much he was esteemed by them,
conceive a like opinion of him? Title of honor, 2. part: cap. 11.
This Master Seldom testifies, that the Mahometans do honor him, as we, and
that they call him Chederle: which name (says he) one expresses by (...).
His Margin points us unto Contacuzenus, Apol. 3. Which I cannot meet with: and
therefore take it upon credit. The rather, because I find in Master Sam.
Purchase, Pilgrimage. lib 3. cap. 13.
out of Busbequius, that the Turks affirm their Chederle, to be the same
with St. GEORGE: and that the Dervices (which are a kind of Turkish Monks)
have a great Temple dedicated to his honor at Theke Thioy, not far from
Amasia, the chief City of Cappadocia. And in the Turkish History we read
that they have in Caire of Egypt, a Temple dedicated to Saint Barbara, and
another to Saint George; which amongst those nations are of great Fame. So
Knolles in the life of Selimus. All I find of him in the rest of Contacuzenus,
(I mean his History, is, that at his request, the Turkish Sultan did reedifie
a ruinous Temple, consecrated to St. George's memory. Lib. 4. cap. 14.
Post haec petivit legatus vester (says the Sultan in his Letter to that
Greek Emperor) ut quoddam veteris templi ruinosum aedificium vicinum Romany,
S. Georgij, renovaretur: id etiam fecimus. So great and powerful is the truth,
that it prevails even among Turks and Infidels.

CHAP. V.
(1) The honor done unto the Dead in the decent burial of their bodies. (2)
The relics of the Saints of what esteem in the Church primitive. (3) The
care of Gregory of Tours to preserve his writings: and what he testifies of
Saint George's relics. (4) What mention there is made of them in Aymonius,
and others. (5) Churches distinguished anciently by the names of Saints: and
for what reason. (6) St. George's Churches in Lydda, and in Ramula; made
afterward a Bishops See. (7) St. George's Church built by Sidonius Archbishop
of Mentz. (8) That mentioned in St. Gregory's Epistles. (9) St, Georges Church
in Rome; the title of a Cardinal. (10( Churches erected to St. George in
Alexandria and elsewhere. (11) Of Faustus Rhegiensis. (12) And the
Pseudo-Martyr in Sulpitius. An application of the rule in Lerinensis unto the
business now in hand.

(1) THis discourse of the bodies of the Dead, leads me directly to the third
of those three courses, whereby the Church endeavored to preserve alive the
memory of the Saints and Martyrs: collecting of their Relics, and laying them
with all due honors, in some place fit and worthy of them. Which piety of
theirs, extended at the first, no further, than to the pious and devout
interrement of their bodies: the tyranny of those which first made havocke of
the Church, extending in those times, no further than to death. So read we of
St. Stephen, the Protomartyr of the Church; that being stoned unto death,
certain devout men carried him, (or his body rather, which was his Relic,
all that was left of him) to the burial, and made great lamentation. But in
succeeding times* as the Persecutions grew more violent; so also grew the
Tyrants more unmercifull, and barbarously cruel: no longer now contented with
the simple death of those that suffered; but tearing of their limbs asunder,
and scattering abroad their bones, and casting forth their ashes into the
wind, that so they might not have the honor of an honest burial. So
witnesses Lactantius of Diocletian, Divin* instit. l. 5. cap. 11.
under whom St. GEORGE was made a Martyr, Et non tantum artus hominum dissipat
(says he) sed and ossa ipsa comminuit, and in cineres furit, ne quis extet
sepulturae locus. A desperate and raging tyrant, qui lucem vivis, terram
mortuis denegabat; which neither would allow the benefit of life unto the
living, nor burial to the dead. In these and such like barbarous and cruel
times, it was the commendable custom of the Christians, to recollect those
bones which by the Tyrants had bin so scattered; and to interre them with due
honor: that even the Bones also which were broken might rejoice; that so those
precious Relics of their dear Brethren, which were to meet together in a
joyful Resurrection, might not lie scattered, up and down the fields, a
scorn and laughter to the Gentiles.

(2) At length according as the minds and thoughts of men were raised unto an
high esteem and admiration of the Martyrs: so did they with a greater zeal
frequent their shrines; and set an higher price and estimate upon their
Relics. Not careful only to afford them all due respects, because of those
many miracles which it pleased GOD to work in and about those places where
they were intombed: but in short time, ascribing some divine and secret virtue
to them; whereof, Heaven knows, they were not guilty. It is recorded that the
Turks in the Sack of Lyssa, finding the tomb of Scanderbeg, did violently
break it open, and take thence his bones; every one somewhat, more or less,
as they could divide them: vainly conceiting, that they should never have the
worse in any action, as long as any Relic of that victorious Soldier was
about them. So also that opinion, which the people of those devout and pious
times, had first upon good grounds conceived of any of the Martyrs; and that
respect, which worthily at first, they bare unto their shrines and Relics:
degenerated at the last so far, that they fell also into the same conceit and
superstitious folly. Hereupon were the monuments and dormitories of the Saints
again opened: their bodies translated, some of them entire, into new
Sepulchers; and others dismembered piece by piece, and carried into far
Countries: that Church or Nation being conceived most happy, which had procured
any the least bone into their possession, of such especially of the Saints,
which were in greatest credit and opinion with the people. So that now the
cruelty of the barbarous tyrants in the height of persecution, might seem to
be revived in the dawning of Superstition. Which notwithstanding, there might
perchance be somewhat said in their excuse: as viz. that the Relics then by
them so zealously affected, were most of them true and real; not counterfeited
by any cheating Mountebanke; and therefore worthy of all due respect and
reverence. For who so cold in his affection to the Saints, that would not
gladly give them honor, even in their dust? So much respect, no question, may
be due unto the Relics of the Saints, if truly such; as by Pope Leo was
afforded to a parcel of the cross, sent to him by the Bishop of Jerusalem:
Epist. 72.
of which he tells that Prelate in an answer to him, Particulam dominica
crucis, cum eulogijs dilectionis tuae veneranter accepi: That he received it
with great reverence and thanks.

(3) Not to descend more downward, we will look back into those former
times, and therefore least corrupted; wherein we find first mention of the
Relics of St. GEORGE. And in the first place we meet with Gregory of Tours,
who flourished in the next age after Pope LEO abovenamed, and dyed about the
year 596. A man of special quality, a Bishop by his calling; and as he
testifies himself, Author of many several books, Hist. Franc l. 9. prope
finem*
and treatises. Quos libros licet rusticiori stilo scripserim, etc. Which
though he wrote in a more plain and homely style, yet he does earnestly
conjure all those, which should succeed him in that charge; per adventum Domini
nostri, etc. Even by the coming of our Savior CHRIST, and by the dreadful
day of judgment; that neither they suppress them, or cause them to be
unperfectly transcribed: Sed ut omnia vobiscum integra inlibataque permaneant,
sicut a nobis relicta sunt; but that they be preserved as uncorrupted and
entire, as they were left by him. Of these books, seven of them did
especially concern the miracles of the Holy Martyrs: and in the first thereof,
he tells us in the general, Multa de Georgio martyr miracula gesta
cogn^vimus, De glor. Mart. cap. 101.
that he had known of many miracles done by Saint GEORGE. And in particular,
habentur eius reliquiae in vico quodam Cennomannensi, ubi multa plerunque
miracula visuntur: Some of his Relics also are in the Village of Le Maine,
where oftentimes there were seen many miracles. There is a further passage in
that Book and Chapter, which though I shall relate, yet I will hardly take
upon me to defend it: it is briefly thus. Huius reliquiae cum reliquorum
Sanctorum a quibusdam ferebantur, etc. Some certain men, that carried with
them some of St. GEORGE'S Relics, and of others also of the Saints; came once
unto a place in the frontires of Lymosin: where a few Priests, having a little
Chanterie or Oratorie made of boards, did daily power out their Devotions to
the Lord. There, for that night, they begged for lodging; and were accordingly
made welcome. The morning came, and they prepared to go forward in their
jorney; they were not able to remove their Knap-sacks [ capsulas,] out of the
place wherein they laid them. Loath to depart without their Relics, it came at
last into their minds, that sure it was the will of GOD, they should bestow
some of them on their Hosts: which being done, the difficulty was removed, and
they proceeded in their journey. This story, as before I said, I will not take
upon me to defend. Only I note from hence, that in this Gregory's time, or
before it rather, the Relics of St. George were in especial credit: and so
by necessary consequence the Saint himself exceeding famous.

(4) Not to say any thing here of St. George's head, and of the Temple built of
purpose by Pope Zachary, in honor of it; which we shall speak of presently,
in a place more proper: we find the Relics of our Martyr mentioned with
great honor in Aymonius. An Author of the middle times, anno 837. not long
before the shutting in of the first day of learning, in the Christian Church:
one of the Monks of St. GERMANS monastery, in the Suburbs of Paris; and
public Notarie thereof, for the time being. Before we come unto his
testimony, we must first take notice, that Childebert Son of Clovis, the
first Christian King of France, who began his reign about the year 515: did
in the later of his time, anno 542. erect a Monastery near Paris, unto the
honor of St. Vincent. This monastery thus founded, as he endowed it with many
Lands, and large immunities: so he enriched it with the Relics of St.
Vincent, and St. GEORGE, and part also of the Holy Cross; all which he brought
with him out of Spain, whither he had before made two famous journeyes. Hist.
de ghost. Franc. l. 2. cap. 20.
Witness whereof the Charter of the Foundation, copied out by Aymonius: and is
as much of it as concerns our purpose, this which follows. Childebertus Rex
Francorum, etc. In honorem S. Vincentij Martyris (this Vincent was converted by
St. GEORGE as before is said) cuius reliquias de Spania apportavimus, ceu and
sanctae crusis, and beatissimi Georgij, etc. quorum reliquiae ibi sunt
consecratae, etc. In the same Author also, we have another story of St. Georges
arm, given by Justinian the Emperor unto St GERMAN, L. 3. cap. 9.
then Bishop of Paris; as he returned from his Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, by the
way of Constantinople: Vnaque brachium D. Georgij Martyris, pro magno munere
contulit, as mine Author has it. Which Relic was afterward by Saint
GERRMAN, bestowed upon the Abbey of Saint Vincent; wherein he was interred: and
which since then, has been called St. GERMANS. Thus much I find recorded of
the Relics of our Martyr (not to say any thing of his colors or his banner,
preserved, as Schedell tells us, in Bamberge ^ City of Germany; magna cum
solennitate, with great Solemnity: and this enough to show, that even from the
beginning, his Relics and himself, were always had in special honor.

(5) And now at last, we come unto the last of those four ways or courses,
whereby the Church endeavored to preserve alive the memory of the Saints and
Martyrs: viz. the calling of such Temples by the names of those blessed
Spirits, which she had solemnly erected to GODS special service, and
consecrated to his honor. A custom which she long had practiced, even in the
very times and heat of Persecution; when, as it was more dangerous unto the
Church it self, and more unpleasing to the tyrants; so was it also more full
of honor and respect unto the Martyr. Witness whereof those many Temples
erected in the Empire of Severus, Eusebius. l. 8. c. 1. l. 8. c. 8.
Gordian, Philip, and Galicnus; demolished after in the time of Diocletian: and
reerected by the Decree and License of Maximinianus. Which Temples so erected,
were consecrated, though in a second place, unto the memory of some or other of
the more notable and famous of the Saints departed in those fiery times; as
may appear by that which we have elsewhere cyted out of Marcellinus: as viz.
how the Alexandrian people had cast the ashes of their Arian Bishop, George,
into the Sea, ne aedes illis ex struerentur ut reliquis, lest else they should
be taken by the multitude for holy Martyrs; and Temples erected to them, as
unto others of that rank, of which though falsely they conceived him. But in
the time of CONSTANTINE, we find the practice of it very frequent in the
Church: the Emperor himself dedicating one of his own building, (...), unto
the blessed memory of the Apostles. As for his Mothe^ the most illustrious
Helena, we find of (...)cting, a Temple dedicated to the Virgin (...), in the
Town of Bethlehem, another to St. John the Baptist, in the Mountains of
Iudaea; another to St. Peter, on Mount Sion. Nor were those blessed spirits the
Apostles thought worthy only of these honors; but the rest also of the holy
Martyrs and Confessors: the first of this rank which I have met with in my
reading, being that of Dionysius in the City of Alexandria, whereof he once
was Bishop, and there at first one of the Auditors of Origin. Built, as I do
conceive it, in the time of Persecution, by the Gentiles, and burnt as the
Historia^ tells us, in the time and tumults of the Arians: (...) ( viz.
Alexandriae) (...) So Sozomen. Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 5.
Now the reason why it pleased the Church, to give the names of Saints and
Martyrs to their Temples, was not (as our incomparable Hooker has observed
rightly) either that they should serve unto the worship of those glorious
spirits, or that those blessed spirits now made glorious, should take upon them
the protection and patronage of those places: but partly in respect that by the
ministry of those Saints, it pleased God there to show some rare effect of
his Power; and partly in regard that by their deaths, which there the Saints
did suffer for the testimony of the truth, the places where they dyed were
made more venerable.

(6) In these respects, St. George had many Churches built and consecrated, as
to Gods service principally; so, as before I said, in a second place unto his
memory. The first, (for I will only touch upon a few of special note) the
first I say, of those which hitherto I have observed; that in Diospolis or
Lydda in the tribe of Ephraim: built by Justinian Emp. who began his Empire
Anno 527. over, or near the place of our Martyrs sepulcher. Hist. bell. sac.
lib. 7. cap, 22.
Cuius ecclesiam, quam ad honorem eiusdem Martyris, pius et orthodoxus Princeps
Romans Augustus, illustris memoriae D. Iustinianus multo studio et devotione
prompta aedisicari praeceperat etc. So Gulielmus Tyrius speaking of this our
Martyr. This Church, was by the Turks demolished, upon the coming of the
armies of the Western Princes* for the conquest of Jerusalem: the Church
which now stands, being built, after, as the natives say, by a King of
England. The cause which moved the Turks hereto, a fear, least else the
timber of it, which was large and m^ssie, might be converted to some engines,
for the battery of that City: Timentes, ne trabes ecclesiae, quae multae
proceritatis erant, in machinas ad expugnandam urbem vellent convertere. As
that Author has it. Nor far from Lydda is the little City of Rama, or
Ramula, supposed to be the dwelling of Joseph of Arimathea: where our St.
George was honored with another temple, defaced by the Turks also. Cuius ibi
ab antiquo fundatam ecclesiam, Turci nonnihil deformaverant, in the words of
Malmesburie. Lib. 4.
Hence I collect, that seeing one of these Churchs is called ancient, ab
antiquo; and that the timber of the other was large and massy: that certainly
St. George was anciently honored with a Temple; by the magnificence of which
we may conjecture at the ^ame and credit of the Saint. These Churches were in
times succeeding made by D. Godfrie, Gul. Tyrius lib. 7. cap. 22.
and the Christians of the West, a Bishops see; both Cities, and the villages
adjoining, appointed for his diocese: Primitias laborum suorum cum omni
devotione egregio Martyri dedicantes; those Noble princes so consecrating the
first fruits of their victories, to our glorious Martyr. The first Bishop of
them, was a Norman, of the Diocese of Roan: his title, Bishop of St. GEORGE'S;
of which see more in our second Chapter of this second Part;. 4.

The second Church of note, erected in Saint GEORGE'S honor, which I have met
with hitherto, was founded by Sidonius, Archbishop of Mentz in Germany, who
flourished in the year 556, and after: but whether in the Town of Mentz, or
in some other place, I am not certain. Of this Venantius Fortunatus Bishop of
Poyctiers, Florens doctrina and sanctitate, (says the Cardinal,) famous for
piety and learning, has in his Sacra Carmina composed this Epigram. He lived
about the year 570. ^i^lioth. ^atru^ ^^m.


In Basilicam S. Georgij quam aedificavit Sidonius Arch^ep. Moguntinus.
Martyris egregij pollens micat aula Georgij,
Cuius in hunc mundum spargitur altus honos.
Carcere, caede, siti, vinclis, fame, frigore, flammis,
Confessus Christum, duxit ad astracaput.
Qui virtute potens, Orientis in axe sepultus,
Ecce sub Occiduo cardine praebet opem.
Ergo memento preces, and reddere vota, viator;
Obtiner hic meritis, quod petit alma fides.
Condidit Antistes Sidonius ista decenter:
Profician^ anima, qua nova Templa, suae.
Upon St. GEORGE'S Church, built by Sidonius Archbishop of Mentz.
St. GEORGE'S glorious Temple here behold,
Whose noble Acts through all the world are told.
Who in so many several torments tried,
Confessed his Faith in CHRIST; confessing died.
Who great in power, though buried in the East;
Extends his wondrous graces to the West.
Therefore pay here thy vows, who ere thou be;
Where such a Saint is near, to join with thee.
This goodly Temple did Sidonious build:
Unto his Soul may it due comforts yield.
(8) One Temple yet there is, ancienter, as I conceive, than any of the three
yet mentioned; founded by whom, I cannot tell, nor in what place: but specified
by Pope Gregory the first, in an Epistle to Maurinianus then an Abbat; with
great care, and in these particulars. The superscription of it, Gregorius
Mauriniano Abbati; the subject of it, De Ecclesia S. Georgij restauranda,
touching the reparation of St. George's Church: the Letter, this as follows.
Epist. lib. 9. cap. 68.
Quia Ecclesiam S. Georgij positam in loco qui Ad Sedem dicitur, minorem quam
oportet diligentiam habere cognovimus: utile esse prospeximus, quoniam
Monasterium tuum eidem Ecclesiae noscitur esse coniunctum, eius tibi curam
committere: hortantes ut and sollicitudinem illic congruam studeas adhiberi, et
Psalmodiae officium solenniter exhiberi facias. Et quia Ecclesiam istam
reparatione certum est indigere, volumus ut quicquid illuc accedere potuerit,
ipse accipere, atque in eius reparationem, ut praevideas, debeas erogare. St.
GEORGE'S Church, situate Ad sedem, not being looked unto, with that diligence,
which belongs unto it; and since it is so near your unto Monastery: we think
it good to commit the care thereof unto you: Requesting that you would bestow
your utmost diligence upon it: and have a care the Psalmodie, or daily prayers,
be solemnly performed. And since we have been credibly informed, that it is
out of reparation; it is our pleasure, that you gather up the profits of it,
and lay them out upon the work, so far as you think it fit. So far the
letter. As for the writer of it; not to say any thing of his exceeding
industry and learning, whereby he gained unto himself, the attribute of
Magnus: he died about the year 604. before which time, the Temple of St.
GEORGE was now grown old and ruinous; quite out of reparation. Which being so,
considering what durable Materials, Churches are commonly composed of; and in
what strong and lasting form compacted: I am almost persuaded, that the Church
here mentioned, was built immediately upon the death and dissolution of our
Martyr.

(9) From Gregory, we will descend on one of his successors in the Chair of
Rome, by name Pope Zachary; who entered on that Dignity, Anno 742. the founder
of St. George's Church in Velo Aureo; or as some others call it, in Velabro; a
part of Rome. The chief occasion of the building, was our Martyrs head: which
precious Relic was given unto him by the Venetians; and by him here inshrined
in a Church built only for that purpose. Idem quoque (viz. Zacharias)
Basilicam B. Georgij in Velabro condidit; eoque loci caput ipsius Sancti
collocavit: So Platina affirme's it. I know indeed, that the later editions of
that Author, read it B. Gregorij; but questionless they are mis-printed. For
in an old edition of this book, at Colen, anno 1529. and afterward in that of
Lovaine, corrected by Oniphurius, anno 1572. it is B. Georgij, Chronica Chron.
Aetas. 6. Page 240.
as before we read it. Herm. Schedell adds that besides the Church there was
also built a Monastery; and that it did continue in great honor, even unto
his times. Platina.
Huius inelyti Martyris caput, cum postmodum Venetijs delatum fuisset; in eius
honorem Monasterium et Ecclesia erecta fuit, quod nunc usque maxima veneratione
perseverat. A Church, it seems of great name and credit: such which of long
has been a title, of some Roman Cardinal. For in the life of Alexander 6. we
have there mention of one Raphael Cardinal of St. George's, Camerarius S.
Ecclesiae, High Chamberlain of the State Ecclesiasticke. And in the 5. Tome of
the Bibl. S. Patrum, we have a^tract de Iubileo, written by James then
Cardinal of St. GEORGES: Iacobi S. Georgij ad velum aureum Diaconi Cardinalis,
de Iubileo, liber unus, as the title tells us. Which James was nephew to Pope
Boniface the eighth, by him advanced unto that office, in his first call of
Cardinals; anno 1295. So de la Bigne, the first Collectour of those Volumes,
out of an ancient Manuscript of Alphonso Chicarelli.

(10) Hitherto our inquiry has been made, in Asia, and in Europe only; we
will now cross over into Afric: that so it may appear, that every part of
the known world (I mean known anciently) has in it some memorial of our
Saint and Martyr. In this, we will content our selves with Alexandria, the
Queen of Cities and Metropolis of Africa, as Sir George Sandys calls her:
where we shall find an ancient Temple dedicated to St. GEORGE. For thus the
Letter of Ioh. Comus, the Suffragan of Amba Gabriel, Patriarch of Alexandria,
directed to Pope Clement 8. and dated on the 28. of December, anno 1593. Tres
Alexandria sunt Ecclesiae Catholicae: una nomine principis Angelorum S.
Michaelis; secunda S. Marci Evangelistae, ac tertia nomine Martyris magni S.
Georgij, extra urbem, ad littus maris salsi: et omnes istae Ecclesiae indigent
aedificatione, vestitu et impensis pauperum et egenorum. There are (says he)
three Christian Churches in Alexandria, St. Michaels the Archangell, St. Marks
the Evangelist; and thirdly, that of St. George the great Martyr, without the
City, and near unto the Sea; all which do stand in need of reparation,
ornaments, and money for the entertainment of the poor. I know that Mr. Sam.
Purchase does account this Letter, Pilgrimage. l. 6. cap. 5.. 5.
and the whole business handled by Baronius in his Corollarie, ad Tom. 6.
where this Letter is; to be forged, and counterfeit: as having in it, a
submission of this Patriarch and the Church of Egypt, to the Sea of Rome;
whereas indeed there was no such matter. But somewhat surely there was in it,
which might occasion such an Embassy to Rome; and some dependence of the
Christians of this Country upon the Pope: It being noted by G. Sandys, Rel. of
his jorn. lib. 2. page 110.
that multitudes of late have been drawn to receive the Popish Religion,
especially in Cairo, (the Seat of the Alexandrian Patriarch of the Cophties,
or native Christians of that Country) by the industry of Friars; having had the
Roman Liturgy sent them from Rome, together with the Bible, in the Arabicke
language. As for the thing it self, it is affirmed by Mr. Phurchas, that there
are three Christian Churches in Alexandria; which is enough to confirm our
purpose. Other Churches there also are, dedicated to St. George of good
antiquity, though of less note; as viz. that of Caire in Egypt; that of Beddi
in the realm of Ethiopia: and lastly, that in Constantinople, built by
Justinian the Emperor: De aedif. Just. lib. 1. orat. 3.
(...). As Procopious has it. What Churches have been consecrated to his
memory, with us, in England; we shall see hereafter.

(11) If any thing may be objected, against ought that we have spoken in this
present Chapter, and the last; it is in likelihood, the case of Faustus
Rhegiensis, and the Pseudo-Martyr in Sulpitius Severus: both which were held
for Martyrs, although the one of them was a Theife, and the other an Heretic.
Of Faustus Rhegiensis, who in the opinion of the ancient Church, was reckoned
for a Semi-Pelagian; it is affirmed by Doctor Abbotts, afterward Lord Bishop
of Salisburie, that he had place in the French Martyrologies, a Festival
allotted to him on the 17. of January, and a Temple dedicated to him by the
people of his own City. De veritat. and great. Chapter lec. 1.
Immo et in Martyrologie Gallicano inter Sanctos numeratum; eoque nomine, ab
Ecclesia Rhegiensi, erecta nominis eius titulo insignita Basilicae; et die
festo, Ian. 17. honoratum, etc. It may be hence objected, that all which we
have spoken hitherto, is of little value: those honors having been
communicated even to Heretics; such as St. George is said to be by Doctor
Reynolds. To this we answer, first, that this was only a particular Act, of
the national Church of France: their Faustus never being received generally,
as St. George was, in the Church-Catholique. And therefore it is said by my
said Lord of Salisburie, that these honors were accumulated on him, spectante
orb Christiano, tacente Romans Ecclesia, contradicente nemine: not by the
approbation of the Church in general; but only a connivence at it, in regard
of those of France. Secondly, that Faustus, though accounted for an Heretic
abroad, might yet be otherwise an honest and religious man, and so reputed in
his own City, where afterward he had his Temple: For I have seen it
somewhere cyted out of Chrysostom, (...), that even an Heretic may have a
very fair and commendable conversation. And last of all, that Faustus was not
such an Heretic, that his memorial should be blasted for it in all
generations. Not such an Heretic, as aimed at the foundation of the Faith, as
did the Arian; nor such as overthrew the virtue of Gods grace, as did Pelagius.
Only he is accused, that undertaking to confute the writings of Pelagius; he
did not run a course quite contrary to the other; but in some tolerable
manner, and in some points of less consequence; did seem to trench upon his
tenets.

(12) As for the Pseudo-Martyr in Sulp. Severus, Second sunday in Lent.
he is by Dr. Boys, brought in, to prove against the Papists, how much they
have abused themselves and all the Church, in Canonizing those for Saints, who
could be no better tha^ devils. And in the next words, the Papists adore others
who were neither Saints in Heaven, nor men on earth, as St. Christopher, Saint
George, etc. The cases here are Parallel: but sure it were a task too
weighty, either for him, or any other, to prove this Pseudo-Martyr to have
been Canonized a Saint; or that he was reputed one in the opinion of the
Church. All which Sulpitius does report is this; Not far from Tours, whereof
St. Martin then was Bishop, there was a little Oratorie much frequented by some
simple people, upon opinion that some holy Martyr had been there buried. Saint
Martin who suspected presently that there was some Imposture in it, repaires
unto the Chapel: and calling upon GOD to manifest the truth, a certain shape
passed by them, who confessed that he was once a Theife, but by the simple
people reckoned as a Martyr; there being nothing in his life or death, to merit
that opinion. Ille antem nomen edidit, Sulpit. Seve^. in vit. S. Martini. lib.
1.
de crimine confitetur, latronem se fuisse, ob scelera percussum; vulgi errore
celebratum, sibi nihil cum Martyribus commune esse, cumillos gloria, se poena
retineret. This is the whole: and then a few poor simple people must be
reputed for the Church in general; or else this inference is nothing to the
purpose.

(13) There is a rule in Lerinensis, that that is to be counted true in the
Church Catholic, which has been so believed by all sorts of men, Advers.
haer. cap. 3.
in all times, and in all places. In Ecclesia Catholica illud magnopere
curandum est, ut teneamus id, quod ab omnibus, quod semper, quod ubique
creditum est. Advers. haer. cap. 3.
Unless we can apply this rule unto the business now in hand; it is not our
desire, that any man should think St. GEORGE to be a Martyr. And first, if we
consult the testimonies of all sorts of men; we find St. George to be thus
reckoned, both by Turks and Christians: by the West Churches, and the
Eastern; by the Papist and the Protestant: by Princes, Prelates, and their
people; by writers ancient, and by modern. If we expect the general consent
herein of all the times and ages since his death and Martyrdom: we have
already made it plain by way of a Chronology, that there has been no age,
no not that Seculum infelix, as it is called by Bellarmine; in which we have
not plentiful assurance of our cause. And for the close of all, look into all
parts of the world, and tell me which of all the three, has not afforded
honor to him, as an holy Martyr. His name commemorated in the Martyrologies of
Rome, and Greece; his Relics reverenced in Spain, Constantinople, France and
Germany: Temples erected to his honor, in Rome, Constantinople, Ramula,
Diospolis, Alexandria, Caire, and Aethiopia, and in other places; by Prelates,
Popes, and Emperors. Temples in Asia, Europe, and in Africa. And in the
principal Cities also of the East, and West, and Southern parts of the whole
world. Then certainly we may affirm of our St. George, Datercul. l. 2.
as the Historian did of Pompey; Quot parts terrarum sunt, tot fecit monumenta
victoriae suae. So then, the story of St. George, and the opinion of his being
Martyr, having been entertained by all sorts of men, in all the ages of the
Church, and all the quarters of the world: we may maintain, according to the
rul of Lrinensis, that therefore it is to be counted true, De Idol. Romans l. 1.
c. 5.. 22.
without more disputing. The one affirmed by Doctor Reynolds, Georgius, quem
Orientalis and Occidentalis ecclesia pro martyr colit; and in another place,
universalem ecclesiam, hoc est, Orientalem and Occidentalem Georgium pro
Martyr coluisse out of which one so granted, we will without demanding leave,
conclude the other.

CHAP. VI.
(1) St. George how he became to be accounted the chief Saint of Soldiers.
(2) St. George when first esteemed a chief Patron of Christianity. (3) The
expedition of the Western Princes, to the Holy Land. (4) The story of the
succors brought unto their Army by St. George. (5) His second apparition to
them as the Leaguer of Jerusalem, (6) The Probability of the former miracle,
disputed. (7) An essay of the famous battle of Antiochia, by way of Poem.

(1) HItherto have we spoken of Saint GEORGE, according as he is esteemed and
honored as a Saint, in the general opinion of the Christian world; and of the
public honors done unto him, in the Church of GOD, the ground and pillar of
truth, as the Apostle calls it. Our method now does lead us on, to marshall in
those honors, which have been also done unto him, by the Kings and Princes of
the earth: that so unto the testimony and suffrage of the Church, we may add
also the full authority and power of the civil Magistrate. But since the
honors done by them unto Saint George, consider him, some of them as a Saint
in general; some, as a principal Patron of the affairs of Christendom; and
others, as the tutelary Saint or Guardian of military men: we must in brief
declare the reason, why he was made the tutelarie Saint of Soldiers; and at
what time he first began to be accounted, so principal a Patron of
Christianity; before we can descend unto particulars. And first, if we demand
how our Saint George became to be accounted the chief Saint of Soldiers: we
answer, that he was himself a Soldier of chief rank and quality, and
therefore in the superstitious times before us, conceived to be most worthy to
countenance that calling. For which cause also, it pleased the Church of Rome,
who then did what she listed; to join with him in commission, although perhaps
not with equal power, St. Maurice, and St. Sebastian. So witnesses Baronius
out of the Roman Ceremonial De divinis officijs; Annot. in Rom Mart. 23. Apr.
Romanam ipsam Ecclesiam ad expugnandos fidei hosts, hos praecipue martyrs
invocare consuevisse, Mauritium, Sebastianum, and Georgium. Which Maurice and
Sebastian also, were both of them Soldiers of the same time with our St.
George; and both of eminent place in their several Armies: Romans Martyr. Sept.
22. and Ian. 20.
MAVRITIUS being one of the Chiefetaines of the Theban Legion, slaughtered by
MAXIMINIANUS, in his expedition toward Britain; SEBASTIAN, a Commander of
the first rank, [ Princeps primae cohortis] under DIOCLETIAN. This was the
reason why they were first selected, to take upon them the defense of military
men: Saint GEORGE, as chief upon the earth in birth, and honors; so also
generally reckoned by the men of War, to be of greater power, than either of
the other, and therefore most devoutly prayed to. Hence is it, that the Poet
MANTVAN calls him the MARS of Christians: MARS being at the first some notable
swash-buckler himself; and afterward the GOD of Soldiers, in the opinion of
the Gentiles.

Vt Martem Latij, sic nos, te Dive Georgi,
Nunc colimus.
As Rome did MARS; so we
St. GEORGE, do honor thee.
And in another place.

Inclyte bellorum rector, quem nostra Inventu^
Pro Mavorte colit.
Thou famous President of Wars,
Whom we adore instead of MARS.
(2) Nor was St. George only reckoned as a chief Saint of soldiers; but after,
and before, the English took him to themselves, esteemed a principal patron
of the affair of Christendom. For, as before I noted, the Christians used to
call upon him (being so lessoned by their superstitious teachers) as an
advocate of victory: and did implore his help, ad expugnandos fidei hosts, in
all their Wars against the enemies of our religion; as they did also pray
unto St. Maurice, and St. Sebastian, though not so generally. Hence is it that
St. Mark, St. James, St. Davis, St. Andrew, and the rest, being once chosen
the Protectors of particular States and Countries, were never importuned to
take upon them the tuition and defense of any others. It may be, they were
fastened unto those employments, as once the Tyrians chained the statua of
Hercules, their especial Guardian, to their Altars: for fear he might be
won to take part against them, and give succor to their enemies. But of St.
George, we find not any such sufficient bond, by which he is obliged either
unto particular places, or designs: as one whom they thought good to leave at
large, that so he might the better succor the afflicted parts of
Christendom. For which cause, howsoever in the latter days he was conceived,
to be a special fautor of the English: yet have the Georgians, and the
Genoese, always esteemed him as their Patron; and by the German Emperors, he
has been made Protector also of their military orders, V. Chapt. 7.
of which more hereafter. How, and on what occasion, he came to have the
general patronage of Christianity conferred upon him; at the least as I
conceive it, I am next to show: first making room for that which follows, by
a short, but necessary digression.

(3) After the year 600. the affairs of Christendom began in all places to
decline: the Western parts beginning to be overspread by superstition; the
Eastern made a prey unto the Saracens, who in their conquests labored what
they could to advance the sect of Mahomet. By this means, as they enlarged
their Empire; so did they also propagate the infinite impieties of that
Impostour: whose irreligion had the fortune, not only to be entertained by
those poor wretches, whom the Saracens had conquered; but also to inveigle
them, by whom they were subdued. For when the Turks, under the conduct of
Tangrolipix, had made themselves masters of the Persian Empire; then in
possession of the Saracens: they took upon them presently the Law of that
seducer, as if Mahometanisme had been annexed inseparably unto the Diadem.
Proud of this victory, and little able to contain their active spirits in an
obedient Peace at home; they were employed in several Armies, and to several
purposes: one of them, under Cutlu-Moses, who turned his forces on the
Christian Empire; the other under Ducat and Melech, two kinsmen of the Persian
Sultan, who bent their strength against the Saracens of Syria and Damascus. In
this design, the issue prooved so answerable to their hopes* that quickly they
became possessed of almost all Armenia, Media, and the Lesser Asia, inhabited
in most parts of them then by Christians: as of all Syria, the Holy Land, and
therein of Jerusalem. So that in all the East, the Gospel of our Savior was
either utterly extinguished; or his name celebrated only in obscure and
private places. Religion being in this state, the Christian Princes of the West
most of them then in peace and amity with one another, jointly and joyfully
resolve upon the freeing of the miserable East, from thraldom. Persuaded
thereunto, piously, by a Reverend Hermit, whose name was Peter; who had been
witness of those miseries which the Christians there endured: and cunningly by
Urban, of that name the second, Pope of Rome; who by employing such and so many
Princes in those remote Countries, foresaw a way to bring the Roman Prelates
to their so-much-expected greatness. The Princes of most note which put
themselves into the action, were Robert Duke of Normandy, brother to Will.
Rufus King of England; Hugh, brother to the King of France; Godfrey of
Bouillon, Duke of Lorreine, with his two brethren Baldwin, and Eustace;
Tancred, and Beomond, two noble Normans of the Kingdom of Naples: and he which
for his spirit and magnanimity, might have been reckoned with the first;
Ademar Bishop of La Puy en Velay, a little territory near unto Auvergne in
France, the Popes Legate. The Army which attended them, amounted to no less
than 30000. fighting men; the time of this their expedition, an. 1096. or
thereabouts: their fortune so succesful, that they expelled the Turks out of
all Asia the less; compelling them into the Eastern parts of their dominions.
Having no enemy at their backs, they passed the streights of Taurus: and
entering into Syria which they quickly mastered; they sat them down at last,
before the famous City of Antiochia. A place of chief importance for the
assurance of their new conquests; and therefore very much desired.

(4) This famous City after a long and painful seige, was at last rendered to
them: and the defense thereof, together with a large and spacious territory,
committed to Prince Bo^mund. But as they rested here for the refreshing of
their troops extremely weakened in that tedious and lingering Leaguer; they were
themselves besieged by an huge multitude of enemies: who though they came too
late to raise the seige; were yet persuaded, that they came time enough to
redeem the Town. This seige they kept so straight, that they within, not
looking to be so invested, became in short space utterly disheartened: their
store of corn, consumed; their horses dying every day for want of fodder;
themselves continually diminished, and forespent, by want and sickness. No
other means of safety left, they are resolved to put it all upon the fortune
of a Battle: which battle had they lost, there had been then an end of all
their undertakings. But out they must; a few weak men, against a multitude of
able Soldiers, well horsed, and full of lusty spirits. Suppose the battles
joined, and we will tell the rest out of Robertus Monachus, De Che. pr^ncip.
bello etc. lib. 7.
a Benedictine of the Monastery of Rhemes, who flourished in the year 1120.
and wrote the story of this war. Dum sic certatur (says he) and tam longi
certaminis prolixitas nostros fatigabat, nec numerus hostium videretur
decrescere; Albatorum militum innumerabilis exercitus visus est de montibus
descendere, quorum Signifer and duces esse dicuntur, Georgius, Mauritius,
Demetrius: quos ut primum vidlt Podiensis Episcopus, exclamavit magna voce,
dicens, O milites, ecce vobis venit auxilium quod promisit Deus, etc. Our
Soldiers being wearied with the long continuance of the battle; and seeing
that the number of enemies decreased not, began to faint: when suddenly an
infinite number of heavenly Soldiers all in white; descended from the
Mountains; the leaders of them being St. George, St. Maurice, and St.
Demetrius. Which when the Bishop of La Puy (and not of Podie as it is commonly
translated) first beheld; he cried aloud unto his troops, These are (says he)
the succors, which in the name of God, I promised to you. The issue of the
miracle was this, that presently the enemies did turn their backs, and lost
the field: there being slain upon the place, and in the chase, 100000. horse,
besides foot innumerable; and in their trenches, such infinite store of
victuals and munition, that served not only to refresh the wearied Christians,
but to confound the enemy. This memorable Field is generally reported to be
fought upon Saint Peter's eve, Anno 1098.

(5) If this may be believed, this were enough, for ever to entitle St. GEORGE
unto the general patronage of Christianity: and yet there is one testimony
yet to come. A testimony which I meet with, in Iacobus de Voragine; whom though
I dare not trust too far, on his own word; yet I dare give some leave unto
him, to report another. The evidence is this. Hist. Lombard in Georgio.
Legitur in Historia Antiochena, quod cum Christiani pergerent ad obsidendum
Jerusalem, quidam Iuvenis speciosissimus apparuit sacerdoti cuidam, qui S.
Georgium ducem Christi se esse dicens* monuit ut eius reliquias secum in
Jerusalem deportarent, and ipse cum ijs esset. Cum autem Jerusalem
obsedissent, and Saracenis resistentibus per scalas ascendere non auderent; B.
Georgius armis albis indutus, et cruce rubra insignitus apparuit, innuens ut
post se securi ascenderent, et civitatem obtinerent. Qui ex hoc animati,
civitatem coeperunt, et Saracenos occidere. We read (says he) in the
Chronicles of Antioch, that as the Christian army marched unto Jerusalem, a
beautiful young man appeared unto a certain Priest, saying that he was
George, one of the Captains of Christ Jesus; and telling him withal, that if
they took along his Relics with them, they should not doubt of his
assistance. After, when now they had beseiged the Town, and that none of them
durst attempt to scale the walls; St. George armed all in white, and a redd
cross upon his breast, appeared unto them: bidding them lay aside all fear,
and follow him; which doing they possess the town, and put the foe unto the
sword. Thus the old Legendarie: But whether he report the passage, as he found
it; or whether any such relation be at all, in the Chronicles of Antiochia: I
am not able to determine. Likely it is, that this may be the same with the
former story, a little altered in the telling.

(6) To return therefore back again unto Robertus, or Rupertus, as some call
him; and to his story of the succors brought unto the Christian army by St.
George: I dare not take upon me the defense either of him, or his relation.
William of Tire, a learned man, and a good historian, who lived about the year
1180. and wrote at large the story of the holy wars; in the description of
this battle, tell's us no such matter. Only we find, that at the joining of
the armies, it pleased the Lord to rain a sweet and gracious dew upon the
Christians: by which, their horses, and themselves, were very much refreshed.
Yet not to cast it off for altogether as a Monkish fable; we may discourse
upon the possibility thereof, with diverse arguments. As first, that Tyrius in
his silence, is not to be alleged against another affirmavit: and that,
though silent in the present, he does in other places make good mention of that
miraculous assistance, which GOD sometimes vouchsafed the Christians in this
war. Particularly, that when they lay before the Town of Antioch, and sent
some Troops abroad for forage; 700. of them put an huge multitude of the
enemies unto the sword: their handful seeming to the foe, Lib. 5. cap. 2.
to be a large and gallant Army. Factum est divinitus (says he) ut nostri qui
vix essent s^ptinginta, infinita millia viderentur. He tells us also, that
Prince Godfrey and the rest, erected Lydda famous for St. GEORGE'S Tomb, unto
the dignity of an Episcopal See; Lib* 7. cap. 22.
Primitias laborum suorum, cum omni devo^^one, egregio martyri dedicantes, so
consecrating with all due devotion the first fruits of their labors to that
glorious Martyr. Which pious act of theirs, might have perhaps some reference
to that assistance which before he brought them: as also might their calling of
the Tower of the two Sisters, in the City of Antiochia, by the name of St.
GEORGE'S Tower; mentioned in the Turkish History. William of Malmesburie, who
lived about the same time with To. Monachus, and I persuade my self had never
seen his Story of the Holy Wars, but learnt it rather from some, who had
commanded in that service; relates also the same passage. For speaking of that
slaughter, which beyond hope the Christian Army made of those that fought
against them; he goes thus forwards. De gest. Angl* Reg. l. 4.
Persuadebantque sibi videre antiquos martyrs, qui olim milites fuissent,
quique mortis pretio parassent vitae praemia; Georgium dico and Demetrium (this
Demetrius was Proconsul under Maximinian, by whom at last he was made a
Martyr) vexillis levatis a partibus montanis accurrere: Iacula, in hosts; in
se, auxilium vibrantes. They verily believed (says he) that they beheld those
ancient Martyrs, which had once been Soldiers, and were now possessed of
glory, George viz. and Demetrius, to hasten from the Mountains with displayed
ensigns: casting their darts against the enemy, and succouring the
Christians. Nor does he only tell the story, but does justify the truth of
it; and prove the possibility. Nec diffitendum est affuisse martyrs
Christianis, sicut quondam angelos Macchabaeis, simili duntaxat causa
pugnantibus. For why (says he) might not God send his Saints to assist the
Christians, as once he sent his Angel to assist the Macchabees; both-fighting
in the same quarrel? Doubtless the arm of God is never shortened; nor is his
love unto the Christians, and his care of them, less than it was to them of
Iewrie. That God which by an Angel destroyed that infinite Host of 100085.
men, which beseiged Jerusalem; and by a noise of Horse and Chariots in the
Air, did raise another: might not he also do as much in the defense of those,
which fought against the enemies of their Redeemer? This might I say be urged,
to prove the probability of that story related in Robertus; if any would
assume unto himself the office of a Proctour in it: which I will not. Let it
suffice, that on this ground, the Christian world being in those times
thoroughly possessed with the truth of it, St. GEORGE became to be accounted a
chief Patron of the affairs of Christendom: which was the matter to be
proved.

(7) If any shall conceive these stories of the apparitions of Saint GEORGE,
rather to be Poetical, than Historical; I will not much contend with him.
What may be thought, touching the apparition of the Saints departed, we shall
see hereafter. But for the present, though I determine not, that it is simply
Poetical; yet certainly I dare resolve it to be such, as may be made the
ground of an excellent Poem: if any darling of the Muses would vouchsafe to
undertake it; Cui men's divinior atque os Magna locuturum. For my part, rather
to lead the way to others; than out of any hope to prove happy in this kind my
self; I will make bold to venture on it, by way of trial, and essay: Tanquam
si placet hic impetus, tametsi nondum recepit ultimam manum; as he in
PETRONIUS.

The battles ready were to join, when lo
Lord Godfrey eager to assail the foe,
Cheeres up his men. My valiant host, said he,
Which have thus long been wed to victory;
Be not this day divorced. Maintain your right
Got in so fair a love, by this days sight.
A day which if we win, we may secured
From further Rivalls, rest our selves assured.
Nor shall the haughty Persian ever dare
To court her favors, or hereafter care
How to disturb us more: instructed right
That we prevail, as often as we fight.
These forces overthrown, and what are they
Poor heartlesse men, borne only to obey;
Mustred in haste, never before in field,
And brought of purpose, not to fight, but yield:
These overthrown; the way will open be,
As well for us to win; as them to flee.
Nothing to stop our march, till we set down
With all our troops, before the Holy Town:
And then, how poor their forts, how weak their powers,
To hinder, that the conquest be not ours.
Jerusalem, the beauty of the East,
More than all earthly habitations, blessed,
In thy dread Lord: how happy shall we be
When in thy glorious freedom we shall see,
Where our Redeemer preached, and where he died;
Where last he supt, and where his cause was tried.
Or see the garden where he was betrayed,
Or view the place in which the Lord was laid.
Where we may see the Tropheies of our God;
And kiss the sacred pavements, where he trod.
Thrice happy souls are we, whom he has chose
To free those honored places from his foes:
From them, which with unhallowed hands have made,
A gain of godliness; his tomb, a trade:
And either force the pious soul away,
Or sell him his devotions, make him pay.
This is the cause, Christ's cause; for which from far
We took the Cross, and undertook the war.
He leads us on, and he desires no more
But we would do as we have done before:
That we would conquer still; which never yet
Knew what it was to fly, or to submit.
Advance then, be as forward to subdue
His foes, for him; as he to die for you.
This said, the holy army kneeling down,
With hands reared up; besought the Lord to crown
The action with success, to show his might
In them, whose greatest strength was will to fight.
When straight a precious dew falls from above,
A timely sign of Gods regardfull love;
Upon the Host: which ready was before
To faint for drought, and now had moisture store.
Refresht with this, they cry amain^; why thus
Do we permit these dogs to bark at us?
Why stand we still? Why make we not our way
Upon the bellies of our foes, say they?
And saying so, as if anew inspired
With heavenly vigor, never to be tired
In length of fight, upon their foes they run:
Each man an army, in himself. Begun
Is now the deadly mixture: breast to breast,
The armies meet; and crest opposed to crest.
As when two Rams encounter on the downs,
Both fierce, and jealous both; their horned crowns
They rudely mingle, and full-fraught with ire,
Each strives to make the other to retire:
So they, thus met, and iustling face to face,
Each seeks to force the other from his place.
Oh who can tell the horror of that day;
The groans, the deaths, the flights, the disaray,
Of either part: each, in their turns, oppressed;
Both reinforced, when they expected lest.
The Christians angry, that they now should find
Resistance; which did elsewhere, like the wind,
Sweep all before them: stomack'd it the more,
And pressed upon them harder, than before.
See how Duke Robert, with his English bands
Even in the front of his Battallion stands:
Grasping a Sword well tried in many a jar,
And lays about him like the God of War.
More deaths he gives than strokes; and yet his blows
Fall thick, like storms of hail, upon his foes.
How happy had he been, if fighting thus,
He had there died; and not returned to us.
See yonder, where Lord Godfrey roaves about
In plates of seaven-fold steel, well armed throughout.
The soul of all the Camp; dispersing aid
To all whose hearts were faint, or thoughts dismayed.
What should I speak of noble Tancreds deeds;
Of Eustace, Baldwin: or who both exceeds,
Of warlike Bohemund; well known in field,
And skilled in all things, but to fly, and yield.
Or what of Ademare, whose only words
(His words were prayers) did more, than they with swords.
These raging thus, and every where the Plain
Covered with blood, and heaps of Pagans slain:
Behold a fresh supply of Turks, unseene
Untouched as yet; come fiercely rushing in.
And as a Reaper in a field well-growne,
Does with his hook; so they with swords, cut down
All those which durst withstand: and so restore
The fury of the day, even spent before.
By this, the Christians weary waxt, and began
Full of despair to break their ranks: each man
Shifting to save himself; not thinking so
To make the whole a prey unto the foe.
Nor could their noble Leaders make them stay
The hazard of the War.
Which spied, the Pagans made a hideous sound,
And cried, down with the^, down unto the ground.
The day is ours: let us pursue the chase,
And spare no more the noble, than the base.
There is a place, but far above the sky,
A place beyond all place; which mortal eye
Never yet saw. A City all of gold,
The walls of stones most precious to behold.
The gates of pearl, each gate an entire mass:
The streets of Crystal, and transparant glass.
Where neither Sun nor Moon does shine: yet light
Perpetual there, a day without a night.
Which, durst I be so bold, I might well call
The Court of GOD, the King of Heavens White Hall.
There does the Judge of all the world, possess
His glorious throne in endless happiness.
His Saints and Angels, all, with one accord
Chaunting the praises o^ their living Lord.
Which, with eternal peace and comforts blessed,
Know but one joy; yet are of all possessed.
And standing all before his presence, be
Equal in grace, though differing in degree.
Here, all his Court about him, leaning on
His dreadful Scepter in an higher throne
Than all the rest: darkness his secret place,
And watery Clouds hiding his glorious face;
He spoke unto them thus. And as he spoke
He made the earth tremble, and the mountains quake:
His nosthrills smoakt; and thundering in his ire,
Came from his mouth, haile-stones and coals of fire.
See how (quoth he) the faithless folk begin
To Advance their heads, as if they meant to win
The day, in spite of heaven: and would not know,
That we, above, dispose of things below.
But sooner shall the Sun forgo his light,
And bury all the world in endless night:
Sooner the beauties of the earth shall wither,
And Parchment-like the Spheres rolled up together:
Than I will fail my people* or permit
Their foes to spoil them, till they me forget:
Till they forget that God, who loves them best,
And wallow in those sins, I so detest.
This I have said, and if I say the word
It is for ever said: I am the Lord.
Go then, prepare your selves, all you that were
Soldiers beneath, and now are sainted here:
Go succor your allies; that they may say
You can as well fight when they need, as pray.
My word, you know, would bring them all to ground:
Or by mine Angels, I could soon confound
Them, and their pride at once; were they far more
Than stars in heaven, or sands upon the shore.
But this my pleasure is, this my decree:
Yours be the service, mine the honor be.
This said, the heavenly armies low inclined
At their Creatours feet: and those assigned
To this employment, swiftly posted thence.
The Saints chief virtue is obedience.
Behind they quickly left the Crystalline;
And the eight Sphere, where the fixed stars do shine:
The several orbs, in which the Planets move;
And in unequal courses, equal prove.
The Heavens thus past, and spreading all abroad,
Upon the wings of the swift winds they rode:
And gliding through the yiedling air; did light
Upon a Mountain near unto the fight.
There they disposed their ranks. Mauritius lead
The Theban Legion, all at once made dead;
Of which, himself the chief: Demetrius, those
Who to great office, and preferment rose.
The rest, of common quality, by lot
Fell to Sebastian; who refused them not.
But yet the Chief, with supreme power possessed,
Was wanting; he that should command the rest:
Till by the common suffrage of them all,
They chose St. George to be their General.
St. George, in feats of War exactly tried:
Who lived a Soldier, and a Martyr died.
A blessed Saint, that lost, and suffered more;
Than almost all the rest that went before.
Things ordered thus, the Heavenly Soldiers fly,
Swifter than thought upon the Enemy.
And brandishing their flaming swords, make way
For the damned souls, to leave their walls of clay.
So fast they fell, that wearied Charon roared
For help, to waft them over the Stygian foord.
And Pluto feared, their numbers were so great,
They came to dispossess him of his seat.
In which distrust he rung the Larum-bell;
Never before afraid to lose his Hell.
Amazed the Persians stood, to see their men
Fall down in heaps, there where no eye could ken
An enemy at hand: for well they knew
The Christians either fled, or backwards drew.
As Niobe, a fruitful mother late,
When she beheld her sons untimely fate;
And viewed their wounds, and heard the bow-strings twang,
Yet could not see from whence the mischief came:
Stiff with amazement, stood astonished; and
Does, still a marble, in that posture stand:
So they confounded stood; except, that none
So happy was, as to be made a stone.
Their ranks are broke, their Chieftaines slaughtred be;
But how, or by what hand, they could not see.
Mean while the Almighty from above the sky,
Upon the Earth bent down his gracious eye:
And saw his sacred troops, now ready bent
To execute their Sovereign Lords intent.
Which seen, he Michael called. Michael, said he
Thou know how I committed unto thee
The safety of my flock; next under him,
Who with his precious blood did it redeem.
How I elected thee, this style to have,
The Angel Guardian of the Church: and gave
Thee, power above the rest, my Lambs to keep,
And cast the Dragon down into the deep.
Go thou unto the Christian Host; take thence
That cloud of flesh, with which their mortal sense
Is darkened and obscured; that so they may
Behold the glorious wonders of this day:
And for a space, the light of Heaven sustain;
And see my Saints, and view my armies, plain.
At his Creatours feet, with reverence due
The Angel bowed: and swift as lightning flew
To do the business by his Lord assigned;
Spreading his golden feathers to the Wind.
Approaching near the host, he straight fulfilled
His Makers pleasure: as the Lord had willed,
He did away the clouds which dimmed their sight,
And let them see the heavenly armies fight
In their defense: and his dispatch so done,
He fixed his wings, and stood a looker on.
By this, the almost vanquished Christians heard
A tumult in the adverse host: yet feared
To turn again, or learn what it might mean,
Until the dreadful noise grew more extreme.
At last they made a stand, and faced about,
And saw the Pagan army all in rout:
Their troops dispersed, their colors fall to ground,
And with dead bulks the fields all covered round.
And first they thought some former strife renewed
Had made their hands with their own blood embrew'd.
Or that they saw the Christian troops recoyle,
And thought them lost, and quarreled for the spoil.
Thus they, for how could mortal man suppose,
That God had armed his Saints, against his foes!
When suddenly, their fancies thus perplexed;
Appears a Comment which explained the Text:
Their eyes, but how they knew not, opened were;
Their sight before obscured, was now grown clear:
So clear and piercing, that they durst abide
To brave the Sun in his full height of pride;
And saw, at noone, the stars where sixth they be,
As if their eyes had brighter beams, than he.
Lifting their pious heads up to the sky,
As men amazed to see the orbs so nie;
They straight espied, what least they thought to find,
The glorious Angel hovering in the Wind.
And not far off, the Saints, those blessed sprights,
(Ah how could sinful man deserve such sights!)
Raging with bloudied swords, in their defense;
All armed in white, the robe of innocence.
As the Disciples full of care and dread;
In their Lords death, themseves as good as dead:
When they beheld him entered in the place,
Where they all stood; and viewed his sacred face,
And heard his voice, (never was voice so sweet)
Warbling this note, Behold my hands and feet;
Believed not yet, their joys were so extreme,
But thought it was a vision, or a dream:
So stood the Christian Troops; and did not know,
Whether the things they saw, were true, or no.
At last, thus Ademare. Behold (he said)
The host of Heaven assembled in our aid;
Legions of Saints, by their Creatours will
Sent down to help us from his Holy Hill:
Avenging us upon our foes, this day;
As once the stars fought against Sisera.
See how St. George, the Captain of the rest,
Never in such a charge before, so blessed;
See how he leads them on: how in one hand
With wondrous strength he shakes his flaming brand;
And in the other, valiantly does weild,
The colors of the Saints; a silver Field
Charged with a bloody Cross; and this the Word,
The dear remembrance of our dying Lord.
See how the Heavenly Legions following close
Upon their Leader, execute their foes.
What slaughter they have made upon the Plain,
How many millions of the foes are slain:
But see, blessed Soldiers see, the Saints have won
A glorious day; and back to heaven are gone.
They looked, and saw all true as he had sed,
The Saints departed, and the Pagans fled;
And would have plied the chase, but Ademare,
Told them the time was fitter far for prayer.
So down upon the ground themselves they flung,
And made a Temple, of the field; and sung
Te deum to their God, upon the place:
Sing Soldiers, sing; sing Soldiers, sing apace.
For since the Angels caroll'd, credit me;
Never had men more cause to sing, than ye.
CHAP. VII.
(1) The honor done by Kings, to others; of what reckoning. (2) Arguments used
by the Jews, in the defense of their Temple of Jerusalem. (3) Of Monasteries
dedicated to St. George. (4) St. George's Canons: a Religious order. (5) St.
George by what Kings honored anciently, as the chief Saint of Soldierie. (6)
The military Order of St. George, in Austria. (7) The German or Dutch Order,
called Sanct Georgen Schilts. (8) St. George's bank in Genoa. (9) And his band
in Italy. (10) The Georgians why so called: and of the honor, done by them,
to our Martyr. (11) A view of several places denominated of St. George. (12) A
recollection of the Arguments before used, in the present business.

(1) THe ground thus laid, we now proceed unto those public honors, which
have been done unto our Martyr, by the Kings and Princes of the earth: of
which, some of them, as before I said, reflect upon him, only as a Saint in
general; some, as the principal Saint or Guardian of the military men; and
others, as an especial Patron of the affairs of Christendom. With these, we
shall upon occasion, intermingle such honors also, as have been afforded to
him, by some few Patriarchs and Prelates, Princes Ecclesiastical, chief
Rulers of their several Churches. Which we shall do the rather, that so the
pious actions of the King and civil Magistrate, may be abetted by the fair
example of the Prelates: and the devout performances of the Prelates, may be
defended by the power and countenance, of their Sovereign Princes. A matter
questionless of chief importance to the business now in hand: the Sovereign
Prince, as he alone is the original of Civil honor, and Political
nobility; so also not a little to be regarded, in his demeanor toward those
above, whom he may honor, though he cannot make them honorable. We take it
kindly, when those of lower quality, give us that worship and respect that is
due unto us: but if we find an extraordinary regard at the hands of those to
whom the Lord has made us subject; we then conceive our selves, to be upon the
very top and pinnacle, of all worldly happiness. It was a greater honor unto
JOSEPH, Gen 41. V. 42.
that PHARAOH took a ring from his own hand, and put it upon Joseph's, arrayed
him in vestures of fine linen, and put a gold chain about his neck; than if
the whole, united suffrages of the Common people had decreed, V. 43.
to cry before him, bow the knee. Dan. 4, 8*
More also did it add to the esteem of DANIEL that the great Emperor of the
East, gave him the name of Belteshassar, Dan. 4, 8.
according to the name of one of his especial Gods: Than if that all his
Subjects had studied to adorn him with the most glorious attributes, that
possibly the wit of man could have invented. For if according unto ARISTOTLE'S
affirmation, Honor is rather seated in those, Ethic. l. 1. c. 5.
which give it, than in them that do receive it; ((...):) Then certainly by
how much greater and more excellent, the party is, who does respect or honor
us; by so much more may we conceive, that we are honored and respected.

For which cause, Hest. chapter 6. v. 6.
when King AHASVERVS, proposed this question unto HAMAN, What shall be done
unto the man whom the King delights to honor: That proud and haughty
Favorite conceived it rightly, that possibly a greater favor could not be
done unto a Subject; and thereupon concluded in his own heart, thus; To whom
should the King delight to do honor, more than to my self, so highly raised
and settled in his good opinion. A false Conclusion, though the premises were
true; I mean the Mayor, or the Proposition, as they call it. Popular spirits,
are carried commonly about with popular reports; and, like a flock of silly
sheep, are prone to take that way, which any better than themselves, have laid
before them. But Kings have Kingly minds, and use not to rely upon uncertain
rumors: more likely to deny respects, where they may be challenged; than to
confer them upon those, that have not truly merited.

(2) How much the honor done by Kings, ought to be valued; we may perceive
in that which is related by JOSEPHUS, touching the Temple of Jerusalem. Those
of Samaria, and some Schismatickes of Iewrie with them, Antiqu. Iud. l. 13. c.
7.
had built themselves a Temple on Mount Garizim: which Temple they contended,
before Ptolomie Philometor King of Egypt, to be more ancient and more
orthodoxe, than that so celebrated by the Jews. A question hereupon arising;
ANDRONICVS, a learned and religious Jew, took on him the defense of the true
Temple, as Advocate for those of Judah: against Sabbaus, and Theodosius,
Proctors for the Samaritanes. The day of hearing come, and Ptolomie in
presence, Andronicus had license granted by his Adversaries; first, to proceed
unto his proofs: themselves not yet resolved, so it appeared, what might be
said in their own quarrel. He did so, and he prooved his cause by three
sorts of Arguments; first, from the letter of the Law, then from the constant
and continual succession of the high Priests: and lastly, That the Kings of
Asia had vouchsafed to Honor it with many costly presents, and rich offerings.
(...), etc. (...). So far the Story. The application of it, this. We have
already verified the Cause of our St. GEORGE, although not from the letter of
the Law it self; yet from the practice of the Church, which is the fairest
Commentary that was ever made upon that letter: and we have proved it, from
the succession of so many several Authors, most of them Priests, and other
public Monuments of antiquity; which since his time, the several ages of
the Church successively have given us. It now remains, that we make mention
of those Honors, which have been done unto him, by the Princes of the most
parts of Christendom: That so there may be nothing wanting, by which Saint
George may be restored unto his Honor, and his History asserted. The issue
of the former business was this, that those of Counsel for the Schismatickes
and Samaritans, had nothing to reply: and so the sentence was pronounced in
favor of the Jews. Our method is the same, our evidence as fair, our proofs
as pregnant: and therefore we presume of equal favor, in the judgment.
Namque aequum reor (as Tullie has it) ut qui in eadem causa fuerunt, Orat. pro
M. Marcello.
in eadem etiam essent fortuna.

(3) And first, not to say any thing of that which has been said already, or
shall be said hereafter, touching those Churches, which by several Kings and
Princes have been erected to his Honor: We will begin with those
particulars, of this last rank of proofs, which come most near it; and which
reflect upon him only as a Saint. Of this kind are those many Monasteries,
and Houses of religious persons, which have been founded partly to his Honor,
and dedicated by his Name. The first of which, that built by Hildericus King of
Lorreine, or Austrasia, Anno 660. founded Ad deserta loca montis Vosagi, the
mountainous parts of the Province of Alsatia: and dedicated to the blessed
Virgin, the two Apostles Saint Peter, and Saint Paul, and to Saint George.
Fundavit ibi (says the learned and judicious Munster) Hildericus Rex
Austrasiae, Cosmograph. l. 3.
Anno 660. monasterium and Abbatiam ordinis S. Benedicti, in honorem gloriosa
virginis Mariae, and Apostolorum Petri and Pauli, atque S. Georgij. Yet
notwithstanding, that such and so many blessed spirits were joined with him in
the dedication; it seems that the greatest honor of it, was conferred upon
St. GEORGE* the whole adjoining Country being called St. George's valley. Vnde
et locus ille atque vallis, vo catus est vallis S. Georgij, as that Author has
it. Lib. 3. P. 589.
We read also in the same Munster of two other Monasteries of that Order,
entitled by his name, and both in Germany; but the time of the Foundation not
specified: one of them built by the Lord of Degernow; the other, by one
WILLIAM, the Abbat of some other Convent of the same Order. The second
Monastery which we meet with, dedicated unto Saint GEORGE, is that in
Venice, De orig. Mon. l. 5. cap. 25.
erected (as HOSPINIAN tells us) by TRIBUNUS MEVIUS, once Duke of that State
and City, Anno 975. In which HOSPINIAN also, and the same Book of his, we
find Saint GEORGE'S Abbey, an house of Benedictine Monks, founded about the
year 996. by the most excellent Princess, HEDINGE, Duchess of Bavaria: Anno
1005, ab Henrico secundo Steinam translatum etc. Which after, in the year
1005. was by the Emperor Henry of that name the second, translated from those
unpeopled Mountains where before it was; and settled in Steinberg, a Town of
Suevia. Another of Saint George's Abbeyes, we read of also in the same
Author; founded at Ausbourg a principal City of those parts of Germany, by
Walter, Bishop of that City, anno 1142.

(4) Nor did the fruitful devotion of those times, employ it self only in
consecrating houses of Religious persons by his name, and to his memory: but
sometimes the Religious folk themselves were dedicated to his name, and wore
his livery. Of this kind were St. GEORGE'S Canons, an order of new Regulars,
Bellarm. in Script. Eccl.
founded at Venice: called by the Cardinal in his Chronology, Ordo S. Georgij
de Alga; by Pol. Virgil, Canonici D. Georgij in Alga. The founder of them,
Laurentius Iustinianus, a Venetian by birth, and the first Patriarch of that
City: famous for long time, doctrina, sanctitate, and miraculis, for learning,
sanctity, and miracles. Borne in the year, 1381. and at the first a Canon
Regular, as they use to call them, in opposition to those Canons which had
forgot their name, and became Secular. Anno 1426. made Bishop of Venice: and
after by Pope Nicholas the fifth, created, as before I said, the first
Patriarch of that City, anno 1450. in which great dignity, he continued five
years longer, and than dyed. By Bellarmine, the institution of this order, Id
in Chronologia.
is referred ad annum 1410. when he was yet a private man: no less than
sixteen years before his consecration. Pol. Virgil acquaints us with the
founder of these new Regulars, in which the Cardinal is silent; De Invent.
rerum, lib. 7. c. 3.
but tells us nothing of the time: and adds withal, that their habit is of
blew or watchet. Canonici D. Georgij in Alga (says he) Venctijs a Laurentio
Iustiniano instituti, caeruleo utuntur habitu. Hospinian mentions two latter
broodes, Hespin. de orig. Monach. l. 6. c. 47.
of the same name and order: of which the one, candidus plane est, is
distinguished by their white habit; the other, Extra monasterium atri coloris
chlamydem assumit, is apparelled all in black. They are obliged to no
profession. Their Order, I mean that founded by Justinian, was ratified by
John the 22th. or as Balaeus, by Gregory the 12th.

(5) In the next place, we are to look upon the honors done unto our Martyr,
as superstitiously conceived to be the Patron of the military men: the fighting
Saint, as Mr. Purchase, though little reverently, Pilgrimage, l. 3. cap. 1^.
calls him. Reges enim in militari conflictu S. Georgium invocare solitos, etc.
For that the greatest Princes used to call upon Saint GEORGE in the day of
Battle; Baronius labors to make good by two examples; the one of Cunibert, a
King of Lombardie; the other, of Nicephorus, an Emperor of Constantinople.
Whether these instances do prove sufficiently, the matter to be verified; we
shall best see by looking on them: though I must needs say, that in the first,
there is small hope of finding much to the purpose. PAVLUS DIACONUS, who lived
about the year 774. principal Secretary of State to DESIDERIUS King of the
Lombards; Hist. Longob. lib. 6. cap. 17.
reports it of King CUNIBERT, one of the Kings of that Nation: that in a place,
where he had formerly vanquished the Alahis, a barbarous people, he built a
Monastery to the honor of Saint GEORGE. In campo Coronatae, ubi bellum contra
Alahis gessit, in honorem B. Georgij Monasterium construxit, says the Author.
Where by the way it is to be observed, That in the late Edition of this Author
by Gruterus, we read not Georgij, but Gregorij; (which also is the error of
the new editions of PLATINA, as before I noted:) but yet he tells us in his
Annotations, that the old Books read it Georgij; himself, none of Saint
GEORGE'S friends, it seems, not willing so to have it longer. Which brings
into my mind, that memorable saying of old TIMON. Who being asked by Aratus,
how he might get the works of Homer in the best Edition: returned this
answer, That he must make inquiry after the most ancient Copies, and not for
those which were last corrected. (...) (says Diogenes Laertius,) (...).
Whether this passage of this Longobardian King, may be sufficient proof for
this, that he did call upon Saint George in the day of Battle; is next to
be examined. For my part, I believe it cannot: though the particular
circumstance of the place where, might unto one which were contentious so to
have it, administer an argument of possibility. My reason is, because this
CVNIBERT began his reign over the Lombards, Anno 698. And I persuade my
self, that in those early days, this superstitious invocation of Saint
GEORGE, as a chief Advocate of Victory, was not in fashion. Let it suffice,
that though it prove not thoroughly what BARONIVS did intend: yet, is proof
sufficient, that Saint GEORGE was specially honored among the Lombards, as a
Saint of more than common note; which is as much as I endeavor to make from it.

In the next instance of NICEPHORVS, surnamed PHOCAS, Emperor of
Constantinople; the proof, as I conceive it, is fair and pregnant: delivered
thus, by GEORGIUS CEDRENUS, who flourished in and about the year One thousand
and seventie, in his Compendium Historiarum.

NICEPHORUS PHOCAS, (he began his reign, in the year Nine hundred sixty
three,) had entered in a War against the Rossi, a Scythian or Sarmatian people
bordering on his Empire: with whom encountering upon Saint GEORGE'S day, he
gave them a memorable Overthrow. Edit. Gr. Lat. page 556.
And then it follows; (...), etc. Id est, The Emperor having paid his vows
unto the most victorious Martyr, St. GEORGE, upon whose Festival he had
discomfited his enemies; went the next morning with his Army, unto Dorostulum.
The greek Phrase, (...), used in the Author; is found often in Demosthenes,
and other Writers of those more elegant times, of the Greek language: with
whom it signifies, Sacra facere ob partam victoriam, to sacrifice unto those
Gods after the victory, whose ^avour they implored before it. I have here
rendered it, the payment of his Vows, more proper to the use and meaning of the
word, in the Christian Church: the meaning of the whole passage being this,
that he had vowed some special honor to St. George, (...), as he there calls
him, in case he should obtain the victory: which afterward according to the
honor of his vow, he did religiously perform.

(6) In our last sort of evidence, which is next to follow; we must reflect
upon St. George, as a chief Patron of the affairs of Christendom: though
even in some of these, we may consider him, as a chief Patron also of the men
of War. Of this kind was that military Order of Saint George in Austria,
first instituted by Radulphus Habspurgensis, Emperor of Germany, and first
Duke of Austria of this family; for the defense of Hungary, Edit. Paris, page
1464.
Styria, and Carinthia. The Author des Estates du Monde thus has it. Radolphe
de Habspurg (he began his Empire anno 1273) pour defendre La Hongrie, la Syrie,
(he means Styria) et la Carinthie, contre les arms de Turcs, institua l'ordre
de St. Georges, etc. He also tells us, that he gave unto the Master of it, a
Town of Carinthia, well built and situate, for his ordinary Seat: together
with the Toparchie of Chranichberge, Trautmandorfe, Scharfeneich, and St.
Patoville; for the revenue and maintenance of the Order. As also how he
permitted the fellows of it, La croix rouge de St. George, dans les armoiries
des leurs maisons; to bear St. George's cross in their own Arms, the Arms
belonging to their houses. In most of this we may believe him: but where he
tells us that this institution was intended contre les arms de Turcs, against
the forces of the Turk, in this we must be bold to tell him, that he is
deceived. For in these times the Turkish Kingdom was suppressed and ruined by
the Tartars: nor had they ever any footing in the Continent of Europe, until
the year 1358. when under the conduct of Solomon the Son of Orchanes, they
surprised Callipolis in Thrace.

(7) In imitation of this Order, FREDERICK the third, Emperor of the Germans,
and Duke of Austria, instituted the Order of Saint Georgen Schilts: if at the
least, as BERNARD of Luxembourg conceives, it were not rather a restitution of
the former Order then decayed. Of which thus Stumpsius in his history of the
Switzers, Lib. 13. c. 21.
anno 1448, Caesar Fredericus communem fecit in Suevia pacem, omnium Ordinum
confederatione, quae vocabutur St. Georgen Schilts. Nam omnes qui in ea
comprehendebantur debebant gestare clypeum S. Georij, modo ex Nobilitate
essent. The Emperor Frederick (says he) anno 1448 established a firm Peace
and League in Schwaben by a confederacy of all the States together. Which
Order, had the name of Sanct Georgen Schilts; because it was permitted unto
such as were comprehended in it, to bear an Escutcheon of Saint George in
their own arms, (so I conceive it;) if they were nobly descended. Forty
years after, a new League and Confederacy was set on foot under the old
name, but for ten years only; at the request of MAXIMILIAN, son to the
former Frederick, and afterward his successor in the German Empire: the most
potent of the Princes and Imperial Cities, being contained in it. Annal.
Suevic. part. 3. l. 9. c. 1.
Anno 1488, (says MARTIN CRUSIUS) Suevi impulsu Maximiliani ob tuendam mutuam
pacem and quietem, foedus quoddam Nortbergae ineunt inter se decennale, foedus
dictum Clypei Georgiane societatis: in quo foedere potentissimi quique
Principes, non modo civitates Imperij fuerunt. So he.

(8) We must now cross the Alps, and make over into Italy: where we shall
find St. GEORGE to be conceived as great a Patron of the Commonwealth of
Genoa; as of the peace of Germany. For as the Germans were secured from Wars
without, and civil broils within; by the Confederacy and Order of Saint
George's Sheilds: so are the Geneose protected, and the ancient dignity of
that State preserved, by St. George's Bank or Treasury. The first beginnings
of which Bank or Treasury, and the administration thereof; together with that
benefit which redounds thereby unto the public: take here, according as it is
related by that great Statesman, Machiavell, in his History of Florence. Post
diuturnum illud bellum quod Genuenses multis ab hinc annis cum Venetis gessere;
Lib. 8.
cum pace iam inter eas respub. constituta, Genuenses civibus suis ob aes in
bello concreditum, satisfacere non possent, etc. After that tedious War
between the Genoese and the Venetians was now ended, anno 1381. and the
Genoese perceived themselves unable to repay those moneys, which they had taken
up of their private Citizens, for the mainteining of the War: they thought it
best to assign over to them, their ordinary taxes, that so in tract of time,
the whole debt might be satisfied; and for that purpose allotted them a common
Hall, there to deliberate and determine of their affairs. These men thus made
the masters of the public Taxes and Revenew elect amongst themselves, a common
Council of an hundred; and over them, eight Officers of especial power, to
order and direct the rest, and to dispose of the Intrado: Vniversam vero
administrationem titulo S. Georgij insignivere, which Corporation so
established, they entitused St. George's Bank. It happened afterward that the
Republicke, wanting more moneys, was glad to have recourse unto St. George; who
now grown wealthy by the just and orderly administration of his stock, was
best able to relieve them: and as before they released their taxes, so now [
ditionem suam oppignorare coepit] they morgaged their domaine. So that at last,
St. George continually growing richer, and the State poorer: this Corporation
became possessed of almost all the Towns and Territories belonging to that
Signeurie; all which they govern by their own Magistrates, chosen by common
suffrage from among themselves. It followed hereupon, that the common people
respected less the public, and chiefly bent their favors, to the Corporation
of St. George: this being always prudently and moderately governed; that, many
times inclining unto tyranny: this never changing either their Officers, or
form of government; that subject to the ambitious lusts of every proud
Usurper, both Forreiner and Citizen. Insomuch, that when the potent families of
the Fregosi, and the Adorni, contended for the Principality of that State;
most of the people stood idle, looking upon them, as spectators of a quarrel,
which did not any way concern them: St. George not meddling more in it, than to
take oath of the prevailing faction to preserve his liberties. Rarissimo sane
exemplo, neque a tot Philosophis, imaginarijs istis in rebuspub. suis, unquam
reperto, etc. A most excellent and rare thing (says he) never found out by any
of the Philosophers in their imaginary Commonwealthes; that in the same State,
and the same people, we may see at once tyranny and liberty, justice and
wrong-dealing, civilitie and rudeness: this only Corporation preserving in
the State, the ancient beauty and orders of it. Nay he persuades himself,
that if St. GEORGE should in the end become possessed of the remainders of the
public demeanes, quod omnino eventurum mihi persuasissimum est, of which he
makes not any question: that certainly that State might not be only equalled
with the State of Venice, but preferred before it.

(9) From St. George's Bank or Treasury, let us proceed unto St. George's
Band or Regiment; both instituted near about the same time, and much unto the
same purpose: St. George's Bank, preserving the ancient dignity of that
City; his Regiment or Band reviving the decayed repute and credit of the
Italian Soldierie. The Author of it, one Ludovicus Conius; the occasion, this.
After the Norman and Dutch lines in the Realm of Naples; the French and
Arragonians became competitours for that Kingdom; the Popes of Rome, having at
that time, sundry quarrels with the Emperors; and many of the Towns of Italy
taking thereby occasion, to recover liberty. By means of which, the whole
Country was in a manner over-runne with foreign Soldiers: the States thereof
all jealous of each other, and so not willing to employ their own people. So
that all Italy did swarm with French, and Dutch and Spanish Soldiers: the
English also flocking thither, under the conduct of Sir John Hawkwood, after
the Peace made between our Edward the third, and the French King. At last,
this Lodovicus Conius rightly considering, how ignominious and dishonorable a
thing it was, that Italy should not be able with her own hands, to maintain
her own quarrels; collected a choice band of Italian Soldiers, which he called
St. Georg's Regiment: which shortly grew to such esteem, that they eclipsed
the glory of the foreign Companies, and restored the ancient luster, to their
native forces. Is enim postea (says the same MACHIAVELL) ex Italo milite
exercitum conscripsit, Hist. Florent. lib. 1.
sub titulo S. Georgij: cujus tanta fnit virtus and disciplina militaris, ut
exiguo temporis intervallo, omnem gloriam militibus externis adimeret, suam
Italis restitueret, eoque solo usi sunt deinceps Italiae Principes, si quod
inter eos bellum gerebatur. So he; and we will only add thus much, that out
of this so famous Seminary of St. GEORGE'S Regiment, came afterward that
Braccio, and Picennini, which had so much to do in the affairs of Italy: as
also that Francisco Sforza, which made himself Duke of Millaine, and left it
to his Children.

(10) Our next journey must be for Asia, where in the midland of it, we find
a Country between Colchis and Albania, called anciently Iberia; but now
Georgia: the reason of which new name is reported diversely. Michael ab Ysselt
is confident that they took their appellation from Saint GEORGE; Georgiani
vero vocantur a D. Georgio, etc. Others, with better reason, at the least in
mine opinion, that they are called so from the Georgi, the ancient inhabitants
of these tracts: which ancient Georgians, Sir Walter Raleigh makes to be
denominated, quasi Gordians, from the Gordiaei, a Mountain people of the
Hill-Countries; and Stephanus in his Thesaurus, quasi Georgici, Husbandmen.
Georgij Asiae populi ab agricultura nomen sortiti, as he there has it.
Between these two, we have one indifferent, Pilgrimage, l. 4. c. 1.. 2.
Master Samuel Purcha^, who says that it is called Georgia, either from the
honor of their Patron Saint GEORGE, or happily because they descended of those
Georgi which PLINY names among the Caspian Inhabitants. Let it suffice, that
though they take not their denomination from Saint GEORGE, yet they afford him
more honor, than any other of the Saints: Ib.. 5.
the same Author telling us, that when they go into a Church, they give mean
respect to other Images; but that Saint George is so worshipped, (we will
permit him to make merry with himself) that his Horses hoofes are kissed of
them. Michael ab Ysselt more seriously, Hist. sui temp. ad Ann. 1577.
though he err somewhat in the derivation. Georgiani vero vocantur a D.
Georgio, quem velut patronum praecipuum, and in suis contra Paganos praelijs
velut signiferum and propugnatorem ingenti honor venerantur. Quocunque enim
tendunt, turmatim incedunt, vexillum D. Georgij insignitum circumferentes,
cuius open and auxilio, in bello maxim se iuvari credunt. The Georgians (says
he) are so denominated from Saint GEORGE; whom as their principal Patron, and
their Champion in their wars against the Pagans, they worship with especial
honor. For which way soever they employ their Forces, they carry with them a
fair Banner, with the picture of Saint George upon it; believing that by his
assistance, they are much comforted and aided in their wars. So the Historian.

(11) But howsoever, we dare not say with him, that this Asian people had their
appellation from Saint George their Patron: yet we are confident of this, that
many places both of Asia and Europe, have received denomination from him. For
here in Asia, we find a large and spacious Valley, not far from Libanus,
which is called St. George's Valley: and we have also noted, that the Town of
Lydda or Diospolis, was by the Christians called Saint George's, and that there
is in Europe, a St. George's Valley also, in the midst of Germany. Add
hereunto, that the Thracian Chersonesse is now called commonly St. George's
Arm: which is remembered by Maginus in his Geographie; and has been since
observed by Sir George Sandys. The learned Munster, does transfer this
appellation from the Land, Cosmograph. lib. 4.
unto the Sea; from the Thracian Chersonesse, unto the narrow straight or Arm
near to it, which they call Bosphorus: Porro Bosphorus appellatur brachium S.
Georgij, says he; and like enough the name is fitted unto both. But why this
Chersonesse was called Saint George's Arm, I cannot say: unless perhaps that
Relic of Saint George was there in former times laid up; which after by
Justinian the Emperor was bestowed upon Saint German, as before I noted.
Paulus Diaconus makes mention of Saint George's River, Hist. Miscell. l. 2^.
cap. 29.
near to the Country of the Bulgarians: Coeterum Aprili mense (says he of
Constantine the Son of Eirene) cum castra moveret contra Bulgares, venit ad
castellum quod dicitur Probati, ad rivum D. Georgij. We read in our
industrious CAMDEN also, that the Irish Ocean which runs between Britain
and Ireland, is called by Seamen at this day, Saint GEORGE'S Channel. And lest
that any part of the old World, should not have some place in it of this name,
Lib. 7. cap. ult.
PATRITIUS tells us in the book of his own Navigations, that one of the
Azores, is called St. George's. Est and D. Georgij insula, etc.

(12) To draw up that together, which has been formerly alleged in Saint
GEORGE'S cause; I hope it will appear, that there is no occasion, why he
should either be reputed as an Arian, or a Counterfeit, a Larva: nay, why he
should not be accounted, to have as high a place in immortality, as any of
the other; those blessed Spirits the Apostles, excepted only. For if
antiquity may be thought worthy of any credit; we have antiquity to friend:
or if the common suffrages of so many famous and renowned writers, successively
in every age, may be of any reckoning with us; Saint George may challenge as
much interest in them, as any in the Calendar. However, put case that they have
erred in their relations of Saint GEORGE; and that they took that evidence,
which out of them we borrowed, on trust from one another: yet what shall be
replied to this, that in the Church of God, he has been hitherto reputed, as
an holy Martyr. Shall we conceive the Church of God would be so careful to
preserve his memory in the public Martyrologies; or give him place in their
public Liturgies, or take such heed unto his Relics, or honor him with
Temples: had he been such a damnable and bloody Heretic; or (which, they
say, is better,) if he had never been at all. Or if he had been such, may
it be thought, that both the Church, and all the learned members of it, for
1300, years almost, should be deluded; no man in all that time, able to see
into the fraud: or that the Spirit of God, should quite abandon all the rest,
and settle only on some two or three of later times; who though they kept
amongst themselves the Band of Peace, had not, as it appears, the Spirit of
Unity? Or, last of all, suppose the Monks and Friars should join together,
to put a trick upon the world; and that they had prevailed upon the Church, to
give countenance unto it: shall we conceive so poorly of the greatest Kings
and Princes in the Christian world, that they were all of them abused; and
drawn to do^ such honors, to one which either never was a man, or was now a
Devil? All this is hard to be digested. And we may well be counted easy of
belief, if only on the ipse dixit of one man, and the conjectures of another,
were they of greater reputation than they are; we should give faith unto their
sayings: (to one of them I mean, for both are not to be believed together:)
when such a Cloud of Witnesses affirm the contrary; Catalogus testium
veritatis, a Catalogue of witnesses in all times and ages.

If men may be believed upon their bare assertion, why may not they be
credited, which say Saint George was once a Martyr, and is now a Saint; as well
as they which say he was not? Or if we will not take up any thing on trust,
without some reason for it: why rather should not they be worthy of belief
which have good proof for what they say; than those that build upon
conjectures, ill-grounded, and worse-raised? Lastly, if that may be believed
most safely, (...), in the words of Aristotle, which both the vulgar wits and
more excellent spirits have agreed on jointly: still we are where we were, and
still St. George must be a Martyr. But I am now for England; where I am sure to
find as ample testimonies for St. George, as any other part of the world what
ever.

CHAP. VIII.
(1) St. George not anciently esteemed the Patron of the English. (2) Churches
erected to him here in England. (3) His apparition to King Richard in the Holy
Land. (4) What may be thought in general touching the apparition of the
Saints. (5) And what in this particular. (6) St. George when he began to be
entitled particularly to the English. (7) The honors done him here, and among
the Irish. (8) The institution of the noble Order of the Carter. (9) A brief
view of the chief Statutes of the Order. (10) St. George the Patron of it.
(11) Sir Walter Raleighs opinion touching the killing of the Dragon. (12) And
of them also, which desire to have the George Symbolicall. (13) A Catalogue of
all St. George's Knights, of that most noble Order, until this present. (14)
The Conclusion of the whole.

(1) Our course is now for England, divisos orb Britannos, as the Poet has
it; divided from the other parts of the World, as in her situation, so in her
felicities. Of which, and of the testimonies which she is able to afford unto
Saint GEORGE, we shall speak in several; it being as the Panegyric and
Solinus call it, another world: the rather, because in the latter days, he
has been reckoned as the especial Patron of this Nation; and as particular
to us, as is Saint ANTONIE to Italy, Saint DENIS unto France, or any of the
other to their proper places. I say, in the later days only, for anciently we
were not thought to have more right to him, than any other of our Neighbors:
however it be said by some, that he has always been the tutelarie Saint
and Guardian of our Nation. Dr. Reynolds, Idol. l. 1. cap. 5.. 22.
For if we will believe our English Fugitives, we may behold the picture of
Saint GEORGE in their Church at Rome, with this inscription: Georgium
Cappadocem Anglia sibi protectorem elegit, and maximis beneficijs tum pace tum
bello receptis, semper religiosissime coluit. Id est: This GEORGE of
Cappadocia, the English chose to be their Patron, and for the many benefits
received from him both in Peace and War, have always very religiously
worshipped him. Or if we will believe that the victorious Prince King ARTHUR
bare him in one of his royal banners; which was a sign of special dependence
on him, and relation to him: we find in Master Seldom, that so by some it is
rep^rted; Annot. in Poly. Olb. p. 68.
and HARDING (whom I have not seen) is cyted in the Margin. And first, to make
reply to that which was first alleged; if so our Fugitives of Rome, do by
their Semper understand, that ever since his Martyrdom, Saint GEGRGE has
been esteemed and worshipped as the Patron of the English: we must needs
tell them, that howsoever this may be believed at Rome, it is not likely to
be entertained with us here in England: If by their Semper, they mean only,
that always since the English chose him for their Patron, he has been
specially esteemed and worshipped by them: we grant indeed that since that
time Saint GEORGE has always been especially honored; though not
religiously worshipped. As for King ARTHUR, we read in MALMESBURIE, that at
the Seige of Bannesdowne [ mons Badonicus] not far from Bathe, to which the
Saxons had retired, and thereon fortified: that in his royal Arms, he bare
the portraiture of the blessed Virgin. Postremo in obsidione Badonici montis,
Hist. de gest. Angl. lib. 1.
fretus imagine dominicae matris, quam armis suis insuerat, etc. as he there
has it. Of any Image of Saint George, we have ne gry quidem, either in him or
any other of our Historians: Nor is it easy to be credited, that in so small
a tract of time, Saint George was grown so eminent in the opinion of the
Britains as to be deemed the Patron of their Armies, their tutelarie Saint
against their enemies.

(2) If from the Britains we proceed unto the Saxons, I have not found as
yet, that either in their Heptarchie, or after they became one entire state, a
Monarchy; they had St. GEORGE in more than ordinary honor. Unless perhaps we
may believe, that Theobald one of the Saxon Kings, might take a special liking
to him, upon the commendation of Cunibert, King of the Lombards; by whom he
was magnificently feasted, in his journey toward Rome. His diebus Theobald rex
Anglorum Saxonum, De gest. Longob. l. 6. c. 15.
qui multa in sua patria bella gesserat, ad Christum conversus Romam
properavit; qui ad Cunibertum regem veniens, (this Cunibert as before we noted,
had built St. George a Monastery) ab eo mirifice susceptus est: says Paul the
Deacon. But in the Empire of the Normans, we have variety and store enough:
some of it, even in their first entrance, before their state and affairs here
were well settled. For in the year 1074, Camden in Dobunis.
(which was some eight years after the death of Harald) Robert D'Oyley, a
Nobleman of Normandy, when he had received at the hands of William the
Conqueror, in reward of his service in the Wars, large possessions in the
County of Oxon, built a spacious Castle on the West side of the City [of
Oxford] with deep Ditches, Ramparts, an high raised Mount, and therein a
Parish Church unto St. George: unto which, when the Parishioners could not have
access, by reason that King Stephen most straightly besiedged Maud the
Empress, within this Castle; St. Thomas Chapel in the street hard by was
built. Afterward King Edward the 3. that famous and puissant Prince, being
borne at Windsore, erected there out of the ground a most strong Castle; equal
in bigness to a pretty City; and in the very entrance of it, a most stately
Church, consecrated B. Virgini Mariae and S. Georgio Cappadoci, Id. in
Attr^batijs.
unto the blessed Virgin Marie, and St. George of Cappadocia: but brought unto
that sumptuous magnificence, which now we see it carry, by King Edward the
fourth, and Sir Reginald Bray. Of which, both Church and Castle, thus Draytons
Muse in the 15. song of his Poly-Olbion.

Then hand in hand her Thames the Forest softly brings,
To that supreamest place of the great English Kings:
The Garters royal seat, from him who did advance
That princely Order first, our first that conqured France:
The Temple of St. George, whereas his honored Knights
Upon his hallowed day, observe their ancient rights.
Thus had we (as we find in Camden) a Monastery dedicated to St. GEORGE in
the County of Derby; built by the Greyslayes, gentlemen of good ancientrie in
that country. Thus have we also a fair Church, consecrated to St. George's
name, in Doncaster; a St. GEORGE'S Church, in South-werke, and in London: and
not to travail further in this inquiry, a St. GEORGE'S Church in Burford;
where it pleased GOD to give me, first, my naturalll being, and afterward my
education. In which regard, I hold my self bound in a manner, to vindicate St.
GEORGE'S honor; having received such comforts in a place, where his memory
was anciently precious, and the only Church in it, dedicated by his name.

(3) St. George thus generally honored by the English, as a Saint; it was not
long before they fastened (superstition being then in the very height) a more
particular respect upon him: the first beginnings whereof, we must refer
unto King Richard, of that name the first; according to the information, which,
William Dethick, Garter, principal King of arms, gave to the learned Camden,
and is thus extant in his most excellent Brittannia. Richardo cum contra Turcas
and Agarenos, etc. When as K. Richard warred upon the Turks and Saracens,
Camden in At^^^bat.
Cyprus and Acon, and was weary of so lingering delay; whiles the seige
continued long, in wonderful care and anxiety: at length, Illabente per D.
Georgij, ut opinatum est, interventum, spiritu, etc. Upon a divine inspiration,
by the coming in and apparition (as it was thought) of St. GEORGE, it came
into his mind, to draw upon the legs of certain choice Knights of his, a
certain Garter or tacke of Leather, such only as he had then ready at hand.
Whereby they being distinguished, and put in mind of future glory promised
unto them, in case they won the victory; they might be stirred up and
provoked to perform their service bravely, and fight more valiantly. In
imitation of the Romans, who had such variety of Coronets, wherewith military
men for sundry causes were accordingly rewarded: to the end, that by these
instigations (as it were) cowardice being shaken off, the valor of the mind,
and courage of the heart, might show it self more resolute. Which passage I
have therefore recited at the full length, because that some there be, which
have referred the institution of the most noble Order of the Garter, unto this
King, and to this occasion: and are persuaded verily, that Edward the third did
only bring it again in use, being awhile forgotten, or neglected. But herein,
as the learned Camden, who saw as far into antiquity, as any man either
before his birth, or since his death; gives but a cold assent, or rather no
assent at all: so neither have I met with any of the more judicious sort, which
do affirm it; though the opinion be related in many of them.

(4) However, though we refer not unto this occasion, and those times, the
Institution of the Garter: yet we may warrantably be persuaded, that this
occasion did much promote the reputation of that Saint among the English:
whereby, in tract of time, that most heroicke Order was dedicated to him. As
for the thing it self, because that all the apparitions of the Saints in these
late days, are commonly suspected: we will digress a little, to show what may
be said in the general defense of the thing questioned; that so we may the
better see, how much we may believe in this particular of King Richard and St.
GEORGE. And first if we consult the Scriptures, Mat. 27. v. 52.53.
we find that at the Resurrection of our Savior, the graves were opened, and
many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose, and came out of the graves, and
went into the holy City, (...), and appeared unto many. This as it was an
extraordinary dispensation and far above the common Law and course of Nature;
so was it for a special end: to verify the Resurrection of our Savior, on
whom they did attend, and to assure the faithful of the certainty of their
future Resurrection also. A sign it was, says Reverend Theophylact; (...):
Chrysostom more particularly, (...), a token of the Resurrection; and for the
close of all, Saint HIEROME, Vt dominum ostenderent resur^gentem. So then,
although in ordinary course, the Saints are in the Heaven of glories; and that
their bodies be corrupted in the earth: yet upon special cause and at the
pleasure of their GOD, they may assume an humane shape; and in that shape
appear unto their Brethren, according to the will of him that sends them. For
if the Angels, to whom no bodies do belong, have appeared visible to many of
GODS people, in execution of the charge committed to them: how much more easily
may we believe the same, of the Saints departed; that even they also, at some
times, and on some great occasions, have been employed by GOD, in their own
ordinary form and shape? Potamiaena a Virgin Martyr, Eccl. Hist. l, 6. cap. 4.
is reported by EUSEBIUS, that she appeared unto BASILIDES her Executioner,
the third night after her decease, (...), putting a Crown upon his head:
foretelling so, that not long after he should receive the Crown of Martyrdom.

(...), etc. Nay, the same Author tells us, that many of the people of
Alexandria (where she suffered) were converted to the Faith, by the frequent
apparitions of that Virgin. Other examples also there are many; and of Angels
also. Of the Archangell MICHAEL, Camden in Danmonijs.
there are reports of several apparitions, upon Mount Garganus in Naples;
upon Saint MICHEL'S Mounts, in Normandy, and Cornwall: H^spinian. and alij
and one unto King Charles the 7. on the bridge of Orleans, in his wars
against the English, (illustri seu miraculo seu viso D. Michaelis, in praelio
ad pontem Aurelianae civitatis, etc.) which was a chief occasion of the French
Order of St. Michael. I know indeed, that in times of late, the Priests have
dealt exceeding faithlesly, both with Church and people, in this kind: their
doctrine, in the point of Purgatory, being such, as could not well subsist
without many foul Impostures, and counterfeit apparitions of the Dead.
Insomuch that as once Lyra said, In Ecclesia Dei populus saepe decipitur a
Sacerdotibus fictis miraculis, In 14. c. Dan.
lucri causa; Gods people many times is couzened by the Priests with fained
miracles: so we may say also, that for the sake of filthy lucre, they have as
often been abused with forged apparitions.

(5) But this, of all things else, cannot be well objected against this
apparition of Saint George: King Richard having no such end proposed unto
himself, in raising this report; as to abuse his people, or to satisfy his
avarice. And certainly were it recorded in any grave and serious Author, that
such an apparition as this mentioned, of St. George; had been seen generally
by the Army, or by such others which might for certain have affirmed it: I
make no question, but the probability thereof might have been easily defended.
Bnt since it is related only upon the credit of a private Register; and in
that Register, with no more confidence, than opinatum est, it is so thought: I
must crave license to declare my self herein, and how I do conceive it. We
have already in the prosecution of this History of Saint GEORGE; spoke of the
apparition of this Saint, and many others, at the battle of Antiochia:
whereby the Christian Armies, then ready for the fight, were so encouraged and
revived, that they obtained a memorable victory upon the enemy. By means
whereof, Saint George became so famous in all the parts of Christendom; and
especially among those Soldiers, which were continually (in those times) sent
to pursue the Wars of the Holy Land: that possibly there could not be a
greater spur unto the military men; than to suggest unto them, that Saint
George had lately shown himself unto their Chieftaines, and promised them
success, or counseled them in their designs. Master de Bellay has recorded,
that IOANE of Orleans, so much commemorated in our common Chronicles; was not
what she appeared, but only so disguised and prepared before hand, Discourse
de l'art milit.
Pour fair revenir le courage aux Francoys: for to revive the drooping spirits
of the French; so fallen and broken, that they were not to be raised, but by a
miracle. Somewhat to this purpose is related by PLUTARCH, of AGESILAUS. Who to
embolden his Soldiers to the fight, wrote with a certain juice, the word
Victory, in the palm of his hand: and after, being at the Sacrifice, he
laid his hand cunningly upon the heart of it, so leaving the word Victory
imprinted on it; which presently he showed unto those about him, as if it had
been there written by the Gods. I cannot say for certain that this apparition
to King Richard, was by him set on foot for the same purpose; and that it was
no other than a Kingly fraud, to quicken and revive the spirits of his
Soldiers: but I persuade my self, if I did say so, having no other testimony
than an opinatum est against me; I might be pardoned for my boldness.

(6) This notwithstanding, the fame of such his apparition to that King, did,
as before I said, exceedingly promote the reputation of that Saint among the
English: so far, that the most excellent Prince King EDWARD the third, made
choice of him, for his Patron. So Master CAMDEN witnesses in his Remains,
that GEORGE has been a name of special respect in England, since the
victorious King EDWARD the third, chose Saint GEORGE for his Patron: and the
English in all Encounters and Battles, have used the name of Saint George in
their cries; as the French did, Montioy Saint Denis. The more immediate
occasion was, that this Edward at the battle of Callice, Anno 1349. being
much troubled with grief and anger, drawing his Sword, called earnestly upon
Saint Edward and Saint George: whereupon many of his Soldiers flocking
presently unto him, they fell upon the enemy, and put many of them at that
instant to the sword. Tho. Walsingham Anno Regn. 23
Rex Edwardus provide frendens more apri, and ab ira and dolor turbatus,
evaginato gladio, S. Edwardum and S. Georgium invocavit, dicens, Ha Saint
Edward, Ha Saint George: Quibus auditis and visis, milites confestim Anglici
confluebant ad Regem suum. Es facto impetu contra hosts, tam animose
institerunt, quod ducenti ex illis ceciderunt interfecti, etc. The next year
after, followed the Institution of that noble Order of the Garter, dedicated
unto Saint George also: by which he came possessed alone of that special
patronage, as the more military Saint; which in the former Invocation might
seem to be divided, between St. Edward and himself. Nor did the King stay
here, but having chose St. George to be the tutelarie Saint and Patron of his
Soldierie; he caused him to be painted as upon a lusty Courser, holding a
white Shield with a red Cross on it, in his hand: and gave unto his Soldiers,
to every one a white Coat or Cassock, with two red Crosses, on each side of
them one; to wear upon their armor. Hist. Anglic. l. 19.
Edwardus item (says Pol. Virgil.) cum D. Georgium militia praesidem optasset,
postea ei armato and equo insidenti, dedit scutum album, rubra a cruce
perinsigne: dedit and militibus suis saga alba, utrimque binis crucibus, item
rubris, munita; quae illi super armaturam induerent. So that (says he) it is a
seemly and magnificent thing, to see the Armies of the English, to sparkle
like the rising Sun; the Soldierie of other Countries, having no habit,
either to distinguish or adorn them. From henceforth therefore, we must not
look upon St. GEORGE, as a Saint in general; but as conceived, (such was the
superstition of those times) the special Patron of the English: of which, the
Pilgrim in the Poet, thus prophecieth unto his Red-crosse Knight, as he there
calls him. Faery Qu. l. 1. cant. 10. n. 61.
Then seek this path which I to thee presage,
Which after all, to Heaven shall thee send:
Then peaceably thy painful Pilgrimage
To yonder same Jerusalem do bend;
Where is for thee ordained a blessed end.
For thou amongst those Saints, which thou do see,
Shall be a saint; and thine own Nations friend,
And Patron: thou St. George shall called be
St. George of merry England; the sign of victory.

Song. 4.
And hereunto alludes Mich. Draiton, in his Poly-Olbion; in a great
controversy, questionless which was then hot, among some Nymphs of his in
that Poem.

And humbly to St. George, their Countries Patro^, pray,
To prosper their designs, now in that mighty day.
(7) Of other honors done by the English to St. GEORGE, more than they called
upon him, as their Advocate of victory; it may perhaps seem little necessary to
dilate. But since our Invocation of God and St. GEORGE, is by some men
conceived, Purelia^. Pilgrim. l. 3. c. 13
to be rather Turkish, than truly Christian: we will produce such evidence,
as may be less liable unto offense. Of which kind, I persuade my self, was
that honor done unto him in a piece of gold, current in those times, in this
Kingdom, Camden in Reliqu.
called The George-noble: which on the one side had the picture of Saint GEORGE
upon it, with this Impresse; Tali dicata signo men's fluctuare nescit. Nor can
it be offense, that many noble families in this Realm, had the name of Saint
GEORGE: an ancient family of Saint George, (out of which flourished many
Knights, since the time of King Henry the first,) at Hatley; which is of them
called Hatley Saint George, as I have found in learned Camden: In Icenis or
Cambr. Sh.
another of them, as I conceive it, at Hinton, Saint GEORGE in Com. Sommerset;
the Baronie at this present, of the right honorable the Lord Pawlet. But this
I leave unto Clarentieux, one of the Kings of Arms; as most interessed in it.
I will not here observe that CHARLES of Burgundy, one of the fellows of the
Gareer, being in discontent with EDWARD the fourth for his Peace with France;
Hall^ Chron.
brake out into this Passion, Oh LORD, Oh Saint GEORGE, have you done thus
indeed, etc, or that the English used his name, as an ordinary oath among them,
Par St. George dirent les Angloys, vous dites vray, etc. as Froissart notes it.
Vol. 1. p. 141.
These things, I say, I will not speak of, lest they may give offense to our
nicer ears; nor of more honors of this lesser rank or quality, afforded him
in England: and therefore though the Sea be very troublesome and unruly, we
will pass over Saint GEORGE'S Channel into Ireland. And here I shall observe
that only, which I find in Master Seldens notes on the Poly-Olbion; as viz.
that under Henry 8. it was enacted, that the Irish should leave their Cramaboo,
and Butleraboo, words of unlawful Patronage: and name themselves as under St.
George and the Kings of England. Which noted, since I must return again for
England, there to behold the solemn institution of the Garter: it will not be
amiss to note, that notwithstanding all the opposition made against him, both
here among our selves, and abroad with others. St. George does still retain
his place in our common Calendars. Not in those only, made for the state of
every year, where commonly he shines in Festival red letters; as do no other
of the Saints, but those whose Feasts are by the Church observed as Holy: but
also in the Calendar prefixed before the public Liturgy of our most blessed
Church of England; where he is specially honored with the name of Saint, as is
not any of the rest, excepting those which saw our Savior in the flesh.
Excellent evidence; that as the state of England is much devoted to Saint
GEORGE'S honor; so he does still preserve his place and reputation, in the
opinion of the Church. An argument to me so powerful and prevailing: that in
Morbonium the mere word, or bare conjecture of every one, of what especial
fame soever; which guided by his private spirit, shall resolve the contrary.

(8) I said, the state of England is much devoted to Saint GEORGE'S honor: and
if we look upon the Institution of the most noble Order of the Garter, we
shall see cause enough to say it. An Order of that excellency, that the
mightiest Princes of Christendom, have reputed it among their greatest honors
to be chosen and admitted to it: the names and dignities of whom, we shall see
presently, in our Catalogue of this Order. A founder it had, of a most
accomplished virtue, the Thunderbolt of War, as some call Antiochus; and in
the times of Peace, nothing inferior to any of the Lawmakers of the best
ages, so much celebrated. Briefly we may affirm of him, Velleius Patertecul.
l. z.
as the Historian of Augustus; the fittest parallel that I can find for him,
amongst famous Princes: Homo omnibus omnium gentium viris, magnitudine sua
inducturus caliginem. This most excellent Prince, the glory of his times, and
a chief ornament of Europe, having exceedingly prevailed both against the
French and Scottish Kings, discomfited their Armies, and taken one of them in
person: ordained this most noble Order and society of Knights, so to adorn
their valor manifested in the Wars, with honor, the reward of virtue. Their
number 26. no more; Vt pretium faciat raritas, lest being else communicated
unto many, it might at last become despicable: nor ever have our Kings exceeded
in the number, but still confined themselves unto the first intention of the
Founder. COVVELL, in his Interpreter, printed at Cambridge Anno 1607. relates
the Institution of it thus. In verbo Garter.
EDWARD the third, after he had obtained many great victories, King JOHN of
France, King JAMES of Scotland, being both Prisoners in the Tower of London, at
one time; and King HENRY of Castile the Bastard being expulsed, and DON PEDRO
restored by the Prince of Wales: did on no weighty occasion first erect this
Order, Anno 1350. Of the occasion afterward; ob^erving for the present, how
ill his History agrees with his Chronology. For true it is, that this most
noble Order was instituted on the 23. of this King, which falls out rightly,
with the year 350. But then King JOHN of France, was but newly entered on his
Kingdom: and the expulsion of King HENRY was the last act almost, of that
tryumphant Prince of Wales; Don Pedro not coming into England, till the thirty
ninth of King Edward.

As much is he mistaken also, in the name of the King of Scotland, who was then
Prisoner in the Tower; which was not James, but David: there being no James,
King of that Country, in more than fifty years after. For the occasion of it,
it is received generally, that it took beginning from a Garter of the Queen,
or rather of Ioane Countess of Salisburie, a Lady of incomparable beauty,
which fell from her as she danced, and the King took up from the ground. For
when a number of Nobles and Gentlemen standing by, laughed thereat, he made
answer again, that shortly it should come to pass, that Garter should be in
high honor and estimation: adding withal these words in French, Honey Soit qui
maly pense, Id est, Shame be to him that evil thinks; which after was the
Motto or Impresse of the Garter. Which were it so (says Master Camden) it need
not seem to be a base original thereof, Camden in Attrebat.
considering as one says, nobilitas sub amore iacet. He adds withal, that
some report, how from his own Garter given forth, as a signal of a battle,
which sped so fortunately; he called them Knights of the Garter. But
whatsoever the occasion of it was, likely it is that it took this name from
the blew Garter, which the Fellows of it wear on their left Leg: carrying the
foresaid impresse wrought with golden Letters, and enchased with precious
Stones; and fastened with a buckle of Gold, as with the Bond of most inward
society, in token of unity and Concord; that so there might be a Communion as
it were of virtues, In verbo Knights of the Garter.
and good will amongst them. Doctor Cowell reports in his Interpreter, that he
has seen an ancient monument, wherein it does appear that this most noble
Order is a College or Corporation, having a Common seal: consisting of the
Kings of England as Sovereigns thereof, or chief Guardians of it; 25.
Knights, fellows (as they call them, or Companions) of the Garter; 14. Canons
resident, being secular Priests; 13. Vicars, or Chorall Priests; and 26. of
the inferior sort of gentry, military men, called commonly, Poor Knights of
Windsore: (whereof indeed there are but twelve.) There belongs also unto this
Heroicke Order, the Prelate of the Garter, which is the Lord Bishop of Winton,
for the time being; a Chancellor; a Register thereof, which always is the
Deane of Windsore; an Usher, which is one of the Vshers of the Kings Chamber,
called Black-rod: and last of all a chief Herald, even the most principal of
all, GARTER first King of Arms, instituted by that victorious Prince King
Henry the fifth; to attend chiefly on this Order and do them service at their
Funerals.

(9) The Kings of England, are (as I said before) the Sovereigns of this noble
Order: and either do in person, or by their lawful Deputy, by them nominated
and appointed, elect the fellows of the Order, and solemnize the Festivals,
and hold the Chapters. To them it also appertains to have the declaration,
reformation, and disposition of the Laws and Statutes of the said most noble
Order. Which Laws and Statutes were first instituted and devised, by the
victorious Prince, King Edward, of that name the third; after revised and
ratified by many the succeeding Kings: And on the Reformation of Religion, much
altered by King Edward, of that name the sixth. Page 143*
About this time (says Sir John Hayward, in his History of that Prince) the
Order was almost wholly altered, as by the Statutes thereof then made it does
appear. A thing not to be wondered at. For even the Laws of the most settled
States and Kingdoms have been often changed and varied; according to occasion
and the Princes pleasure. Unto them also, to the Sovereigns, I mean, or to
their Deputies, it appertains to choose and nominate into the Order, whom they
esteem to be most worthy of that honor; and like to be the greatest
ornament unto it. Yet so, that six at least of the said fellows do conveene
at the Election, and concur in it: the residue of them being all warned to
be there present, and such as fail of their attendance, without just cause,
such as the Sovereign shall approve, to be amerced. In their elections, two
things there are, which they especially observe. First, that the party
nominated, be a Gentleman of name and arms for three descents, both by the
Fathers side and by the Mothers. Camd. Bliz. Anno 1563.
For which cause, when the Garter was reproachfully taken from the Lord William
Paget, by Dudley of Northumberland, to give to John his eldest son, the Earl
of Warwick: he used this color to disguise that foul dishonor; that the
said Lord, (as the first raiser of his house) was said to be no gentleman of
blood, neither by Father nor by Mother: as Sir John Hayward tells the story.
Hist. of Ew. 6. page 143.
The second thing to be observed, is that the party nominated, be without
spot, or foul reproach: as viz. not convict of Heresy; nor attaint of
treason; nor by his Prodigality and riot decayed in his estate, by means
whereof he is not able to conserve the honor of his Order; nor such a one
that ever fled in the day of battle, his Sovereign Lord, or his Lieutenant
being in the Field. In all which cases, a Knight elected and installed; may
also, if it please the Sovereign, be degraded. The party chosen by the
Prince, if he be a stranger, is certified thereof soon after by Letters from
the Sovereign: and many times, the Statutes of that Order, have been sent
unto him, to consider of them, whether or no he will accept of this election.
But this a matter merely formal. For commonly our Kings are first well
assured of the parties good affection to them, before they choose him; and as
for foreign Princes, it is a true note of Master Camdens, In Attrebat.
that the most mighty of them have reputed it their chiefest honor to be
chosen and admitted into this Company: as we have said before, and shall see
anon, in the ensuing Catalogue. If he accept it (as no question but he will,)
then does the Sovereign forthwith send unto him by his Ambassador, and the
chief Herald (commonly) the whole habit of the Order, with the Garter and the
Collar; wherewith they do invest him. And on the other side, the Prince or
stranger so invested, within convenient time, send their sufficient Deputy,
with a mantle of blew Velvet, to be installed in their room, at St. GEORGE'S
Church at Windsore. But if the party chosen be a Subject of the Kingdom, the
Garter is delivered to him presently upon his election, to signify that he is
chose into the Order. Afterward, in the Chapter House, upon the reading of his
Commission before the Sovereign or his Deputy; he is invested with his Robe
and with his Hood. Then follows the Installment performed with many grave and
magnificent Ceremonies: which done, he does receive the Collar of the Order.
These, at their installations, have always an oath administered; that to their
power, during the time they shall be fellows of the Order, they shall defend
the honor, quarrels, rights, and lordships of the Sovereign; and that they
shall endeavor to preserve the honor of the said Order; and all the statutes of
it, they shall well observe without fraud or Covin. Which oath is by the natives
of the kindome, taken absolutely, and in terms; but many times, by strangers,
relatively and by halfes, in reference to some former Order. So So when King
Henry the third of France, was by the Earl of Darby, invested with the Garter,
Anno 1585, Camden. in Elizab.
he took his oath to keep the Statutes of the Order in all points, Quae
legibus Ordinis S. Spiritus, and S. Michaelis non adversantur; wherein they
were not opposite unto the Order of St. Michael, and the Holy Ghost, to which
he had bin sworn before. Id. ^n Anno 1582.
Upon which reason also, Frederick King of Denmark, though he did joyfully
accept the habit of the Order; refused to take the oath at all: because he had
been sworn before (at his installation in the Order of Saint Michael) to the
King of France. Being thus solemnly installed, and seated in the place
belonging to them in the Chapel, their next care is to fasten an Escocheon of
their Arms and hachments, in a plate of metal, upon the back of their said
stalls: which they remove, according as themselves, in Order, are advanced
higher. And in that Order, do they also change the places of their banners,
swords and Helmets; which are continually set over their said stalls, during
their being of the Order. This only is the difference, that at the death of
any of the Knights of this most noble Order, their Plate of Arms, is left for
ever to that stall, where last they sat; to preserve their memory: whereas the
Banner, Sword, and Helmet, are all taken down; and offered with all due
solemnities; the Offering made by such of the surviving Knights, as by the
Sovereign shall be destinated to that service. I said before, that they remove
their Plates, and Hachments, according as themselves in order are advanced
higher. in this Order, they take place according to the antiquity of their
Creation; and not according to their dignities, titles, and estates: so that
sometimes a Knight Bachelour, has place before an Earl or Baron; as not long
since we had example in Sir Harry Lea, Knight, keeper of the Armorie. Only in
honor unto strangers, which be Dukes, or Sons and Brethren unto foreign
Kings and Princes: it is permitted that they take their rooms and places,
according to their quality. Hitherto have we spoken of the Election of Saint
GEORGES Knights, and their admission to the Order. A little would be said now of
the means and ways, whereby their rooms are voyded, and their places
destitute; and they are three: for either they are void by Death, or by
Degradation, or by Cession and surrendrie. The second of the three (for here we
will not speak of Death) is Degradation: a piece of Justice more to be
commended where it may not, than where it may be spared. The cases wherein
Degradation is allowed of, I have shown already: but the examples are but
few. William Lord Paget, which was so scornfully degraded by Northumberland;
was by Qu. Mary, Camden Eliz. Anno 1563.
with great honor, restored again unto his Order. And Sir John Fastolfe,
which for his valiantness had been elected of the Order, was by the Duke of
Bedford, Halls Chron. in Ew. 6.
under whom he served, and unto whom he was great Master of the Household;
divested in great anger of his GEORGE and GARTER: because he had departed from
a battle, (which the English lost) without stroke stricken. But afterward by
means of friends, and upon good excuse, and reason, by him alleged in his
defense, (as certainly he was a wise and valiant Captain, however in the
stage, they have been pleased to make merry with him) he was restored unto his
honor. The third and last means of avoydance, is by Cession and Surrendrie:
and the examples hereof also are but few. This I am sure of, (not to make
further search into it) that Philip King of Spain, being offended with Qu.
Elizabeth, about the altering of Religion, and thereby alienated from the
English: delivered back to the Lord Vicount Mountague, Camd. Eliz. Anno 1560.
the robes and habit of the Order, wherewith he was invested on his marriage
with Qu. Mary. By which his Act, as the Historian has observed, Cum Anglis
amicitiam visus est prorsus eiurare: he seemed to break off utterly, all
amity and friendship* with the realm of England. It Is true indeed, King
Philip being once resolved to renounce his Order, was of necessity to send
back the habit. For so it is ordained amongst them, that even such of them as
depart this life, are to take care especially, that the Garter, be restored
unto the Sovereign; by him and by the Company of the said Order, to be
disposed of to some other. Examples in which kind are infinite to be related.
Windsore, the fairest and most stately of our English Palaces, was by King
Edward who adorned and beautified it; conceived most fit to be the Seat of
that most excellent Order, which he had established. An house indeed, worthy
of such inhabitants; and therefore worthily honored by them. For here, they
always leave in readiness, the mantle of their Order, to be laid up for
them; for any sudden chances which might happen to require their presence at
Saint GEORGES Chapel, or in the Chapter House. Here do they solemnize the
Installations of their Brethren; and perform their obsequies. And lastly, such
a reverend regard they owe the place, that if they come within two miles of it
(except that they be hindered by some weighty and important business) they
always do repair thereto; and putting on their mantles, which are there in
readiness, proceed unto the Chapel, and there make their Offerings. Nor do
they go at any time from out the Castle, if their occasions bring them thither;
till they have offered in like manner. I should now from the Knights and from
the Order, proceed unto the Patron of it: but that I first must meet an error;
by some reputed as a Law and Statute of the Order, and so delivered by
tradition from hand to hand: Pol. Virgil lib. 19.
viz. that those of this Heroicke Order, are by their Order bound, Vt mutuo se
iuvent, that they defend each other, at all extremities and assaies.

But doubtless there is no such matter. Only the Knights are bound, not to
engage themselves in the service of a foreign Prince, without license from the
Sovereign: nor to bear Arms on one side, if any of their Fellows be
already entertained upon the other. This is the ground of the report: for Omnis
fabula (as the Mythologists affirm) fundatur in Historia. Id. Angl. hist. 26.
Yet hereupon, Alphonso, Duke of Calabria, son unto Ferdinand King of Naples;
knowing that Charles, the eighth of France, threatened the conquest of that
Kingdom: did with great importunity request, to be elected of this Order; as
accordingly he was. Conceiving, that if once he were Companion of that Order,
the King of England, as the Sovereign thereof, would be obliged, to
countenance and aid him in his Wars against the French. Which hopes, as they
were built upon a false, and ruinous ground; so is it not to be admired, if
they deceived him. Polydore Virgil, who before accounted mutual defense to be
a Statute of this Order: does, in this passage, overthrow his own building.
Concluding this relation, of Alphonsus and his investiture, with this note;
Iampridem ea consuetudo ferendi auxilij obsoleverat: that long ago that
custom had been out of use. Ibid.
He might as well have said, and more agreeable unto the truth; it had never
been.

(10) Having thus spoken of the Statutes of this most noble Order, whereby they
are and been governed; we will descend in the next place to give you notice
of their Patron; which, after the opinion of those times, they chose unto
themselves. Of which, thus Pol. Virgil in his English History, Ord^ vero est
D. Georgio ut bellatorum praesidi dicatus: Lib. 19.
quare equites quotannis diem ei sacrum multis ceremonijs colunt. This Order is
(says he) dedicated unto Saint George, as the chief Saint and Patron, of the
men of War: whose Festival they therefore solemnly observe with many noble
Ceremonies. But what need Polydore have been produced unto this purpose: since
from the Charter of the Institution we have a testimony more authentical. For
there King Edward tells us, that to the honor of Almighty GOD, and of the
blessed Virgin, our Lady, St. Mary; and of the glorious Martyr Saint GEORGE,
Patron of the right noble Realm of England; and to the exaltation of the holy
Catholic Faith: he had ordained, established, created, and founded within
his Castle of Windsore, a Company of twenty six noble Knights, to be of the
said most noble Order of Saint GEORGE, named the Garter. It Is true indeed that
Polydore has well observed with how great Ceremony and solemnity, the
Knights do celebrate this Feast. Attending both on the Vespers, and the day it
self, at divine Service; attired in the most rich and stately Mantles of the
Order: and gallantly adorned with their most rich and sumptuous Collars, (which
we call of S. S.) the Image of Saint GEORGE, garnished with pearls and
precious stones, appendant to them. In which their going to the Church, and in
their setting at the Table; they go, and set, by two and two: every one with
his fellow, which is foreagainst him in his stall. And if by chance it happen
that his fellow be not present; he does both go, and set, alone. I say, if so
it chance to happen: for all the fellows are obliged, to be there personally
present, without a just and reasonable cause, acceptable to the Sovereign or
his Deputy, and signified by special Letters of excuse. Other the pomp and
rich magnificence of this Feast, I forbear to mention, as utterly unable to
express it. The mind is then best satisfied in such things as this; when the
eye has seen them. But I proceed unto St. George. Of which their Patron, and
of the noble Order it self, the Marriage of the Tame and Isis, a Poem written
some years past; does thus descant.

Auratos thalmos, regum praeclara sepulchra,
Et quaecunque refers; nunc Windesora refer
Desine. Cappadocis quamvis sis clara Georgi
Militia, procerumque cohors chlamydata intenti
Cincta periscelidi suras, te lumine tanto
Illustret; tantis radijs perstringet and orbem
Vt nunc Phrix^um spernat Burgundia vellus,
Contemnat cochleis variatos Gallia torques,
Et cruce conspicuas pallas, Rhodus, Alcala and Elba;
Solaque militiae sit gloria splendida, vestrae.
Windsore relate no more the glorious things
In thee, thy gilded roofes, and Tombs of Kings;
Or that thou art so honored in the rites
Of George, the Cappadocian Martyrs, Knights.
Who clad in mantles rich, and circled round
The leg, with that the Garter so renowned;
Does so advance thy name, and with its rays
Splendant and glorious, so the world amaze:
That Burgundy her Golden-fleece neglects,
And France St. Michaels Collar disrespects,
And Spain, and Malta both, esteem but small
Their Crossed robes: thy Order dimmes the^ all.
Hence is it, that the Knights of this most honorable Order, are called in
Latin Equites Georgiani, St. George's Knights; and sometimes also in the
English: as in that passage before noted out of the Poly-Olbion. The Temple of
S. George, whereas his honored knights
Upon his hallowed day observe their ancient rites.
And in many others also of our better sort of Authors.

(11) The other ornaments and habit belonging to this Order, besides the
Garter, are a Gown, a Kirtle, a Chaperon, a Cloak, a Girdle, and a Collar: all
stately and magnificent both for stuff and fashion; but worn only upon days
of extraordinary solemnity. For ordinary use, besides the Garter which is for
every days wearing, and their Cloak with the Sun on the left shoulder of
it, in his full glory; which last was added by his most excellent Majesty now
being: they have a blew Ribbon which they wear about their necks; with the
picture, or rather portraiture of the GEORGE, appendant to it. This
portraiture, or GEORGE, as they use to call it, Sir Walter Raleigh, against the
stream of most Writers, makes to be Historical: Part. 1. cap. 1.. 10.
I say against the stream of most writers; because I have not met with any
others, which do so conceive it, but Wicelius only; as before I noted. Sir
Walters reason, this. And though (says he) for the credit of the killing of
the Dragon I leave every man to his own belief: yet I cannot but think, that
if the Kings of England had not some probable record of that his memorable act
among many others; it is strange, that the Order full of honor, which Edward
the third founded, Hist. of the world, Part, 1 l. 2. c. 7.. 3.. 5.
and his successors royally continued, should have borne his name: seeing the
world had not that scarcity of Saints in those days, as that the English were
to make such an erection upon a fable, or person fained. So he: And this I
well allow of in relation to the Saint; whose being, and whose being of a Saint
of special eminency, it justifies sufficiently. But I persuade my self, it
cannot well be used in the defense of his killing of the Dragon: which being
thrust into the Legends by Iacobus de Voragine, as before we noted, found
afterward a general entertainment in the Christian Church: and amongst other
places here in England also.

(12) As therefore some have made the whole story of St. GEORGE, to be
symbolicall; so have some others made it to be also, of the same nature, in
particular relation to this Order. Thus Doctor Reynolds in his first of the
Idolatries o^ Rome, Cap, 5., 22*
Verum illustres eius Ordinis Heroes, melius iam edocti atque cruditi,
intelligunt Georgium suum non Cappadocem esse, sed symbolicum: quo excitantur
and monentur, ut Draconem oppugnent, and bestiam, Id est, Romanum Antichristum.
The Nobles of that Order, (says he) instructed better than before, conceive it
rightly, that this their GEORGE has no relation unto him of Cappadocia; but
merely is symbolicall: by which they are advised and lessoned, to labor to
destroy the Beast, and Dragon, mentioned in the Apocalypse; id est, the Roman
Antichrist. And to this purpose Dr. Boys, late Deane of Canterbury; Gospel 5.
Sunday after Easter.
I write not this (says he) to dishonor that noble Order of the Garter. For
under correction, and salvo semper honor Ordinis, I take the GEORGE which
adornes those right honorable Worthies, to be symbolicalll only: signifying
that a valiant Knight should always be ready to fight against the Dragon; and
other enemies of the Church and state whatsoever. Which words of theirs may be
approved also, so far as that this use may commendably be made of it: but if
they were thus spoken, as in relation to the first intention of the founder;
there is not any thing more false, nor less agreeable to the truth of story.
I say, this use may commendably be made of it. For by the Charter of the
Institution it apppeares plainly, that this most excellent Order was first
ordained unto the honor of Almighty GOD, and to the exaltation of the Holy
Catholic Faith. And in the Statutes of the Order, it is a cause sufficient
for a Knight to be refused at the Election; yea, and degraded after his
Installation: that he has been convicted and attainted of Heresy, and
error, against the Faith Catholic; or has for any such offense, suffered any
pain, or conviction public. Add hereunto, that when it is appointed, that
their Banners Swords and Helmets, shall be placed above their stalls; it is to
this intent and purpose: to signify (so says the Statute) that they do bear
them in defense of holy Church, as all true knighthood does require. So that we
see, that all the purpose of the Order is to instruct and lesson them; still to
oppose the Devil, that old Dragon, and all his instruments what ever, in
maintenance of the Gospel, and Gods true Religion. For which cause doubtless,
does Chaucer, in a Sonnet to the fellows of the Order; thus counsel and
advise them.

-- But for Gods pleasance
And his Mother, and in signifiance
That ye been of St. GEORGE'S liverie,
Does him service and knightly obeisance
For Christ's cause is his, well known ye.
So far our English Homer, the Father of our English-Muses. I am not able to
affirm it, but possibly it may be so, that some such matter was intended; when
it was ordered so precisely in the Statutes, that none of this most noble
Order, shall be seen openly without his George: and that it may not be
engaged, aliened, nor sold, nor given away, for any need, cause, or necessity
whatsoever. Whereas the other of the Ornaments, are for solemn days only;
and that the Garter may sometimes be laid aside, as in case of taking any
journey: for then it is sufficient to wear a blew ribband under their boots,
to denote the Garter. I say perhaps some such might be purpose of it: but I
affirm it not for certain. This I am sure of, that this their constant and
continual wearing of St. GEORGE'S Image, may be a fair instruction unto all
of this Heroicke Order; never to lay aside St. GEORGE'S resolution, of
encountering with the Dragon, that old Serpent; that so they may at last receive
the blessed and immarcessible Crown of Glory.

(13) I said before, that many of the mightiest Princes of Christendom have
reputed it among their chief honors, to be chosen and admitted into this
fellowship. For proof of which, and that we may behold what excellent Peers
and Princes of our own and other Nations, have in all times successively,
been chosen into this most noble Order: we have adjoined a Catalogue of all
Saint GEORGE'S Knights, from the first institution of it till the present.
Which Catalogue I have here laid down, according as I find it in the
Catalogue of Honor, published by Milles of Canterbury; adding unto him, such
as have been admitted, since that publication. Hereafter, if this work may
ever have a second birth, and that I have ability to nde, or means to search
into the public Registers of this Order: I shall annex to every of them, the
time of their Creation; as we have done in all of them since the first of
Queen ELIZABETH.

THE FIRST FOVNDERS, as they call them, of the Garter: EDWARD the III. Of
ENGLAND, and FRANCE, etc. being the Chief or Sovereign of it.
EDWARD the III. King of England. Edward 3. An. Chr. 1350.
HENRY, Duke of Lancaster. PETER, Capit. de la Bouche. WILLIAN MONTACVTE, Earl
of Salisburie. JOHN, Lord Lisle. JOHN BEAVCHMP, Knight. HVGH COVRTNEY, Knight.
JOHN GRAY of Codnor. Knight. MILES STAPLETON, Knight. HVGH WORTHESLEY, Knight.
JOHN CHANDOS, Knight Banneret. OTHO HOLLAND, Knight. SANCHIO DAMPREDICOVRT,
Knight. EDWARD Prince of Wales. THOMAS BEAVCHAMP Earl of Warwick. RAPH,
Earl of Stafford. ROGER MORTIMER, Earl of March. BARTHOLM. de Burgherst,
Knight. JOHN, Lord Mohun of Dunstere. THOMAS HOLLAND, Knight. RICHARD
FITZ-SIMON, Knight. THOMAS WALE, Knight. NEELE LORENGE, Knight. JAMES AVDLEY,
Knight. HENRY ESME, Knight. WALTER PAVELY, Knight.
Which Founders being dead, these following were in the time of the said Edward
the third, elected in their places; according as their stalls became vacant, by
the death of any of the others.

viz.
RICHARD of Bordeaux, Prince of Wales; and after, King of England, of that name
the second. LIONELL, Duke of Clarence. JOHN of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster. EDMOND
of Langley, Duke of York. JOHN, Duke of Britain, and Earl of Richmond.
HVMFREY de Bohun, Earl of Hereford. WI^LIAM, de Bohun Earl of Northampton.
JOHN HASTINGS, Earl of Pembrooke. THOMAS BEAVCHAMP, Earl of Warwick. RICHARD
FITZ-ALAN, Earl of Arundell. ROBERT VFFORD, Earl of Suffolk. HVGH, Earl of
Stafford. GVISCARD of Engolesine, Earl of Huntingdon. INGELRAM of Coucy, Earl
of Bedford. EDWARD, Lord Despencer. WILLIAM, Lord Latimer. REYNOLD Lord
Cobham, of Sterborough. JOHN, Lord Nevill of Raby. RAPH, Lord Basset of
Drayton. Sir WAL^. MANNY, Banneret. Sir THOMAS VFFORD. Sir THOMAS FELTON. Sir
FRANCIS VAN HALL. Sir ALAN BOXHVLL. Sir RICH. PEMBRVGE. Sir THOMAS VTREIGHT.
Sir THOM. BANISTER. Sir RICH. LA VACHE. Sir GVY of Brienne.
RICHARD the II. KING OF ENGLAND, and Sovereign of the Garter, Elected in his
Time into the Order, these that follow.
(...). Chr. 1377
THOMAS of Woodstocke, Earl of Buckingham, and Duke of Gloucester. HENRY of
Lancaster, Earl of Darbie, and Duke of Hereford. WILL. Duke of Gelderland. WILL.
Earl of Holland, Hainault, etc. THO. HOLLAND, Duke of Surrey. JOHN HOLLAND,
Duke of Exeter. THO. MOVVERAY, Duke of Norfolk. EDWARD, Duke of Aumerle.
MICHAEL DE LA POLE, Earl of Suffolk. WILL. SCROPE, Earl of Wiltes. WILLIAM
BEAVCHAMP, Lord Aburgevenny. JOHN, Lord Beaumont. WILL. Lord Willoughby.
RICHARD, Lord Gray. Sir NICHOLAS SARNESFEILD. Sir PHILIP DE LA VACHE. Sir
ROBERT KNOLLES. Sir GVY of Brienne. Sir SIMON BVRLEY. Sir JOHN D'EVREVX. Sir
BRIAN STAPLETON. Sir RIGH. BVRLEY. Sir JOHN COVRTNEY. Sir JOHN BVRLEY. Sir JOHN
BOVRCHIER. Sir THO. GRANDISON. Sir LEWIS CLIFFORD. Sir ROBERT DVMSTAVILL. Sir
ROBERT of Namurs.
HENRY the IIII, of that Name; KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter: made Choice of
HENRY, Prince of Wales. Henry. 4. An. Chr. 1399.
THOMAS of Lancaster, Duke of Clarence. JOHN, Duke of Bedford. HVMFREY, Duke of
Gloucester. ROBERT, Count Palatine, and Duke of Bavaria. THO. BEAVFORT, Duke of
Exeter. JOHN BEAVFORT, Earl of Somerset. THO. FITZ-ALAN, Earl of Arundell.
EDM. Earl of Stafford. EM. HOLLAND, Earl of Kent. RAPH NEVILL, Earl of
Westmerland. GILBERT, Lord Talbot. GILBERT, Lord Roos. THO. Lord Morley.
EDWARD, Lord Powys. IOH. Lord Lovell. Edw. Lord Burnell. IOH. CORNWALL, Lord
Fanhope. Sir WILL. ARVNDELL. Sir IOH. STANLEY. Sir ROE. VMFREVILL. Sir THOM.
RAMPSTON. Sir THOM. ERPINGHAM. Sir IOH. SVLBIE. Sir SANCHIO of Trane.
HENRY the V. of that Name, KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the Garter,
graced with the Order,
SIGISMVND, King of Hungary and Bohemia, Emperor Elect. HENRY, V. An. Chr.
1413.
JOHN, King of Portugal. CHRISTIERNE King of Danemarke. PHILIP, Duke of
Burgundy. JOHN HOLLAND, Duke of Exeter. WILL. DE LA POLE, Duke of Suffolk.
IOH. MOVVERAY, Duke of Norfolk. THOM. MONTACVTE, Earl of Salisbury. RICH.
VERE, Earl of Oxon. RICH. BEAVCHAMP, Earl of Warwick. THOM. Lord Camoys.
JOHN, Lord Clifford. ROBERT, Lord Willoughby. WILLIAM, Lord Bardolfe. HENRY,
Lord Fitzhugh. LEWIS ROBSART, Lord Bourchier. HVGH STAFFORD, Lord Bourchier.
WALTER, Lord Hungerford, Sir SIMON FELBRIDGE. Sir IOH. GRAY, of Eyton. Sir IOH.
DABRIDGECOVRT. Sir IOH. ROBSART. Sir TRANK VAN CLVX, of Germany. Sir WILLIAM
HARRINGTON. Sir JOHN BLOVNT.
HENRY, the VI. of that Name, KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter: assumed into it,
ALBERT of Austria, King of Bohemia, Hungary, HENRY, VI. An. Chr. 1422.
and Emperor of Germany. FREDERICK, Duke of Austria, and Emperor. EDWARD,
King of Poland. ALPHONSO, King of Arragon and Naples. CASIMIRE, King of
Portugal. EDWARD, Prince of Wales. PET. Duke of Conimbria, and HENRY, Duke of
Visontium, both Sons to the King of Portugal. The Duke of Brunswicke. RICH.
Duke of York. IOH. BEAVFORT, Duke of Somerset. EDM. BRAVFORT, Duke of
Somerset. JASPER of Hatfeild, Duke of Bedford. JOHN MOVVBRAY, Duke of Norfolk.
HVMPH. STAFFORD, Duke of Buckingham. GASTON DE FOIX, Earl of Longueville. JOHN
DE FOIX, Earl of Kendall. ALVARES D'ALMADA, Earl of Averence. JOHN FITZ-ALAN,
Earl of Arundell. RICH. NEVILL, Earl of Salisbury. RICH. NEVILL, Earl of
Warwick. IOH. TALBOT, Earl of Shrewsbury. IOH. TALBOT, Earl of Shrewsbury,
Son to the former. JAMES BVTLER, Earl of Wiltes. WILL. NEVILL, Earl of
Kent. RICHARD WIDDEVILL, Earl Ryvers. HEN. Viscount Bourchier, Earl of Essex.
JOHN, Viscount Beaumont. JOHN, Lord Dudley. THO. Lord Scales. JOHN Lord Gray,
of Ruthin. RAPH Lord Butler, of Sudeley. LIONELL, Lord Wells. IOH. Lord
Bourchier of Berners. THOMAS, Lord Stanley. WILL. Lord Bonvill. IOH. Lord
Wenlocke. IOH. Lord Beauchamp, of Powys. THOMAS, Lord Hoo. Sir JOHN RATCLIFFE.
Sir JOHN FASTOLFE. Sir THOMAS KYRIELL. Sir EDWARD HALL.
EDWARD the IIII, of that Name; KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter: made Knights thereof
EDWARD, 4. An. Chapter 1461*
FERDINAND, King of Naples. JOHN, King of Portugal. EDWARD, Prince of Wales.
CHARLES, Duke of Burgundy. FR. SFORZA, Duke of Millaine. FREDERICK, Duke of
Vrbine. HERCULES, Duke of Ferrara. RICH. Duke of York, the Kings Son. RICH.
Duke of Gloucester. JOHN MOVVBRAY, Duke of Norfolk. JOHN Lord Howard, made
afterward Duke of Norfolk. JOHN DE LA POLE, Duke of Suffolk. HENRY STAFFORD,
Duke of Buckingham. JOHN NEVILL, Marquise Montacute. THOMAS GRAY, Marquise
Dorset. JAMES Earl of Douglas, in Scotland. WILL. FITZ-ALAN, Earl of
Arundell. THOM. Lord Maltravers. ANTH. WOODVILL, Earl Ryvers. WILL. Lord
Herbert, Earl of Pembrooke. JOHN STAFFORD, Earl of Wiltes. HEN. PERCY, Earl
of Northumberland. JOHN TIPTOFT, Earl of Worcester. GALLIARD, Lord Duras. JOHN
Lord Scrope, of Bolton. WALT. D'EVREVX, Lord Ferrers. WALT. BLOVNT, Lord
Montjoy, WILL. Lord Hastings. Sir JOHN ASTLEY. Sir WILL. CHAMBERLAIN. Sir
WILL. PARRE. Sir ROB. HARICOVRT. Sir THOMAS MONTGOMERY.
RICHARD OF GLOVCESTER, of that Name the third, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter, admitted these: viz.
THO. HOWARD, Duke of Norfolk. RICHARD, 3. An. Chr. 1483.
THO. Lord Stanley, afterward Earl of Darby. FRANCIS, Viscount Lovell. Sir
IGHN COGNIERS. Sir RICH. RADCLIFFE. Sir THOM. BVRGH. Sir RICH. TVNSTALL.
HENRY the VII. of that Name, KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter, admitted to this honor
MAXIMILIAN, HENRY, VII. An. Chr. 1486.
Archduke of Austria; and after Emperor. JOHN, King of Portugal. JOHN, King
of Danemarke. PHILIP of Austria, King of Castile. ALPHONSO, Duke of Calabria,
and after King of Naples. ARTHVR, Prince of Wales. HENRY, Duke of York, and
Prince of Wales after his Brother. VEALDO, Duke of Vrbine. EDW. STAFFORD, Duke
of Buckingham. THOM. GRAY, Marquise Dorset. JOAN VERE, Earl of Oxon. HEN.
PERCY, Earl of Northumberland. GEO. TALBOT, Earl of Shrewsbury. HEN.
BOVRCHIER, Earl of Essex. RICH. GRAY, Earl of Kent. EDWARD COVRTNEY, Earl
of Devon. HEN. Lord Stafford, Earl of Wiltes. EDM. DE LA POLE, Earl of
Suffolk. CHAPTER SOMERSET, Earl of Worcester. GERALD, Earl of Kildare. JOHN,
Viscount Wells. GEO. STANLEY, Lord Strange. WILL. STANLEY, the Lord
Chamberlain. JOHN, Lord Dynham. ROB. WILLOUGHBY, Lord Brook. Sir GILES
D'AVBENY. Sir EDW. POYNINGS. Sir EDW. WIDDEVILE. Sir GILBERT TALBOT. Sir JOHN
CHEYNIE. Sir RICHARD GVILFORD. Sir THOM. LOVELL. Sir THOM. BRANDON. Sir
REGINALD BRAY. Sir RHESE AP THOMAS. Sir JOHN SAVAGE. Sir RICH. POOLE.
HENRY, the VIII. of that Name, KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter: Chose in his Reign
CHARLES the fifth, HENRY, VIII. An. Chr. 1509.
Emperor of Germany, and King of Spain. FERDINAND, Archduke of Austria, and
King of the Romans. FRANCIS the first, King of France. EMANVEIL, King of
Portugal. JAMES the fifth, King of Scotland. HENRY FITZ-ROY, Duke of Richmond,
and Somerset. IVLIAN DE MEDICES. EDWARD SEYMOVR, Earl of Hartford, and after,
Duke of Somerset. THOM. HOWARD, Duke of Norfolk. CHAPTER BRANDON, Duke of
Suffolk. JOHN DVDLEY, Viscount L'isle, afterward Duke of Norhumberland.
ANNAS, Duke of Montmorancie. HENRY COVRTNEY, Marquise of Exeter. WILL. PARRE,
Marquise of Northampton. WILLIAM PAVVLET, Lord St. John of Basing, after,
Marquise of Winchester. HENRY HOWARD, Earl of Surrey. THO. BVLLEN, Earl of
Wiltes. WILL. FITZ-ALAN, Earl of Arundell. JOHN VERE, Earl of Oxon. HENRY
PERCY, Earl of Northumberland. RAPH NEVILL, Earl of Westmerland. FR. TALBOT,
Earl of Shrewsbury. PHIL. DE CHABOT, Earl of Newblanch, Admiral of France.
THOM. MANNOVRS, Earl of Rutland. ROB. RATCLIFFE, Earl of Sussex. HENRY
CLIFFORD, Earl of Cumberland. WILL. FITZ-WILLIAMS, Earl of Southhampton.
THOM. Lord Cromwell, Earl of Essex. IOH. Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford.
THOMAS, Lord Wriothesley, after Earl of Southampton. ARTHVR PLANTAGENET, base
son of Edw. 4. Viscount L'isle. WALT. D'EVREVX Viscount Hereford. EDW.
HOWARD, Lord Admiral. GEO. NEVILL, Lord Abergevenny. THOM. W^st, Lord de la
Ware. THOM. Lord Dacres of Gillesland. THOM. Lord Darcy of the North. EDWARD
SVTTON, Lord Dudley. WILL. BLOVNT, Lord Montjoy. EDW. STANLEY, Lord Monteagle.
WILL. Lord Sands. HENRY, Lord Marney. THO. Lord Audley of Walden, Chancellor of
England. Sir JOHN GAGE. Sir HENRY GVILFORD. Sir NICH. CAREVV. Sir ANTHONY
BROWN. Sir THOM. CHEYNIE. Sir RICHARD WINGFEILD. Sir ANTH. WINGFEILD. Sir
ANTH. St. LEDGER, Lord Deputy of Ireland. Sir IOH. WALLOP.
EVVARD the VI. of that Name, KING OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the
Garter: ascribed into the Order,
HENRY the second, King of France. EDWARD, 6. An. Chr. 1547.
HENRY GRAY, Duke of Suffolk. HENRY NEVILL, Earl of Westminster. FR. HASTINGS, Earl
of Huntingdon. WILL. HERBERT, Earl of Pembrooke. EDW. STANLEY, Earl of
Darby. THO. WEST, Lord de la Ware. GEO. BROOK, Lord Cobbam. EDWARD, Lord
Clinton, Admiral. THOMAS, Lord Seymor of Sudeley. WILL. Lord Paget, of
Beaudesert. THOM. Lord Darcy, of Chiche. Sir ANDREW SVTTON, alias Dudley.
MARY, QVEENE OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the Garter, assumed into the
void places,
PHILIP of Austria, King of Spain, the Queens Husband. EMANVEL, Duke of
S^voy. HENRY RATCLIFFE, Earl of Sussex. ANTH. BROWN, Viscount Montacute.
WILL. Lord HOWARD, of Effingham. WILL. Lord Gray, of Wilton. EDW. Lord
Hastings, of Loughborow.
ELIZABETH QVEENE OF ENGLAND, etc. and Sovereign of the Garter: supplied the
Vacant places of the Order, with
1559. FREDERICK, Duke of Wittenberge. THOM. HOWARD, Duke of Norfolk.
ELIZABETH, An. Chapter 1558.
1559. ROB. DVDLEY, Lord Denbigh, and Earl of Leicester. HENRY MANNOVRS, Earl
of Rutland. WILL. PARRE, Earl of Essex, and Marq. of Northampton. 1560.
ADOLPHVS, Duke of Holsatia. 1561. GEORGE TALBOT, Earl of Shrewsbury. HENRY
CARRY, Lord Hunsdon. 1563. AMEROSE DVDLEY, Lord L'isle, and Earl of Warwick.
THOM. PERCY, Earl of Northumberland. 1564. CHARIES the Ninth, King of France.
FRANCIS Lord Russell, Earl of Bedford. 1568. MAXIMILIAN, King of Hungary and
Bohemia, Emperor. 1570. FRANCIS HASTINGS, Earl of Huntingdon. WILL. SOMERSET,
Earl of Worcester. 1572. FRANCIS, Duke of Montmorency. WALTER, Viscount
Hereford, and Earl of Essex. ARTHVR, Lord Gray of Wilton. EDM. BRVGES, Lord
Chandos. FREDERICK, King of Denmark. 1574. HENRY STANLEY, Earl of Darby.
HENRY HERBERT, Earl of Pembrooke. 1575. CHARLES, Lord Howard of Effingham, and
Admiral of England, afterward Earl of Nottingham. 1579. JOHN CASIMIRE, Count
Palatine of the Rhene, and Duke of Bavaria. 1584. HENRY the Third, King of
France. EDW. MANNOVRS, Earl of Rutland. WILL. CECILL, Lord Burghley. WILL.
BROOK, Lord Cobham. HENRY, Lord Scrope of Bolton. 1486. HENRY RATCLIFFE, Earl
of Sussex. 1588. ROBERT DEVREVX, Earl of Essex. Sir HENEY SIDNEY, Lord
President of the Marches. Sir CHRISTOPHER HATTON Lord Chancellor. 1592.
GILBERT TALBOT Earl of Shrewsbury. GEORGE CLIFFORD, Earl of Cumberland. 1593.
HENRY PERCY, Earl of Northumberland. EDWARD SOMERSET Earl of Worcester.
THOMAS, Lord Burgh. EDMOND, Lord Sheffeild. Sir FRANCIS KNOLLES, Treasurer of
the Household. 1596. HENRY the fourth, King of France and Navarre. 1597.
FREDERICK, Duke of Wittemberge. THGM. SACKVILL, Lord Buckhurst; afterward
Earl of Dorset. THOM. Lord Howard of Walden, afterward Earl of Suffolk.
GEORGE CARRY, Lord Hunsdon. CHAPTER BIOVNT, Lord Montjoy, after Earl of Devon. Sir
HENRY LEA, Keeper of the Armorie. 1599. ROB. RATCLIFFE, Earl of Sussex. HENRY
BROOK, Lord Cobham. 1601. WILL. STANLEY, Earl of Darby. THOM. CECILL, Lord
Burghley, after Earl of Exeter.
JAMES the first, KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, and Sovereign of the Garter, adorned
that Noble Order with these Worthies, viz.
1603. JAMES, I. An. Chr. 1602.
CHHRISTIERNE the fourth, King of Denmark. HENRY Prince of Wales. LEVVLS, Duke
of Lennox, and afterward of Richmond. HEN. WRIOTHESLEY, Earl of Southhampton.
JOHN ERESKIN, Earl of Mar. WILL. HERBERT, Earl of Pembrooke. 1605. VLRICK,
Duke of Holst. HEN. HOWARD, Earl of Northampton. 1606. ROB. CECILL, Earl of
Salisbury. THOM. HOWARD, Viscount Bindon. 1608. GEORGE HVME, Earl of
Dunbarre. PHILIP HERBERT, Earl of Montgomery. 1611. CHARLES, the Kings second
Son, after the death of his Brother Henry, Prince of Wales. THOM. HOWARD,
Earl of Arundell. ROB. CARRE, Earl of Somerset. 1612. FREDERICK, Prince
Elector Palatine. MAVRICE VAN NASSAVV, Prince of Orange. 1615. THOMAS ERESKIN,
Viscount Fenton, and after, Earl of Kellie. WILLIAM, Lord Knolles, after Earl
of Banburie. 1616. FRANCIS MANNOVRS, Earl of Rutland. GEORGE VILLIERS, Earl,
Marquise, and after, Duke of Buckingham. ROBERT SIDNEY, Viscount L'isle; after
Earl of Leicester. 1623. JAMES Marquise Hamilton. 1624. ESME STEWARD, Duke of
Lennox, and Earl of March. CHRISTIAN, Duke of Brunswicke.
CHARLES, Of that Name the First; KING OF GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND;
Sovereign of the most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, called commonly the Garter;
adorned therewith
1625. de Lorreine, Duke of Chevereuze. WILLIAM CECILL, CHARLES, I. An. Chr.
1625.
Earl of Salisbury. JAMES HAY, Earl of Carlisle. EDWARD SACKVILL, Earl of
Dorset. HENRY RICH, Earl of Holland. THOMAS HOWARD, Earl of Berkshire. 1627.
GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS, King of Swethland. HENRY Van Nassaw, Prince of Orange. 1628.
THEOPHILUS HOWARD, Earl of Suffolk. 1629. WILL. COMPTON, Earl of
Northampton. 1630. RICHARD Lord Weston, Lord high Treasurer. ROBERT BERTY,
Earl of Lindsey. WILLIAM CECILL, Earl of Exeter.
THE FELLOWS of that most Noble Order of St. GEORGE, called commonly the
Garter; according as they now are, this present May, Anno 1630.
CHARLES, King of England. CHRISTIERNE, King of Denmark. ADOLPHVS, King of
Swethland. FREDERICK, King of Bohemia. HENRY, Prince of Orange. Duke of
Cheureuze. HENRY, Earl of Northumberland. EDMOND, Earl of Moulgrave. WILLIAM,
Earl of Darby. JOHN, Earl of Mar. PHIL. Earl of Pembroke, and Montgomery.
THOM. Earl of Arundell and Surrey. ROBERT, Earl of Somerset. THOMAS, Earl of
Kelly. WILLIAM, Earl of Banbury. FRANCIS, Earl of Rutland. WILLIAM, Earl of
Salisbury. JAMES, Earl of Carlisle. EDWARD, Earl of Dorset. HENRY, Earl of
Holland. THOMAS, Earl of Berkshire. THEOPHILUS, Earl of Suffolk. WILLIAM,
Earl of Northampton. RICHARD Lord Weston, of Neyland. ROBERT, Earl of
Lindsey. WILLIAM, Earl of Exeter.
Iamque opus exegi. Thus have I, as I hope, made good, that which at first I
undertook: so to assert the History of this most blessed Saint and Martyr;
that neither we become ashamed of Saint GEORGE, nor he of us. In which, though
sometimes upon just and necessary causes, I have took liberty to digress a
little: yet in the general, I have conformed my self to the rule of Pliny;
and kept my self unto my title. In the first part, we have removed those
imputations which were cast upon this Story; by the practices of Heretics;
and follies of the Legendaries. We have given also satisfaction to those
doubts, and arguments; which in these latter ages, have been made against
Saint George: and that so thoroughly, and point per point, as the saying is;
that I persuade my self, there is not anything unsatisfied, which may give
occasion to reply. If any man too passionately affected to men's names, and
persons; shall wai^e the cause in hand, to take upon him the defense of those
whose judgments herein are rejected: such I must first inform, that I respect
and reverence those famous Writers, which have thought the contrary; as much as
any: and that I have those excellent copies of themselves, which they have left
behind them, in as high esteem; as any he that most adores them. Only I must
conceive my self to be a Freeman; obliged to no man's judgment, nor sworn
to any man's opinion, of what eminent rank soever, but left at liberty, to
search the way of truth, and trace the foote-steps of antiquity; from which I
would not gladly swerve. Which protestation first premised, Advers. Error.
Johan. Hierosol.
I will be bold to use Saint Hieromes words unto his Reader: Quaeso Lector ut
memor tribunalis Domini, etc. nec mihi, nec Adversarijs meis faveas; neve
personas loquentium, sed causam consideres. The second Part of this discourse,
contains the formal justification of Saint GEORGE'S History, considered in
it self: so far forth, as it has been commended to us, in the best
Authors. In that, we have confirmed it, first, by the testimony of such Writers
of good quality; which have unanimously concurred in it: and those both of the
Greek Church, and of the Latin; both Protestants, and Papists. In the next
place, we had recourse unto the practice of the Church Catholic; which has
abundantly expressed her good opinion of him: in giving him such special place
in her public Martyrologies, and in her ordinary Service; in taking such a
tender care of his precious Relics, and consecrating by his name, so many
goodly and magnificent Temples. To this, we have adjoined the public honors
done unto him, by the greatest Princes and Republics in the Christian world.
Not only in erecting Monasteries to his name, and memory; and instituting
Orders of Religious persons to his honor: but, as the times then were, in
making him the tutelarie Saint of their Men of War, the special Patron of
their estates, and military Orders also; and not so only, but the Guardian of
the distressed affairs of Christianity. In the last place, we have
particularly related the honors done unto him here in England: as generally,
in calling Churches by his name, in making him the Patron of this most noble
Kingdom, in leaving him his place in our public Calendars, and forcing the
wild Irish to call upon him in their battles; so more especially, in
dedicating to him, that most Heroicke Order of Saint GEORGE, called commonly
the Garter. Such honors, and of such high esteem, as might have been of
force, to make an Englishman, suspend his censure of him; and to forbear to
second any quarrels raised against him: had not Saint AUSTIN truly noted this,
to be a quality of Error, that whatsoever likes not us, we would not gladly
should be pleasing unto any others. Hoc est error is proprium (says he) ut
quod cuique displicet, De goner. Cont. Man.
id quoqne existimet oportere displicere alijs. What has been done by me, in
the contexture and composition of the whole; I leave to be determined, by all
learned and Religious men, who shall hap to read it: to whose judicious
censure, next under his most sacred Majesty, and this most excellent Church
whereof I am; I willingly submit my self, and my performance. For my part, I
resolve of it, with the Author of the Macchabees, with whose submission of
himself I conclude this Treatise: Ego quoque in his faciam finem sermonis. Et
si quidem been, and ut Historiae competit; hoc and ipse velim: sin autem minus
digne, concedendum est mihi. If I have done well, and as is fitting the Story;
it is that which I desired: but if slenderly and meanly, it is that which I
could attain unto.

And here shall be an end.
FINIS.
LONDON. Printed by B.A. and T. F. for Henry Seile, at the Tygers-head in St.
Paul's Churchyard. 1631.


