ANTIDOTVM LINCOLNIENSE OR AN ANSWER TO A BOOK ENTITVLED, THE HOLY TABLE, NAME,
and THING, etc. Said to be written long ago by a Minister in Lincolnshire, And
Printed for the Diocese of Lincoln, Ao. 1637.

Written and inscribed to the grave, learned, and religious Clergy of the
Diocese of Lincoln. BY PET: HEYLYN Chapleine in Ordinary to his Matie.

1 COR. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently and in order. LONDON, Printed
for JOHN CLARK, and are to be sold at his shop under St. Peter's Church in
Cornhill. 1637.

TO THE KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, CHARLES, BY THE GRACE OF GOD King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most dread Sovereign:
YOur Majesty's exemplarie piety in the house of God, has spread it self
abroad amongst all your Subjects; and they were ill Proficients in the school
of piety, did they not profit very much under such a Master. Your Royal and
religious care, that all things in your Regal Chapels be done according to
the prescript of the public Liturgy, and ancient usage of this Church, is a
prevailing motive unto all your people, not to be backward in conformity to
such an eminent part of your Princely virtues. Such a most excellent pattern
would soon find an universal entertainment in the hearts of men; were there
not some, the enemies as well of piety, as public Order, that dissuade from
both. None in this kind more faulty than an obscure and namelesse Minister of
Lincoln Diocese, in a discourse of his not long since published. A man that
makes a sport of your Ma ties Chappells, as having never Holy table, p. 36.
heard of the use of the Chapel, nor read of any ordering and directing course
from the Royal Chappells; and puts a scorn upon Ibi. p. 83, 84, 85, etc.
the piety of the times, in being so inclinable (by your most sacred Ma ties
divine example) to decency and uniformity in Gods public service. Nay,
whereas in the Primitive times, the holy Altars, as they then used to call the
Communion Tables (for other Altars they were not) were esteemed so sacred, that
even Milites irruentes in Altaria, osculis significare pacis insigne. S. Amb.
Ep. 33. l. 5.
the barbarous Soldiers honored them with affectionate kisses: this man
exposes them to contempt and scandal, as if no terms were vile enough to
bestow upon them. Nor deals he otherwise with them, who out of their due
zeal to God, and for the honor of the Reformation against the unjust
imputations of those of Rome, and the procuring Stat. 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
of due reverence to Christ's holy Sacraments (too much slighted in these times,
and in many places) have travailed to reduce this Church to that ancient Order,
which has been hitherto preserved in your Majesty's Chappells, and the
Cathedralls of this Kingdom: whom he has openly traduced, as Holy Table, p.
204.
if they were but taking in the outworks of religion, and meant in time to
have about with the fort it self. In this regard, I thought it was my bounden
duty to represent unto your Majesty's faithful and obedient Subjects the true
condition of the business so by him calumniated: together with the doctrine
and continual usage both of the Primitive Church of Christ, in the world
abroad, and the Reformed Church of Christ in this your Majesty's Realm of
England. Which work, as it was principally intended to settle and confirm the
minds of your Majesty's people, whom some have labored to possess with
preiudicate fears: so to the end it may receive amongst them a more fair
admittance, I have presumed to prostrate both my self and it, at your Royal
feet, with that humility and reverence which best becomes

Your Majesty's most obedient Subject, and most dutiful Chaplain, PET. HEYLYN.

A PREFACE TO THE GRAVE, LEARNED, and religious Clergy of the Diocese of
LINCOLN.
IT is well noted by the Poet, that the Sero medicina paratur, Cum mala per
long^s invaluere moras. Ovid.
remedy does come too late, when once the mischief is confirmed and settled by
too long delays. And thereupon he has advised us, Principiis obstare, to
crush a spreading evil even in the beginning, before it gather head, and become
incurable: On this consideration I applied my self to the present business;
and so applied my self unto it, that it might come unto your view with all
speed convenient, before that any contrary persuasion, by what great name so
ever countenanced, should take too deep a root in any of you, to be thence
easily rem^ved. In the beginning (...) March last, there peeped into the world
a book entitled The holy Table, Name and Thing, said to be written long ago
by a Minister in Lincolnshire, in answer to Dr Coal, a judicious Divine of
Queen Mary's days; and printed for the Diocese of Lincoln, An. 1637. So that
being written by a Minister in Lincolnshire, and printed for the Diocese of
Lincoln; who could conceive but that it was intended for the private use of
you, the Clergy of those parts, and not to have been scattered, as it was,
over all the Kingdom: But being so fair a Babe, and borne in such a lucky
hour, it would not be restrained in so narrow a compass, and therefore took
the liberty to range abroad; secretly, and by stealth at first, as commonly
such unlicenced Pamphlets do, till it had gotten confidence enough to be
seen in public; and then, which was not until the first of April, I had the
happiness to read and peruse it thoroughly: So that as Florus said of the
Ligurians (...)
, that it was aliquanto major labor invenire, quam vincere; the like may be
a^birmed of this and such like lawless, and nonli^^t Pamphlets, that it is no
less^ labor to find them but, th^n having found them, to confu^^ them.

For having read, and thoroughly perused the same, I found forthwith, that the
most part of all the business, was to detect the extreme falsehood of the man;
which is so palpable, and gross, that I dare boldly sav it, and will make it
good, such, and so many impostn^es of all sorts; w^^^ (...) thrust upon the
world in so small a Volume. For first, he makes an Adversary of he knows not
whom, and then he (...)* he cares not how; mangling the Autho^s words, whom
he would confu^e, that so he may be sure of the easier conquest; and
practicing on those Authors whom he is to use, that they may serve his turn
the better, to procure the victory. A strange and cruel kind of Minister,
equally unmercif^ll to the dead, as to the living; with both of which he
deals, a^ did (...).
Procrustes with his captives, (...), making them fit unto his bed* ^f they be
longer than his measure, then he cuts them sho^^er; and if they be too short,
then he racks them longer: Hardly one testimony or authority in the whole
discourse that is any way mate^^^all to the point in hand, but is as true, and
truly cited, as that the book it self was writ long ago in answ^r unto Dr
Coal of Queen Maris^ days: which, as it is the leading tale, and stands in
front of purpose to make good the entrance; so does it give a good essay of
those fine stories and inventions, which we are like to find within. One that
conjectured of the house by the trim or dress, would think it very richly
furnished: The walls thereof, that is, the Margin, richly set out with Antique
Hangings; and whatsoever costly workmanship all Nations of these times may be
thought to brag of; and every part adorned with flourishes, and pre^ty
pastimes, and gay devices of the Painter: Nor is there any want at all of
Ornaments or Vtensils to set out the same; such specially as may serve for
ostentation, though of little use, many a fine and subtle Carpet, not a few
idle Couches for the credulous reader, and every where a Pillow for a Pur^tans
Elbow; all very pleasing to the eye, but slight of substance; counterfeit
stuff most of it, and wrought with so much fraud, and falsehood, that there is
hardly one true stitch in all the Work: From the beginning to the end, our
Minister is still the same, no Changeling: Hor. de Art.
Servatur ad imum,
Qualis ab incoepto processerit, et sibi constat.


And yet if all these piae frauds, (for so they must be thought in so grave a
Minister) did aim at nothing else, than to advance the reputation of his holy
Table; the answering of his work were more proper for another Adversary. The
holy Table has no enemies in the Church of England; and therefore he is feign
to fly to Rome, to find out some that are ashamed of the name of the Lords
Table. But so it is, that under the pretense of setting up his holy Table, this
Minister has dispersed throughout his book, such principles of faction,
schism, and disobedience, that even that Table also is made a snare to those,
who, either out of weakness, or too great a stomach, do greedily devour
what ever is there set before them. So venomous a discourse requires an
Antidote, a timely and a present Antidote, before the malignitie of the poison
be diffused too far; and therefore I thought fit to provide one for you* for
you the learned and religious Clergy of the Diocese of ^^nc. for who^, and
for whose use alone, that worthy Work of his, whosoever he be, must be
pretended to be printed, yet so, hat any others may be made partakers of it,
whose judgment and affections have been, or are distempered by so lewd a
practiser, who cares not if the Church were in a combustion, so he may warm
his hands by the flame thereof. The Author, what he is, is not yet discovered;
all that is openly revealed, is that he was a Minister in Lincolnshire, as in
the Title; some Minister of the Diocese, as the License calls him. The book, if
we believe the Title Page, was writ long ago, in answer unto Doctor Coal, a
judicious Divine of Queen Mary's dayes^: but what the Author means by Queen
Mary's days, is not so easy to determine. If he speaks properly, literally,
and anciently, as in the first part of the Title he would same be thought; he
may perhaps meet with a Doctor Coal was Deane of ^. Paul, in Qu. Mary's time,
as in the Acts and ^on. part. 3.
Doctor Coal in Queen Mary's days; but then that Doctor Coal would not serve
his turn, because he had no hand in the Coal from the Altar; but if he mean
the present times, and reckon them in the rank of Queen Mary's days, as if
the light in which we live, proceeded not from the clear Sun^shine of the
Gospel, but the fierce fire of persecution; I would feign know what could be
said more factiously, to inflame the people, whom he, and others of that crew,
have every were aff^ighted with these dangerous fears. Q. Mary's days, we
bless God for it, were never further off, than now; religion never more
assured, the Church better settled, nor the Divines thereof more lea^ned, and
religious, than at this time under the most auspitious Reign of our Gracious
Sovereign. And therefore they that practice with all art and cunning to cast
such scandals on the State, and such foul slanders on the Church, are utterly
unworthy of those infinite blessings, which by the sword of God and Gideon, the
favor of the Lord, and our religious Sovereign, they enjoy in both: So that
the supposition of a book written long ago, in answer to a Doctor of Queen
Mary's days, is at the best a factious figment, and a p^rnicious Imposture, to
abuse the people; and only for that cause invented.

This factious figment thus rejected, all that is left us to find out this
Author, must be collected by the style and argument, though that perhaps will
give us but a blind discovery. The argument, both in the maine, and on the by,
shows that he is a true descendant of those old Ministers of Lincoln shire,
which drew up the Abridgement in King James his time: in case he be not some
remainder of that scattered company, which hitherto has hid his head, and now
thrusts out with Bastwick, Prinne, and Burton, to disturb the State. The style
composed indifferently of Martin Ma^^e-Prelate, and Tom: Nash: as s^^^rillous
and full of folly, as the one; as scandalous and full of ^action, a^ the other
was: which, howsoever it may please young heads, and such as are affected as
the Writer is, yet it gives just offense to the grave and learned, who would
have serious matters handled in a serious manner. They that can find him ^ut
by either of th^se Characters, must have* more knowledge of the Diocese, than
I dare preten^ to; who am pronounced beforehand, and by way of challenge, to
be none of the Voisinage, and consequently no fit man to be returned of the
Inquest. Only I have made bold out of my care and zeal to the common^good, to
give you this short notice of him; that if by chance you should encounter with
him any where in his private^ (...), you may take heed lest he seduce you by
his practi^es; and in the mean time be forwarned, lest he misguide you by his
writings: For coming in the habit of a neighb^ur Minister, especially being
recommended to you, for one so Orthodox in doctrine, and cons^nant in
discipline to the Church of England; you might perchance be apt to give credit
to him, and lend too credulous an ear to his sly temptations. Therefore to
save that title which the Church has in you, and to preserve that interest
which it claims in your best affections, I have adventured to put in this
Caveat, in the Churches name; which if you should neglect, as I hope you will
not, I must be forced in maintenance of her right and interest, to bring my
double quarrel. Books of a popular argument, and followed in a popular way,
are commonly much cherished by that race of men, who love to run cross to
all publick-order. And therefore it concerns all Churchmen, and you especially
of that Diocese, for which that worthy Woke was printed, to have a wise and
timely care, that those which are committed to your several charges, be
rightly balanced, and not inv^igled and abused by the neat subtleties of
those, who only labor to deceive them.

And it concerns us all, the rather, because those factious and schismatic
Pamphlets, that came out with, and since the good Ministers Book, seem to
endeavor nothing more, than to possess men's minds, as before I said, with
dangerous and desperate, though most needless fears, that all things go not
right amongst us. The placing of the holy Table in that comely sort, as is most
co^sonant to the practice of the Primitive times, and to the general usage of
all Cathedrals in this Kingdom, and his Majesty's Chapels, given out by false
and factious men; only to be a preamble to a greater change: And howsoever in
it self it be a matter of indifferent nature, and so acknowledged to be both
by the Minister himself, good man, and by the writer of the letter to the
Vicar of Grantham; and that the Table be so placed in his Lordships Chapel,
(by whom the Ministers book was allowed and licenced) as is Vide Sect. 2. chapter
4. in fine.
elsewhere said; this comes all to one: for place them* how they will in
Cathedral Churches, his Majesty's and the Bishops Chapels, and be the matter
so indifferent, as no one thing more; yet take we heed we do not place them
Altarwise in Parochial Churches; rather than so, poor people must be
frighted with we know not what, and told that there is somewhat in it which is
worth their fears; something that mainly tends unto the alteration of religion
here by law established. As if the Table could not stand where the Altar did,
or be placed Altar-wise all along the wall; but it must needs implie some
Popish and prohibited sacrifice, to be intended for the same, though not yet
ready to be offered. In which most false and scandalous imputations, as all the
Pamphlets of these times are extremely guilty; so there is none more positive
in it, than this Minister of Lincoln Diocese. These new Reformers (I desire
you to observe his words) though they prepare and lay grounds for the same,
dare not (for fear of so many laws and Canons) apparently profess this
Eleusinian doctrine. They are as yet busied in taking in the outworks, and
that being done, they may in time have a bout with the Fort it self. A speech
of that schismatic, factious, and seditious nature, that greater of that
kind was never uttered by Bastwicke, Layton, Burton, Prynne, or any pestilent
Pasquill of the present, ne dum in any of the former times. And though you may
conjecture ex pede Herculem, what you are like to find by this, in the whole
bulk of the discourse: yet for your better satisfaction, I will lay before
you, as by way of Parallel, the harmony or agreement which is between him in
his holy Table, and H. Burton in his late seditious Sermon, and Apology. Not
in the language only, which is in both so like, and so full of clamor, as if
they had but one pen between them; but in their factious and schismatic
positions, in which they do agree so sweetly. Which done, it shall be left to
you to consider of it, whether it may be possible that they should jump so
even, in so many passages, by mere inspiration, and the enthusiasme of the
same ill spirit, or that they rather fell upon it, (as Iuglers sometimes do
their tricks) by combination and confederacy.

The Minister of Lincoln. Mr. Burton of London. THese new reformers, though
they prepare and lay grounds for the same, dare not (for fear of so many laws
and Canons) apparently profess this Eleusinian doctrine. They are as yet
busied in taking in the out-workes, and that being done, they may in time have
a bout with the fort it self. page 204. THey must first down with Tables, and
up with Altars, etc. And what then? Surely a Priest is not far off. But where
is the sacrifice? Stay a while; that service comes last, and all these are
preparations unto it. So as all these Preambles do at last usher in the great
God of the host, so soon as it is well baked; and the peoples stomachs fitted
to digest so hard a bit. page 105. I appeal to any indifferent men, that
pretend to any knowledge in divinity; if the Reading Pew, the Pulpit, or any
other place in the Church; be not as properly an Altar, as is our holy Table,
howsoever situated. page 75, 76. Well, yet a rail must be made about it, to
insinuate into peoples minds an opinion of some extraordinary sanctity in the
Table, more than in other places of the Church, as the Pulpit, Pew, or Font. p.
33. A number of our Churches have their Isles of such a perfect cross, that
they cannot possibly see either high Altar, or so much as the Chancell. page
224. When they must use no prayer at all after the Sermon, but come down, and
read a second or third service at the Altar, where in great Churches half the
people cannot hear a word. page 150. Without which transposing of the Table,
the Minister, were he that Stentor with the sides of brass, could never be
heard of his congregation. p. 204. Reading a second service at the Altar, where
even in lesser Churches, the people cannot possibly hear without a St^ntorious
voice of the Minister. In the Epistle to the King. Our Communion shall be at
the soonest our fourth, and by no means our second service. page 174. And
read a second or third service at the Altar. page 150. It seems by you, we
are bound only to pray, but not to speak the words of the Canons. page 75.
When they forbid Ministers to use any prayer before their Sermons, but the bare
and barren form of words in the Canon. page 150. God is as well God of the
West, North, and South, as he is of the East: and it is Paganish to make him
more propitious in any one corner of the world, than he is in another. page
219. Praying with their faces toward the East, thus tying God to a fixed
place. page 129. Whereas S. Paul reckons up a long Catalogue of graces, to be
blameless, vigilant, s^ber, modest, learned, hospital, and I know not what:
the man is content the Puritans take all these for themselves, etc. page 191.
The good Ministers of the Land ( i. e. the Puritan Ministers) are the Kings
most loyal, loving, dutiful, faithful, obedient, and peaceable subjects.
page 48. He might also mark some special differences which our Canons
themselves do make between Cathedrals and Parochial Churches; and
particularly in an observation concerning the point in hand page 182, 183. But
let us examine a little what force there is in this Argument: Cathedrals are so
and so: therefore all other Churches must conform to them. I deny the
Argument. Legibus vivendum est, non exempl^s. p. 160. I hope it will be no
offense, if I pluck out this Cumane creature, (who like a sawning Sycophant,
thinks to take sanctuary in that holy ground) from the shadow and shelter of
the Royal Chapel. page 35. In the last place being pulled away from the
horns of their Cathedral Altars, as not able to shelter themselves from their
pursuers: they fly as to their last refuge, and most impregnable fort, to the
Kings Chapel. page 165. Every Parish Church is not bound to imitate in all
outward circumstances, the pattern and form, and outward embellishment and
adorning of the Royal Chapel. page 33. Why should subjects think to compare
with the King, in the state of his Royal family or Chapel: there being many
things in the Kings Chapel, which were presumption to have in ordinary
Churches. page 165. It is not therefore his Majesty's Chapel, but his Laws,
Canons, Rubricks, and Proclamations, which we are to follow in these outward
Ceremonies. p. 34. The worship and service of God and of Christ, is not to be
regulated by humane examples, but by the divine rule of the Scriptures. page
165. This Table, without some new Canon, is not to stand Altar-wise, and you at
the North-end thereof; but Table-wise, and you must officiate at the North-side
of the same, by the Liturgy. page 20. The external rites and ceremonies in
the Church, are limited by Act of Parliament prefixed to the Communion book,
and no more to be added or used in Churches. page 166. Doctores legendi sunt
cum venia. The Doctors must be pardoned if they sometimes slip in their
expressions. p. 91. Their works are not without their naevi or spots, so as
they that read them must margaritas e coeno legere, gather pearls out of the
mud. page 112. I should therefore reasonably presume, that this good work in
hand is but a second part of Sancta Clara, and a frothy speculation of some
few, etc. p. 85. The book of Franciscus S. Clara, which has been now thrice
printed, and that in London as they say, and is much applauded by our
Innovators, etc. page 117. And so the Bishop of Norwich must be ever sending
forth letters of persecution: because John Fox observes, that one of them did
so. p. 98. So hot is the persecution against Gods faithful Ministers and
people in those Counties of Norfolk and Suffolk, etc. page 25. that in all
Queen Mary's time there was not so great havo^ke made of the faithful
Ministers of God, etc. page 65. S. Cyprian aggravates the offense of these
Testators, that by making Churchmen executors and overseers of their last
wills, Ab altari sacerdo^^s, and ministros volunt avocare, will needs withdraw
ministers from their Ecclesiastical functions, with no less offense, than if
under the law they had with-drawne the Priests from the holy Altar. page 167.
When Clergy men dare in affront to Gods word, to Christ's doctrine and example,
etc. usurp and take upon them to meddle in the managing even of the highest
and weightiest affairs of Princes, States, and temporal kingdoms, which is
incompatible with the Ministerial function. Epistle to the Nobility. page 22.
If the Ordinaries now command where there is no law or former Canon in force,
it lays a grievance on the subject, as a thing unjust, and consequently of a
nature whereunto obedience is no way due. page 66. And herein we have ^ause to
bless the name of God, who has raised up many zealous and courageous
Champions of his truth, I mean faithful Ministers of his word, who choose
rather to lose all they have, than submit themselves to their unjust and base
commands, page 83. This fellow jumbles again the King and the Bishop, tanquam
Regem cum Regulo, like a Wren mounted upon the feathers of an Eagle. page 91.
Little Pope Regulus plays such Rex in Norwich Diocese. And in the Margin.
It signifies both a little King, a Wren, etc.

So far the Parallel holds between them in their words and writings. And I
pray God there be not a more unseene Parallel at least in their ends and aims,
between this Lincolnshire Minister, and Prinne, and Bastwicke, as well as
between him and Burton.

What think you now of this consent and harmony between the Minister of
Lincoln Diocese, and H. B. of London? Think, you not that they hold
intelligence with one another, and by their weekly packers give and receive
advertisements, both what they mean to write of, and how to follow it?
Certainly this must needs be done by mutual correspondence and combination;
at least non sine numine divum, not without special influence of the same ill
spirit. Yet I must tell you by the way, that of the two, the Minister of
Lincoln is the most adventurous: who befides all that here is said, has a long
studied discourse in maintenance of sitting at the holy Sacrament, which good
Master Burton never winched at. But now upon the stating of the question by
this man of Lincolnshire, some of the latter libells (of which we have had
many since the Ministers book) have brought in that too; and made it one of
the disparities or Antitheses, between our Savior and the Prelates. And yet
the brethren may do well, not to give too much credence to him. For howsoever
he has strained so much to gain their favor; and set them out with a long
Catalogue of graces, as vigilant, sober, blameless, modest, learned,
hospital, and I know not what. page 191. Yet at another time, he flings them
off, as if they had no reference to him. For if they will express no reverence
at their approach unto the holy Table, as you know they will not; take them
Donatus for him, they shall be ^ever written in his Calendar for the children
of this Church. page 99. 100. Or if they do dislike the callings of the
Reverend Ordinaries of this land, as you know they do: He wishes them
presently with M. Cotton in the new, as unworthy of that most happy government,
which (by the favor of God and the King) all the Laity and Clergy do here
enjoy in the old England. page 64, 65. And thus he deals with Calvin also,
whom he endeavors to save harmless all he can, from having any hand in
changing the English Liturgy: yet says, he was a Polypragmon. page 144. a man
pragmatically zealous, page 145. And thus he feeds them, as you see, with a bit
and a knock, altera manu piscem ostendens, altera lap^dem: and will be sure to
keep them under, how much so ever he advance them.

But O le quid ad te? What makes all this to me, may this Minister say; who am
nor named nor glanced at in his holy Table; or at least named no otherwise,
then amongst those Authors, which were selected purposely to adorn his Margin?
It is true, the Minister, as if he knew not whom to pitch on for the Coal from
the Altar, lays about him blindefold: and like the Holy Table. page 232.
naughty boy he speaks of, he flings his stones abroad where he sees most
company; not caring whom he hit, so he hit at some body. Yet generally the
needle of his compass points unto the North, and he drives much at one or
other, that was not of the voisinage, but an inhabitant of a remote and another
province. page 3. who used to travail Grantham Road, p. 71. and was a friend
unto the Vicar, page 110. John Coal, as he is called by name, page 88.
New Castle Coal, as from the place and parts of his habitation, page 114. A man
whose learning lay in unlearned Liturgies, page 85. and used to crack of
somewhat unto his Novices, page 122. but to be pit^yed for all that, in being
married to a widow, page 168. Who the man aims at in these casts, is not here
considerable. It is possible he aims at no body, but at have amongst you.
However, all this while, that I may keep my self unto my Accidence Had the
Doctor kept himself unto his A^cidence* he could not have forgotten that
Edwardas was his proper name. p. 23.
Petrus dormit securus, and may sleep safely if he will; for none of all these
by-blowes do reflect on him. Done with much cunning I assure you, but with ill
success. For now he least of all expects it, I must draw the Curtain, and let
him see his Adversary, though he hide himself. Virgil. Aeneid. 9.
Me, me, adsum qui feci, in the Poets words. I am the man that never yet saw
Grantham Steeple; though for the Churches sake I undertook the Patronage of
the poor dead Vicar. The letter to the Vicar being much sought after, and by
some factious hands spread abroad, of purpose to hinder that good work of
uniformity which is now in hand, did first occasion me to write that answer to
it, which passes by the name of A Coal from the Altar. Now a necessity is laid
upon me to defend my self, and with my self that answer also, from the most
insolent, though weak assaults of this uncertain certain Minister of the
Diocese of Lincoln; who comes into the field with no other weapons, than
insolence, ignorance and falsehood. In my defense whereof, and all my
references thereunto, I am to give you notice here, that whereas there were two
Editions of it, one presently upon the other; I relate only in this Antidote
to the first Edition: because the Minister takes no notice but of that alone.

The method which I use in this Antidotum, shall be shown you next, that you
may know the better what you are to look for. The whole discourse I have
divided into three Sections. Into the first whereof I have reduced the point in
controversy, as it relates to us of the Church of England: following the
Minister at the heels in his three first Chapters, touching the state of the
question, the Regal and Episcopal power in matter of Ceremony; and in the
fourth bringing unto the test, all that he has related in several places of
his book, touching the taking down of Altars, and alteration of the Liturgy
in King Edwards time. The second Section comprehends the tendries of the
Primitive Church, concerning Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars; together with
their general usage in placing of the Altar or holy Table: and that contains
four Chapters also. In which we have not only assured our cause, both by the
judgment and the usage of the purest Ages: but answered all those Arguments
(or Cavils rather) which by the Minister have been studied to oppose the same.
The third and last exhibites to you those Extravagancies, and Vagaries which
every where appear in the Ministers book; and are not any way reducible to
the point in hand: wherein we have good store of confident ignorance,
fal^^fications far more gross, because more unnecessary; and not a little of
the old Lincolnshire Abridgement. And in this wise I have di^posed it for your
ease, who shall please to read it: that as you are affected with it, you may
end the book either at the first or second Section; or else peruse and read
it thoroughly, as your stomach serves you. In all and every part of the whole
discourse, as I have laid down nothing without good authority; so have I
faithfully reported those authorities which are there laid down: as one that
cannot but have learned by this very minister, that all falls dealing in that
kind, however it may serve for a present shift; yet in the end, (...) both
shame to them that use it, and disadvantag^ to the cause, Great is the (...)
the last, though for a while suppressed by men's subtle practices. Nor would I
that the truth should fare the worse, or find the less esteem amongst you;
because the contrary opinion has been undertaken, by one that calls himself a
Minister of Lincoln Diocese. You are now made the Judges in the present
controversy, and therefore it concerns you in an high degree, to deal
uprightly in the cause, without the least respect of persons: and having heard
both parties speak, to weigh their Arguments, and then give sentence as you
find it. Or in the language of Minutius; Quantum potestis singula ponderare,
ea vero quae recta sunt, eligere, suscipere, probare. And that you may so do,
and then judge accordingly, the God of truth conduct you in the ways of truth,
and lead you in the paths of righteousness, for his own names sake.

Westminster, May 10. 1637.
PErlegi librum hunc, cui titulus est [ Antidotum Lincolniense, etc.] in quo
nihil reperio sanae doctrinae, aut bonis moribus contrarium; qu^ minus cum
utilitate publica imprimatur.

Ex Aedibus Londin. Maii die 7. 1637. Sa: Baker.

The Contents of each several Section and Chapter, contained in this Treatise.
SECTION I.
CHAP. I. Of the state of the question, and the occasion of writing the letter
to the Vicar of Gr.
The Author of the Coal from the Altar defended against him that made the holy
Table, in respect of libelling, railing, falsifying his authorities, and all
those accusations returned on the Accusers head. The Minister of Lincolnshires
advantage in making his own tale, and altering the whole state of the question.
The Vicar cleared from removing the Communion Table of his own accord; as also
from a purpose of erecting an Altar of stone, by the Bishops letter. That
scandalous term of Dresser, not taken by the writer of that letter from the
country people. The Vicars light behavior at bowing at the name of JESUS, a
loose surmise. The Alderman, and men of Gr: repair unto the Bishop. The
agitation of the business there. The letter written and dispersed up and down
the country, but never sent unto the Vicar. The Minister of Lincolnshire has
foulely falsified the Bishops letter. A parallel between the old and the new
Editions of the letter.

CHAP. II. Of the Regal power in matters Ecclesiastical, and whether it was
ever exercised in settling the Communion Table in form of an Altar.
The vain ambition of the Minister of Linc: to be thought a Royalist. His
practice contrary to his speculations. The Doctor cleared from the two Cavils
of the Minister of Linc: touching the Stat. 1. Eliz* The Minister of Linc:
falsifieth both the Doctors words; and the Lo Chancellor Egertons. The
Puritans more beholding to him than the King. The Minister of Linc:
misreporteth the Doctors words, only to pick a quarrel with his Majesty's
Chapel. A second onset on the Chapel, grounded upon another falsification
of the Doctors words Of mother Chapels. The Royal Chapel how it may be said
to interpret Rubricks. The Minister of Linc quarrels with Queen Elizabeth's
Chapel; and for that purpose falsifieth both his foreign Authors, and
domesticke evidences. Not keeping, but adoring images, enquired into in the
first year of Q. Eliz. That by the Queens Injunctions, Orders and
Advertisements, the Table was to stand where the Altar did. The idle answer of
the Minister of Linc. to the Doctors argument. Altars and Pigeon-houses all
alike, with the Linc. Minister. The Minister of Linc: false and faulty
argument, drawn from the perusers of the Liturgy, the troubles at Frankfort,
and Miles Huggards testimony. Of standing at the North-side of the Table. The
Minister of Linc: produces the Pontifical against himself. His idle cavils
with the Doctor touching the Latin translation of the Common prayer Book. The
Parliament determined nothing concerning taking down of Altars. The meaning and
intention of that Rubric. The Minister of Linc: palters with his Majesty's
Declaration about S. Gregory's. A copy of the Declaration. The sum and
substance of the Declaration. Regal decisions in particular cases, of what
power and efficacy.

CHAP. III. Of the Episcopal authority in points of Ceremony; the piety of
the times, and good work in hand; and of the Evidence produced from the Acts
and Monuments.
The Minister of Linc: arts and aims, in the present business. Dangerous
grounds laid by the Minister of Linc: for over-throwing the Episcopal and
Regal power. He misreports the meaning of the Council of Nice, to satisfy
his private spleen. The Minister of Linc: overthrows his own former grounds
by new superstructures; protests in a thing against his conscience Charge
the Doctor, with such things as he finds not in him, Denies that any (...)
t^ing may have two known and proper names; therefore that the Communion table
may not be called an Altar also; and for the proof thereof does fa^sifie his
own authorities. The Doctor falsified again, about the Canons of the year
1571. The Minister beholding to some Archdeacons for his observations. Their
curtalling of the Bishops power, in moving or removing the Communion table, to
advance their own. The piety of the times, an^ the good work in hand,
declared, and defended against the impious and profane derision of the Minister
of Linc. The testimonies of Fryth, and Lambert, taken out of the Acts and
Monuments, cleared from the cavils of the Minister of Linc. The Minister of
Linc. cuts off the words of Lambert, Fox, Philpot, and Bishop Latimer, and
falsifieth most foulely the Acts and Monuments: Corrects the Statute and the
Writ about the Sacrament of the Altar: Pleads poorly for the Bishop of
Lincoln and Deane of Westminster, in the matter of Oyster-boards and Dressers:
and falls impertine^^ly foul on the Bishop of Norwich.

CHAP. IV. Of taking down Altars in K. Edw. time, altering the Liturgy first
made; and of the 82. Canon.
The Doctor leaves the Minister of Lincolns Method, for this Chapter to keep
close to England. Altars not generally taken down in the 4. of K. Edw. 6. The
Minister of Linc. falsifieth the Bishops letter to the Vicar; and palters with
a passage in the Acts and Mon. to make them serve his turn about the taking
down of Altars. A most notorious piece of nonsense in the new Edition of the
letter. The Altars in the Church of England, beaten down in Germany. Altars not
beaten down de facto, by the common people, but taken down by order, and in
fair proceeding. Matters of fact may be made doctrinall sometimes, and on some
occasions. The Order of the King but a kind of law. The Minister of Linc.
takes great pains to free Calvin, from ha^ing any hand in altering the
Liturgy. Land marks and bounds laid down, for the right understanding of the
story. Calvin excepts against the Liturgy, practices with the D. of Somerset,
both when he was Protector, and after His correspondence here with Bp. Hooper,
and ill affection to the ceremonies then by Law established. The plot for
altering the Liturgy so strongly laid, that it went forward notwithstanding
the Dukes attainder. The shameful ignorance and most apparent falsehoods of the
Minister of Linc. in all this business. Calvin attempts the King, the
Counsel, and Archb. Cranmer. The date of his Letter to the Archb. cleared from
the cavils of the Minister of Linc. the testimony given the first Liturgy by
K. Edw. 6. asserted from the false construction of the Minister of Linc. as
also that given to it by the Parliament. Archb. Bancroft, and Io. Fox, what
they say thereof. The standing of the Table after the alteration of the
Liturgy, and that the name of Altar may be used in a Church reformed.

SECTION II.
CHAP. V. What was the ancient Doctrine of the Church concerning Sacrifices,
Priests, and Altars: and what the Doctrine of this Church in those particulars.
That Sacrifices, Priest^, and Altars, were from the beginning, by the light of
nature; and that not only amongst the Patriarchs, but amongst the Gentiles.
That in the Christian Church there is a Sacrifice, Priests, and Altars, and
those both instituted and expressed in the holy Gospel. The like delivered by
Dionysius, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, and in the Canons of the Apostles. As also
by Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin, and S. Cyprian. How the Apologeticks of those
times are to be interpreted, in their denial of Altars in the Christian
Church. Minutius Foelix falsified by the Minister of Linc. What were the
Sacrifices which the said Apologeticks did deny to be in the Church of Christ.
The difference between mystical and spiritual sacrifices. S. Ambrose
falsified by the Minister of Linc. in the point of Sacrifice. The Doctrine of
the Sacrifice delivered by Eusebius: The Doctrine of the following Fathers, of
Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars: What is the Doctrine of this Church, touching
the Priesthood and the Sacrifice. The judgment in these points, and in that of
Altars, of B. Andrews, K. James, B. Montague, and B. Morton.

CHAP. VI. An Answer to the ^avils of the Minister of Linc. against the points
delivered in the former Chapter.
Nothing delivered in the 31 Article, against the being of a Sacrifice in the
Church of Christ, nor in the Homilies. A pious Bull obtruded on the Doctor by
the Minister of Linc. The Reading-Pew, the Pulpit, and the poor-mans Box made
Altars by the Minister of Linc. And huddle of impertinencies brought in
concerning sacrifice Commemorative, Commemoration of a sacrifice, and material
Altars. The Sacrifice of the Altar known by that name unto the Fathers.
Arnobius falsified. The Minister of Linc. questions. S. Paul's discretion, in
his Habemus Altar, Heb. 13. 10. and falsifieth S. Ambrose. The meaning of that
Text according unto B. Andrews, B. Montague, the Bishop and the Minister of
Linc. The same expounded by the old Writers, both Greek and Latin. The Altars
in the ^postles Canons made Panteries and Larders; and Judas his bag an Altar
by this man of Linc. The Doctor and Ignatius vindicated in the three places
touching Altars. The profane Passage in the Ministers Book of a Widow-Altar.
An answer to the Cavils of the Minister of Linc. against the evidence produced
from Irenaeus and S. Cyprian. The Ministers ignorant mistakes about the meaning
of Tertullian in the word Ara. Pamelius new reading about Charis Dei, not
universally received. A brief recital of the substance in these two la^t
Chapters.

CHAP. VII. Of Churches, and the fashion of them, and of the usual place
allotted in the Church for the holy Altar.
Places appointed for Divine worship amongst the Patriarc^^s, Jews, and
Gentiles. The various conditions and estate of the Christian Church, and that
the Churches were according unto those estates. What was the mening of the
Apologeticks when they denied the having of Temples in the Church of Christ.
the Minister of Linc. stops the mouth of Minutius Felix, and falsifieth
Arnobius. Altars how situated in the troublesome and persecuted times of
Christianity. The usual form of Churches, and distinct parts and places of
them in the Primitive times. That in those times the Altars stood not in the
body of the Church, as is supposed by the Minister of Linc. Six Reasons for the
standing of the Altars at the upper end of the Quire or Chancell in the days
of old. Of Ecclesiastical traditions, and the authority thereof. The Church of
England constant to the practice of the former times. The Minister of Linc.
tells a Winter tale about the standing of an Altar in the Cathedral Church of
Dover. The meaning of the Rubric in the Common-prayer-booke, about the placing
of the Table in Communion time.

CHAP. VIII. An answer to the Minister of Lincolns Arguments against the
standing of the Lords Table at the upper end of the Quire.
The Minister of Lincoln forsakes his Bishop, about the placing of the Altar in
the body of the Church. The Altar in Eusebius Panegyric, not in the middle of
the Church. The Ministers confidence and ignorance, in placing the Altar of
incense close unto the veil. Tostatus falsified by the Minister of Lincoln.
(...)* in the fifth Council of Constantinople, and the meaning of it. The
Minister of Lincoln at a loss in his Critical learning, both Greek and Latin.
Varro corrupted by the Minister of Lincoln. Saint Augustine what he meant by
mensa illa in medio constituta. Albaspinus falsified. Durandus sets the Altar
at the upper end of the Quire. The testimony of Socrates and Nicephorus,
asserted to the Doctor from the Ministers Cavils. The Altars how now placed in
the Greek Churches. The weak autorities produced by the Minister of Lincoln,
for placing of the Table distant from the wall, and some of them corrupted
also. The general Precedents of the Minister, for placing of the holy Table,
forged: as also are the A^ts of the Council of Millaine under Borromeo. The
Minister confesses guilty, and confutes himself of falsification. Many
particular Precedents brought in; most of them counterfeit and forged; and
altogether conclu^e nothing to the point in hand. The Minister of Lincoln
against himself.

SECTION III.
CHAP. IX. A brief survey and c^nsure of the first service of Ex^^avagancies,
in the holy Table.
The Ministers Extravagancies, one of the greatest part of his whole discourse.
His ignorant mistaking in the Mathematics concerning the inventions of
Euclide, Archimedes, and Pythagoras. The Minister Faulters in the original of
Episcopal authority. His bringing in of Sancta Clara, and Sancta Petra, for the
Iingle only. The Minister mistakes the case of the German Priest^. His cauils
at the form of Prayer before the Sermon; and turning toward the East in the
Act of Prayer. The Ministers ignorant endeavors to advance the authority of the
Archdeacons. The Minister mistaken in the Diaconicon* What the Diacony was, and
that it adds but little to the dignity of Archdeacons, that the old Deacon had
the keeping of it. The Minister absurdly sets the Deacon above the Priest.
Portare Altar, not an honor in the first Deacons, but a service only. The
little honor done by the Minister to the Archdeacons, in drawing down their
petigree from the first Deacons. The Ministers ignorant mistake in his own word
utensil. The Minister subjects the Priest to the authority of the Churchwarden,
and for that purpose falsifieth Lindwood. His ignorant derivations of the
present Churchwarden from the old Oeconomus. The Minister endeavors to exclude
the Glergie from meddling in secular matters; and to that end abuses the
autori^ie of the ancient Fathers. His ignoranc^ in the Catechism, and
confident mistakes in that. His heartless^ plea for bowing at the name of JESUS.

CHAP. X. The second service of Extravagancies, sent up and set before his
guests by the Minister of Lincoln.
The Metaphorical Altar; in the Fathers, good evidence for the proof of Real
Altars in the Church. Ignatius corrupted by Vedelius. My Lord of Chichesters
censure of Vedelius. The Minister misreports Saint Bernard, and makes ten
Altars out of four. A new original of the Table in the Christian Church, from
the Table of Shewbread; the Ministers fumbling in the same, deserted by those
Autors that he brings in for it. The Minister pleads strongly for sitting at
the holy Sacrament; and for that purpose falsifieth Baronius, misreports Saint
Austin, and wrongs Tertullian. The Benedictines sit not at the Sacrament on
Maundy Thursday. Of the Seiur de Pibrac. The Minister advocates for the Arians,
and will not have them be the Authors of sitting at the holy Sacrament; and for
that cause deals falsely with the Polish Synods which impute it to them. Three
Polish Synods ascribe the sitting at the Sacrament to the modern Arians. The
ignorance of the Minister about accipere and reservare in Tertullian. What the
Stations were. Lame Giles. The Minister slights the appellation of the second
Service as did the Writer of the letter, and brings in several arguments
against that division. The Ministers ignorance in the intention of the
Rubricks. Of setting up a Consistory in the midst of service. The authority of
the Priest in repulsing unworthy persons from the Sacrament; defended against
the Ministers. He sets a quarrel between Cathedral and Parochial Churches;
and mistakes the difference between them. The Injunctions falsified. Of being
ashamed at the name of the Lords Table. The Minister ashamed at the name of
Altar. Of pleasing the people; and the Ministers extreme pursuit thereof. The
Minister falsely charge on the Doctor, a foolish distinction of the Diptychs.
The conclusion.

ANTIDOTVM LINCOLNIENSE.
SECTION I.
CHAP. I.
Of the state of the question, and the occasion of writing the letter to the
Vicar of Gr.
The Author of the Coal from the Altar defended against him that made the holy
Table; in respect of libelling, railing, falsifying his authorities, and all
those accusations returned on the Accusers head. The Minister of Lincolnshires
advantage in making his own tale, and altering the whole state of the
question. The Vicar cleared from removing the Communion Table of his own
accord; as also from a purpose of erecting an Altar of stone, by the Bishops
letter. That scandalous term of Dresser, not taken by the writer of that
letter from the country people. The Vicars light behavior at bowing at the
name of JESUS, a loose surmise. The Alderman, and men of Gr: repair unto the
Bishop. The agitation of the business there. The letter written and dispersed
up and down the country, but never sent unto the Vicar. The Minister of
Lincolnshire has foulely falsified the Bishops letter. A parallel between the
old and the new Editions of the letter.

IT was an old, but not unwitty application of the Lo: Keeper Lincolns, One who
had been a singular friend to that town when he was in place.
when he was in place; that as once Tully said of Plato, In irridendis
Oratoribus maximus Orator esse videbatur: so he might also say of N. appointed
speaker of the Parliament for the house of Commons, Sect. 1.
that with great eloquence he had desired to be excused from undertaking that
employment, for want of eloquence. The same may be affirmed as truly, I am
sure, more pertinently, of this Non-nemo, Mr Some body; In the license.
some Minister of Lincoln Diocese: Charging the Doctor whom he undertaketh,
with libelling, he has showed himself the greatest libeller; accusing him of
railing, he has showed himself the veriest railer; and taxing him for
falsifying his Texts and Authors, has showed himself the most notorious
falsifier that ever yet put pen to paper. And first, he charge him with
libelling, upon a new page 1.
but witty Etymology of the Lo: Chancellor S. Albans, that a libell was
derived from two words, a lie, and a bell; of which, the Doctor made the lie,
and sent it for a token to his private friend; the bell being put to by that
friend, in commending it to the Press, and ringing it abroad over all the
Country, p. 1. Nor is it placed there only in the front to disport the
Reader, but it is called a libell, p. 21. and p. 60. The whole book nothing
but a libell against a Bishop. p. 58. and that you may perceive he is no
changeling, but ad extremii similis sibi, the same man throughout; a libell it
is called again toward the latter end. p. 220. Here is a libell with a
witness, a libell published by authority, a licenced libell, printed with
license, as himself confesses, p. 4. For whosoever made the lie, you make his
Majesty, in effect, to be the author of the libell: because you cannot but
conceive, that no man durst have printed his Declaration in the case of S.
Gregory's Church, without his Majesty's express consent, and gracious
approbation. Or if you would be thought so dull, as not to apprehend a thing so
clear, Cap. 1.
yet must the publishing of this libell rest in conclusion on my Lord high
Treasurer, at whose house the book was licenced. Which is so high page 4.
a language against authority, against the practice of this Realm for licencing
of books, and finally against the honor of the Star Chamber, on whose decree
that practice and authority is founded; as was never uttered and printed with,
or without license, by any subject of England before this time. But this
concerns not me so much, as the higher Powers: I only touch upon it, and so
leave it: and with it turn the libell back on this uncertain certain
Minister, who daring not to show himself in the Kings high way, was feign to
seek out blind paths, and crooked lanes, in them to scatter up and down those
guilty papers, which are indeed a libell both for name and nature. For if a
libell be derived from a lie and a bell, it serves this turn exceeding fitly.
First Mr. Somebody, this some Minister, makes the lie, telling us of an answer
writ long ago by a Minister of Lincolnshire, against a book that came into
the world but the year before; and then he sends it to the Lord B^ of
Lincoln, Deane of Westminster, who forthwith puts a bell unto it, an
unlicenced license, and rings it over all the country; page 1.
And it did give an Omen of what nature the whole book would prove, by that
which follows in the Title; Printed for the Diocese of Lincoln. Whereas
indeed it was not printed either for that Diocese, or for any other, but
calculated like a common Almanac, for the particular Meridian of some one
discontented humor; with an intent that it should generally serve for all the
Puritans of Great Britain. Or if you are not willing it should be a libell, to
gratify you for this once, let it be a Low-belt* A thing that makes a mighty
noise to astonish and amaze poor birds, that coming after with your light,
you may take them up, and send them for a token to Pere Cotton, or carry them
along with you, when you go your self with the next shipping for New England.
But being a low-bell and a libell too, take them both together, Vt si non
prosint singula, juncta juvent.

Your second general charge is Railing, Oysterwhore language as you call it,
p. 98. And being some minister, some great man, such a one as Theudas in the
Acts, who boasted of himself that he was some body: you think it a preferment
to the Doctor, to wear your livery, which you bestow upon him with a badge,
(that you may know him for your own) and call him scurrilous railer, p. 140
Railing Philistin. p. 191. and Railing Doctor, p. ult. Where do you find him
peccant in that peevish kind, that you should lay such load upon him? What one
uncivil, much less scurrilous passage, can you deservedly charge him with, in
his whole answer to that letter, which you have took upon you to defend,
maugre all the world? The worst word there, if you find any one ill word in
it, was I trow good enough for your friend I. C. a Separatist from this Church,
at that time; perhaps a Sebaptist by this time: who by the Answerer is supposed
to be the writer of that letter; and might have been supposed so still, for
ought you know, had not you told us to the contrary, and got your Ordinaries
hand to the Certificate. But be he what he will, pray Sir who are you, that
you should quarrel any man for railing, being your self so ready a master in
that art, that howsoever your fingers might perhaps be burnt, your lips
assuredly were never touched with a Coal from the Altar. Quin sine rivali. I
will not seek to break you of so old a trick; which I am very well contented
you should enjoy without any partner. Only I will make bold to deal with you,
as Alexander did with his horse Bucephalus, (...) Plut.
take you a little by the bridle, and turn you toward the Sun, that other
men may see how you lay about you, though your self do not. Hardly one leaf
from the beginning to the end, wherein you have not some one Title of honor to
bestow upon him; which without going to the Heralds, I shall thus marshall as I
find them. Poor fellow, p. 2. and 61. Animal pugnacissimum, Gander, Common
Barretter, p. 3. Wrangler, p. 4. Haughty companion, p. 5. Doughty Doctor, p.
21. This animal, p. 24. Scribler, p. 26. Cumane creature, and fawning
Sycophant, p. 35. Animal ratione risibile, a most ridiculous creature for his
reasoning, p. 42. Pamphletter, p. 58. and poor pamphletter, 85. Firebrand, p.
62. most injudicious and trifling Novice, p. 65. Judicious Rabbi, p. 76. A
divine of Whims and singularity, p. 77. Mountebank, and madman, p. 88.
Impostor, p. 94. Calfe, p. 103. Squeamish gentleman, p. 120. Poor Doctor, p.
132. and 158. A thing that cannot blush, p. 141. Mushrom, and audacious
companion, p. 150. This man of rags, p. 154. Bishop Would^bee, p. 159. Impudent
companion, p, 188. Blinking Doctor, p. 190. Base sycophant, p. 191. Whifler, p.
203. Braggard, p. 227. and to conclude with Railing Doctor. p. ult. He manus
Trojam erigent? Is this the means to save your Si Troja dextra defendi pous
est, etc. p. 60.
Troy from ruin, of which you tell us, p. 60? No other way to show your Zeal
unto the cause, but by forgetting all good manners? Such stuff as this, till
you, and your confederate Mr H. Burton came in print together, has not been
set to open sale, since Walgraves press, was the press for Puritan P^mphlet^
in Q. Elizabeth's time, whereof see Mar. Marre-Prelate, Epist. to the
Convocation p 23.
Walgraves press, in London, and that of T. C. which you wot of in the City of
Coventry, Holy table, page 5.
have been out of work. Burton and you, the only two that have revived that
kind of language, which since old Martin Marre-Prelates days has not seen
the Sun; but being now brought again into the world, and on a through perusal;
confirmed and licenced, you may proceed for your part, Cum privilegio, none
dares touch you for it. Fortunate man, whose very railings are allowed of, as
being In the license.
most orthodoxe in doctrine, and consonant in discipline to the Church of
England; and therefore very fit to be printed, there is no question of it.
Nobis non licet esse tam disertis: For us poor fellows as we are, it is not
our ambition to look upon that height of eloquence, which you so prosperously
have attained to. Or could we reach it, (being, I think, a matter feasible) we
should be sure to have a check for it, not an approbation. But I will ^ase you
of that fear. Non In Philip. 2.
tractabo ut Consulem, ne ille quidem me ut consularem; however it was Tullies
plea, shall be none of mine; I must remember who I am, not what you merit: and
therefore, in my answers to your sleights and cavills, I will reply ad rem, and
not ad hominem. You have some Coals upon your head already: In using you thus
gently, I Romans 12. 20
shall heap on more; which is an honester revenge than you ever studied, and
better than you have deserved.

The first two faults you charge him with, were only criminal, in which the
Star Chamber, or the Guild Hall might afford you remedy: but that which
follows in the last, is Capital; clipping the Kings own coin, and such as
is made current within this kingdom: a general falsifying of his Majesty's
Declarations, Laws, Injunctions; of all books, either printed here, or
imported hither. The whole book, as it is a libell against a Bishop, so every
leaf thereof is a malicious falsification of some Author or other. p. 58.
Quaerisne aliquid dici brevius? Could any man have spoke more home, and used
fewer words? In case this be not, (...), nothing ever was. What? not one leaf
without some falsification, and a malicious one to boot, of some Author or
other? Assuredly, if so, you may justly call him false-fingred gentleman, bold
man, a nibler at quotations, and what else you please. There is not a friend
he has, but will thank you for it. But if your challenges be but such as
those you mention, p. 23. in calling Ploydon Judge, being but a Counselor at
Law, (no such malicious falsification, if you mark it well) and setting down
Sir Robert, for Sir Edward Coke, a mistake only of the Printer: have you not
made your triumph before the victory? The Author saw those errors, and saw them
mended too, before you observed them: both of them being corrected in the
second edition, which followed close upon the first, within one fortnight; and
which you cannot but have seen, though you dissemble it, only to make your
brethren merry when you meet together. For in your 90. page encountering with a
passage of Bishop Latimers, you cite it from the author, as in p. 16. and so it
is indeed in the second edition: whereas those words of Bishop Latimers are p.
15. in the first. This is no honest dealing to begin with; yet this is that
which we must look for, Par my and par tout, as you know who say. And for the
And mends it by a kind of Sacril^dge, by taking from a noble Gentleman his
name given in ^aptisme, p. 23.
sacrilege you complain of, had it been the Authors (as it was not) of all
men else, you have least reason to accuse him; having your self offended in
the self-same kind, by taking from him his name given in Baptism. For in your
88. page you call him John Coal, as if you knew him from his cradle: which, if
the Church book may be trusted, and those which are yet living that affirm the
same, was not the name given by his Godfathers, and Godmothers; though you may
find it in your Had the Doctor kept him to his Accidence. p. 23.
Accidence, if you seek it there. And yet it is no wonder neither, that it
should be thus: it being in some places a received custom, that children when
they come for Camdens Remain^s.
Confirmation, do change the names which they had given them at the Font:
Sufficient ground for you to deal thus with the Author; and by what name
soever he was called in Baptism, to have him entitled by your own. You tell
us of some other things, wherein he does both page ^.
feign and fail, as you hunt the letter: but what you say, you say without
book. For upon examination it will soon appear, that he has fained in
nothing, whatsoever you say; nor failed in any thing, which you say he faines.
And were it tolerable in another, to run the wild-goose chase upon C^n-none,
and Common (or tri^iall) law. p. 23.
words and letters, which is a sport you much delight in; I have a friend in
store should follow this train-scent with you, for your best preferment, and
give you three for one in the bargain too. But for your fainings and your
failings, and whatsoever other falsifications you can charge upon him; we shall
see more hereafter when you bring them forth. Mean time you may be pleased to
know how ill this office does become you. You know who said it well enough,
Romans 2. 21.
Thou which teach another, teach thou not thy self? Thou that preachest a
man should not steal, do thou steal? And being that you came so lately from
your Accidence, you cannot but remember the first example in Verba accusandi,
damnandi, which you are most perfect in: if not, I Will tell you what it is, Qui
alterum incusat probri, ipsum se intueri oportet. This is so easy to be
Englished, that you need no construing book; and tells you, who had need be
told it, that it behooves you to take care that every thing be well at home,
before you come into the Court to accuse another. Otherwise you will prove such
a Censor morum, as was Manutius Plancus in the Roman story, Vell. Pat. l. 2.
Qui nil objicere posset adolescentibus, quod non agnosceret senex: most guilty
in your doting days of those very crimes, which you have charged on them of
the younger sort. Which said in general, we mean to lay before you plainly,
without welt or guard, your juggling in the carriage of this business, as it
relates unto the state of the question, and other the Contents of your first
Chapter: and after all those manifest and most notorious falsifications and
impostures which you have put upon the world, in your The Title.
holy table. The holy table never was so made an Altar, as you have made it in
that book; by offering on the same such spotted, maimed, and most illegal
sacrifices, to your fair Pulch^a Laverna, Da mihi fallere, da justu^sanctum
que videri. Horat.
Laverna.

First, for your stating of the question, you have an excellent advantage,
(could you hold it fast) in making, as you do, your own case, your own
evidence, and your own authorities. The principals in this business, were the
Vicar of Grantham, the Alderman thereof, and my Lord Bishop of the Diocese;
the only Accessory thereunto, the Bishops Secretary. Of all these there is none
that either can, or will confute you in any thing you say, say you what you
will. The Vicar he is dead, and you may use him as you please; for mortui non
mordent, as the saying is: But yet take heed, (and say a friend advised you to
it) what you lay upon him. For though he cannot answer to your slanders now,
he may bring you to answer for them another day. The Alderman being set forth
unto us for page 12.
a discreet and modest man, as the letter tells us; page 7.
A prudent and discreet man, as your book informs us; did never show his
wisdom and discretion more, than that he was page 7.
afraid to offend the Bishop. And being, if he be alive, as prudent and
discreet as ever, must needs be now as much afraid to offend the Bishop, as
before he was; and therefore you may say your pleasure, and call the Alderman,
and the Aldermans letter to witness what you please to say; you are sure of
that. As for the Bishop, from whose mouth you must have the story, he has
good reason to confirm and justify his own relation; that it may set him off
the better, and give the world a full account of his most moderate proceedings
in a point so agitated. Then for the Secretary, being we find not in the
story, that he was any more employed, than page 9, 10.
sitting up with his Lord that night, fetching the book of Martyrs out of the
hall, and borrowing Bishop Jewels works from the Parish Church, and giving out
the letters as his Lord directed, he was but (...), a living instrument; and if
examined, can say nothing that will do you hurt. So that in case, the Bishop
can but keep your counsel, as no doubt he will; and Mr Alderman has not
lost his ancient prudence and discretion, which God forbid, you may stand
forth, and tell your tale, and tell it with as high a confidence, as if we
were obliged to take all for Gospel. This you conceive at least, and go on
accordingly: not thinking that in some main points, those For besides it is
uncertain whether he be of the Voisinage, etc.
of the voisinage and the same Province can detect you; or that there is no way
to bring truth to light, but by confession of the parties. Now in your story
of the business, page 3.
you tell us that the Vicars head was full of ^rotchets. First, page 6.
turning out of the town the Lecturers there, being two grave and painful
preachers, as you set them forth. For being salaried by the Parish (to which
the Bishop was so good a friend) you cannot but extol them, whatsoever they
were; or what just cause soever the poor Vicar had to rid the town of them.
Then for the second Crochet, that was, you say, the removing of the Communion
table from the upper part of the quire, where it was comely placed before, (and
had stood time out of mind) unto the Altarplace, as he called it; and telling
Mr. Alderman (who out of his discretion, must needs question the Vicar for it)
that he had done it, and would justify it. What proof have we for this, (for
of the other you bring none) I mean, that the Communion table stood in the
upper part of the Quire, in such a comely fashion, for so long continuance; and
that it was removed by the Vicar only, without consulting with the
Chancellor, or perhaps the Ordinary? For proof of this we are referred to Mr
Aldermans letter. Then that the Vicar called the Communion table by the name of
Tresle, saying that he would build an Altar of stone at his own charge; and
that the rude people made reply, that he should set up no dressers of stone in
their Church: What proof have we of that? Mr Aldermans letter. Next page 7.
that he used light gestures in bowing at the name of Jesus, so as sometimes
his book fell down, and once himself, to the derision of those that were not
so well affected to that religious Ceremony: What evidence to make that good?
Mr Aldermans letter. These are the most material things in the whole relation,
so far as it concerned the ground of the whole proceeding; and for the proof
of all we must take your word, as well as Mr Aldermans letter. For what if Mr
Alderman writno such letter, or if he writ it on the Post-fact only, to make
good your tale; or if you make more of it than he mentioned in it: as who can
tell but you may deal with Mr Aldermans letters, as you have done throughout
your book with the Aldermans better? Or what if Mr Aldermans letter say as
much as you would have him, why would you have us credit Mr. Aldermans letter,
to the discredit of the Vicar; especially as things stood between them? the
Alderman being most apparently not a party only, but dux partium, the leader of
a party against his Minister. For you your self have told us, that page 6.
Mr Alderman (being nor page 6.
Bishop, Chancellor, nor Surrogate, as I conceive him) commanded his own
officers, (Sergeants, and Beadles, and such fellows) to remove the Table to
the place where it stood before. Which being done accordingly, he cries out
first; and makes Whereupon the Alderman presently wrote unto his Lordsh. page 7.
complaint unto the Bishop when he had no cause: but that he thought it an
high point of wisdom, being so prudent and discreet a man as you say he was,
to make sure work there; and then a fico for the Vicar. So that the Alderman
being both a party, and the Plaintiff too, is not to be admitted for a
witness also, except it be by some new order of your own devising; and like
to be a rule hereafter in that The Doctor by his exquisite knowledge in the
Can-none, and common (or trivial) law. pa. 23.
Can-none, and trivial law, the body of the which we daily look for, of your
setting out.

But ^e the letter his, or not, you think that you have gained three points.
First, a good ground to change the tenor of your own, charging the Vicar in
your printed Copy, with an intent of setting up an Altar of stone, which was
not* to be found in all the Manuscript: Besides, that you have brought him into
some disfavour with his And having too much favor from his Diocesan. page 5.
friend, the Bishop, for daring to remove the Communion table, without leave
from him. Next, for that slovenly and disgraceful phrase of Dresser, given in
the Bishops written letter to the Communion table placed Altar-wise, and from
him borrowed by Mr Prynne, that is now found out to be a phrase of the rude
peoples, as you call them; and on them fathered in the printed letter, to take
off that scandal. Last of all, whereas bowing at the name of JESUS was in the
written letter glanced at, as if it did procure derision from the lookers on:
that is now turned wholly on the Vicar, and his light gestures in performance
of that pious ceremony: the printed letter being altered and explained in that
particular accordingly. Having got thus much by the hand, you need say no more,
but bear your head up bravely, and proclaim your victory. But as he in
Macrobius said, Omne mcum, and nihil meum; so may you also say, did you deal
uprightly, all this that you have got is nothing, and you may put it in your
eye, without fear of Thi^ blinking Doctor. pa. 190.
blinking. For how may we be sure that Monsieur the half-Vicar, as you call
him, p. 70. did of his own head remove the Communion table without authority
from the Bishop, Chancellor, or any of his Surrogates, page 6.
as out of Mr Aldermans letter you affirm he did. It ^eemes to me, that he
acquainted the Diocesan with it, and found from him, if not an approbation, a
toleration at the least, conditioned no umbrages and offense were taken by the
Town against it. For thus the letter; When I spoke with you last, I told you
that the standing of the Communion table was unto me a thing so indifferent,
that unless offense and umbrages were taken by the town against it, I should
never move it, or remove it. Was not this fair leave think you, to make a
trial, how far the people would be pleased with the alteration, (and whether
they would think it tended to It is wel^ done that you affect decency and
comeliness, etc. page 13.
decency and comeliness in the officiating of Gods Divine service.) And on this
leave the table was removed to the Altar place; and stood so, till the
Alderman, page 12
a discreet and modest man, and far from any humor of Innovation, did by far
less authority bring it down again, and was never checked for it. Nor can you
say, that the word last there mentioned, (when I spoke with you last) is to
relate unto that time, when the Vicar and the Alderman encountered at his
Lordships house: Because it follows in the next words, that which I did not
then suspect, is come to pass; viz. the Alderman and better sort of the town
have complained against it. The conference then meant, wherein his Lordship
showed himself so indifferent in the business proposed unto him, must needs
precede the Vicars action; as did the Vicars action the Aldermans riot; the
Aldermans riot, the complaint; and the complaint, that sudden and tumultuary
journey to his Lordships house, which drew out the learned letter now between
us. And so your first report of the half-Vicars hasty running, before he was
sent, is, for the truth thereof disproved, or made very disputable. The other
branch thereof, touching the stone Altar that you talk of, is far more
improbable, and you are feign to chop and change the Bishops letter to make it
good, Cap. 2.
and yet cannot do it. For whereas it was charged upon the Vicar in the M. S.
Copies, that he should be so violent and earnest for an Altar at the upper end
of the Quire: you have it in the printed letter, that he should say he would
upon his omne cost build an Altar of stone at the upper end of his Quire: which
is too great a difference to be an error in the transcripts. Secondly, instead
of that oblation which the Papists were wont to offer upon their Altars, you
now have made it that oblation which the Papists were wont to offer upon these
Altars: and so by changing these to theirs, have turned a Protestant Table to a
P^pish Altar. Thirdly and lastly, whereas the first section in the written
copies, concluded thus, therefore I know you will not change a table into an
Altar: you have converted it to this, therefore. I know you will not build any
such Altar; As great an alteration in the business, as the words themselves.
For had that been the business then in agitation; and not the placing of the
Table Altar-wise, his Lordship might have gone to bed that night, (as indeed he
did) and ended all his letter with the first section; being bu^ 24. lines in
your own printed Copy, and that corrupted too to serve your turn: whereas
there is a large discourse against the placing of the Table Altar wise,
amounting to above two leaves in your own edition. I trow the writer of the
letter was too good an Arti-Zan, (...), to spend himself upon the accessory,
and let the principal be the least part of his care and study: especially
considering how he might thereby gratify the whole town of Grantham, to which
he had been such a friend, when he was in place.

As little truth there is in your invention of the dresser, which you have
turned upon the rude people: rude ones indeed, to give so vile and scandalous a
name to a thing so sacred, in whatsoever posture it was placed or situated.
What is it, I beseech you, that you have made the people say? that he (the
Vicar) should set up no dressers of stone in their Church. Dressers of stone?
It seems the people were as rude as you describe them; so little conversant in
matters which concerned the Church, that they were yet to ^ee^^ in things which
did concern the kitchen. Had the discreet Alderman no more discretion, than to
inform his Lp. of so rude a speech; and tell him in his ear a story of a
stone-dresser, when as he might as well have told him a tale of a Tubb? Had the
rude people, as you call them, applied the name of dresser unto the holy table
placed along the wall, the speech had been more proper, though not less
profane. But now to put the name of dresser of stone into the mouths of
Country people, who never heard of any such thing as a dresser of stone: shows
plainly, that neither any Altar of stone was ever purposed by the Vicar, which
might occasion such an idle and absurd expression; nor that the writer of the
letter took up the name of dresser from the Country people, but first invented
it himself. Adeo mendaciorum natura est, ut cohaerere non possint, said
Lactantius rightly. Your tresle, and your dresser then, may both go together,
ultra anni solisque vias, to your dear brethren in New Engl. and their great
Patriarch there, your good friend I. C. who as they care not now in what place
they dispose of the holy table; so will they care as little, in a little while,
by what name they call it. Of the same piece is that last observation made out
of Mr Aldermans letter, touching the Vicars light behavior, Cap. 1.
in bowing at the name of Jesus: his book sometimes falling down, and once
himself. Which were it so, why do you think that that should make your
friends of Grantham deride the ceremony, when not the ceremony, but the Vicar
was in fault, if such fault there was. Have you not seen some men behave
themselves so apishly in the Pulpit, that others, and those good men too, have
smiled to note it? And yet I hope you will not think, that therefore they
derided that religious ordinance of preaching, when not the ordinance, but the
Preacher was the sole object of the merriment. Or if the men of Gr. or rather
the rude people there, were so profane and impious, as upon that or any other
such occasion to deride the ceremony, the writer of the letter might have spent
his pains to better purpose, I have written to you somewhat more at large, etc.
let. page 13.
in writing to them somewhat more at large, than he has used to express
himself in that kind, to bring them to a better understanding of their
Christian duties. And you, the Champion of the letter, had done a better
office, as I conceive it, to have reserved your self for the defense of that,
and the tenor of it, if any Puritan in the pack should have writ against it,
than thus to have disturbed your self with so little profit. But what if we
join issue with an Negat ionis fo^mula, quam foro Angliae, Reus, Actoris
assertionem infici^tur. Spelm. Gloss.
Absque hoc, and tell you there was no such falling, either of the book, or
man, as you please to say. For tell me of all loves, where was it, in the
Reading pew, or at the Communion table, or in what place else? If in the
reading pew, the deske and seat were able to have saved them both from falling;
and so was the Communion table, if it had been there: If not there, say man,
where it was, and we will have a melius inquirendum about it presently. This
is a trick of yours to disgrace the Vicar, on whom elsewhere you have left a
stain, for taking his mornings draught before he went about it, p. 62. As if
the man, not only were not always right page 8.
in the head piece, and That squirrell. headed young man. p. 59.
squirrell-pated, which might be some infirmity of nature: but that he came
unto the Church, disordered with drink, and inter pocula told the people, quid
dia poemata narrant of the name of JESUS, and so fell down and worshipped, in
stead of bowing.

In the remainder of the story, you put an excellent speech into the mouths
of those of Grantham, partly commendatory of themselves, that they were all
page 8.
p^aceable and quiet men, save that they fought ^ut not without s^riking, etc.
page 8.
once in the Church, about removing of the table; conformable in all things to
the Kings laws ^cclesiasticall, save that they could not but deride the
ceremony of bowing at the name of Jesus; and willing to submit themselves to
any Order which his Lp should appoint, concerning the situation of the Lords
table, so it might stand according as they would themselves. And it was also
partly accusatorie of their Vicar, for putting down their weekly Lecture, and
partly of their own ill fortune, that they should live in the midst of
Recusants, who did begin already to deride and jeere this new alteration: not
without ^ome reflection on his sacred Majesty, for Their chief governor being
one of that p^ofession himself. page 8.
placing over them a chief Governor of that religion. His Majesty was much to
blame, there is no doubt of that, for not consulting with the Alderman about
the fittest man to be Ld Lieutenant of the County: but more the Papists, to
deride that decency and situation of the Lords boorde, there, which they
approve of elsewhere in all our Churches. And I could tell you, did I think
you would thank me for it, that the conformity of our Church in this
particular, according to the practice of approved Antiquity, does more amaze
the Papists, than ever it did those of Grantham: as knowing better than they
do, that the more near we come to the ancient practice, the less they can
upbraid us, and our Church with novelty, which is now made the chiefest weapon
that they fight withal. As for the Only they represented to hi^ Lp, that they
were much sca^dalized with the putting down of their sermons. ib.
putting down of Sermons, wherewith they were much scandalized, as your book
informs us, that was the very marrow-bone of the matter, the thing that most
displeased the people, who must have Chaplains of their own, or else non vult
fac. And had they had their tale of Sermons, it may be probably conjectured,
that Mr Alderman had never removed the table, but rather left it for a text, on
which the stipendarie Lecturers, there, might show their store of zeal, and
want of wisdom. But to go on. The people having ended, and the Bishop forward
in his speech, about the indifferency of the matter, it was the Vicars Q. to
enter, who came in page 8.
pale, and wanne, and staring, obstupuit, steterantque comae, as you know who
says, was by the Bishop used with all lenity and sweetness: and at last,
having told his Lp (being His Lp was heard over-carnest with the said Vicar, to
tell him who they were that set him on these alterations. page 9.
very earnest to get it out of him) who it was that set him on these
alterations, his Lp spoke aloud that all might hear him, that he had supped
on that which the Vicar told him. It is an old saying and a true, audacter
calumniare, necesse est ut aliquid haereat; by none more practiced than your
self. For though you leave us in a wood, and tell us, that page 9.
it is not known particularly, what they there discoursed of: yet by this
blind discovery you make men suspect, that some great man, to whom the Vicar
did retain, encouraged him, at the least, to ^rect an Altar, if not to say
Mass on it, when it was erected. Well then, the Bishop, being gone, betakes
himself unto his study, where (as you say) he sat up most of the night, and
in the morning (as you tell us) came abroad this page 21.
filia unius noctis, this letter to the Vicar, which is now in question,
addressed unto the Vicar, being then in the house (if you tell us right) but lb.
sent to the Divines of the Lecture of Gr. and by them showed unto the Vicar. A
letter of so strange a making, that it would puzzle the best Lecturer there, to
tell exactly what it was; lb.
digested in the former part into the fashion of a letter, but not so figuredly
and distinctly in the latter: directed to no body, nor subscribed by any body.
In all which story, there is nothing true, but that the papers were not sent
unto the Vicar, but to some one or other of your Privados about those parts,
the better to disperse it up and down the Country: and that not on the morrow
morning, but some ten days after. For that it was directed to the Vicar, the
whole proeme shows, which could not be applied unto any other; especially
these words, Now for your own satisfaction, and my poor advice for the
future, I have written unto you somewhat more at large, etc.

That it was fashioned like a letter in the latter end, the conclusion shows,
even in your own edition of it, Which I recommend unto you, and am ever, etc.
And I would feign know what these words, am ever, did relate unto, if not to
the subscription following, which in my written copy was set down thus
(although not printed with the rest) and am ever, Your very loving friend, I. L.

To draw unto an end of this new-nothing, you tell us confidently (like all the
rest) what page 12.
satisfaction the poor Vicar had by this decision; having gained all the
points, you say, excepting the form of placing the Table, which was the only
point he stood on: and that the Vicar after this did reap much fruit and
profit from his Lordships favor, from whom he never received any favor, from
that time forwards. So fine a story have you told, and so little probable;
that they that dwell far off, and are not of the voisinage, can take you
tripping.

Now for the letter it self, you tell us, that it page 11.
varieth in some places in matter from the printed Copy, but little in form.
Nothing at all in form, that is certain, but much in matter: so much as you
thought fit to alter in it, the better to set off the business, and give a
fair face to so foul a cause. Those Copies which I met with, and compared,
and had from very goods hands too, were word for word exemplified in the
printed book. And if you look into Duck^ lane for the old written copies,
which, till the Doctors book came out, were sold for half a crown a piece,
and doubtless may be had there still, if not employed to otheruses; you will
find no such variance in the matter, as you would persuade us. Which variance,
what it is, and how it alters in a manner the whole state of the question, we
shall see the better, by placing columne-wise those particular passages, in
which the variance does consist, according to the old and the new edition, as
hereunder follows.

The M. S. Copy printed with the Coal from the Altar. The Copy licensed and
allowed by the Bp of L. page 68. I have, etc. appointed the Churchwardens,
whom ^t principally does concern, under the Diocesan, to settle it for this
time. Page 12, 13. I have etc. appointed the Churchwardens, whom, in my
opinion, it principally does concern, under the Diocesan, and by his
directions, to settle it for the time. Page 68, 69. That you do the reverence
appointed by the Canon to the blessed name of JESUS, so it be done humbly, and
not affectedly, to procure devotion, not derision of your Parishioners. Page
13. That you do the reverence appointed by the Canons to that blessed name of
JESUS, so it be done humbly, and not affectedly, to procure the devotion, and
not move the derision of the Parishioners, who are not, it seems, all of a
piece. Page 69. But that you should be so violent and earnest for an Altar at
the upper end of the Quire. Page 13. But that you should say, you will upon
your own cost build an Altar of stone at the upper end of your Quire. Page 69.
That the fixing thereof in the Q^ire is Canonical, and that it ought not to
be removed to the body of the Church. Page 13. That the fixing thereof in the
Quire is so canonical, that it ought not to be removed (upon any occasion) to
the body of the Church. Page 69. That other oblation which the Papists were
wont to offer upon their Altars, is a blasphemous figment, etc. Page 14. That
other oblation which the Papists were wont to offer upon these Altars, is a
blasphemous figment, etc. Page 69. It is not the Vicar, but the Churchwardens,
that are to provide for the Communion. Page 14. It is not the Vicar, but the
Churchwardens that are to provide Vtensils for the Communion. Page 70. And
therefore I know you will not change a table into an Altar, which Vicars never
were enabled to set up, etc. Page 14. And therefore I know you will not build
any such Altar, which Vicars never were enabled to set up, etc. Page 71. For
besides that the Country people would suppose them dressers, rather than
tables. Page 15. For besides that the country people without some directio^s
beforehand from their Superiors, would (as they told you to your face) suppose
them dressers, rather than tables. Page 71. Not where the Altar, but where the
steps of the Altar formerly stood. Page 15. Not where the Altar, but where the
steps to the Altar formerly stood. Page 72. Or to make use of their Covers and
ornaments, tables may be placed in their room. Page 16. Or to make use of their
covers, fronts, and other Ornaments, tables may be placed in their room. Page
72. And it seems the Queens Commissioners were content they should stand. Page
16. And it seems the Queen and her Counsel were content they should stand.
Page 73. The sacrifice of the Altar abolished, these (call them what you will)
are no more Altars, but tables of stone and timber. Page 16. The sacrifice of
the Mass abolished (for which sacrifice only Altars were erected) these (call
them what you please) are no more Altars, but tables of stone or timber. Page
73. Where there are no people so void of understanding. Page 16. Where there
are no people so void of instruction. Page 73. For upon the Orders of breaking
down Altars, all Dioceses did agree upon receiving Tables, but not upon the
fashion and form of the tables. Page 16. For upon the Orders of breaking down
Altars, 1550. all Dioceses, as well as that of London, did agree upon receiving
Tables, but not so soon upon the form and fashion of their tables. Page 73. A
table in regard of what is there participated by men. Page 16. A table in
regard of what is thence participated by men. Page 73. For it answers that very
objection out of Heb. 13. 10. Page 17. For it answers that merry objection out
of Heb. 13. 10. Page 74. We have no Altar in regard of an oblation, but we
have an Altar in regard of participation and communion granted unto us. Page
17. We have no Altar in regard of an oblation, but we have an Altar, that is a
table in regard of a participation and communion there granted unto us. Page
74. The use of an Altar is to sacrifice upon, and the use of a table is to eat
upon. Page 17. The proper use of an Altar is to sacrifice upon, and the proper
use of a table is to eat upon. Reasons, etc. 1550. Vide Acts and Monum^nts,
page 1211. Page 74. The Church in her Liturgy and Canons calling the same a
table only, do not you call it an Altar. Page 17. The Church in her Liturgy
and Canons calling the same a Table only, do not you now, under the
Reformation, call it an Altar. Page 74. In King Edwards Liturgy of 1549. it is
every where called an Altar. Page 17. In King Edwards Liturgy of 1549. it is
almost every where called an Altar. Page 74. The people being scandalized
herewith in Country Churches, first beats them down de facto, then the
supreme Magistrates, by a kind of law, puts them down de jure. Page 17. The
people being scandalized herewith in Country Churches, first, it seems, beat
them down de facto; then the supreme Magistrate (as here the King) by the
advice of Archbishop Cranmer, and the rest of his Counsel, did Anno 1550. by a
kind of law, put them down de jure, 4. Ed. 6. November. 24. Page 74. And
setting tables in their rooms, took from us, the children the Church and
Commonwealth, both the name and the nature of former Alters. Page 17. And
setting these tables in their rooms, took away from us, the children of this
Church and Commonwealth, both the name and the nature of those former Altars.
Page 75. It is in the Christian Church 200. years more ancient than the name
of an Altar, as you may see most learnedly proved out of S. Paul, Origin, and
Arnobius, if you but read a book that is in your Church. Page 18. It is in
the Christian Church at the least 200. years more ancient than the name of an
Altar in that sense, as you may see most learnedly proved (beside what we
learn out of S. Paul) out of Origin and Arnobius, if you do but read a book
that is in the Church. Page 76. That your table should stand in the higher part
of the Chur* you have my assent already in opinion: but that it should be there
fixed, is so far from being Canonical, that it is directly against the Canon.
Page 18, 19. That your table should stand in the higher part of the Chancel,
you have my assent in opinion already: And so it was appointed to stand out of
the Communion orders by the Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical. 1561 But
that it should be there fixed, is so far from being the only Canonical way,
that it is directly against the Canon. Page 77. This table must not stand
Altar-wise, and you at the North end thereof, but table-wise, and you must
officiate at the North end of the same. Pap. 20. This table(without some new
Canon) is not to stand Altar-wise, and you at the North end thereof; but
table-wise, and you must officiate on the North side of the same, by the
Liturgy. Cap. 2.
Page 78. And therefore your Parishioners must be judges of your audiblenesse
in this case. Page 20. And therefore your Parishioners must be Judges of your
audiblenesse in this case, and upon complaint to the Ordinary must be relieved.

Thus have I showed in brief your (...), your tricks and artifices, whereby
you seek to varnish a rotten cause: falsifying the very Text which you are to
comment on, that it may fit your notes the better. A pregnant evidence that
there is no fair dealing to be looked for from you, when you shall come either
to repeat your adversaries words, or cite your Authors. But fair or foul, we
must go through with you now we have begun: and so on in Gods name.

CHAP. II.
Of the Regal power in matters Ecclesiastical, and whether it was ever
exercised in settling the Communion table in form of an Altar.
The vain ambition of the Minister of Linc: to be tho^gh^ a Royalist. His
practice contrary to his speculations. The Doctor cleared from the two Cavils
of the Minister of Linc: touching the Stat. 1. Eliz. The Minister of Linc:
^alsifieth both the Doctors words, and the Lo: Chancellor Egertons. The
Puritans more beholding to him than the King. The Minister of Linc:
misreporteth the Doctors words, only to pick a quarrel with his Majesty's
Chapel. A second onset on the Chapel, grounded upon another f^lsification
of the Doctors words. Of mother Chappells. The Royal Chapel how it may be
said to interpret Rubricks. The Minister of Linc: quarrels with Queen
Elizabeth's Chapel; and for that purpose falsifieth both his foreign authors,
and domestic evidences Not keeping, but adoring images, enquired into in the
first ye^re of Queen Elizabeth. That by the Queens Injunctions, Orders and
Advertisements, the Table was to stand where the Altar did. The idle answer of
the Minister of Linc: to the Doctors argument. Altars and Pigeon-houses all
alike, with this Linc: Minister. The Minister of Linc: false and faulty
argument, drawn from the perusers of the Liturgy, the troubles at Franck ^ort,
and Miles Huggards testimony. Of standing at the North-side of the Table. The
Minister of Linc: produces the Pontifical against himself. His idle cavils
with the Doctor touching the Latin translation of the Common prayer Book. The
Parliament determined nothing concerning taking down of Altars. The meaning
and intention of that Rubric. The Minister of Linc: palters with his Majesty's
Declaration about S. Gregory's. A copy of the Declaration. The s^mme and
substance of the Declaration. Regal decisions in particular cases, of what
power and efficacy.

PLutarch relates of (...) In vit. Alex.
Alexander, that he did use to say of his two chief favorites, Craterus and
Hephestion, that the one of them was (...), the other (...), the one a lover of
Alexander, the other of the King; Hephestion loved his person, as a private
friend* Craterus his estate and Monarchy, as a public Minister. Princes are
then best served, when these affections meet together; when those that either
are about their persons, or under their dominions, Eupho^mio in Epistol^ ad*
Jacob. Reg.
do Crateru^ cu^ Hephestione confundere, and love them not alone as men, but
Princes, whom they do most truly love. Both of these parts this Somebody*
whom I am to deal with, would feign seem to act: and he does act them
rightly, as a player does, in a disguise or borrowed shape, which he can put
off when he lists, and the play be ended. But yet for all his vizard it is no
hard matter to discern him, his left hand pulling down, what his right hand
builds; all that authority and regard which he bestowed upon the King in the
speculation, being gone in (...), as they say, when it should be reduced to
practice. Of the original of the Regal power, you tell us very rightly that
it is from God, that the Kings page 32.
of England have had the flowers of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, stuck in
their Imperial garlands, by the finger of Almighty God from the very beginning
of this Christian Monarchy within this Island; and that the Kings Majesty may
command a greater matter of this nature, than that the holy Table should be
placed where the Altar stood. An excellent Royalist verily in your
speculations. But look upon you in your practicks, and then you tell us in your
corrected copy of the Bishops letter, that the Table (without some new Canon)
is not to stand Altar-wise; which is directly contrary to that before. I trow
you are not ignorant that the Church makes Canons, it is the work of Clergy men
in their Convocations, having his Majesty's leave for their conveening, and
approbation of their doings. His Majesty in the Declaration before the Articles
has resolved it so; and the late practice in K. James his reign, what time
the book of Canons was composed in the Convocation, has declared so too. If
then the Table may not be removed and placed Altar-wise, without some new
Canon; his Majesty may command it, for ought I see by you, and yet go without.
Or if you mean that any order from his Majesty, or intimation of his pleasure,
shall be as forcible with you, as any Canon of them all; why do you so much
slight his Majesty's Declaration about S. Gregory's? For neither can the man
endure it should be called an Act of Counsel, (which yet the Doctor never
calls it, to his best remembrance;) or that it should have any influence beyond
that one particular case, which first occasioned it: in no respect that it
should have the operation of Canon, either to force obedience, or induce
conformity. So that in fine, you deal no otherwise with his Majesty, than did
Popilius Lenas with the great King Vel. Pat. l. 2.
Antiochus, qui rege^ circumscripsit virgula, as the story has it. You draw a
ring about him with your willow scepter, as if you meant to conjure him into a
circle, and so keep him there. Thus deal you also with his person, (for you
would very feign be taken for Hephestion, as well as Crat^rus.) You tell us of
page 59.
his heavenly expressions used in that Declaration before remembered; and yet
think scorn to follow what he there allows of: talk of his page 33.
sacred Chapel, and the Saint of that Chapel; and in the same breath tell
us, that Parish-Churches are as little bound to imitate the form and pattern
of the one, as you conceive your self obliged to imitate the piety and true
devotion of the other. Saint of the Chapel! Lord how the man bestows his
holy water, when he has a mind to it. Vir. Aeneid.
Spargere rore levi and ramo felicis olivae, Lustravitque vir^s, in the Poets
language. Yet no such Saint, I trow, as Ferdinando the third, of whom you say
both in Regnavit annos 35. in qu^bus n^c fames, nec pestis fuit in regno suo.
page 27.
the text, and in your margin, that in his long reign of 35. ye^r^s, there was
no touch of hunger or contagion. There was a Saint indeed, fit to be shown
unto the world, as a public blessing: in reference to whom, and his most
fortunate Empire, these wretched times have nothing whereof to glory. Sir,
that Parenthesis of yours, as it comes in impertinently, so it looks
suspiciously: and it had shown more wisdom in you to have passed it by, than
it can make for ostentation of your reading, so to take it up.

But let your practice go, and come we to your speculations, in which you have
said much, and produced good proof, to show the true original of the right of
Kings. Bellarm.
Vtinam sic semper errasset, said once the learned Cardinal, of Calvin. It had
been well if you had never handled any other argument. But good Sir, let the
poor man live, and grow up under you, if you please, whom you expose so much
to the public scorn, and tantum non endite of treason against his Majesty.
Assuredly the poor soul meant well, when he attempted to free the Statute 1.
of Eliz. from some, (perhaps some Ministers of Lincolnshire) who had restrained
it to the person of the Queen that was, and that it could not any way
advantage the King that is. If he has failed in any thing, I pray you let him
have your pity, and not your anger. Alas good Sir, you know it is impossible
Terence.
nos illico nasci senes, that we should all of us be experienced Statesmen at
the first dash. We must first serve our time, and wear out our Indentures,
before we come to those high mysteries, which any school boy might have taught
you from Printed 1615.
his Deus and Rex. Think you that no man ever knew till you found it out, that
Kings had their authority from God alone? or find you any thing in the Doctor,
which affirms the contrary? the Doctor, as before was said, thought fit to
clear the Statute 1. of Eliz. from those that went about to restrain all
authority of ordaining rites and ceremonies unto the person of the Queen,
because there is no mention in that clause of her heirs and successors. To
clear which point he brought in six several Arguments, borrowed, as he
tells you there, both from the common Law, and the Act it self. The four
first, as it seems, you are content should stand without further censure; save
that you tell him that the fourth was taught him by some As those Probationers
did, which (p^^adventure) some Iustic^ his Clerk might tell you of. p. 25.
Justice his Clerk, and make your self merry with the fifth and ^ixt. How
justly, let the Reader judge, when he hears the business. The question was,
whether the King lost any thing of that power which was acknowledged by that
Statute to be inherent in the Queen when she was alive, for want of these few
formal words, her heirs and successors. And it is Coal from the Altar, p. 61.
answered fifthly from a resolution in the law, in a case much like: it being
determined by that great Lawyer Ploydon, (for so the last edition calls him)
that if a man give lands to the King by deed enrolled, a fee-simple does pass,
without these words successors and heirs, because in Judgment of Law the King
never dies. This is an argument a comparatis* And what see you therein with
your Eagles eyes, (the Doctor being but a blinker, page 190.
as you please to style him) that you should fall upon him with such scorn and
laughter, and tell him that he does deserve but page 25.
a simple fee, for his impertinent ex^mple of this fee-simple. The Argument was
good to the point in hand, which was not what the King could do by his power
Original, that which he claims only from the King of Kings, which was never
questioned: but how far he might use that Statute, if occasion were, for the
ordaining of such rites and ceremonies, as he with the advice of his
Metropolitan, should think fit to publish. You may call in your laugh again,
for ought I see yet: but that you have a mind to show your teeth, though you
cannot bite.

But his page 25.
next pranke, you say, is worse, where he affirms, ( most ignorantly, and
most derogatorily to his Majesty's right and just prerogative) that the Statute
1. of Eliz. 2. was a confirmative of the old law: whereas his Author has it
rightly, that it was not a Statute introductorie of a new law, but declaratorie
of the old. This is the hint you take to introduce your studied discourse of
the power of Kings in ecclesiasticis, which neither is ad rem, nor Rhombum: but
that you would do somewhat feign to be thought a Royalist; however the poor
people take it to be so deserted. For tell me in good earnest, does the Doctor
say that the said Statute 1. of Eliz. was only confirmative, and not
declaratorie of the old? Does he not say expressly as you would have him? Last
of all, Coal, p. 61, 62.
(says his book) it may be argued, that the said clause or any thing therein
contained, is not indeed introductory of any new power, which was not in the
Crown before, but rather declaratorie of the old, which anciently did belong to
all Christian Kings, (as before any of them to the Kings of Judah) and amongst
others to ours also. If afterward he use the word confirmative, you might have
found his meaning by his first, declaratorie: and not have fallen upon him in so
fierce a manner, as if he had been only for confirmative, and for
declaratorie not one word. But your next prank is worse than this, where you
affirm with confidence and scorn enough, page 26, 27.
that this right is not united to the Crown of England only, as this scribler
seems to conceive, but to all other Christian Crowns, and challenged by all
Christian Princes accordingly. Terence in Andria, Act. 1. S^^. 5.
Proh deum atque hominum fidem! that ever man should write thus, and believe
his Creed, in that which does relate to the day of Judgment. For sure the
Doctor says as much, as all your studied nothing comes to, that the said power
did Coal from the Altar, p. 60.
anciently belong (what, to this Crown alone, as you make him say? No but) to
all Christian Kings, (good Sir note this well) as before any of them to the
Kings of Judah, and amongst others to ours also. Not unto ours alone, but among
others to ours also. Or if this yet be no foul dealing, we will try once more.
You tell us, with great joy no question, page 31.
That to maintain that Kings have any part of their authority by any positive
law of nations, (as this scribler speaks of a jurisdiction, which either is or
ought to be in the Crown by the ancient laws of the Realm, and is confirmed by
1 El. c. 1.) is accounted by that great personage (the Ld Chancellor Egerton)
an ass^rtion of a treasonable nature. But by your leave a little Sir, that
passage of a jurisdiction, which either is or ought to be in the Crown by the
ancient laws of the Realm, is not the Doctors, but Sir Edward Cokes, and cited
from him who^ you have honored with the title of a deep learned man in his
faculty, p. 25. affirming there that he has stated the whole question rightly:
as here, immediately on the recital of the words before repeated, you take
great pains, more than you needed, to give his words a fair construction. If
it was rightly said by Sir Edw. Coke, why not by the Doctor? If no such
treasonable matter in the one, why do you charge it on the other? This is the
thing complained of in the Court-historian: Vel. Pa^. l. 2.
Invidiam non ad causam, sed ad volunt atem personasque dirigere. But yet Gods
blessing on your heart for your affection to Sir Edward: you deal with him far
better and more honestly, than with your Lords great Master, the Ld Chancellor
Egerton: whose words you chop off with an hatchet, as if you wanted patience to
hear him out. You cite him in your margin thus: It was never taught but
either by Traitors, (as in Spencers bill in Edw. 2. time,) or by treasonable
Papists, (as Harding in the Confutation of the Apology) that Kings have their
authority by the positive law. Why stop you there? why do you not go forwards
like an honest man? Have you a squinancie in your throat, and cannot? I will do
it for you. Read on then, ^a^e o^ the (...) p. 99.
by the positive law of nations, and have no more power than the people has,
of whom they take their temporal jurisdiction; and so Ficlerus, Simanca, and
others of that crew: Or by seditious Puritanes and Sectaries, as Buchanande
jure regni apud Scotos, Penry, Knox, and such like. This is flat felony,
believe me, to rob your Readers of the best part of all the business. For
here we have two things which are worth the finding: First what it is, which,
as you say, is by that honorable personage made to be of treasonable nature:
viz. not only to maintain that Kings have their authority by the positive law
of nations, but that they have no more power than the people has. Next, who
they be that teach this doctrine, not only Traitors, and treasonable Papists,
as you make him say, but also seditious Sectaries and Puritanes, Buchanan,
Knox, and Penry, and such like. Nor was it taught by them, the leaders only,
but as it follows in that place, by these, and those that are their
followers, and of their faction, there is in their pamphlets too much such
traitorous seed sown. The Puritans are, I see, beholding to you, for lending
them so fine a cloak to hide their knavery. And hereupon I will conclude, how
great a Royalist soever you pretend to be, you love 'the King well, but the
Puritans better.

From the original and fountain of the sovereign power, we must next follow
you unto the exercise thereof. And here you ask the question, page 32.
How does the Doctor make it appear, that his most excellent Majesty has
commanded any such matter? or that there is (as he avows) any public order for
the same? viz: for placing the Communion Table Altar-wise. To this you answer,
(for you play all parts) that he shall make it cock-sure by three Apodicticall
demonstrations: which are, as afterward you dispose them, the practice of his
Majesty's Chapel, the Queens Injunctions, and his most excellent Majesty's
declaration about S. Gregory's. But first, before we proceed further, let me
ask one question: Where do you find the Doctor say that his most excellent
Majesty has commanded any such matter? No where, most certain, in the book;
nor any where that I can tell of, but in the mint of your imagination, where
there is coynage all the year of these poor Double a piece of brass coin in
France, of which five go to an English penny.
double ones. The Doctor says indeed, His sacred Majesty has already declared
his pleasure in the case of S. Gregory's, and thereby given encouragement to
the Metropolitans, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, to require the like in all
the Churches committed to them. Co^l, p. 63.
Encouragements are no Command,, you had best say so howsoever. For if they
were, I could soon tell you in your ear, who is a very disobedient subject.
But let that pass, cum coeteris erroribus, and see if that be better which
comes after next. I would feign hope some good of you, but I find no ground
for it: you misreport him so exceeding shamelesly in every passage. The first
(you say) of his three Apodicticall demonstrations, (as you please to slight
them) is, that it is so page 32, 33.
in his Majesty's Chapel, where the ancient Orders of the Church of England
have been best preserved, and without which (perhaps) we had before this been
at a loss amongst our selves for the whole form and fashion of divine
service. The Chapel of the King being the best Interpreter of the law which
himself enacted, wherein the Communion Table has so stood as now it does,
sithence the beginning of Qu. Elizabeth, what time that Rubric in the
Common-prayer-booke was confirmed and ratified. Thus you report the Doctors
words, and with shame enough. The Doctor says not any where, (exclusively of
the Cathedralls, as you vouch him here) that the ancient Orders of the Church
of England have been best preserved in his Majesty's Chapel, without the
which (perhaps) we had been at a loss, etc. These are your words, and not the
Doctors. The Doctors words are these: Coal from the Altar. p. 26* 27.
For certainly the ancient orders of the Church of England have been best
preserved in the Chapels of the Kings Majesty, and the Cathedrals of this
Kingdom (good Sir mark you that;) without the which, perhaps, we had before
this been at a loss amongst our selves, for the whole form and fashion of
divine service. Here you leave out, most wilfully, to say no worse, and the
Cathedrals of this Kingdom, not so much to belie the Doctor, as to devise some
quarrel with his Majesty's Chapel, which you cast many an evil eye at. And
thereupon conclude most gravely, page 35.
To what use serve our grave and worthy Metropolitans, our Bishops, our
Convocation house, our Parliaments, our Liturgies, hedged in and compassed in
with so many Laws, Rubricks, Proclamations, and Conferences, if we had been
long before this at a loss in England for the whole form and fashion of divine
service, but for one Deane, and so many Gentlemen of the Kings Chapel. Lord
what a gross of words is here drawn together, to fight with nothing but a
poor fancy of your own; at most with one poor Deane, and a few simple
gentlemen of that contemptible place, the Kings Chapel Royal. Less
strength, and fewer weapons would have been sufficient, to drive this silly
troop before you; whom you might easily have scattered with your very breath,
and made them wait upon your triumph at the first words speaking. Dicite Io
Paean, and Io bis dicite Paean. Never did any story tell of such a conquering
combatant, since King William the Conqueror.

As little truth you use in citing of the other passage from the Doctors text;
and far less modesty in your second onset on his Majesty's Chapel. You make
the Doctor say, The Chapel of the King, being the best Interpreter of the law
which himself enacted, wherein the Communion table has so stood as now it
does, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, etc. and then fly out upon him
without all pity, page 35.
Where did the man ever hear of any Chapel in the Christian world, that gave
form and fashion of divine service, to whole Provinces? Good Sir have patience
but a little, I will pay you all. And tell me I beseech you first, where did
the Doctor ever say they should? The former place you guelded in the very
middle, and this you cut off in the end. Take the whole passage as it lies
together, Coal from ^e Altar, 51, 52.
you will find it thus. For if we look into the former practice either of
the Chapels of the King, the best Interpreter of the law which himself
enacted, etc. as before we had it: or of Collegiate and Cathedral Churches,
the best observers of the form and order of Gods public service; the Vicar
had good warrant for what he did. Here you leave out again the Cathedral and
Collegiate Churches, to pick a second quarrel with his Majesty's Chapel: the
Doctor saying no where, as you make him say, that the Parochial Churches are
to precedent themselves (expressly and exclusively) by the Chapel Royal
(though had he said so, you would hardly make your part against him) but that
they are to precedent themselves by the mother Churches. Finding such store of
Spanish, French, Italian, Greek, and Latin cited in your Margin, only out of
a poor ambition to show your store: I need not doubt but you can understand a
piece of English. Read me this therefore which occurres in the 6. Paragraph of
the second Section, C^al. p. 27.
immediately upon these words, Without the which perhaps we had before this
been at a loss amongst our selves for the whole form and fashion of divine
service. For there it follows, And therefore if it be so in the Chapels and
Cathedral Churches, as the Epistoler does acknowledge, it is a pregnant
argument that so it ought to be in the Parochials, which herein ought to
precedent and conform themselves, according to the pattern of the Mother
Churches. The Mother Churches, note you that; not the Mother Chapels. So that
you might as well have saved your needless disputation, about the inward and
the outward motion of the Princes mind; as those most trivial, and indeed
undutifull inferences which you make upon it, I have heard often of a mother
Church, but now behold a mother Chapel, p. 42. and worse than that, Teach not
the daughter therefore against all antiquity, to jet it out before the mother,
p. 37. you might have also spared you page 35, 36, 37.
several observations of publishing the new Missall by Pope Pius Quintus, not
at the sacred Chapel, but S. Peter's Church; the merry case, (or, as you
should have called it, the ridiculous case) of S. Martins hood; the distinct
service in the Chapels of Salamanca, from those that are in Parish Churches;
the several uses of singing service in this Church, the ancient courses in
some others. All these are only toys to take up the time with, and conclude
nothing to the purpose which we have in hand, as they confute not any thing
that the Doctor says. Yet since you speak so despicably of his Majesty's
Chapel, and the use thereof; page 36.
as one that never heard till now the use of the Chapel: I trust you will not
say that the Kings Chapel is set out in a contrary way, to that required in a
law of the Kings own making; or that the constant usage of the Chapels in
this particular, since the first making of that law, may not be thought to be a
good Interpreter of the law it self. You know the old saying well enough, that
praxis sanctorum, est interpres praeceptorum. And therefore being it has been
still, as now it is, in K. Edwards Chapel, whom the page 114.
judicious divine, Mr. Hooker calls Edward the Saint, and Queen Elizabeth's,
and of K. James, and of his Majesty now living, (whom God long preserve) whom
your self have honored with the style of Saint: We may conclude, that the
Kings Chapel in this kind, or the Kings practice in his Chapel, may be,
and is the best Interpreter of those Rubricks, Laws, and Canons, which you
elsewhere speak of. Nor could you preach a worse, though perhaps no more
welcome doctrine to your dear disciples, than that his Majesty's Chapel is
not ordered as it ought to be: who presently might make this use thereof, that
they would be as little careful to observe the law in their several Parishes.
Regis ad exempl^m. You know right well what follows, though you will not follow
it. If therefore the Communion table do stand Altar-wise in his Majesty's
Chapel, as most sure it does; and that it be a sin against many precepts,
to doubt or whisp^r, but that the King does wisely and religiously in it, as p.
34. you say it is: why should not that give law to the Parish-Churches; or why
should you debar them from a conformity with that, which seems so wisely and
religiously done, in the Chapel Royal? Here is a riddle indeed, if you talk
of riddles.

Having been bold, (as never any man was more) with his Majesty's Chapel, you
cannot leave off so, but you must have a fling at Qu: Elizabeth, and hers: and
page 37.
wish the Doctor had not named at all the beginning of Qu: Elizabeth. For then
say you, therewas an Altar in the Chapel, and the very old mass officiated
thereupon. The very old Mass? What is your meaning? I hope you do not think,
though you speak suspiciously, that that which has been since officiated
thereupon, is a Mass too, though somewhat newer Missale Anglicanum, in Alt.
Damasc. p. 716.
; the English Mass, as your good friends the Puritans have been pleased to
call it. Nor need you be so sorry for nameing the beginning of Queen Elizabeth,
as if you would have passed it over with a So it pour non dict, for fear the
Doctor (of whose credit you are very careful) should be suspected for some
hopes of having the old Mass set up again: as p. 51. you tell him what great
hope he has, of having one day an Altar and a sacrifice for joy of his
diagram. The Doctor speaks not of placing the Communion table, so as it stood
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth; but says C^al. p. 51.
that in the Chapel Royal it has so stood as now it does, since the
beginning of Queen Elizabeth: i. e. for 80. years together without
interruption or alteration. In the beginning of her reign, and ever since the
beginning of her reign; are two different things: and this you could not but
observe, but that you had a mind to quarrel with that excellent Lady; for
which I trow, your brethren, who now so much adore her memory, will conn you
little thanks in private. For whereas that most excellent Lady followed
therein the practice of her brother Vide Bish: Hoopers 3. Sermon on Jonah,
before K. Edw.
King Edw. 6. and kept her Chapel up in that form and order as was most fit
both for the decency of Gods public service, and the magnificence of her own
royal State: we are now told that this was done page 38. in marg.
Pour flatter les Catholics, and les Princes estrangers, only to flatter with
the Catholics, (this flattering with the Catholics, you very cunningly left
out in your translation) and with foreign Princes. Nay, if Du Chesne may be
believed (or rather if you may be believed that belie Du Chesne) all this was
done, not out of piety, but policy: Ibid. in marg.
Et par my cette innovation laissa plusieurs chooses qu'elle jugea
indifferentes, come les Orgues, les Ornaments d'eglise, quoy que plus pour
police que pour religion: as you cite the words. Andre du Chesne, an honester
man than you, tells us no such matter. For having named the Organs and
Ornaments of the Church, Histoire d' Angleterre l. 21.. 10.
he brings in Music, the names and dignities in the Ecclesiastical
Hierarchy, Archbishops, Bishops, Canons of Churches, Curates, Priests and
Deacons, as also Lent, and abstinence from flesh on Fridayes and Saturdayes.
Then adds, what you have made him say of Organs, and the Church Ornaments,
(and not the Ornaments of her Chapel only) that this was done plus pour
police, que pour religion, more for policy than religion. Which words, if you
observe him well, are not to be referred to all that went before (for then
Archbishops, Bishops, Priests and Deacons had been retained only in point of
policy) but to the keeping of Lent and other fasting days. Wherein du Chesne
has spoke no more than what is extant in the Statute of 5. Eliz. cap. 5. where
it is said expressly, that the forbearing of flesh was meant only politickly,
for the increase of fishermen and mariners, etc. Or if you think, as I do,
that he did not consult the Statute for it; then out of doubt, he borrowed it
from Inlib. 3.
Sanders de schismate Anglicano, where it is said terminis terminantibus, in
this case of Lent, and fasting days, and in this only, Non religionis, sed
publici tantum commodi causa hoc ipsum mandari. Your other Frenchman, the
freedom of whose language you so much commend, took his hint from the same
hand also: and you are but a Doctor Slanders, to join with him and them in any
thing, which tends to the dishonor of so brave a Lady. This said, you wheel
about to fetch another blow at the Queens Altar, placing a crucifixe on the
same, (which stood there but a little while) and then demand whether the Parish
Churches were to take pattern by this, when as not any of the subjects might
in their private houses possess a crucifixe. For proof of which you cite the
45. Article of etc. for the Regal visitation, viz. page 39.
Whether you know any that keep in their houses, any undefaced Images, tables,
pictures, and cut off all the rest with an etc. Read on then, pictures,
paintings, and other Monuments of fained and false miracles, pilgrimages,
Idolatry, and superstition, and do adore them. Voyla Monsieur, not the
possessing, but the adoring of the cruci^ixe, was enquired into. Welfare the
Frenchmen yet, who I leave him to my Margin, where he shall find two or three
Frenchmen, who out of the freedom of the nation, will be sure, parler ^out,
etc. p. 39.
out of the freedom of their nation, will be sure, parler tout, and conceal
nothing that ever they heard of. You have a more retentive faculty, and you
make your best of it. Your next quotation, that Images of Christ be not only
defects, but also lies, for which you vouch the Homily against the peril of
Idolatry, is (...) dictum, nothing unto the point in hand; but that you are a
venturous gamester, and love to have at all, whatsoever it cost you. For if you
take the reason of the Homily with you, part 3. p. 42
which is, that of the Godhead which is the most excellent part of Christ, no
Image can be made: it will appear that in the meaning of the Homily, the
images or picture of a mortal man, may not be only called a defect, but a lie
also; because no picture can be made of the soul, which is the most excellent
part of the whole man. But either speak more unto the purpose, or else hold
your peace.

The Doctors 2. Argument, (according as you please to new mould his book) is
taken (you say) from the Queens Injunctions; more pertinently, page 40.
you confess, than was the former from the Queens Chapel, but that it has
not any solidity to rest upon. Why so* Do not the Queens Injunctions say,
I^junct. for Tables in the Church.
that if the Altar were took down (which they commanded not) the holy Table
should be decently made and set in the place where the Altar stood, and there
commonly covered as thereto belongs. Yes, but you say, page 41.
there follows somewhat which this false fingred Gentleman left out, viz. and
as shall be appointed by the Visitors: Thereupon you conclude that placing and
adorning of the table was referred to the Commissioners, who in their Orders,
tertio of the Q^eene, appointed That the table should stand where the steps
within the Quires and Chancels stood, and should be covered with silk or
buckram: and having said so, wind your horn, And there, if you be a good
Hunts man, you may wind your horn, and blow the fall of that Injunction. p.
41.
and blow the fall of the Injunction. In all this there is no solidity, and as
little truth. Those words, and as shall be appointed by the Visitors, relate
not to the placing of the table, which was determined of in the Injunction, but
to the covering of the same, wherein the said Injunctions had determined
nothing. For mark the words; The holy Table in every Church shall be decently
made, and set in the place where the Altar stood; What more? and there commonly
covered as thereto belongs, and as shall be appointed by the Visitors; and so
to stand, saving when the Communion of the Sacrament is to be distributed, etc.
What think you now? what is referred unto the Visitors, the placing of the
table, or the covering only? Not the placing surely, as you find in the last
period of the said Injunction; viz. And after the Communion done, from time to
time (not till the Visitours should determine otherwise) the same holy Table to
be placed where it stood before. Then for the Orders of the year 1561. can you
find any thing in them that crosses the Injunction? Take the whole Order as
it lies, and then wind your horn. Orders taken the 10. day of Oct. etc. Order
4.
It is ordered also, that the steps which be as yet at this day remaining in
any Cathedral, Collegiate, or Parish Church, be not stirred or altered, but be
suffered to continue. And if in any Chancell the steps be transposed, that they
be not erected again, but that the steps be decently paved, where the
Communion Table shall stand out of the times of receiving the Communion, having
thereon a fair linen cloth, with some covering of silk, buckram, or other
such like^ for the clean ^^^ping of the said cloth. No order here, for
altering the Communion table from that place and posture in which it had been
situated by the Queens Injunction: or that it should stand where the steps
within the Quires or Chancels stood; much less, as you have made it in your
falsified Copy of the Bishops letter; where the steps to the Altar formerly
stood: as if they would not have it stand close along the wall, but near unto
the steps, and so from the wall, as you thence most shamefully collect. Now
whereas it is appointed further in the said Orders, Order 5.
that there be fixed upon the wall over the said Communion board, the tables of
Gods precepts imprinted for the said purpose; or as in the Advertisements
partly for due or^er, etc. Printed. 1584. p. A. 4. 2.
advertisements of An. 1564. upon the East-wall over the said table: the Doctor
laying all together conclud^d thus, that being the table was (by the
Injunction) to be placed where the Altar stood, above the steps, (as by the
Orders,) and under the Commandments (as by the Orders and Advertisements;)
therefore it was to stand all along the wall. Against this you have nothing to
reply, but bold conjectures. page 42.
Why not as well in the place of the steps, and endwise to the wall? and page 43.
why not the Commandments over the Communion board, that is, in some higher
place where they may be seen, although the table stand in the midst of the
Quire? and why not page 43.
over the Communion table, that is, over the end of the table? I see you are
excellent at Tick tack, as you have been always, and will not let a why not
pass, if it come in your way. But this is, as Domitian said of S^neca's style,
Arena ^ine calce; and hangs together, as we say in the English proverb, like
pebbles in a with. But so, it seems, you will not leave us. You have another
answer to the Queens Injunction, touching the setting of the table in the
place where the Altar stood: which is, that it might stand above the steps with
the end Eastward, and the side Northward, and page 44.
yet obey the words of the Injunction, and be in the place where the Altar
stood. How so? Because, say you, the Injunction was directed to her Majesty's
subjects, not to her Mathematicians, and therefore was more likely to use the
term of a common and ordinary, than a proper and Mathematical place. And so
the place of the Altar, in this Injunction, is not all and in all dimensions,
but some part only of the room which the Altar filled. I gather by your style,
you are some great body, some Minister, as the License styles you; and doubt
not but you have many servants, although not many Mathematicians, attending on
you. And let me put you a familiar case, this once. It is a thing I use not
often. Suppose you have an old side-board, or Court-cupboard standing in your
dining room; and you command your servants (being no Mathematicians, suppose
that too) to take the said old side-board, or Court-cupboard away, and set
another in the place: If he should set it end-wise, where the other stood
side-wise, would not your blood be up, and your black staff about his ears?
Your difference out of Aristotle between (...) and (...), serves for nothing
here, more than to make a show, and to deceive poor people that understand it
not. And yet in confidence of the cause, you tell the Doctor, that page 45.
for the great pains he has taken, with his line and level, in finding out
the place where the Altar stood; he might have spared it all against the
building of a new Pigeon-house. Horat.
Naturam expellas furca licet; I see there is a profaneness in your bones, which
will never out. Never did man speak of sacred things, with so little reverence.
Dressers, and Pigeon houses, and whatsoever scandalous conceit comes next to
hand, we are sure to heareof. It would do better, as I take it, if when you
write next of a sacred argument, some boy or other might cry out to you, as
heretofore the Priest did when he was to sacrifice, Virgil.
Procul hinc, procul esto profane. And so much for your first and second
answers, to the Queens Injunction.

Now for the 3. in which you have disposed the flower of all your Army, your
very Ianizaries, you tell us with like confidence, that page 47.
if by these Injunctions, the table was to stand where the Altar stood; then
should the said Injunctions vary from the rites, which but few days before had
been prescribed by Parliament, to be used in the book of Common Prayers. How
prove you that? Marry say you, the Minister appointed to read the Communion,
is directed to read the Commandments, not at the end, but the North side of
the table, which implies the end to be placed toward the East great window. 2.
It was practiced so in K. Edwards time, as is (not proved, but) endeavored to
be proved out of the troubles at Francofurt. 3. Because it is very likely that
Cox, Grindall, and Whitehead ( being half the number of the per^sers of the
Liturgi^ which was to be confirmed in the Parliament following) would observe
that ceremony in placing the Communion Table, which themselves abroad, and at
home had formerly practiced. These are the Arguments we must trust to, to
confirm the point; but these will not do it: for they are only say-soes, and
no proofs at all; and might as justly be denied by us, as venturously affirmed
by you. But we will scan them severally, beginning first with that comes last,
and so proceeding ascendendo, until all be answered. First then, Cox, Grindall
and Whitehead, made not up half the number of the Perusers of the Liturgy.
The Author whom you cite, Camden in Eliz. An. 1558.
names us eight in all, Parker, Bill, May, Cox, Grindall, Whitehead,
Pilkington, and Sir Thomas Smith; all joynt-Commissioners in the business. So
that unless it may be proved that three and three makes eight; (and if it may
be proved you are more cunning at Arithmetic, than in all the Mathematics
beside:) Grindall, and Cox, and Whitehead made not half the number. But let
that pass for once, how shall we know that they did place the Communion Table
end-long, both at home and abroad? For this we are directed to the troubles at
Francofurt, page 23. and 24. in which there is not any word that reflects that
way. All we find there, is the recital of a letter sent from the conformable
Englishmen at Strasburgh to the schismatic congregation of the Englishmen
in Francofurt, about reducing them unto the book of Common Prayers established
in the latter end of K. Edward 6. which letter was delivered to them, by Mr.
Grindall and Mr. Chambers, and signed by 16. of their hands, Grindals being
one; but not one word of Cox or Whitehead. Or grant this too, that Grindall,
Cox and Whitehead placed their Communion table, end-long, when they were
abroad, and might be fearful of offending those amongst whom they lived: yet
would it be no good conclusion, that therefore they appointed it should be so
here, where they were safe and out of danger; and had the countenance of the
Q^eene, who liked old orders very well, for their encouragement. You saw this
well enough, and therefore dare not say it for a certain, but It being very
like, that Cox, G^^nd^ll, etc. p^g. 47.
a likely matter: and likelihoods, I trow, (except it be for you) are no
demonstrations. This said, your second argument about the practice in K.
Edwards time, endeavored to be proved from the troubles at Francofurt, is
already answered: Your poor Which the writer of the ^etter ind^avoured to
prove. page 46.
endeavors, and your simple likely-ho^ds may well go together. Nor is there
any thing in all that relation, which concerns this practice; more than a
summary of the orders in K. Edwards book drawn up by Knox and others of that
crew, to be sent to Calvin; by his determinat^ sentence to stand or fall: where
it is only said, that the Minister is to stand at the North-side of the table.
Which being a recital only of the Rubric in the Common Prayer book, makes
but one Argument with the first; or helps, God wott, but very poorly for the
proof of that. But where you knock it on the head, with saying that the
placing of the table end-long, with one end toward the East great window, was
the last situation of that table in K. Edwards time; and call page 47, 48.
Miles Huggard for a witness: most sure Miles Huggard tells you no such matter.
Displaying o^ Protestants. An. 1556. p. 81.
For thus says Miles. How long were they learning to set their table, to
minister the said Communion upon? First they placed it aloft, where the high
Altar stood. Then must it be set from the wall that one might go between: the
Ministers being in contention on whether part to turn their faces, either
toward the West, the North, or South. Some would stand westward, some
northward, some southward. How say you now? Does Miles say any thing of
placing the table end-long? No point. He says it was removed from the wall
where at first it stood, that one might go between the said wall and it; and
so I hope it might standing North and South: but that it was placed endlong,
not one word says Miles.

Your outworks being taken in, come we unto the fort it self, the Rubric:
where it is said, the Minister standing at the North-side of the Table, shall
say the Lords Prayer. The Doctor answered this before in his Coal from the
Altar, viz. Coal, p. 23.
That being in all quadrangular and quadrilaterall figures there were four
sides, though commonly the narrower sides be called by the name of ends: the
Minister standing at the north-end of the table, does perform the Rubric, the
table standing in the place where the Altar stood; as well as standing at the
North-side, in case it stood with one end toward the East great window. And
this he did conceive the rather* because that in the Common Prayer book done
into Latin, by the command, and authorized by the great Seal of Qu. Eliz. it
is thus translated, Ad cujus mensae Septentrionalem partem, Minister stans, or
abit orationem dominicam; that the Minister standing at the North-part of the
table shall say the Lords Prayer. This is the sum of his discourse: what
reply make you? First, entering on a vain discourse, touching the raptures of
the soul, when it is thoroughly plunged in the study of the Mathematics, and
therein showing your notorious ignorance, in mis-reporting the inventions of
Archimed^s and Pythagoras, which we will tell you of hereafter; you fall on
this at last for the maine of your answer. page 52.
Loquendum est cum vulgo, when we speak to the people of a side, we must take
a side as they take it; and that the Doctor was too blame to dispute out of
Geometry against custom, and that with people which are no Geometricians: page
49.
Poor subjects that are penally to obey Laws and Canons, not being to be
spoken to according to the Rules of Art. page 53.
You tell us further, that every Art has to it self its own words of art,
and thereupon produce an Epitaph on the Chanter of Langres, full of odd
musical notes, and pretty crotchets in that chanting faculty. And with another
tale page 57.
of Euclide, and certain Diagrams drawn in the sand by the Egyptians; advise
the Doctor to remember, that the Rubric was written for the use of the
English, and not of the Gyps^es. Of all this, there is little that requires an
answer, consisting all of flourishes, and fencing-tricks; but not one handsome
ward to keep off a blow. For speak man, was that Rubric written for the
Laity, or for the Clergy; for the poor subjects, as you call them, or a
learned Ministry? I trust you are not come so far, as to believe that every
Cobbler, Tailor, or other Artizan, may take his turn, and minister at the holy
Altar: though you have something here and there, which without very favorable
Readers may be so interpreted. If so, as so it was, the Rubric being only
made for the direction of the Clergy, and amongst those the Ministers of
Lincoln Diocese, (whom I presume you neither will nor can condemn of so much
ignorance:) why do you talk so idly of poor subjects that are penally to
obey laws and Canons, and ignorant people that are not to be spoken (...) by
Rules of Art?

But this, it seems, has been your recreation only. For page 55.
not to dally with us longer, you tell the Doctor, that learned men in these
very particular ceremonies, which we have in hand, have appropriated the word
sides to the long, and the word end, to the short length of an oblong square.
This, if well done, is worth the seeing: and how prove you this? Gregory the
13. who had about him all the best Mathematicians in Europe, when he renewed
(or changed) the Calendar, does call them so in his Po^tificall. Non sequitur.
This is the strangest sequel that I ever heard of. Nor can it possibly hold
good, unless it had been said withal, that in the setting out the said
Pontifical, he had consulted with those Mathematicians, in this very thing, by
whose advise and counsel he renewed the Calendar. And be that granted too:
what then? Why then say you, in his Pontifical he makes no more sides of an
Altar, ^han of a man, to wit, a right side, and a left side; calling the lesser
squares, the anterior and posterior part thereof. For proof of this, you cite
him thus: Et thuri^icat Altar undique ad dextrum and sinistrum latus, page
144. And then again, in anteriori and posteriori part Altaris, page 142. of
your Edition, Venet. 1582. being in mine of Paris, 1615. page 232. and 247. But
clearly this makes good what the Doctor says. For the anteriour part must
needs be that at which the Priest stands when he does officiate; which by
their order, is with his face to the East: and the posteriour, that which is
next the wall, which page 183. you call the backside of the Altar. And then it
must needs be, that the two sides thereof, as they are called in the
Pontifical, must be the North-end, and the South-end, which justifies
directly the Doctors words, when he affirms Coal from the Altar. p. 24.
that the Rubric, (according to the meaning and intent thereof) is as well
fulfilled by the Minister, standing at the North end of the Table, placed along
the wall, as at the north side of the same standing toward the window. I hope
you have no cause to brag of this discovery. That which comes after, concerns
the translation of the book of Common prayer, page 56.
by Walter Haddon, as you conjecture: which you except against, as recommended
to a few Colleges, and not unto the Church of England: and yet acknowledging
in your margin, that it was recommended unto all the Colleges, which are the
Seminaries, no doubt, of the Church of England. 2. That it never was confirmed
by Act of Parliament, or by K. James his Proclamation; but take notice of the
authorizing thereof under the great Seal of Qu. Elizabeth, no less effectual
for that purpose than a Proclamation. 3. That in that translation page 57.
the Calendar is full of Saints, and some of them got into red scarlet; which
howsoever it may cast some scandal on the Queen, (whom you have a stitch at)
is nothing to the prejudice of that translation of the Rubric. 4. That Dr
Whitaker, when he was a young man, was set by his Uncle, the Deane of Paul's, to
translate it again into Latin, which makes you think that other version was
either exhausted, or misliked. Misliked you cannot say, till you bring a
reason; and if it was so soon exhausted, it is a good argument that it was
well done, and universally received. Lastly, you fly to your old shift,
affirming, that those times considered, the Liturgy was translated rather to
comply with the foreign, than to reigle and direct the English Churches.
Which were it so, yet it makes nothing to this purpose. For whether it be pars
septentrionalis, the northern part, or latus septentrionale, the northern
side, it must be equally displeasing to the foreign Churches, (for you mean
only those of the Church of Rome) in which the Priest officiating is enjoined
to stand in medio Altaris, with his back toward the people; being a different
way from that prescribed the Minister in the Liturgy of the Church of England.
Certes you do but dally in all you say; and show your self a serious
trifler, but a sorry disputant.

Securi de salute, de gloria certemus Tacit. de vit. Agri^.
I must have one pull more with you about this Rubric; and since you give so
fair an hint, about the Statute which confirms it. The Parliament 1. of Qu.
Elizabeth began at Westminster, Ian. 23. An. 1558. and there continued till the
8. of May next following: in which there passed the Act, for uniformity of
Common prayer, and service of the Church, and administration of the Sacraments,
cap. 2. Together with this Act there passed another, inabling the Queen to
delegate what part she pleased, of her supreme power in Ecclesiasticis, to
such Commissioners as she should appoint, according to the form in that Act
laid down. Presently on the dissolving of the said Parliament, the Queen sets
out a book of Injunctions, as well to the Clergy, as to the Laity of this
Realm: in one of Injunct. for Tables in the Church.
which Injunctions, it is clear and evident, that howsoever in many and sundry
parts of the Realm, the Altars of the Churches were removed, and Tables placed
for the administration of the Sacrament: yet in some other places the Altars
were not then removed, upon opinion of some other order to be taken by her
Majesty's Visitours. This put together, I would feign have leave to ask this
question: The Rubric ordering that the Minister should stand at the north-side
of the Table, (there where tables were;) and in so many places of this
Kingdom, the Altars standing as before: where should the Minister stand to
discharge his duty? Not in the middle of the Altar, as was appointed in the
Liturgy of K. Edw. An. 1549. That was disliked and altered in the
Service-booke of the year 1542. confirmed this Parliament. Nor on the
North-side, as you call a side: for that supposes such a situation, as was not
proper to the Altar. Therefore it must be at the northern end, or narrower side
thereof, as before was said; or else no Service to be done, no Sacraments
administered. The Parliament was so far from determining any thing touching
the taking down of Altars, that a precedent Act 1 Mar. cap. 3. for punishment
of such as should deface them, was by them continued. This was left solely to
the Queen, the Metropolitan and Commissioners, to be done, o^ not done, as
might seem most convenient to them: and yet the Parliament confirmed that
Rubric for standing at the north side of the Table. And for the Queen, the Bp
yields it in his letter, that she and her Commissioners (or as your altered
Copy has it, she and her Counsel) were content the Altars should stand still
as before they did: the Injunction leaving it as a thing indifferent, and of no
great moment, so that the Sacrament be duly and reverently administered.
Neither did the Commissioners in their Visitation, determine any thing for
taking down of Altars, where they found them standing, that we can meet with
in their Orders of the year 1561. Nor need you stick at the word Table,
mentioned in the Rubric, confirmed in that Parliament, as if that did imply,
or intimate the necessary taking down of Altars. For you your self have told
us, that sacrifice and Altars being relatives, no sooner page 16.
was the sacrifice abolished, but these (call them what we will) are no more
Altars, but tables of stone and timber; in the Epistle to the Vicar. So then,
that which was once an Altar, when there was a sacrifice, (the sacrifice of the
Mass you mean) is now become a table only; whether of stone or timber, that is
no way material: and therefore standing as they did when the Act was made, the
Minister could not possibly officiate at the north-side, unless you call the
narrower end, a side, as the Doctor does; and as your self do, did you
understand your self, out of the Pontifical. Besides, the meaning of the Act
is to be considered, not the words alone: which was to fix the Minister to
some certain posture. For in K. Edwards first Liturgy, An. 1549. the Minister
was appointed, as before is said, to stand in medi^ Altaris, with his back
toward the people. After, when as the King had commanded to take down the
Altars, and to set up tables, then followed first a difference about the
situation of those Tables; some being placed like Altars, and some like tables,
according as we have it in the Acts and Monuments, part 2. page 700. Hereupon
followed that confusion which Miles Huggard speaks of amongst the Ministers
themselves: some standing northward, some southward, and some westward. For
remedy whereof, it was appointed in the second Liturgy, that he, the
Minister, should have some certain point, whereupon to fix: your self
affirming, page* 48.
that this contention was determined by the Rubric, still in force, for the
North-side of the Table. So that the meaning of the Rubric being only this,
to assign the Minister some certain point whereon to fasten his aspect, in
his officiating at the holy table* that meaning is as well complied withal, in
standing at the north or narrower side thereof, placed along the wall; as
standing at the longer side, with one e^d toward the East great window. Nay I
will go a little farther, and put it to consideration, (and no more than so)
whether the Rubric ordering that the Minister shall stand at the North side of
the Table, does not imply the Tables standing Altarwise, close along the wall,
if within the Chancell; and close to the partition, if within the Church. And I
propose it on this ground: Because in case it had been meant in the composure
of that Rubric, that the holy Table should stand endlong, and far off from
the wall, or the partition, the fittest posture for the Minister had been at
the East End thereof, with his face downwards, toward the people. Certain I
am, that in that posture he would be best both seen and heard of all the
Congregation, (better by far than standing at either side thereof either
north or south) which seems to be the thing most stood upon in the Bishops
letter to the Vicar. But I propose this only as a consideration; I affirm it
not.

Next, we must follow you to the third Argument of the Doctor, drawn from the
exercise of that supreme power in Ecclesiasticis, which is invested in the
King. For granting page 42.
that the King may command a greater matter of this nature, than that the Table
should be placed where the Altar stood: you only seem to doubt page 58.
whether his Majesty has any way declared his pl^asure* that he would have it
so or not. Before you asked the Doctor where the King commanded it, as if not
any thing but an express command, had the power to stir you: when other men,
as wise as you, have thought the intimations of a Prince, in matters The Bishop
entering into a discourse of the indifferency of this circumstance. p. 8.
of indifferent nature, (as you acknowledge this to be) sufficient inducements
for a subject to conform thereto. Now you have changed your style, and only
stand on the denial, that his most sacred Majesty has not in this case
declared his pleasure: you mean, perhaps, not so declared it, as that it
pleases you to obey his pleasure. The Doctor says Co^l, p. 63.
in brief, that his sacred Majesty has hereupon already declared his pleasure
in the case of S. Gregory's, and thereby given encouragement to the
Metropolitans, Bishops, and other Ordinaries, to require the like in all the
Churches committed to them. Your answer is as short, but not half so sweet,
page 58.
that it is most untrue, that his Majesty has declared in that Act, one word
of his pleasure hereupon: i. e. (as you expound your self) against the
contents of the Bishops letter. Most gravely spoken. What had his Majesty to
do with the Bishops letter, that he should signify his pleasure thereupon,
when as the merit of the same was not called in question? Aquila non capit
muscas, you know the proverb. The business then in question, was the standing
of the Table in S. Gregory's Church, which by the Ordinary there, was placed
Altar-wise: and his most sacred Majesty did thereupon declare his pleasure,
approving and confirming the Act of the said Ordinary. You challenge this as
most untrue, and presently fall foul on the poor man, for libelling against
the Bishop, malicious falsifying of his Authors in every page: and finally
(your own turn served) for coming to that height of impudency, as ponere os
in coelum, to outface heaven it self, and mis-report the justice of so divine
a Majesty. Why so? Because, say you, If we abstract from this Declaration,
(which the bold man has printed for an Act of Counsel) the allegations, which
he, the said bold fellow, calls the relations of both parties; and his
Majesty's just pleasure for the dissolving of the appeal: the remainder will
prove a full confirmation of the Bishops letter. If so, then Virgil.
frange leves calamos, and scinde Thalia libellos, the Doctor took much pains
to little purpose. And that it is so, you are peremptory, as in all things
else, because the Declaration tells us, That the liberty given by the Communion
book, or Canon, for placing the Communion Table in any Church or Chapel with
most conveniencie, is not to be understood, as if it were ever left to the
discretion of the Parish, much less to the particular fancy of any humorous
person, but to the judgment of the Ordinary, to whose place and function it
does properly belong to give direction in that point, both for the thing it
self, and for the time when and how long, as he may find cause. These are his
Maties words indeed, mentis aureae verba bractcata, as you rightly call them:
but they oppose not any thing that the Doctor says. You find not in the
Doctor, that the placing of the holy table, or the interpreting of those Canons
and Rubricks which concern it, was either left to the discretion of the
Parish, or to the particular fancy of any humorous person in the same: which
is the only thing which that part of his Majesty's Declaration does relate
unto. That which the Doctor says is this, that by the declaration of his
Majesty's pleasure in that present business, there was encouragement given to
the Metropolitans, Bishops, and other Ordinaries to do the like: i. e. to
place the holy table in the several Churches committed to them, as it was
placed in S. Gregory's by the Ordinary thereof. This I am sure, his Majesty's
words, which you applaud so, do not contradict. And on the other side, that
the whole Declaration laid together, gives that encouragement to the
Ordinaries, which the Doctor speaks of, you might plainly see; but that you
had no mind that any Ordinary should be encouraged to so good a work; which
you deride and scorn throughout your book, as shall be shown more fully in the
next Chapter. Mean time, that all the world may see, how wilfully you shut your
eyes, and stop your ears, against whatever is contained therein, which you
like not of; I will once more set down the said Declaration, and after, gather
thence some few observations, either to cure you of your wilfulness, or to
shame you for it.

At White Hall the third day of November, 1633.
Present, the Kings most excellent Majesty. L^: Arch B. of Cant. Lo: Keeper.
Lo: Arch B. of York. Lo: Treasurer. Lo: Privy Seal. Lo: D. of Lennox. Lo:
High Chamberlain. E. Marshall. Lo: Chamberlain. E. of Bridgwater. E. of
Carlisle. Lo: Cottington. M. Treasurer. M. Comptroller. M. Secretary Cook. M.
Secretary Windebank.
THis day was debated before his Majesty sitting in Counsel, the question and
difference which grew about the removing of the Communion table in S. Gregory's
Church, near the Cathedral Church of S. Paul, from the middle of the Chancell
to the upper end, and there placed Altar^wise, in such manner as it stands in
the said Cathedral and Mother Church, (as also in all other Cathedrals, and in
his Majesty's own Chapel) and as is consonant to the practice of approved
Antiquity. Which removal and placing of it in that sort, was done by order
from the Deane and Chapter of S. Paul's, who are Ordinaries thereof, as was
avowed before his Majesty by Dr. King, and Dr. Montfort, two of the Prebends
there. Yet some few of the Parishioners, being but five in number, did
complain of this Act by Appeal to the Court of Arches, pretending that the
book of Common Prayer, and the 82. Canon, do give permission to place the
Communion table, where it may stand with most fitness and convenience. Now his
Majesty having heard a particular relation made by the Counsel of both parties
of all the carriage and proceedings in this cause, was pleased to declare his
dislike of all Innovation, and receding from ancient constitutions, grounded
upon just and warrantable reasons, especially in matters concerning
Ecclesiastical order and government, knowing how easily men are drawn to
affect novelties, and how soon weak judgments in such cases may be
over-taken and abused. And he was also pleased to observe, that if those few
Parishioners might have their wills, the difference thereby from the foresaid
Cathedral mother Church, by which all other Churches depending thereon ought
to be guided, would be the more notorious, and give more subject of discourse
and disputes that might be spared, by reason of S. Gregory's standing close to
the wall thereof. And likewise for so much as concerns the liberty given by the
said Common book or Canon, for placing the Communion table in any Church or
Chapel with most convenience: that liberty is not so to be understood, as if
it were ever left to the discretion of the Parish, much less to the particular
fancy of any humorous person, but to the judgment of the Ordinary to whose
place and function it does properly belong to give direction in that point,
both for the thing it self, and for the time, when and how long, as he may
find cause. Upon which consideration his Majesty declared himself, That he
well approved and confirmed the Act of the said Ordinary, and also gave
command, that if those few Parishioners before mentioned, do proceed in their
said appeal, then the Dean of the Arches (who was then attending at the
hearing of the cause) shall confirm the said Order of the aforesaid Deane and
Chapter.

This is the Declaration of his sacred Majesty, faithfully copyed out of the
Registers of his Counsell-Table. Out of the which I do observe, first, that
the Ordinary did de facto, remove the Communion Table from the middle of the
Chancell, and place it Altar wise at the upper end. Secondly, that in the doing
of it, they did propose unto themselves, the pattern not alone of their own
Cathedral mother Church, but of all other Cathedralls, and his Majesty's
Chapel; and therewithal the practice of approved Antiquity. Thirdly, that
his most excellent Majesty upon the hearing of the business, declaring his
dislike of all Innovations, did yet approve the order of the Ordinary; which
shows, that he conceived it not to be any variance from the ancient
constitutions of this Church. Fourthly, that all Parochial Churches ought to
be guided by the pattern of the Mother Church, upon the which they do depend.
Fifthly, that not the people, but the Ordinary, is to interpret as well the
R^brick as the Canon, touching the most convenient placing of the holy table.
Sixthly, that i^ pertains to the place and function of the Ordinary to give
directions in that kind, both for the thing it self (how it shall stand) and
for the time, when and how long, (it shall so stand) as he finds occasion.
And last of all, that notwithstanding any thing that was objected from the said
Canon and Communion book, his Majesty did well approve the Act of the said
Ordinary; and not approve it only, but confirm it too: giving command to the
Deane of the Arches, that he should finally and judicially confirm the same,
if the appeal were followed by the said Parishioners. This is, I trow, a
Declaration of his Majesty's pleasure; not only in relation to the present
case, that of S. Gregory's then and there by him determined; but to all others
also of the same nature. He that so well approved that Act of the Deane and
Chapter of S. Paul's; would questionless approve the like in another Ordinary.
^or being the case is one, the Chappells Royal still the same, the Mother
Churches no less to be followed by the Parochials in one place than others:
why should you think the sentence or decision should be different? Or if you
think this Declaration of his Majesty's pleasure is no encouragement to other
Ordinaries, to bring the Parish-Churches to conform with the Cathedrals in
this particular; because his Majesty does not say, in terms express, that he
would also very well approve the like in all other Ordinaries: you do
notoriously bewray, either your ignorance or wilfulness, or some worse
condition. For know you not that Maxim in the Civil laws, Cod. l. 1. (...).
14. l. 1^.
Sententia Principis jus dubium declarans, jus facit quoa^ omnes? or that the
Civil Lawyers say, Rex solus judicat de causa a jure non definita? If not,
consult that learned case of the Post-nati, stated by the Lord Chancellor
Egert^n, page 107. whom you have elsewhere cited, and must need have seen.
The Declaration of the Kings pleasure, what ever you think of it, is no
trivial matter: and that not only in such things as he shall command, but
such as he allows of, confirms, and sets his approbation on them. The book
of Just. Instit. lib. 1.
Institutes, if you went no further, could tell you somewhat to this purpose:
Where it is said, (construe it as you list your self) Quodcunque Imperator per
epistolam constituit, vel cognoscens decrevit, (N. B.) legem esse constat: and
is to stand for good in whatsoever case and business of the same nature;
unless it be in personal matters of praemium and poe^a, and such like. Regal
decisions in this kind, are like the ruled cases (as they call the^) in the
Common law; or the Responsa prudentum, the judgments and determinations of the
Reverend Sages in that profession, extant in their Reports, Terme-bookes, and
Commentaries: First made in reference to the cause which was then before them,
but of authority (as the least directive) in all other business of the like
condition, till overruled in open Court by equal both authority and
judgment. And it is a good rule in such bouts as this, Post-nati. page 41.
De similibus ad similia iudicium and argumentatio recipiuntur. Last of all,
for the Canon laws, (that you may see how much all laws condemn you for your
obstinate folly) what is the whole body of the Decretals (one of the greatest
parts thereof) but a collection of particular Rescripts and decisions made by
several Popes, upon particular and emergent cases? which being so made, are
still remaining on record as judgments, sentences, or decisions for all and
every cases of the like condition; Volentes igitur ut hac tantum compilatione
omnes utantur, in judiciis and in scholis, as in the Proeme to the work. This
is, I trust, enough to shield the Doctor from your fury, for saying only that
by this Declaration of his Majesty's pleasure, in that one particular, the
Metropolitans, Bishops, and other Ordinaries had no small encouragement, to
reduce private Parish Churches to an uniformity with their Cathedral. Against
the which, as you have not one word to say, but your own ipse dixit, that it
is untrue; and your own mecum st^tui, that nothing shall persuade you to the
contrary, as long as Mr. Alderman of Gr: and the good people of the Diocese
are not pleased withal: so might we well have saved this labor, and left you
to the singularity of your sullen humor. And so I leave you for this time;
only, I cannot choose but marvel why you should lay such impudency to the
Doctors charge, for page 58.
misreporting the Justice of so divine a Majesty; which he reports in the same
words he found it copied forth unto him; or calling him bold fellow, for
printing it for an Act of Counsel, being a Declaration of his Majesty's
pleasure at the Counsel board, and which you call an Act your self, in the
self-same page: or finally correcting him, for saying the Relation of both
parties, not the Allegation; when as the word Relation only is in his copy of
the Act. Had he dealt so with you, you would have called him half a dozen
times, Animal pugnacissimum, Gander, Common Barretter; and I know not what: you
being in this case like the Cock, that is well fed with Garlic before the
fight, who seeks to over-match his Adversary, rather with rankness of breath,
than strength of body.

CHAP. III.
Of the Episcopal authority in points of Ceremony; the piety of the times,
and good work in hand; and of the Evidence produced from the Acts and
Monuments.
The Minister of Linc* arts and aims, in the present business. Dangerous
grounds laid by the Minister of Linc: for overt^rowing the Episcopal and
Regal power. Cap. 3.
He misreports the meaning of the Council of Nice, to satisfy his private
spleen. The Minister of Linc: overthrowes his own former grounds by new
superstructures; protests in a thing against his conscience. Charge the
Doctor with such things as he finds not in him. Denies that any one thing may
have two known and proper names; therefore that the Communion table may not be
called an Altar also; and for the proof thereof does falsify his own
authorities. The Doctor falsified again, about the Canons of the year 1571.
The Minister beholding to some Archdeacons for his observations. Their
curtalling of the Bishops power, in moving or removing the Communion table, to
advance their own. The piety of the times, and the good work in hand,
declared, and defended against the impious and profane derision of the Minister
of Linc: The testimonies of Fryth, and Lambert, taken out of the Acts and
Monuments, cleared from the ^avils of the Minister of Linc: The Minister of
Linc: ^uts off the words of Lambert, Fox, Philpot, and Bishop Latimer, and
falsifieth most foulely the Acts and Monuments: Corrects the Statute and the
Writ about the Sacrament of the Altar: Pl^^ds poorly for the Bishop of
Lincoln and Deane of Westminster, in the matter of Oyster-boards and Dressers:
and falls imp^rtinently foul on the Bishop of Norwich.

SVnt quos curriculo pulverem Olympicum Collegisse i^vat, etc. Horat. Carm. 1.
lib. 1.
For still I follow him up and down in his own fancies. The Poet tells us of
some men that had a great delight in the Olympic exercises, in hope to win
the prizes which were there proposed. Our Somebody, some Minister, some I know
not who, has an itch that way; a great desire to get the prize; and I cannot
blame him. Terrarum Dominos evehit ad deos? What? to be hoysted up by the
common people, as a man more than mortal, one so like the gods, that it is
hard to say whether he or Jupiter be the better man? Who would not venture a
fall, to find such applause? especially considering with what ^ase it may be
attained. And certainly in two things he is very like them. For he does only
raise a dust, colligere pulverem, as the Poet has it, and labor what he can
evitare metam, to shoot as wide as it is possible from the mark he aims at:
not caring (so he look like some furious driver, and make his chariot wheels
run on, and rattle,) how it succeeds with him in the maine of the Argument. In
the last Chapter, as he tells us, he has page 60. 61.
reduced into a body all the Regal; and in this, all the Ecclesiastical
power, which the poor fellow, whosoever he was that wrote the Coal from the
Altar, conceived to be any way opposite to his Lordships letter. In doing
which, and patching up a broken Cento, out of particular and (by him)
dismembered passages, collected here and there tumultuously from the Doctors
book; he raises such a filthy dust, that one can hardly see what it is he
aims at; and yet he may come off the better, if he miss his mark. However
having undertaken him, we must do our best, to blow away this dust, and clear
the passage, that every one may see his courses, and what poor shifts he uses
to attain the prize he so much longs for. The Doctor says in several
places of his book, that the Ordinary, of his own authority, may, if he
please, appoint the Communion Table to stand Altar-wise: that his most sacred
Majesty has given encouragement to the Bishops and other Ordinaries so to do,
in his decision of the case about S. Gregory's: and therefore as the case then
stood with the Doctors friend, being it was exacted of his Ordinary, it did
require more of his obedience, than his curiosity. Otherwise should all men be
so affected as to demur on the commands of their Superiors, in matters of
exterior order and public government, till they are satisfied in the grounds
and reasons of the said commands; or should they fly off from their duty, at
sight of every new device that was offered to them; there would soon be a
speedy dissolution both of Church and State. And to that purpose there was used
a speech from Tacitus, Hist. l. 1.
viz. Si ubi ^ubeantur quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio imperium
etiam intercidit. So far you cite him rightly, (which I wonder at, being a
fault you are not guilty of too often) save that you left out that of every new
device, there mentioned: as loath to be conceived Whereas indeed he is but a
Divine of inv^ntion, etc. p. 1.
a Divine of invention; affecting as you do, to be accounted one of judgment.
What you reply to this we shall forthwith see: that which concerns the
encouragement given to the Bishops and other Ordinaries, by his sacred Mtie,
first being wiped off in this short parenthesis page 61.
the contrary whereof you have showed in the precedent Chapter. Short work,
believe me, you have as ready a way to confute an Adversary, as he that
undertook to confute the Cardinal, with these two words, Mentiris Bellarmine.
But since you do appeal to your performance in that Chapter, we must observe
your method also, (being you are so good an Artist) and ^ell you with more
truth, though not more words, that I have shown the contrary in the former
Chapter, to that which you affirm in this so bravely.

Your answer to the next is more, but not more material. The Doctor told you
that the Ordinary of his own authority, might (if he pleased) appoint the
Communion table to be set up in the place where the Altar stood, and there
placed Altar-wise as in the Mother Churches, and the Cappels Royal. And he had
good authority, he thought, for what he said; His sacred Majesty having so
declared it in the decision of the case about S. Gregory's: affirming then and
there, that it properly belongs to the place and function of the Ordinary, to
give direction in that point, both for the thing it self, and for the time,
when and how long, as he may find cause. O mentis aureae verba bracteata, page
59.
His Majesty's Rescript fit to be written in plates of gold, is this, and this
only, concerning the point of controversy. However you applaud not His
Majesty's approbation and confirmation of what was done by the Deane and
Chapter of S. Paul's, in the case there handled; as crossing ex diametro your
own resolutions: yet this particular clause you have selected for an Euge
tuum, a passage not to be extold sufficiently. But not being constant to your
self, we must expect^ you should confute it, and so eat your words. Nor do
you mean our expectation should be frustrate. For entering on a vain discourse
of Episcopal government, which is to be, you say, by page 65.
Canan Law, not by Canon shot: you fall to telling us, that they neither have,
nor challenge any exorbitant power ^ver their Clergy, Laws, Canons, and Acts
of Parliament (with a (...), (especially over ^ct of Parliaments;) that they
must govern with a power of moderation, not of domination; that sitting in
their Chaires they are to judge according to the Canons, and not of the Canons:
page 66.
that whatsoever power the Pr^lates had in former times of making Canons, and
inflicting penalties in the same, it was all taken from them by K. Henry 8. and
therefore if the Ordinaries now command where there is no Canon in force, it
lays a burden and grievance upon the subjects, from which they may appeal as
a thing unjust; and Appeals being in the Canon Law, as ancient in the Church
of God as the Canons themselves; and purposely allowed of, because possibly a
Prelate may propose unto himself some peevish, wrangling and wasp^sh humor of
his own, in stead of a Canon; Hereupon you conclude, (whatever has been said
of his sacred Majesty in those his mentis ^u^eae verba bract^ata) that it is
untru^, page* 67.
that the Ordinary has any authority of his own, (as he is Ordinary) to place
the holy table in one or other situation. And therefore for your part, (Let the
King use his pleas^^e in approving and confirming what he has a mind to;)
page 69.
the Liturgy continuing as it is, you had far leiver ^e ^e that should obey
(without offense to any man in place be it spoken) than he that should
peremptorily command i^ this kind of Alteration. And as for the obedience of
the people, the Ordinary may indeed expect it, page 68.
If he command according to the Laws and Canon^ confirmed, for otherwise he
is in his excentricks, and moves not as he ought to do: Nay, if the Ordinary
should command where there is page 66.
no law or former Canon in force, being it is a thing unjust that he should so
do, it is by consequence, of a nature, whereunto obedience is n^ way due. page
67.
Not that you would advise any Clergie^an of what degree soever, to oppose his
Ordinary, either in this or any other particular of so low a nature; no God
forbid; you have more wit I trow then so; but that you have a mind to lay such
grounds, as any factious spirit may fly out upon, without more advising. For
tell me, to what purpose else is all this discourse? His Majesty being the best
Int^rpreter of the Canon, has left the matter absolutely unto the Ordinary,
as properly belonging to his place and function: yet if the Ordinary do
command it, he is in his eccentricks, commands a thing for which there is no
law or Canon, judges not by the Canons, but of the Canons, governes his
Clergy as a General does his Army in a drunken mutiny; rather affects a
domination than a moderation, and finally proposes somewhat out of a peevish,
wrangling, and waspish humor, to which obedience is not due, non si me
obsecres. What is this Here i^ not only I. C. but T. C. up and down, p. 70.
up and down think you, I. C. or T. C. as you phrase it page 70? This is an
excellent kind of Argumentation, to weaken not alone the Episcopal, but the
Regal power: as if the one had no authority to interpret Rubricks; nor the
other to proceed according unto that interpretation. He that can gather any
better conclusion from such factious premises, must have some Lincoln Logic,
which never grew in either University. I will not tell you here, that I
conjecture you do aim at some particular, in this extravagant discourse; as
if all matters of the Church were carried in a higher strain than they ought
to be; because in a more orderly and canonical way than your queasie stomach
can admit of: but I must tell you needs, that you have falsified most
abominably the Council of Nice. You tell us, it is possible, a Prelate may
propose unto himself some peevish, wrangling, and waspish humor of his own in
stead of a Canon; from which there lies an Appeal by the Canon Law: And for
that purpose cite those words of the Council of Nice, cap. 5. (...). But as
you do translate them falsely, for your private aim; so you have made the
Council say what it never meant. The Council speaks not there of any
possibility, that Bishops should propose unto themselves their own peevish,
waspish, wrangling humors, in stead of Canons. All that it says is this,
(...) etc. Council* Nicen. c. 5.
It is required that no man should be excommunicate by his Bishop, either out
of weakness, stomach, or any other kind of harshnesse; and that there should
be Synods twice in every year, for the particular examination of such matters.
Call you this a proposal of their own waspish, wrangling and peevish humors,
in stead of Canons? But that you have a License to say what you list, you durst
never have said it.

And yet, I think we may forgive you both this and that extravagant discourse
which before we spoke of. For you have made us very fair amends, Amends for
Ladies says the play, in that which follows; and so confute your self to
save me a labor. You tell us out of Bp Bilson, page 66, 67.
That whatsoever by the laws of God, the Prince, or the Church, is once
constituted, is no longer to be mooted upon, but absolutely obeyed by all
inferiors. And what God, the King, and the Church have directed, is not to be
put to deliberation, but to execution. Your Author, a most reverend and learned
man, speaks plainer than you do, who do affect most miserably in all your
style too much of the Barrister. Perpet. government of Chapter ^. 14. p. 295.
What is decreed (says he) by Superiors, must not by inferiors be debated
whether it shall take place or no; but be rather obeyed with readiness. So
that in all cases determined by the laws of God, the Church, and the Prince,
consultation is both superfluous and pr^sumptuous; execution is only needful.
And now I would assume, did I not think it would offend you, but by the King
it is determined, that it does properly belong unto the Ordinary to place the
Communion Table where he thinks most fitting, in reference both to place and
time. Ergo, what ever you have said in your last discourse, is either to a very
factious and undutifull purpose, or to none at all. In the next place, you
grant it to be true as the Doctor says, page 67.
That in all doubts that do arise, how to understand, do, and execute the
things contained in the Liturgy, a deciding power is left to the Bishop of the
Diocese: But then you say, page 67.
It is as true, that the Doctor dasheth out with an etc. the maine pr^viso of
this power; so that the same be not contrary to any thing in this book. What
then? Therefore it is untrue, that the Ordinary has an authority of his own
(as he is Ordinary) to place the holy Table in one or other situation, more
than what is given him (in case of doubt and diversity only) by the foresaid
Preface. This is just hide and seek, or the blind-mans buf^e. The Preface
gives the Ordinary a deciding power, in case of doubting or diversity, and in
that case only: yet when there is a doubt, and difference about the placing of
the Table, either he has no such deciding power, or else may not use it. The
Ordinary has no authority, but what is given him by the Preface, and the
Preface gives him an authority which he may not exercise. These are like sick
men's dreams, Horat. de ^^te.
Cujus, velut aegri somnia, vanae Finguntur species, things of ill coherence.
And if you hope to save your self by the proviso, so that the same be not
contrary to any thing in this book, you are wide as ever: that contrariety
which you dream of, being taken away, by that decision of his Majesty, which
you have honored with your Eulogie of mentis aureae. Nay you go further at
the last, and cut your own throat with your own weapon: page 68, 69.
Affirming that in a case of doubt, diversity, and ambiguity, the Bishop, or
Ordinary, is punctually to be obeyed by those of his jurisdiction: excepting
only when his said command does expressly oppose an Article of the belief, one
of the ten Commandments, or the general state and subsistence of Gods
Catholic Church. I think you are not of opinion, that placing the Communion
Table Altar-wise, is expressly opposite to either of the three here mentioned:
being, as you profess elsewhere, a The Bishop entering into a discourse of the
indifferency of this circumstance. p. 8.
circumstance indifferent. Nor shall you chall^^ge me for leaving out your
preamble to this ^esolution, If he command according to the laws and Canons
confirmed: unless you can make good, which I think you cannot, that any thing
commanded according to the laws and Canons confirmed, may oppose expressly an
Article of the faith, etc. Besides, that in your following words you speak
more generally, without relation unto laws and Canons confirmed, page 69.
that in all other cases whatsoever (except before excepted) that are dubious,
the inferior is bound to believe his superior. This point, you say, well
poised, would clear a world of errors both in the Church and Commonwealth; but
was here handled either very impertinently, or against your self. For your
Protest, that page 69.
you have not heard of any L d Bishop that has exacted of his Diocese, the
placing of the holy table, as this man would have it; Horat.
credat Iudaeus appella, Non ego. I am too well acquainted with you, to take up
any thing on credit. For hark you in your ear, what mean the bleating of
those sheep? page 68.
this fellows jumbling against the King and the Bishop, tanquam Regem cum
Regulo, like a Wren mounted on the feathers of an Eagle? You are not such a
Sphinx, I hope, but you may meet an Oedipus at one time or other. And pray you
tell me ere we part, whether did you borrow that trim conceit out of the News
from where little Pope Reg^lios has p^ayed such Rex. pa. 7.
Ipswich, or lent you it to H. B. before hand, to try how it relished? An
excellent piece it was, believe me, and such a one as does deserve the guerdon
in Virgils Eclogue, Egl. 3.
Et vitula tu dignus, and ille.

Having thus battered down the Episcopal power, for placing or displacing the
Communion Table, which yet stands fast enough for all your assaults; you sallie
next upon the Vicar, Monsieur the half Vicar, page 70.
as you call him. Angry you are at somewhat, but you dare not say what. Where
does the Doctor say (as you charge upon him) that Monsieur the half Vicar
should have power to remove (of his own head) the Communion Table; or to call
that an Altar, which his Rubric calls a Table, and no otherwise; to be enabled
to do this by the Canons, and to be Judge, yea a more competent Judge of the
conveniencie of the standing thereof, than the Ordinary, and his Surrogates;
not permitting the Church Officers to do what they are enjoined by their
immediate Superiors? These Myrmidons, I assure you, swarmed out of your strong
fancy only, and are not extant any where in the Doctors book, nor by you
hudled up in your broken Cento. You only charge the Doctor there, page 61.
for saying that the Vicar might desire to have an Altar, i. e. to have the
Communion Table placed Altar-wise, at the upper end of his Quire. And why not
so? Desire to have a thing done thus, and thus, implies not any grant of power
to do it. To have a power of ones own head to remove the Table, and to desire
to have the Table placed Altar-wise; are as far asunder, as you are from
obtaining the office of an Arch B* although perhaps you may desire it. Nor does
the Doctor say in ter^inis, that it was lawful for the Vicar to call that a^
Altar, which the Rubric calls no otherwise than a Table; but that Coal.
the Epistoler (whosoever he was) had no reason to suspect, that any
propitiatory sacrifice was aimed at by the Vicar of Gr. although he used the
name of Altar for the holy table. Or had the Doctor said so in terms express;
had it been either h novum crimen, or ante h^c tempus inauditum? May we be
sure, upon your word, that because page 76.
names were first invented to divide and sever one particular thing from
another; or that a thing cannot have two proper and distinct names; therefore
the holy Table may not be called an Altar. Is it not told us in the letter,
Coal from the Altar, p. 32, 33, 73.
that in the Old Testament one and the same thing is termed an Altar, and a
Table: an Altar in respect of what is there offered unto God; and a Table, in
respect of what is there (or thence) participated by men. And have not you your
self informed us ou^ of Cardinal ^eron, that it is ever called a Table when
it points to the Communion, and an Altar when it points unto the sacrifice,
page 102. I see your memory is not altogether so good as your invention.
Several respects may give the ^ame one thing, two names; as several
capacities to the selfe-^ame person. There is a license to your book,
subsigned John Lincoln Dean^ of Westminster. Bishop of Lincoln, and Deane of
Westminster, are two distinct and proper names; and yet no doubt you would be
sorry they should not both belong to the same one man. Your other reason, that
it should not* Letter to the^ Vicar.
be called an Altar, because the Church in her Liturgy and Canons do call it
a table only, is no such And is a s^ronger one than your headpiece is capable
of, p. 75
strong one, but that an ordinary headpiece may be fit to hold it. The
Liturgy and Canons both, do call the Eastern part of the Church by the name
of Chancell Rubr. before the Communion, and ^anon 82.
. The Table in Communion time shall stand in the body of the Church, or in the
Chancell. So the Liturg^e. The Table shall be placed in so good sort within the
Church or Chancell. So the Canon Rubr. before the Communion, and ^anon 82.
. What then? Therefore, according to your reason, the Church in her Liturgy
and Canons calling the same a Chancell only; why does the Epistoler so often
call it a Quire, and you not check him for it? That which you bring us from
Barba^us, page 75.
that where we have a Law and Canon to direct us, how to call a thing, we
ought not to hunt after reasons and conceits to give it another appellation;
besides, that it is nothing to the purpose, is by you falsified of purpose, to
help at need. Barbatus has not in your margin any one syllable, that looks
that way: Barbatus in Clement. de elect. c. 1. n. 11.
Vbicunque habemus legem vel Canonem, non debemus allegare rationem, nisi lege
vel Canone deficiente. What has this rule to do with names and appellations,
that speaks of neither? You should first learn to construe a piece of Latin,
before you take upon you to be a disputant. There is another pretty fetch
concerning Altars, which I will put off to the sixth Chapter, where we shall
look on that discourse, which you have given us, piece by piece of the name of
Altar, though sorry you should force me to waste my time in such a needless
(...) as this is.

What follows next in your said Cento? Because page 61, 62.
for any thing the Canon tells us, the Vicar was to have a greater hand in
ordering the said table, than the Bishops immediate officers the Churchwardens
were, or ought to have: and that he did not any thing against the Canon, in
causing the table to be disposed of to a more convenient place than before it
stood in. Where find you this? Not in the Doctor certainly, if you mark him
well. The Doctor speaks not any thing of the Canons generally, (as you make
him speak) but of that one particular Canon, which was alleged in the letter.
The Vicar, as before you charged it, desired to have an Altar, i. e. the
Communion table placed Altar-wise at the upper end of his Quire. The Bishop
reasons against this out of the Canons, Anno 1571. that not the Vicar, but
the Churchwardens were to provide (utensils, says your new Edition) for the
Communion, and that not an Altar, but a fair joined Table. The Doctor hereunto
replies, Coal from the Al^ar, p. 10.
that for any thing those Canons (and not the Canon) tell us, the Minister (as
in this case the Vicar) was to have a greater hand in ordering the said table,
being so provided, than the Churchwardens were or ought to have. And that the
Vicar did not any thing in this case against the Canon (i. e. the Canon then
proposed) for he provided not the table, but only caused the table which he
found provided, to be disposed of to a more convenient place than before it
stood in. Have you found any thing in those Canons that affirms the contrary?
If yea, why* do you not produce it? If not, why make you such a clamor upon
no occasion? The Doctor neither there, nor elsewhere, does justify the Vicars
Act, peromnia; nor indeed in any thing, if he did any thing in this, against
the Canon: but says in one Coal, p. 10.
place what he did* and in another what he thought Coal, p. 51.
to be most convenient. Nor could the Doctor but conjecture out of the Preamble
of the letter, that the Vicar did acquaint the Bishop with his desires, and
found from him a toleration at the least, if not an approbation, as before I
said. Yet upon this weak ground, which will bear no foundation of a solid
building, you run into a long and vain discourse, of the authority and
office of Bishops, Archdeacons, and Churchwardens: for ostentation of your
reading, and that you have a mind to traduce the Doctor, as if he held ^ome I
am sure this te^^t is in the hig^est degree I^suiticall. p. 71.
Jesuitical tenets which might in time prove prejudicial to the estate of
Bishops. All that I can collect from thence, is, that you are beholding for
your observations to one or more Archdeacons of your near acquaintance: who
were not willing, as it seems, to take all this pains for you, and do no
honor to themselves. Yet let me tell you as a friend, you trust them somewhat
further than a wise man would; and suffer them to plume themselves with the
Bishops feathers: taking that power unto themselves, which you full feign would
fix originally in the Diocesan. For what say you, from them, to the point in
hand? whether or not the Vicar ought to meddle with the holy table. It is, say
you, page 78.
not the Ordinary, but the Apostles themselves, that have turned the Parsons
and Vicars from being active in this kind, to their diviner meditations. It is
not reason that we should leave the word of God to serve table. Since when,
from the first Deacons, then appointed, to our page 79.
present Archdeacons (in whose office the ancient power of the Deacons is
united and concentred) Incumbents have been excluded from meddling with the
Vtensils of the Church, or Ornaments of the Altar. But see you not withal,
that by this reason the Bishops are excluded also. For were they not the
Apostles, of whom it is affirmed, that it was no reason that they should leave
the word of God to serve tables? And who sustain the place and office of the
Apostles at this day, if not the Bishops? See what credulity, and too much
confidence in your friends has brought upon you. I question not the matter
now, meaning to meet with that hereafter. Besides, you suffer your Archdeacons
to use the name of Altar without offense; which you conceived to be so capital
a crime in Monsieur Vicar. page 79.
Ornaments of the Altar, -- The very Altar it self with the Rail about it, --
To move and remove the Altar: Altar thrice used in half a page, and you check
not at it. The rest of your dismembered Cento, and the good sport you make your
self, touching the advancing of the Church-warde^s above their Minister, and
whatsoever other shreds you have patched together for your more delight, are
not considerable in this place, or to this purpose. It is the Doctors
undertaking, to answer to your arguments, and not your scorns: Nor loves he,
howsoever you like of it, to have his portion with those men that sit in the
seat of the scornful.

But non bonum est ludere cum Sanctis. What sport soever you are pleased to
make with him; take heed how you offend against God and piety. The piety of
these times, though you are fully bent to make sport therewith, is no such
waking dream, that you should set your self to d^ride it, in so gross a
manner. The Doctor tells us of that letter, that it Coal from the Altar. p. ^.
was spread abroad of purpose, the better to discountenance that uniformity of
public Order, to which the piety of these times is so well inclined; -- of
purpose to distract the people, and hinder that good work is now in hand. This
is the game you have in sent, and having taken up the cry, follow it up and
down over all the book: not here alone, where ex professo you pursue it, but
page 188. 192. 197. 214. 228. etc. This, be it what it will, you tell us, is as
page 64.
yet in abeyante, pendant in the air, you know not where; and like yer long to
fall upon our heads, but you know not when: page 83.
that you have opened your eyes as wide as possibly you can, but cannot
discover it: Or page 84.
if there be such an especial inclination of these times to piety, it is a
peculiar piety (you assure us so) differing from the piety of former times. And
therefore you do page 85.
reasonably presume that this good work in hand is but the second part of
sancta Clara, with whom you make the Doctor tamper in points of I am af^raid
(...) judicious Divines that tamper so much in doctrine with Sancta Clara, and
in discipline with Sancta Petra. p. 71.
doctrine, as in the points of discipline with sancta Petra. But tell me I
beseech you, conceive you uniformity, and uniformity of public Order in the
officiating of Gods divine service, to be no good work? And find you not the
piety of these times, inclinable in an higher degree to that uniformity, than
any of the times before? When did you ever find a King, that did so seriously
affect Church-worke; or that has more endeavored to advance that decency and
comeliness in the performance of divine Offices, which God expects and
requires, than his sacred Majesty? His own example in the constant keeping of
the hours of prayer, and most devout behavior in the acts thereof: think you
they are not sweet incitements unto all his subjects, to follow those most
pious steps in the which he walks? Vel. Paterc. l. 2.
Recte facere cives suos Princeps optimus faciendo docet. His Majesty's
religious carriage in the house of God, and due observance of those Orders
which the law requires in common people, is a more excellent Sermon upon that
text, than ever you yet preached on any. They must be needs exceeding dull, or
somewhat worse, which will not profit very much by such heavenly doctrine. If
you have opened your eyes so wide, as you say you have, it is not that you
cannot, but you will not see it; and are grown blind, not out of want of
sight, but want of piety. Add to all these, the Princely zeal of his
magnificent heart, for the repairing of S. Paul's; by which example,
questionless, the other Churches in this land will fare the better. And add
to that, his Majesty's most sacred care, that in all places where he comes in
Progress, what scantnesse of room soever was wont to be pretended, no
consecrated place shall be profaned by those employments, to which they have
been put in the times before. And see you nothing all this while, no good
work, no piety? Then look into those Country Churches, to which his Majesty
in his times of Progress repaires most frequently for hearing and attending
Gods public service: leaving the privacy of his own Court, and presence, to
set a copy to his people, how to perform all true humility and religious
observations in the house of God. If you see nothing yet, and that there must
be something which has spoiled your eyesight; it is the too much light you
live in: by which you are so dazeled that you cannot see this part of piety, or
else so blinded that you will not. And we may say of you in the Poets language,
Sunt tenebrae per tantum lumen obortae. Then to go forwards, descendo, can you
remember any Metropolitan of and in this Church (and gather all your wits about
you) which has more seriously endeavored to promote that uniformity of
public Order, than his Grace now being? His cares and consultations to advance
this work, to make Jerusalem (if such as you disturbed him not) at unity
within it self, are very easy to be seen: so easy, that it were sensibile
super sensorium ponere, to insist long on it. The very clamours raised upon
him, by those who love nor unity nor uniformity, and have an art of fishing
with most profit, in a troubled water; are better evidence of this, than you
have any in your book to maintain the cause. Nor hear we any of the other
bells, which are not willing for their parts to make up the Harmony; but that
great Tom rings out of tune. For when did you or any other know the Prelates,
generally, more thoroughly intent upon the work committed to them; more earnest
to reduce the service of this Church to the Ancient Orders, appointed in the
Common Prayer book? It is not long since, that we had but half prayers in
most Churches; and almost none at all in some, your friend I. Cottons for
example. See you no alteration in this kind? Is not the Liturgy more
punctually observed of late, in the whole form and fashion of Gods service,
than before it was? Churches more beautified and adorned than ever since the
Reformation; the people more conformable to those reverend gestures in the
house of God, which though prescribed before, were but little practiced?
Quisquis non videt, coecus; quisquis videt, nec laudat, ingratus; quisquis
laudanti reluctatur, insanus est; August de Civit. Dei l. 1. c. 7.
as the Father has it. This, if ingratitude to God, and obstinate malice to
his Church, has not made you blind, you cannot choose but see, though you
would dissemble it: And if you see it, do you not think it a good work? and
is there not a piety of and in these times, which more inclines to the
advancement of that work, than of the former? would any man, that only wears
a form of godliness, make this his May Game; and scornefully entitle it the
page 85.
imaginary piety of the times, and the Platonicall Idea of a good work in
hand? Take heed, for vultu l^ditur pietas. Laughed you but at it in your
sleeve, you had much to answer for; but making it your public pastime, you
make your self obnoxious to the wrath of God and man, both for the sin and
for the scandal. And as for the good work in hand, in case you will not help
it forwards, (as I doubt you will not;) do not disturb it with your factious
and schismatic Pamphlets.

Having made merry with your friends, about the inclination of these times to
piety, and the advancement of so good a work as the uniformity of public
order: you pass, I know not how, to the Acts and Monuments, and the examination
of such passages as were thence taken by the Doctor. Perhaps you are a better
Artist than I take you for: And being it is Art is celare artem, you mean to
tender to the world such an Art of writing, as has no art in it. But the less
cunning, the more truth, as we use to say. If we could find it so, it were some
amends; and though I see but little hope, yet I mean to try. The Doctor told
you in his Coal. p. 14.
Coal from the Altar, that not a few of those which suffered death for
opposing the gross and carnal doctrine of transubstantiation, did not only
well enough endure the name of Altar, but without any doubt or scruple called
the Lords Supper sometimes a sacrifice, and many times the Sacrament of the
Altar. So that if they endured it well enough, in others, or used it themselves
without doubt or scruple; it is as much as was intended by the Doctor. And for
the proof of this, he first brings in John Fryth, relating in a letter to his
private friends, that they his adversaries examined him touching the Sacrament
of the Altar; whether it was the very body of Christ, or no. These are page 86.
you say their words, not his. Why man, whose words soever they were in the
first proposal, does not he use the same without doubt or scruple? find you
that he did stumble at them, or dislike the phrase? Had he been half so
quarrelsome at the phrase, as you are, he might have testified his dislike in a
word or two; the Sacrament of the Altar, as they call it. Your self inform us
from him, that in some cases, at sometimes, he used that qualification, as viz.
p. 308. I added moreover that their Church (as they call it) has no such power
and authority, etc. An Argument there of his dissent, none here: their Church
as they call it, there; the Sacrament of the Altar here; no dislike at all. You
might have suffered the poor man to rest in peace, and not have called him
Vouz avez Fryth, Let him in Gods name come up to the (...). page 87.
to the bar to so little purpose. The second witness was John Lambert, who
also used the word or phrase with as little scruple. Acts and Mon. part 2. p.
401.
As concerning the other six Articles I make you the same answer, that I have
done unto the Sacrament of the Altar, and no other. You quarrel this, as that
before, being you say page 87.
their words, not his; and hereunto we make that answer as unto the former:
They were their words in proposition, his in rep^tition; especially the
repetition being such as s^ewed no dislike. But where you tell us of his
Answer, Ibid.
viz. I neither can nor will answer one word; and thereupon infer, John
Lambert answers there not one word for you: that's but a touch of your old
trick, in cutting short quotations when they will not help you. John Lambert
being demanded, not whether he approved the name of Sacrament of the Altar, but
whether he thought that in the Sacrament of the Altar, there was the very body
and blood of Christ in likeness of bread and wine; replied, I neither can ne
will answer one word: what, ends he there, as you have made him? no, by no
means: I neither can ne will answer one word Acts and Mon. part. 2. p. 401.
otherwise than I have told you since I was delivered into your hands: which
was, that he would make no answer of what he thought, till they brought some
body to accuse him. John Lamberts other testimony used by the Doctor is, as
follows. Christ being offered up once for all in his own person, is yet said
to be offered up, not only every year at Easter, but also every day in the
celebration of the Sacrament, because his oblation, once for ever made, is
thereby represented. Act. and Mon. part. 2. p. 435. These words you challenge
as not his. How so? Because it follows in the place. page 88.
Even so says S. Augustine. Even so says S. Augustine? what, and stops he
there, as if he only said those words from that Reverend Father? Had it been
so, we had lost nothing by the hand, the words being his in the Original, and
Lamberts in the Application: but it is not so. For thus it follows in the
place; Even so, says Augustine, is the Sacrament of Christ's body, the body of
Christ; and the Sacrament of Christ's blood; the blood of Christ in a certain
wise or fashion. You may call home the Montebank, (for ought I can see) which
you Vouz avez An honest man, John Lambert. Put stand you by for a Montebank,
John Coal. p. 8^.
bestow upon the Doctor; and keep him to your self till the Doctor needs him.
Touching Archbishop Cranmer, can you show us any where, that at the term or
phrase of Sacrament of the Altar, he did take offense? if not, you give the
Doctor what he Coal. page 14.
there affirms. And since on your discovery, which I thank you for, I find
it was John Fox, and not the Arch Bishop, which drew up those allegations
against the six Articles (which following so immediately on the Arch Bishops
opposition See the Acts and Mon. part. ^. p. 443.
to those Articles, might very easily be mistook for his, by one that is not
so much studied in the book as you seem to be) we have lost nothing by the
change. I trow if Mr. Fox took no offense thereat, you will have little
thanks for your great preciseness. Oh but, say you, there follows page 88.
such a peale after it, as none but a madman would cite him for this purpose:
viz. This monstrous Article of theirs in this form of word^ as it stands,
etc. What? does John Fox call it a monstrous Article, only because the
Sacrament is there called, the Sacrament of the Altar? If not, you might have
kept your madman to your self, as you do your Montebank. This monstrous
Article of theirs in the form of words as it stands, is, that the Sacrament
of the Altar is the very natural body of Christ, the self same which was
borne of the Virgin Mary. This you dash out with an etc. to make your partisans
bele^ve, that no entitle the Lords Supper, by the name of the Sacrament of the
Altar, was in John Fox his judgment, a monstro^^ ^^ticle. Vt magno it populo.

In citi^^^^ ^ohn Philpot, you proceed accordingly. Coal. page 15.
The D^^^^r told you out of him, in what respects the old Writers do sometimes
call the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, amongst other names which
they ascribe thereunto, the Sacrament of the Altar. To this you make reply,
page 89.
that he has dealt with Philp^t, exceeding hardly, cutting off the head and
feet of his discourse, and thereby making the quotation, almost as true a
Martyr, as the man himself. First for the head of his discourse, it is no more
than this; Acts and Mon. part. 3. p. 23.
I must needs ask a question of my Respondent Dr. Chadsey, concerning a word or
twain of your supposition i. e. of the Sacrament of the Altar, what he means
thereby, and whether he take it, as some of the ancient Writers do, terming the
Lords Supper the Sacrament of the Altar. This is the head. Where I am sure he
has lopt off the head, which had a shrewd tale to tell. p. 89.
is the shrewd tale it has to tell? Does not the head confess that it was
called so by some ancient Writers? And what more find you in Leaving the
relation like Philopoemens A^mie, all belly. page 89.
the belly? Then for the feet. Demanding (as you make him say) whether he
took it as the Ancients did, or for the Sacrament of the Altar which is made
of lime and stone, over which the Sacrament hangs: and finding that they
meant it this later way, he declares himself, Then I will speak plain
English, that the Sacrament of the Altar, is no Sacrament at all. Had you
reported Philpot rightly, we should have no great cause to How like you John
Philpot. page 89.
like him: but it is you that martyr the quotation, and not the Doctor. His
question was, Acts and Mon. part 3. page 23.
whether they took it otherwise than the Doctors did, as for the Sacrament of
the Altar which is made of lime and stone, over which the Sacrament hangs,
and to be all one with the Sacrament of the Mass, as it is at this present in
many places. And finding that they took the Sacrament of the Altar, and the
Sacrament of the Mass to be all one; then, quoth Philpot, I will speak plain
English, the Sacrament of the Altar which ye reckon to be all one with the
Mass, once justly abolished, and now put in full use again, is no Sacrament
at all, neither is Christ present in it. See you Sir, how you cheat and abuse
your Reader, leaving out, in the question, and to be all one with the Sacrament
of the Mass; and in the answer, that they took the Sacrament of the Altar,
and the Sacrament of the Mass to be all one; and in the resolution, which ye
reckon to be all one with the Mass once justly abolished? You should have
dealt more faithfully in your quotations of those books, in which each petty
Chapman will find your falsehood.

The other passage which you cite from the said John Philpot, out of the Acts
and Monuments, part 3. page 553. viz. as touching their Sacrament, which they
term of the Altar; and so make it their term, not his; that is answered in,
and with the former. He does not say, The Sacrament which they term of the
Altar; but their Sacrament which they so term, that is, the Mass. The
Sacrament of the Altar was the Fathers language; to call their Mass so, was
their own. Your other instance touching Philpot, out of the same part, page
571. we shall see hereafter. Concerning Bp Latimer, the Doctor told you, Coal
from the Altar, p. 15.
that he plainly grants, that it (i. e. the holy Table) may be called an
Altar, and so the Doctors call it in many places; but there is no propitiatory
sacrifice but only Christ's. You, in your repetition, leave out this, It may be
called an Altar, and make the Doctor say no more, than that old Latimer plainly
grants, that the Doctors call it so in many places: and thereupon infer, he
does not page 90.
call it so himself. Then for the Doctors, (having first called upon him to
speak truth, and shame the devil, for he is the old clipper of speeches) you
tell us that it follows in old Latimers words, that they may be deceived in
some points, though not in all things: I believe them when they say well, or as
it is in the margin, page 91.
Doctores legendi^s^nt cum venia; which you construe thus, the Doctors must be
pardoned if they sometimes slip in their expressions. No matter for the margin,
that comes out of season. I trust you will not justify all the marginall notes
in the Acts and Mon. But as for Latimers speech, that they might err in some
points, though not in all things; it seems he did not think that they erred
in this; himself affirming positively, that it may be called an Altar, as the
Doctors call it; though you leave that out. You may take with you home the old
clipper of speeches, to wait upon the Mountebank, and the Madman, that are
there already. To the first place Coal from the Altar, p. 15.
alleged from B. Ridley, viz. that in the Sacrament of the Altar, is the very
body and blood of Christ; you answer only as before, that they are their
words, and not his; page 91.
the words articulated upon him, and not his own. But whose soever they were in
the proposition, he uses them without doubt or scruple in the repetition;
which was the only point that they were produced for. Against the other
passage of that Reverend Prelates, that the word Altar in the Scripture does
signify as well the Altar whereupon the Jews were wont to offer their^burnt
sacrifices, as the Table of the Lords Supper; and that S. Cyril means by this
word Altar, not the Jewish Altar, but the Table of the Lord, etc. you have
naught to answer: confessing plainly that In ^nswering to that place of (...)
objected to the Bishop of Lincoln, etc. ^e says as you say. p. (...).
he says as the Doctor does. Which is the only fair dealing he has found
yet from you; though after you would feign retract, page 92.
affirming that the Bp of Lincoln would smile very heartily, to see that such a
passage, as this is, should be brought by the Doctor, to defend his Altars. Let
them laugh that win.

That which comes next after, is the Act of Parliament, 1 Edw. 6. cap. 1. of
which the Doctor tells us, Coal from the Altar, p. 16.
that it was resolved in the same, that the whole Communion should be restored,
which in effect was a plain abolition of the former Mass; yet the Act was
entitled, An Act against such persons as shall speak irreverently against the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ, commonly called the Sacrament of the
Altar. He tells us also, that in the body of the Act, that there was a Writ
determined of, upon such delinquencies, wherein it is expressly called
Sacrosanctum Sacramentum Altaris: and that the said Act being repealed 1 Mar.
cap. 1. was afterward revived by Qu. Eliz. and every branch and member of it,
1 Eliz. cap. 1. So that the Act being still in force, the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper is to this day entitled in the Statute law, the Sacram^nt of the
Altar. This Statute you affirm to be produced by the Doctors with the same
felicity as the Martyrs were, page 92.
that is, to witness point blank against himself: the Dr, only peeping over the
wicket, but, as you say, not daring for his ears to open the door, and look
into the body of it. Why do you think the Doctor should be such a flincher?
First, as you say, page 93.
because the Sacrament of the Altar was not the name, but the addition only to
the name of the blessed Sacrament; the very name it self being the Sacrament of
the body and blood of Christ: the one the name, the other the page 94.
nickname, as you call it. This said; Ibid.
you fall upon the Doctor, and bid him come with shame enough into the body of
the Act, and see what impostures he printeth for the people: because for^ooth
it is there called the comfortable Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ,
commonly called the Sacrament of the Altar, and in Scripture the Supper and
Table of the Lord. Good angry Sir, do you find any imposture here on the
Doctors-part? Affirms he otherwise, than that the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper was, and is by that Statute (still in force) entitled also by the name
of Sacrament of the Altar? It is, you say, a penal law, and being it was a
penal law, it was to speak ad captum vulgi. Do you not call to mind, that you
told us lately of the Queens Injunctions, page 44.
that they were directed to her Subjects, not unto her Mathematicians; and of
the Rubric in the Liturgy, that it was made for people page 52.
that were no Geometricians: and then conclude the point out of Chancellor
Egerton, that page 54.
words must be taken sensu currenti, custom and use being the best expositor
both of Laws and words? Take the Impostor home with you to make up the mess;
and then you have a Mountebank, a mad man, the devil an old clipper of
speeches, and the said Impostor to keep you company.

You challenge upon all, and on no occasions, a special interest in antiquity;
and cite, as you have cause sometimes, some of the Ancients that call it the
Sacrament of the Altar: yet tell us, upon better thoughts, that it is called so
indeed, but not by the law of God, page 95.
nor by the law of man; but commonly, that is, by the common error and Popery
of these times. The Papists are beholding to you, for giving them such interest
in the Ancient Fathers. The Fathers call it so, and it was called so only by
the common error and Poperic of these later days. Do not you make the Fathers
exceeding young, or Popery exceeding old, in that you make the Fathers and
Popery of an equal standing. Your slender observation, that in those times
this very Sacrament was called the Mass, and allowed to be called so by Act of
Parliament, (you mean it is so called in the Liturgy, confirmed that
Parliament, 2. and 3. Edw. 6. c. 1.) is not worth the noting. Yet thereupon you
make this inference, that if the Doctor shall report of you, that you have said
Mass, when you have only administered the Communion, you will have your remedy
against him, as in case of slander. And well you may. You know that Statute is
repealed, there being another Liturgy confirmed by Parliament, which makes
void the old. But so it is not with the Statute touching the Sacrament of the
Altar, which is as much in force as the second Liturgy. Nor need you fear
that any man will report of you, that you have said Mass, when you have only
administered the Communion: though some perhaps may say (and bid you take the
remedy that the law allows you) that you, or some good friend of yours, have
offered to say Mass, there where you ought to have administered the Communion
only. Be not too busy on your chalenges, as you love your self; lest some
adventurous Swordman bid you do your worst, and take up the wasters.

As for the Writ, directed in the body of the Act to my LL. the Bishops, you
say it does not page* 96.
call it (as the Doctor falsifyeth the Act) Sacramentum Altaris, but only that
it was grounded on the Statute made concerning the Sacrament of the Altar. Why
Sir, the Doctor does not say, that the Writ calls it so expressly; V. Coal
from the Altar, p. 16.
but that it is expressly called so in the Writ. And if you have no better
answer to the Writ, than unto the Statute, both Writ and Statute will hold good
against all your Cavills: and the poor Doctor may be How many Presidents of
that writ, can t^is great La^yer show in the book of Entries. p. 5. 95
Lawyer good enough to defend the Writ, although there were no Precedents
thereof in the book of Entries. You saw the weakness of this plea, and
thereupon you adventure on a further hazard. You tell the Doctor, elsewhere, of
his great presumption in offering to Correcting Magnificat, p. 77.
correct Magnificat: and that being never in such grace, as to be made Lord
Keeper of the great seal of England, he page 23.
should presume to give a man a call to be a Judge, who died but an Apprentise
in the laws. Yet now you fall on both those errors, of which you have already
pronounced him guilty. For you must needs correct the Statute, which the whole
Parliament (wiser I take it than your self) has thought fit to stand: and
tell us of the Writ, (which yet my Lord Bp of Lincoln, when he was Lord Keeper,
had no power to alter) that it page 97.
ought to be issued contra formam Statuti concernentis sacrosanctum Sacramentum
corporis and sanguinis Dominici; whereas the Statute gives no warrant for any
such Writ to be issued from the Court of Chancery. Had you authority of making
either Writs or Statutes, I doubt not but your first Statute should be this,
that it should be lawful for any man wheresoever, or whenever he saw the
holy Table placed Altar-wise, to call it a dresser; and then a Writ to be
awarded against all those that should speak unreverently of your said service
of the dresser. At least it should and might be lawful for the rude people so
to call it, and none so bold as to control them. On them indeed you have
trans-ferred it, in your new edition of the letter, to excuse the Bishop: but
then you never tell us, as you might have done as well in the same Edition, how
sorely they were reprehended by the Bishop for it. Here very unseasonably, and
by some page 98.
Susenbrotus figure, you have brought it in; and seem exceeding angry (as I
think you are) that it should be so Prynned and pinned on the Bishops sleeve.
But be not so extremely angry though mass: Prynne may furnish you with as good
a note as that when occasion serves; and recompense you for the use of your
Dresser by some trick of law. But where you say, that Ibid.
if one Bishop of Lincoln, and one Deane of Westminster, shall speak
irreverently of the Protestants table, (I thought assuredly, it had been the
Lords Table) calling it oyster-table, and oyster-boorde; by this new figure of
the Doctors, all Bishops and Deanes of those two places must till the end of
the world be supposed to do so: you make a strange non sequitur which the
Doctor meant not. He knows there have been many Bishops and Deanes of
either, of such a noted piety, as no man can suppose it of them. All you can
thence conclude is this: that as there was a Bishop of Lincoln, and a Deane of
Westminster that called the Lords table standing Table-wise, or in the middle
of the Chauncell, by the name of oyster-boorde: so to cry quitts with them,
there is (as you have now discovered him) one Bishop of Lincoln and Deane of
Westminster, that calls it standing Altar-wise, by the name of Dresser. As for
John Fox his marginall notes of the blasphemous mouth of Dr Weston, (the Deane
of Westminster) calling the Lords table an oyster-boorde, page 85. and Bishop
White, (then Bishop of Lincoln) blasphemously calls the boorde of the Lords
Supper an oyster-table: those you may either take or leave, as your stomach
serves you. And sure it serves you very well, you had not fallen else on the Bp
of Norwich with so good an appetite, and furnished some of your good friends
out of the Index of your Author, with an excellent note, against the next
Edition of the News from Ipswich. But this is not the only thing wherein H.
B. and you have imparted notes to one another; as may most manifestly be
discerned in that general Parallel, which I have elsewhere drawn between
you. At this time I shall only note how much you are beholding unto your
(...), the back-doors of your books, your Indexes. Here page 98
we are furnished with a note out of the Index of John Fox, touching a Bishop
of Norwich his sending forth letters of persecution. Page 129. you certify us
from the authority of the same learned Index, that Bishop Ridley ordered the
Communion Table to be placed, not Altar-wise, but as a Table. Nor could you
enter into the Fathers but by this back-doore, and there you found by chance
(such good luck you have) that, Sacrificium Altaris page 116
was foysted into the Index of S. Austin, by the Divines of Lovaine, as into
others of the Fathers by the Priests and Jesuits. We now perceive what helps
you had, to clog your margin with such a numerous and impertinent body of
quotations, as serve for very little purpose, but to make a show; a general
muster, as it were, of your mighty reading.

CHAP. IV.
Of taking down Altar^ in K. Edw. time; altering the Liturgy first made; and
of the 82. Canon.
The Doctor leaves the Minister of Lincolns Method, for this Chapter to keep
close to England. Altars not generally taken down in the fourth of K. Edw. 6.
The Minister of Linc. falsifieth the Bishops letter to the Vicar; and palters
with a passage in the Acts and Mon. to make them serve his turn about the
taking down of Altars. A most notorious piece of nonsense in the new Edition
of the letter. The Altars in the Church of England, beaten down in Germany.
Altars not beaten down de facto, by the common people, but taken down by
order, and in fa^re proc^eding. Matters of fact may be made doctrinall
sometimes, and on some occasions. The Order of the King but a kind of Law. The
Minister of Linc. takes great pains to free Calvin from having any hand in
altering the Liturgy. Land mark^s and bounds (...) down, for the right
understanding of the (...). Calvin excepts against the Liturgy, pract^seth with
the D. of (...), both when he was Protector, and after. His correspondence her^
with (...). Hooper, and ill affection to the ceremoni^s then by Law
^stablished. The plot for altering the Liturgy so strongly laid, that it want
forward notwithstanding the Dukes attainder, The (...) ignorance and most
apparent falsehoods of the Minister of Linc, in all this business. Calvin
att^mpt^ the King, the Counsel, and Archb. Cranmen. The date of his Letter to
the Archb. cleared (...) given the first Liturgy by K. Edw. 6. asserted from
the false construction of the Minister of Linc. as also that given to it by the
Parliament. Archb. Bancroft, and Io. Fox, what they say thereof. The standing
of the Table after the alteration of the Liturgy, and that the name of Altar
may be used in a Church reformed.

HItherto we have followed you up and down according as you pleased to lead
the way; and seen what Arguments you had against the placing of the holy Table
Altar-wise, Cap. 4.
borrowed from the Regal and Episcopal power: or rather how you answer the
Doctors Arguments from thence derived. We have gone also overall your Cavils,
devised against his evidence from the Acts and Monuments; wherein he showed you
how indifferently, those holy men, Fryth, Lambert, Philpot, Latymer, and
Ridley, used the name of Altar, calling the blessed Sacrament, the Sacrament of
the Altar, without doubt or scruple. And howsoever you endeavored to stop
their mouths, that so they should not speak at all; or bribe them, that they
might be drawn to serve your turn: yet they have shown themselves right
honest men, and stood to all things which they said at the first report. You
may do well to deal more faithfully hereafter, page 86.
in your quotations of those books, wherein all sorts of men are so thoroughly
versed. We also have made good the Statute, touching the Sacrament of the
Altar, and the condition of the writ in the same awarded, from your vain
assaults; by which you cannot but perceive, that if a man should call the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, by the old known and common name, (as your
self confesses it to be) of Sacrament of the Altar; the Law will be his
warrant in it against all your fury. So far we have gone after you in your
own Method. But now we will crave leave, to collect out of you into one body,
what ever more occurres between the Doctor and your self, of the point in
hand, as it relates unto this Church, the Liturgies, and Canons of the same;
before we look abroad into foreign parts. And this we shall the rather do,
because you brought us in your last Chapter, through the Acts and Monuments,
into the times of K. Edward the sixth, and Qu. Elizabeth: whom we are loath to
part withal, before we have examined every passage which concerns those times
and them that followed. First then, besides the statute before remembered,
enacted by K. Edw. 6. and revived afterward by Q^. Elizabeth, wherein the name
of Sacrament of the Altar is contained expressly: the King did set out certain
Injunctions giv^n by the most excellent Prince, Edward 6. etc. An. 1547. c. 9.
Injuctions, in the said first year of his reign, where it is called the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar. And in the Liturgy of the year 1549. being
the third year of that Kings reign, it is agreed upon both sides, that the
holy Table is generally called an Altar: every where called an Altar, as in the
first, and almost every where, as in your second Edition of the Bishops Letter.
Nor was it to be doubted, but that the old Altars being standing, the old name
continued. The difference is, both for the time, how long they stood; and for
the manner, how they were taken down; and for the Liturgy it self, on what
occasion it was changed.

First for the time, the Bishop tells us in his letter, that they stood a year
or two in King Edwards time: Now you enlarge the time, to four years, as the
Dr. does: saying page 88.
they stood three or four years before the Kings declaration; but in the same
you tell us also, that they stood not one complete year, before the godly
consideration of the people (that is, as you expound your self, the irregular
forwardness of the people) had taken them to task. That they stood four
years at the least, the Doctor proves by an historical deduction out of the
stories of those times. Coal from the Altar. p. 28, 29.
In which it does appear that An. 1547. the Act of Parliament was pass,
wherein it was entitled the Sacrament of the Altar: that An. 1548. the
Common Prayer book was confirmed, although not published till the next, then
near at hand, which was 1549. where the word Altar is often used, everywhere, or
almost everywhere, you know not which. That in the said year 1549. an Order
came to Bp. Bonner from the Lords of the Council, for abrogating private
Masses, wherein it was appointed that the holy blessed Communion be ministered
at the high Altar of the Church, and in no other place of the same, Act. and
Mon. part. 2. p. 662. And finally, that in the fourth year of his reign
(November. 24. 1550) there came an Order from the Council to Bp. Ridley, (who
succeeded Bonner) for taking down the Altars in his Dioces. p. 699. which
order coming to the Bp. part. 2. p. 70^.
with certain reasons also sent from the Lords of the Council, the forenamed
Bp. of London, as the story tells us, did hold his Visitation, wherein he did
exhort those Churches in his diocese, wherein the Altars did remain, to
conform themselves unto those other Churches which had taken them down, and
had set up in stead of the multitude of their Altars one decent Table in every
Church. Which exhortation, as it seems, did prevail so far, that not long
after the Altars were taken down, and Tables set up in the Churches. That it
was done thus in all other dioceses, the Doctor finds not any where, but in the
letter to the Vicar: where it is said indeed, and no more but said, that on the
Orders of breaking down Altars, all dioceses did agree upon receiving Tables;
all dioceses as well as that of London, as your corrupted Copy has it. For
proof of which, as you have falsified the Bishops letters to bring it in; so
you have falsified the Acts and Monuments to make it good. For where the words
run on in a continued style or sense; you stop them where you list, to make
them speak that, which they never meant. The words run thus in the Edition
Acts and M^n printed. 1596.
which you choose to make up the matter. Furthermore in the year next
following, 1550. other Letters likewise were sent for the taking down of
Altars in Churches, and setting up the Table instead of the same, unto Nicholas
Ridley, who being Bishop of Rochester before, was then made Bp. of London in
Bonners place: the Copy and contents of the Kings letters are these as
follows. Here, say you, page 128.
the full point should be, at setting up the Table instead of the same. And
then a new period to begin with the following words, unto Nicholas Ridley, etc.
By this device you think to have won the day, not seeing that by this fine
fancy, you have made nonsense of the first period, and very strange English in
the last. For let the first be thus; Furthermore in the year 1550. other
Letters likewise were sent for the taking down of Altars, and setting up the
Table in stead of the same: and then we shall have letters sent, to we know not
whom; which would be answered and obeyed, we know not when. Then take the
second by it self; unto Nicholas Ridley (who being Bp. of Rochester before,
was then made Bp. of London in Bonners place) the Copy and contents of the
Kings Letters are these as follows: and then you set the Cart before the
Horse, and give us such a kind of English, as is not justifiable by the grammar
of the English tongue. Besides which handling of your Author, you venture on an
affirmation that you have no ground for; nay I am sure you know the contrary to
what there you say. You cite us p. 108, 109.
elsewhere in your book, the third Sermon of Bp. Hooper upon Jonah, preached
before K. Edw. An. 1550. say you, An. 1551. says Mr. Prynne, whose account I
follow. And in that Sermon, It were well then (says he) that it might please
the Magistrates to turn the Altars into Tables, according to the first
institution of Christ, to take away the false persuasion of the people, they
have of sacrifices to be done upon the Altars. For as long as the Altars
remain, both the ignorant people, and the ignorant and evil persuaded Priest,
will dream always of sacrifice. By which it is apparent, that whatsoever had
been done by ^p. Ridley, all other dioceses, as well as that of London, did not
agree on putting down of Altars, and setting up of Tables, as you rashly say.
Nor is it likely that the Altars generally were taken down throughout the
Kingdom, until the second Liturgy was confirmed by Parliament, which was not
till the year 1552 as you say your self.

Next for the manner how they were taken down, you tell us in the Bishops
letter, Letter (in the Coal.) p. 74.
that the people being scandalized herewith (i. e. with Altars) in Country
Churches, first beats them down de facto, then the Supreme Magistrate, by a
kind of Law, puts them down de jure. Your Copy Letter (in the holy Table) p.
17.
stilo novo relates it thus, as viz. that the people being scandalized herewith
in Country Churches, first, it seems, beat them down de facto; then the
Supreme Magistrate, (as here the King) by the advice of Archb. Cranmer and the
rest of his Counsel did, An. 1550. by a kind of Law put them down de jure, 4.
Ed. 6. Nov. 24. This alteration you have made to shift the scene a little, and
carry this tumultuous breaking down of Altars, which you here describe, from
hence to Germany. For you perceive by this, that he relates in the first place,
page 186.
to the reformation of Altars beyond the seas (because he speaks of Supreme
Magistrates,) which the people began by way of fact, before the Magistrates
established the same by way of Law. And this, you say, Luther complains of
against Carolostadius, that he chose rather to hew down, than dispute down
Altars. No question but the Angels which removed our Ladies chamber, from her
house in Bethlem l unto her Chapel at Loretto, assisted you in the
performance of this miracle. It could not possibly be the work of a mortal
man, to shift so suddenly a business of this weight, from England, to the
parts beyond sea. Aeneid. l. 1
Nec vox hominem sonat. Happy man be your dole, that are so highly in the
favor of your friends and followers, that whatsoever you say unto them is
received as Gospel. You had not else adventured on so fine a Legend, but that
you can command belief, even from very Infidels. Minut. Felix.
Tam facilis in mendaciis fides, ut etiam crediderint alia monstrosa miracula.
But tell me between you and me, I will keep your counsel; how can this
business relate unto those of Germany? because, say you, he speaks of Supreme
Magistrates. Why man. Your own Then the Supreme Magi^trate, p. 17.
edition has it Magistrate, not Magistrates; and will you fly off from your
own? Besides you tell us in the words immediately before, that in K. Edwards
Liturgy of 1549. it is almost every where; but in that of 1552. it is no where
called an Altar, but the Lords board. Then you go on, and ask, why so? and
presently return this answer, because the people being scandalized herewith in
Country Churches, first it seems beat them down de facto; and then the
supreme Magistrate, etc. Kind-hearted Germans, that liking not of Altars in K.
Edwards Liturgy, would beat them down at home, in their own Countries,
because the people (which they never heard of) were scandalized herewith in
England. Faith tell me, do you not think them very honest fellows, and that
a dozen of Grantham Ale were well bestowed upon them, by the Alderman there,
for doing such an excellent piece of service, to promote the cause? I need not
tell you more of this trim invention, which made you falsify the letter, with
a long Parenthesis, as here the King, etc. to bring in this Pageant. Only I
shall advise you as a special friend, to take a care you see it entered in the
next edition of the Acts and Monuments, which every time it comes into the
world, grows bigger, by such hands as yours; and will, no doubt, in time grow
great, and be Pellibus exiguis arctatur Livius ingens. Mart.
Livius ingens.

Well then, the Altars in the Church of England being thus beaten down by the
high-Germanes, what did the English do themselves? No doubt but they did beat
them down too; and so they did: the one, in your imagination only, that
dainty forge of new devices; the other in very deed, de facto. And then the
King came after with his bottle and bag, to learn of such good teachers what
he was to do in the case de jure. First beaten down de facto, then put down
de jure: first by the people, after by the King; who as the Doctor told you in
his Coal from the Altar, could not but come too late to carry any stroke at
all in so great business, which they had done before he came. I warrant you,
the King, being young, could not contain himself within doors, but must
needs run to see the sport, when he heard them at it: and being come,
thanked his good people for their pains, and so sent them home. But that your
thoughts were taken up amongst the Germans, you should have told your story
thus: viz. That first the people beat down some de facto, and then the King
much taken with the example, put down the rest de jure, and by public order.
Yet had you told it thus, the Doctor possibly might have questioned you for the
relation: desiring you, as formerly, to tell where you find it: either that
they were beaten down, or beaten down de facto by the common people. That
they Acts and Mon. part. 2. p. 699.
were taken down in the most part of the Churches of this Realm, the Kings
letters tell us: but taking down implies an orderly proceeding; beating down,
has none. And the Kings letters say withal, that they were taken down on
good and godly considerations: which as the Doctor thinks, Coal from the Altar,
p. 41.
implies some order and authority from them that had a power to do it; some
secret Order possibly, from the Lord Protector, or those that after signed the
letter, who meant to try this way how the thing would relish, before they would
appear in it, or be seen to act it. Or put the case, some Bishops now, should
on some grounds to them best known, give way unto the Clergy of their
several Diocesses, to place the Table Altar-wise; and then the King should
signify to the Bishop of Lincoln, that it was come unto his knowledge, that in
many places of the Kingdom the holy table was removed to the Altar place on
certain good and godly considerations: would this be an Argument unto future
ages, that this was done de facto by the Country people? Besides, why should
you think the people in most places of the Realm, were scandalized with Altars
in the Country Churches; when in so many places of the Realm, they took up
Arms, because the Mass was taken from them. Those enterprises which you
speak of, of some certain (s) Zelots in the beginning of K. Edwards, Qu.
Mary's, and Qu. Elizabeth's reign, which sometimes you call good and godly
considerations, and sometimes the irregular forwardness of the people, were
before any law established: and therefore of no kin to these. Things were now
settled by a law, and by that law the Altars were to stand as before they did.
Nor durst the people in the most part of the Churches of the Realm have taken
down the Altars then by law established, on any private consideration how good
soever: therefore I should rather think that it was done in some places, and by
authority from some Ordinaries, such whom the Lords found fittest for the
alteration. You cavil with the Doctor, and reckon it I will give you a short
taste of his faining and his failing. p. 2.
amongst his fainings, for telling you what fine doctrine this was for the
common people; viz. this your report of beating down the Altars in the Country
Churches: wherein he fails, you say, because the writer only mentions it as
a matter of Fact. But being it was such a Fact, as drew on the law, the kind of
law you tell us of, which after put them down de jure: think you to meet with
no apt scholars, that can tell how to raise a doctrine out of the relation?
Our Ancestors in K. Edwards days were zealous of the reformation, and beat
down those dressers; and why should we betray Gods cause, and suffer them to
be advanced? Are you assured, that none amongst your partisans will apply it
so, and after vouch you for their Author? As for the Order of K. Edward, which
you have slighted off with a kind of law, (as you did that in Q^. Elizabeth's
Injunctions with a kind of somewhat) you still stand to that, as being neither
Act of Parliament, nor Act of Council, but an Act of the King sitting in
Council. A most pretty quillet page 128.
Here is a subtilty indeed, a subtilty in print, as they use to say. But take
heed, nihil odiosius est nimio acumine. You should not spend too many of your
nice distinctions upon Kings and Princes.

Now for the alteration of the Liturgy, which did indeed draw with it a full
and final alteration in the thing now talked of: you take great pains to make
it visible unto the world, that Calvin had no finger in it. It had been happy
for this Church, if he and Beza could have kept themselves to their
meditations, and not been curiosi in aliena republica, as they were too much.
You say of Calvin that he was a Polypragmon page 144.
and made his letters fly to all Princes in the world that did but look
toward a Reformation: and that no man page 145.
conceives him to be more pragmatically zealous than you do, even in those
Countries which cared least for him. If so, why take you up the Bucklers for
him, or think he might not stickle here, as in other places? The Doctor drew
a story of it from his own Epistles; which you endeavor to refell, by making
ante-dates, or false dates unto all his letters, and unto most of all the rest,
whom you there produce. As for example: The Letter to my Lord Protector, you
date Octo. 22. 1546. which was a year before K. Edward came unto the Crown
Ibid.
as you say your self: what time he neither was Protector, nor was there any
English Liturgy to except against. Then that Archbishop Cranmer page 144.
did write for Bucer to come over, the 2. of Oct. An. 1549. when Bucer had
been here a long time before, and being at Canterbury, writes Inter opu^cula
Anglicana, pa. 550.
a letter to P. Martyr, dated the 20. day of June that year: and so you make
him come before he was sent for. So for the treaty with the French, whereof
Calvin speaks Epist. ad Buce^um.
you make that March 24. 1549. when Bucer had been here 10. months at least:
and yet you date Pet. Alexanders letter page 143. in marg.
on the same day also, writ by the appointment of my Lord Archbishop to invite
him hither. And thus you toil and moile your self, (h) pugnantia secum,
frontibus adversis componere; to join such things together as are not
competible. But all is well enough so it please the people, and that you can
set out the Doctor like a Jack of Lent, for every boy to fling his stick at.
Therefore to set the matter right, and let you see the Doctor is not so
extremely ignorant in See then how well, on looked into the stori^s of the time,
p 144.
all the story of those times, as you please to make him: I will set down some
bounds and landmarks as it were, for our direction in this search, such as by
no means can deceive us. Know then, that Io. Stow, p. 593.
on the last of Ian. 1547. according to the account of those foreign States,
which do begin the year at Christmasse, K. Edward came unto the Crown: that
Imprinted at London the last day of fuly. An. 1547.
in the lulie following he set out his Injunctions, in the which many things
there are, that tend unto a Reformation of Religion: and that in the V. the
s^atutes of that King.
November after, in the self same year, he held his first Parliament,
wherein the distribution of the Sacrament 1 Ed. 6. c. 1.
subutraque specie, was by law established. An. 1548. Feb. 11. Acts and Mon.
part. 2* p. 658.
an Order was sent forth by the Lords of the Council for the abolishing of
Images; March the 13. next following, the Order of administering the Communion,
Ibid. p. 658.
agreed upon at Windsor, by the Prelates and other learned men, Ibid. p. 659,
660.
was by the King confirmed, and recommended to the Bishops for the public use.
And on the 2. of Oct. the same year, did the Archbishop write to Bucer to come
over hither. Bucer in script. Anglic. p. 190.
Veni igitur ad nos, and te operarium praesta in mess Domini, as the letter
tells us. In the November of that year, began the second 2 and 3. Ed. 6. V.
the statutes.
Parliament of K. Edward, and held on till the 14. of March next after, falling
in An. 1549. in the same account; in which the first Liturgy was confirmed and
ratified. The tenth day after that, March 24. Pet. Alexander, S^cretarie to the
Archbishop, writes again to Bucer In script. Anglic. p. 191.
with a Veni igitur quam citissime poteris* and the June after that we find
him here at Canterbury, from whence he writ to Pet. Martyr, as before was said.
Io. Stow, p. 596.
Apr. 6. Proclamation was made for putting down the Mass throughout the
Realm: Id. ibid.
the July following, those of Devonshire and Cornwall rose up in Arms,
desiring to have their old religion restored again; and Id. 597.
on the 8. of August next, (the Kingdom being thus embroyled) the French
Ambassador made defiance to the King of England. Id. p. 600.
The 14. of Oct. after, the Duke of Somerset was committed to the Tower, and
Id. p. 603.
thence released F^br. 6. 1550. and on the 8. of April next, (being before
discharged of the Protectourship) was sworn Id. p. 604.
Privy Counselor. Mean time, Id. p. 605.
on Ian. 22. Commissioners were sent to treat of a peace with France, which was
Id. p. 604.
proclaimed the last of March next after following. An. 1551. Ianuar. 30. Mart.
In a postscript ad censuram, ep. 503.
Bucer died. The 16. Ioh. St^w, p. 605.
of Oct. after, the Duke of Somerset was committed to the Tower, and on the
first Id. p. 606.
of December following condemned to death. An. 1552. Io. Stow, p. 607. and
Brook tit. Somerset.
Ian. 22. the Duke of Somerset was beheaded; and on the morrow Vide Stat. 5.
and 6. Edw. 6.
next began the Parliament 5. and 6. of Edw. 6. in which the second Liturgy
was confirmed. This said, we shall be sure to find how matters went; and how
far you have lost your self, by your too much quarrelling.

The Doctor thus begins, Coal from the Altar, p. 39.
It seems that Bucer had informed Calvin of the condition of this Church, and
the public Liturgy thereof, and thereupon he wrote to the Duke of Somerset,
who was then Protector. For thus he signifies to Bucer, Epist. ad Bucerum. p.
81.
Dominum Protectorem, ut volebas, conatus sum hortari, ut flagitabat praesens
rerum status, etc, and then advises Bucer to be instant with him, ut ritus,
qui superstitionis aliquid redolent, tollantur e medio, that all such rites as
savoured of superstition should be took away. And how far that might reach,
you can tell your self, knowing the humor of the man, as it seems you do,

Nay he went somewhat further yet, bidding him, page 144.
as you note your self, to take heed of his old fault, (for fault he thought
it) which was to run a moderate course in his Reformations, mediis consiliis
vel authorem esse vel approbatorem. Now Pet. Alexanders letter for calling in
of Bucer, bears date in March, 1549. and Bucer was at Canterbury the June next
following: the first thing that he did at his coming hither, as he says
himself, being to make himself acquainted with the English Liturgy. In
praefatione ad censuram.
Cum primum in hoc regnum venissem, etc. librum illum sacrorum, per
interpretem, quantum potui, cognovi diligenter, as he relates it to the
Archbishop. Of his he gave account to Calvin; and as it seems (Dominum
Protectorem, ut volebas, etc.) desired some letter from him to my Lord
Protector. Not as He desired Calv^n to write by him to the Protector, etc. p.
144.
you dream, before his coming over hither, and before the Liturgy was
published; though possibly before he had been seen of the Duke of Somerset
(the hurly-burlies of those times considered.) For Calvin tells you in that
letter, tumultu^ jam intus sodatos esse confid^, that he now hoped, that all
the tumults and commotions within the Realm were composed and pacified; and
also that there was a rumor of a truce with France. So that this letter must
needs be dated about the Autumn after Bucers coming hither: the Reb^lls not
being fully crushed till the end of August; and nothing, but the news of our
peace within, drawing the French men to assent to a truce abroad.

Then for his letter to the Protector, which is herein mentioned, clearly it
is the letter printed, which bears not date two years before. Not the letter
printed, bearing date two years before p. 144.
as you with ignorance and confidence enough, have been pleased to say. For
you may find the date hereof by a better character, being the ^ame with that
to Bucer. For Epist. ad Protect. Angl. page 66.
he takes notice in that letter, of those Commotions, ingentes illae turbae,
which had happened here, ab aliquo tempore, not long before: as also that the
al^eration of religion was, in part, the cause thereof; quos ex part mutati^
i^ religionis causa concitabat, as himself there tells you. So that this letter
must be written ^alfe a year at least, after the Liturgy established by Act
^f Parliament, and not It must be full 3. years before, etc. p. 145.
three years before, as you ridiculously compute it. As for the substance of
that letter, he there excepteth against Commemoration of the dead (which he
acknowledges however to be very ancient, as also against Chrisme, and extreme
unction; which last (unctionis ceremonia) you have most childishly translated
Chrisoms, oy^e in Bapti^me, and comme^ora^ion of the dead. page 1^6.
oil in Baptism. Which said, he wishes illa omnia abscindi semel, that all
these ceremonies should be abrogated; and that withal he should go forwards
to reform the Church, Quia nempe ve^iti sunt, ut major re^u^ muta^io fe^ri no^
possit, praeser^^m ubi vicino^u^ ratio habenda est. page 70.
without fear or wit, without regard of peace at home, or correspondency
abroad! Such considerations being only to be had in civil matters, but not in
matters of the Church, in quo nihil non ad Deiverbum exigi fas est, wherein not
any thing is to be exacted, which is not warranted by the Word; and in the
managing whereof there is not any thing more distastefull in the eyes of God
than Idem ibid. page 70.
worldly wisdom, ut vel moderemur, vel rescindamus, etc. either in moderating,
cutting off, or going backward, but merely as we are directed by his will
revealed. Nor were these three, and that about Impropriations, the only things
on which he touches, as you please to say. He touches also there on the book
of Quoniam ver^or ne pauce ex^e^^ in regno vivae (...): major pa^s autem (...)
page 68.
Homilies, which very faintly he permits for a season only, but not allows
of; and thereby gave the hint to others, who ever since almost have declamed
against them. And if you think that Calvin never after meddled with the Duke,
about this business, of the Orders of the Church of England; you are exceeding
much mistaken. For whatsoever (...).
crush he had, he lost but little of his power, though he lo^t his Office: and
Calvin still adressed himself unto him for the Advancement of the work. Look
in his letter unto Interea sc^psi ad illu^trissimu^ Duce Some^seti. p. 98.
Bullinger, dated Apr. 10. 1551. which was not quite a year before the
Liturgy was altered, and he will tell you what he did: Interea sc^psi ad
illu^trissimu^ Duce Some^seti. p. 98.
I writ, says he, to the most illustrious D. of Somerset to this effect, that
there was no hope but that the Papists would grow insolenter every day than
others, nisi mature compositum esset dissidium de ceremoniis, unless the
difference were composed about the ceremonies. Composed, and how? not by
reducing the opponents to conformity, but by encouraging them rather in their
opposition: especially by supporting Hooper then Bp. of Gloucester, the
principal leader of that faction, and very zealous (amongst other things)
against the Altar's yet remaining, as before I showed. For so it follows in
that letter, hortatus ergo sum hominem, ut Hoppero manum porrigeret; which it
seems was done, as he propounded. For in another unto Bullinger dated the 29.
of August following, he certifieth to him Certu^ est D. Hopperum episcopatui
suo restitutum esse. page 103.
that Hooper was restored to his Bishopric. Now this being but the year
before the alteration of the Liturgy, Calvin being so intent against the
Orders of this Church, the Duke so forwards to complie with him; and Hooper who
had no less interest in Dudly of N^rthumberland, than Calvin with the Duke of
Somerset, (whereof consult your author, the Acts and Mon. par. 3. p. 147.)
being so eager on the chase: it is not to be doubted but the business went
forwards, though the Duke went backwards. In the relating of which story you
flutter up and down, and have no consistency. You tell us page 147. that in
the first sitting of that Parliament wherein the second Liturgy was confirmed,
he was attainted, and condemned, and presently executed: whereas indeed he was
attainted almost two months, and executed just a day, before that sitting. You
tell us, page 149. that he was a condemned Prisoner, looking every day for the
stroke of the Axe, when the book was passing the Committies (if at all any
such Committie ever was about that Book, which I somewhat question:) whereas
the Axe had done, and the stroke was past, before the Session.

Finally, whereas, in many places of the Bishops letter, you call the second
Liturgy, the Liturgy of the year 1552. as indeed it was: you tell us here,
page 148. of a certain Letter which was delivered to the Duke from Calvin, An.
1551. (as most true it was so) the Liturgy being then newly altered. And so by
that account, the Liturgy was altered, when as the Duke of Somerset was
neither attainted, condemned, or executed, as before you said. Is this your
looking unto the story of the times, which you so much brag of? But as
before I told you, however the Duke went backward, the work went forwards; the
party being grown so well compacted, that it could go alone, without any
leader: especially Duke Dudley who then ruled the roast, having a great opinion
of Bishop Hooper; who being no friend unto the Altars of the Church himself,
might easily induce his Patron to promote the cause.

Next for his tampering with the King and Archbishop Cranmer, we have good
warrant from his Letters. In that unto Farellus Anno 1551. he tells you of a
Letter sent by him to the King by Mr. Nicolas, (one of his tel-tales page 148.
as you call him;) and of the welcome it found both with the King, and with his
Council: as also that he was advised by my Lord of Canterbury to write more
frequently unto the King, than he had done formerly: Not about restitution of
Impropriations, that's but your device; the Archbishop sent him no such message,
unless you find it in your dreams. Calvin had other things to aim at,
although he took that also as it came in his way. Vide Epist. illam ad
Farellu^. p. 384.
In statu Regni multa adhuc desiderantur; many things were amiss that needed
reformation. That was more like to be the Argument of his adresses to the
King. If you will please to take his word, himself shall tell you in his
aforesaid Letter unto Bullinger, that he had writ both to the King and to the
Council (and so had Bullinger it seems.) What was the purpose of those
letters? Epist ad Bulling. p. 98.
ut ^os incitaremus ad pergendum, to set them forwards on the work which was
then in hand: writing withal unto the Duke of Somerset, to countenance Hooper
in his opposition to the public orders then established. Your self have told
us of him, that he was page 144.
a Polypragmon, making his letters fly to all the Princes of the world, that
did but look toward a Reformation: If to all Princes, then no question but to
our King also amongst the rest; and what a kind of reformation Calvin aimed at,
you know well enough. Then for his practicing with the Archbishop; the Doctor
tells you Coal (...) the Altar. p. 39.
that he had written to him An. 1551. being the year before the Liturgy was
altered, complaining in the same, that in the service of this Church there was
remaining a whole mass of Popery, quae non obscuret m^d^, etc. which did not
only blemish, but even overwhelme Gods holy worship. This letter being placed
between two others dated the same year, induced the Doctor to believe, that
it was dated that year also: and this you challenge as And if we give it a date
from the Printers placing of the letter, which is your childish and erroneous
Criticisme. p. 143.
a childish and erroneous Criticisme; but bring no better of your own. Only
you would feign have it dated before this year, and if it might be, two years
sooner: because he tells the Archbishop there, of Chanting vespers here in
England, in an unknown tongue; which was, you say, inhibited by Parliament
page 148.
full two years before the altering of the Liturgy. But if you mark it well,
this will little help you. Epist. ad Calvin. p. 97.
Some Minister of Calvin's (perhaps his Tel-tale Monsieur Nicolas) had from
Cambridge certified him, how things went in England: particularly how all the
Church was provided for, and what great spoil was made of the means and
maintenance thereto belonging. But more especially that those great men, who
held Abby-lands, and consequently were to pay some pensions to the Monks
surviving, did put them into benefices and cure of souls, who had nor mind
nor meaning to discharge that duty, ut pensione iis persolvenda se liberarent,
only to ease themselves of paying the Pensions. This being certified by
Calvin, by a letter dated on Whitsunday, An. 1550. in his next missive to the
Archbishop, Epist. ad Cranmer. p. 101
he complains of both: First, that the Church was so exposed to open Port-sale
(quod praedae sunt expositi Ecclesiae reditus.) and secondly, quod ex publico
E^clesiae proventu aluntur otiosi ventres, etc. that the revenue of the Church
should be bestowed upon those idle bellies (and so you know they called the
Monks) which in an unknown tongue chanted out the Vespers. If this suffice
not for the date, then be pleased to know, that Calvin in that letter relates
to somewhat that had been done by the Archbishop in the Reforming of this
Church for three years before. Atque utinam te duce aliquanto longius jam ante
triennium progressi forent; which (says he) had they done, there had not
been such superstitions left, as he there complains of. Now the first
Reformation made by the Archbishops means, was the Communion book set out 1548.
for the receiving of the Sacrament sub utraque specie. To which if you will
add those three years which are there remembered; you must needs date this
letter as the Doctor does, An. 1551. But the Date seems to be much before
Anno 1551. which is D. Coals conjecture. p. 148.
not one minute sooner.

The Doctor hereupon concludes, as before he did, that leaving the word Altar
out of the Common Prayer book last established, and other alterations which
were therein made, grew not from any Coal, p. 40.
scandal taken at the Altars by the Country people, but a dislike that Calvin
had conceived against the Liturgy, as before was said. Of any hand that Martin
Bucer had therein, more than that he had signified unto Calvin, the quality
and condition of this Church, and of the Liturgy thereof, the said Doctor
says not; and this not absolutely neither, but with a sic videtur, Ibid. p. 39.
that so it seemed. Yet you cry out, without a cause, page 145.
that it was the King, the Lords, and the State, rather than any incitement of
Martin Bucer, that made this alteration in the Liturgy, in the point of
Altars. An alteration there was made by the King and State, though not by the
incitement of Martin Bucer, but of Calvin rather, that Polypragmon, as you call
him.

For, that the Alteration of K. Edwards Liturgy proceeded rather of some
motions from without, than any great dislike at home; the Doctor was induced to
believe, the rather, because the King Co^l, p. 40.
had formerly affirmed in his Answer to the Devonshire men, that the Lords
Supper, as it was then administered, was brought even to the very use as Christ
left it, as the Apostles used it, and as the holy Fathers delivered it. Acts
and Monuments, part 2. page 667. And secondly, because he had observed, that
in the Act of Parliament, by which that Liturgy of 1549. was called in, the
book of Common prayer (so called in) was affirmed to be agreeable to Gods
Word, and the Primitive Church. 5. and 6. Ed. 6. ca. 1. Unto the first of
these, you promise such an Answer, page 150.
an An^wer set down in such Capital letters, that he that runs may read.
And this, no doubt you mean to do, only in favor to the Doctor, who being
but a blinker, as you please to call him, would hardly see your Answer in a
lesser Character.

But first, because we know your tricks, we will set down in terminis, as the
story tells us, what was demanded by the Rebels, and what was answered by the
King: and after look upon the gloss which you make of both, that we may see
which of them you report most falsely, and what you gather from the same.

The Rebels they demanded thus:

Acts and Mon. part. 2. p. 666.
Forasmuch as we constantly believe, that after the Priest has spoken the
words of consecration, being at Mass, there celebrating and consecrating the
same; there is very really the body and blood of our Savior Jesus Christ, God
and man; and that no substance of bread and wine remains after, but the very
self same body that was borne of the Virgin Mary, and was given upon the
Cross for our Redemption; therefore we will have Mass celebrated as it was
in times past, without any man communicating with the Priests, forasmuch as
many rudely presuming unworthily to receive the same, put no difference between
the Lords body, and other kind of meat; some saying that it is bread both
before and after; some saying that it is profitable to no man except he
receive it, with many other abused terms.

Now to this Article of theirs, the King thus replied:

Acts and Mon. part. 2. p. 667.
For the Mass, I assure you no small study nor travel has been spent, by
all the learned Clergy, therein, and to avoid all contention, it is brought
even to the very use as Christ left it, as the Apostles used it, as the holy
Fathers delivered it, indeed somewhat altered from that the Popes of Rome for
their lucre brought it to. And although ye may hear the contrary from some
Popish evil men, yet Our Majesty, which for Our Honor may not be blemished
and stained, assures you, that they deceive, abuse you, and blow these
opinions into your heads, to finish their own purposes.

This is the plain song, as it passed between the Rebels and the King. And
now I will set down your descant on it, in your own words verbatim, not a
tittle altered, that all which run may read, and see how shamefully you
abuse your own dearest Author.

page 150, 151
The Rebels, in their third Article, (set on by the Popish Priests) do
petition for their Mass (that is, that which we call the Canon of the Mass)
and words of consecration, as they had it before, and that the Priests might
celebrate it alone, without the communicating of the people.

To this the King answers, That for the Canon of the Mass and words of
Consecration, (which is nothing altered in the second Liturgy) they are such
as were used by Christ, the Apostles, and the ancient Fathers: that is, They
are the very words of the Institution. But for the second part of their demand,
which was for the sacrifice of the Mass, or the Priests eating alone, they
must excuse him: For this the Popes of Rome for their l^cre added to it. So
there is a clear Answer to both parts of the Article.

A very clear answer, if you mark it well. The Rebels make demand of the
whole Mass, modo and forma, as before it had been celebrated: you make them
speak only of the Canon of the Mass, and words of Consecration. The King, in
his reply, makes answer to the whole Mass, as it was commonly then called, the
whole form and order of the Communion in the public Liturgy, that it was
brought even to the very use as Christ left it, the Apostles used it, and the
holy Fathers delivered it: you make him answer only of the Canon, and words of
Institution, as if that were all. This is not to report an answer, but to make
an answer; and draw that commendation to a part of the common Liturgy, which
was intended of the whole. And yet your Inference is far worse than your
Report: For you have made the King to say, that they should have a Table, and a
Communion, and the words of Consecration, as they were used by Christ, the
Apostles, and the ancient Fathers: but they should have no Altar, nor
sacrifice; for these the Popes of Rome, for their lucre, had added to the
Institution.

This, were there nothing else, would set you forth for what you are; a man
that care not what you say, or whom you ^alsifie, so you may run away from
the present danger, though afterward it overtakes you, and falls far heavier
on you than before it did.

Next, let us see what you reply to that which concerns the Parliament, and
the opinion which it had of the former Liturgy, as both agreeable to Gods
Word, and the Primitive Church. And first you charge the Doctor with borrowing
page 151
that passage from father Parsons three Conversions. Whether it be in father
Parsons, the Doctor knows not. But whether it be or not, that comes all to
one, as long as it is so delivered in the Act of Parliament. Then for the Act
itself, page 152.
you answer, that whereas some sensual persons, and refractorie Papists, had
forb^rne to repair to the Parish-Churches upon the establishment of the
English Service, the Parliament does in the Preamble tell the offenders against
this new law, that prayers in the mother tongue is no invention of theirs, as
the Priests would make them believe, but the doctrine of the Word of God, and
the practice of the Primitive Church: meddling no farther with the Liturgy in
this part of the Act, than as it was a service in the mother tongue.

I have been told, it was a saying of my Lord Chancellor Egerton, that Dr Day,
once Dean of Windsor, had the most excellent arts of creeping out of the law,
of any man whose name was ever brought in Chanc^ry. That Doctor, and this
Minister, are much of the same quality; our Minister being as expert in
creeping out of an authority, as ever was that Doctor in creeping out of the
law. But yet he creepes not so away, but a man may catch him: and catch him
sure we will for all his cunning. For if we look into the Act of Parliament,
we shall easily find, that not the language only, but the order, form, and
fabric of the divine Service before established, is said to be agreeable to
the Word of God, and the Primitive Church, which I desire you to observe, as it
is here presented 5. and 6. Ed. 6. cap. 1.
to you.

Whereas (says the Act) there has been a very godly order set forth by
authority of Parliament, for Common prayer and administration of the Sacraments
to be used in the mother tongue, within this Church of England, agreeable unto
the Word of God, and the Primitive Church, very comfortable to all good people,
desiring to live in christian Conversation, and most profitable to the estate
of this Realm, etc. What think you, on your second thoughts, is that so much
commended by the Parliament? either the very Order it self, of Common prayer
and administration of the Sacraments, or the being of it in the English tongue.
It could not be the being of it in the English tongue. For then the Romish
Missall, had it been translated word for word, without more alteration than
the language only, might have been also said to be agreeable to the Word of
God, and the Primitive Church; which I am sure you will not say. And therefore
it must be the whole form and order, that godly order, as they call it, of
common prayer and administration of the Sacraments, to be used in the English
tongue (take them both together) which they so commended. Compare this
testimony of the Parliament, with that before given of it by the King; and see
if they affirm it of the language, or of the order of the service. The King
affirmed that it was brought unto that use as Christ left it, the Apostles used
it, and the holy Fathers delivered it: the Parliament, that it was agreeable to
the Word of God (including Christ and the Apostles) and to the Primitive
Church, including the holy Fathers. Nor did the Parliament alone vouchsafe this
testimony of the first Liturgy page 53.
Archbishop Bancroft speaking of it in his Sermon preached at S. Paul's Cross,
An. 1588. affirms that it was published first with such approbation, as that
it was accounted the work of God.

Besides, John Fox, Acts and Mon. part 2. p. 660.
whose testimony I am sure you will not refuse, (though you corrupt him too if
he come in your way) has told us of the Compilers of that Liturgy, first
that they were commanded by the King to have as well an eye and respect unto
the most sincere and pure Christian religion, taught by the holy Scriptures, as
also to the usages of the Primitive Church, and to draw up one convenient and
meet order, rite and fashion of Common prayer, and Administration of the
Sacraments, to be had and used within the Realm of England, and the Dominions
of the fame. And then he adds de proprio, as his own opinion, that through
the aid of the holy Ghost, and with one uniforme agreement, they did conclude,
set forth, and deliver to the King a book in English, entitled, A book of
the Common prayer, etc. This, as it shows his judgment of the aforesaid
Liturgy, so does it very fully explain the meaning of the Act of Parliament;
and that it did not, as you say, relate unto the language only, but the whole
order, rite, and fashion, of the Common prayer book.

Thus have we seen the a^teration of the Liturgy; and by that alteration, a
change of Altars into Tables, for the holy Sacrament. The next inquiry to be
made, is how the Table stood, and how they called it; and that as well upon the
taking down of Altars, An. 1550 in some places by the Kings own Order; as on
the general removal of them, by the second Liturgy. First for the placing of
the Table your own Author tells you, Acts and Mon. part. 2. p. 700.
that on occasion of taking down the Altars, here arose a great diversity
about the form of the Lords b^ard: some using it after the form of a Table,
and some of an Altar. But finally it was so ordered by the Bishop of London
(Ridley) that he appointed the form of a right Table, to be used in all his
Diocese: himself encouraging them unto it, by breaking down the wall
standing then by the high Altar side, in the Cathedral of S. Paul. But that it
was so ordered in all other Dioceses, the Doctor finds not any where, but in
the new Edition of the Bishops letter, which you have falsified of purpose to
make it say so, as before was noted. Nor did the old Edition say, that they the
other Dioceses, agreed at all upon the form and fashion of their Tables;
though they agreed, as you would have it, on the thing it self. And therefore
you have now put in these words, so soon, which tells another tale, than
before was told: as if all Dioceses having agreed as well as London, on
receiving Tables, did agree too, but not so soon upon the fashion of their
Tables. For that it was not thus in all other places, your own Miles Huggard
tells page 48. Of the holy Table.
you; and to him I send you to observe it. But this diversity, Ibid. p. 48.
say you, was settled by the Rubric, confirmed by law. What universally? There
is no question but you mean it; or to what purpose do you say so? Yet in
another place you tell us, that notwithstanding the said Rubric, the Tables
stood like Altars in Cathedral Churches; in some of them at least, which had
no privilege, I am sure, more than others had. For thus say you, page 183.
In some of the Cathedralls, where the steps were not transposed in tertio of
the Queen, and the wall on the backside of the Altar untaken down, the Table
might stand all along, as the Altar did. If it did stand in some, it might
stand in all; and if in the Cathedralls, then also in Parochial Churches;
unless you show us by what means they procured that might, which could not be
attained unto by any others. We find it also in the letter Coal from the
Altar, p. 72.
that only to make use of their covers, fronts, and other ornaments, the
Tables might be placed in some of the Chapels, Cap. 3.
and Cathedrals, of the same length and fashion that the Altars were of: Why
might not then the same be done in the Parish-Churches, which were provided at
that time, of covers, fronts, and other ornaments of that nature. page 38. of
the holy table.
Your self concludes it for a foolish dream, that the State should cast away
those rich furnitures of the Chapel, provided for the former Altars; and sure
it is as much a dream that they should cast away their ornaments of the self
same nature out of Country Churches.

And this I am the rather induced to think, because that in the Statute 1
Elizab. 1 Eliz. c. 2.
wherein the Common Prayer book now in force, was confirmed and ratified, it
was enacted, That all such ornaments of the Church shall be retained, and be in
use, as was in the Church of England by the authority of Parliament, in the 2.
of King Edw. 6. until other order should therein be taken by the authority of
the Queen, etc. Which makes it plain in my opinion, that in the latter end of
King Edw. the ^ixt, there had been nothing altered in the point of the
Churches Ornaments, nor consequently in the placing of the holy Table.

Then for the name, it seems they stood as little upon that, as upon the
former. When the old Altars stood, they called them Tables; and when the Tables
were set up, they called them Altars. Your Author Acts and Mon. part 2. p. 700.
could have told you at the first, that the book of Common prayer calls the
thing whereupon the Lords Supper is ministered, indifferently a Table, an Altar,
or the Lords board, without prescription of any form thereof, either of a
Table, or of an Altar. For as it calls it an Altar, whereupon the Lords
Supper is ministered, a Table, and the Lords boorde; so it calls the Table
where the holy Communion is distributed with laud and thankesgiving unto the
Lord, an Altar; for that there is offered the same sacrifice of praise and
thankesgiving. So when the Liturgy was altered, and the word Altar quite left
out; they spared not, as occasion was, to call the holy table by the name of
Altar. The blessed Sacrament it self, they thought no sacrilege to entitle by
the name of Sacrament of the Altar: so did the Martyrs, some of them, in Qu.
Mary's time; and the whole body of the State, in Parliament, 1 Eliz. as was
showed before. Old Father Latimer speaks positively, that it may be called an
Altar; though you, in the repeating of his words, have slipped aside that
passage, and made him cast the common calling of it so, Holy table, p. 97.
upon the Doctors, who might be mistaken. Yea and John Fox himself has told
you Acts and Mon. part 2. page 700.
in a marginall note, The Table, how it may be called an Altar, and in what
respect. The Rubric was no other then, than we find it now: and yet we do
not find, that any thought themselves so tied to the words thereof, as to use
no other. Yet this is pressed upon the Vicar. The Church in her Liturgy and
Canons calling the same a Table only, do not you call it an Altar, Coal* p.
74.
so the old edition: do not you now, under the Reformation, call it an Altar:
Holy table, p. 17.
so says the new. Cap. 4.
Under the Reformation? And why so? Only to make poor men believe, that
Altars, and the Reformation, cannot stand together. But you are out in that, as
in all the rest. The writer of the letter cannot but acknowledge, Ibid. p. 16.
that the Altars do stand still in the Lutherane Churches; and that the
Apology for the Augustane Confession does allow it: the Doctors and Divines
whereof, he does acknowledge also to be Ibid. p. 18.
sound Protestants, although they suffer Altars to stand. And in those other
Churches of the Reformation, some of the chief Divines are far more moderate
in this point, than you wish they were. Oecolampadius Admittimus etc. Epistola
ad Barthol. Hadder.
does allow the Eucharist to be called the Sacrament of the Altar: affirming
also, that for peace sake they would not abhor from the title of sacrifice, if
there were no deceit closely carried under it: and that there is no harm, in
calling the Lords Table by the name of Altar. Zanchie De cultu Dei extern. l. 1.
more fully, Quod neque Christus, neque Apostoli prohibuerunt altaria, aut
mandarunt quod mensis ligneis ut antur; That neither Christ nor his Apostles
have prohibited Altars, or enjoined wooden Tables; and therefore that it is to
be accounted a matter of indifferenci^, whether we use an Altar of stone, or a
table of wood, modo absit superstitio, so that no superstition be conceived of
either. So they determine of the point; not doubting, as it seems, but that it
might be lawful now, under the Reformation, to call the holy Table by the name
of Altar: and which makes more against your meaning, to use an Altar also in
the ministration. Which said, Ibid adieu to England, and the practice here;
meaning to look abroad into foreign parts in the rest that follows; where we
will labor to find out what was the ancient doctrine in the Church of God,
concerning Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars; and what the usage in this point of
placing the Communion table. Yet so that we will cast an eye, sometimes, and as
occasion is, on our own dear Mother, the Church of England, that we may see
how near she comes both in her doctrine, and her practice, to the ancient
Patterns. And we will see withal, what you have to say; and what it is
whereof you purpose to arraigne the poor man you wot of, in all those
particulars.

SECTION II.
CHAP. V.
What was the ancient Doctrine of the Church concerning Sacrifices, Priests and
Altars: and what the Doctrine of this Church in those particulars.
That Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars, were from the beginning, by the light of
nature; and that not only amongst the Patriarchs, but amongst the Gentiles.
That in the Christian Church there is a Sacrifice, Priests, and Altars, and
those both instituted and expressed in the holy Gospel. The like delivered by
Dionysius, Ignatius, Justin Martyr, and in the Canons of the Apostles. As also
by Tertullian, Irenaeus, Origin, and S. Cyprian. How the Apologeticks of those
times are to be interpreted, in their denial of Altars in the Christian
Church. Minutius Foelix falsified by the Minister of Linc. What were the
Sacrifices which the said Apologeticks did deny to be in the Church of Christ.
The difference between mystical and spiritual sacrifices. S. Ambrose
falsified by the Minister of Linc. in the point of Sacrifice. The Doctrine of
the Sacrifice delivered by Eusebius: The Doctrine of the following Fathers, of
Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars: What is the Doctrine of this Church* touching
the Priesthood and the Sacrifice. The judgment in these points, and in that of
Altars, of B. Andrews, K. James, B. Montague, and B. Morton.

IT is the observation of Eusebius De praeparat. Evangel. l. y. c. 6.
, that the Fathers which preceded Moses, and were quite ignorant of his Law,
disposed their ways according to a voluntary kind of piety; (...), framing
their lives and actions according to the law of Nature, Sect. 2.
which words relate not only unto their moral conversation, as good men, but
to their carriage in respect of Gods public worship, as r^ligious men. The
light of nature could inform them that there was a God, had not their Parents,
from the first man Ad^m, been careful to instruct them in that part of
knowledge: and the same light of nature did inform them also, that God was to
be worshipped by them; that there were some particular services expected of
him from his Creature. Of these, the first we meet with, upon record, is that
of Sacrifice almost to co-aevall with the world. For we are told of Cain and
Abel the two sons of Adam Genesis 4. 2, 3, 4.
, that the one of them being a tiller of the ground, brought of the frui^ of
the ground an offering unto the Lord: the other, being a keeper of sheep,
brought of the first lings of his flock, and the fat thereof. This was, it
seems, the quit-rent which they paid to Almighty God, that supreme Lord, of
and by whom they held their temporal fortunes; and from whose hands they were
to look for a more excellent estate. In Genesis 8. 20.
Lex naturalis aequum esse doouit, ut de do^is suis honoretur imprimis ipse qui
dedit: Natural reason, says Ruper^us, told them it was fit that God the
Donour should be honored with some part of that, which he himself had given
unto them. Thus in those early days have we found a Sacrifice, and
Sacrifices, as you say your self, are not to be found without Priests and
Altars. It is true, we do not read in Scriputre of any Altar, till that built
by Noah, nor of any Priest, before Melchisedec. Noah builded an Altar, says
the Text, Genesis 8. and of Melchisedec it is said, that he was the Priest of the
^ost high God, Genesis 14. Not that there were no Altars nor no Priests before.
For howsoever Pererius In Ge. 8. 20.
makes it doubtful, Cap. 5.
whether the use of Altars was before or not, An autem fu^rit usus Altarium,
ne^ne, inc^rtum est: yet Pet. de Moulin, de Altaribus and Sacr.
a good friend of yours, whose Tractat de Altaribus and Sacrificiis, you make
good use of (though you scorn to tell by whom you profit) is more assured that
they were in use from the first beginning. For speaking of the sacrifices of
Cain and Abel, he determines thus Cap. ^.
, Ad haec sacrificia aras extructas consent aneum est, that it is very likely
that Altars were erected for them. Then for the Priest, we need not take much
pains to seek him. The Office of the Priesthood V. Bilson of perp^t. govern.
of Chapter Chapter cap. 1.
was then in Adam, and held by him entirely, till Seth came of age, to take
part of the burden from him: that dignity continuing always after in the
Pater-familias, the eldest of the line or family, till the Leviticall
Priesthood was set up by Moses. An evidence whereof we have in Noah, who
though he was in years, and that his sons were young and lusty Genesis 8. 20.
, did yet discharge the Pri^stly function; Building an Altar to the Lord, and
offering burnt Offerings on the Altar. Which sacrifice of his was
Eucharisticall, not typical: a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving for his
preservation from the Flood; not any way significative of Christ's to come. And
therefore Scaliger Scal. Emen. temp. lib. 5.
does very truly tell us of him, that presently as soon as he came out of the
Arc., (...) immolavit Deo: which (says Rupertus) Non scripta, sed naturalis
lex ^quum esse docuit, was not commended to him by a written law, but merely by
the law of Nature. Such evidence we also have in the story of Melchisedec, who
being the eldest of his line (and commonly received for (...), the son of
Noah) is ^tiled Genesis 14. 18.
at the encounter between him and Abraham, the Priest of the most high God, as
before was said: being also there reported to be King of Salem. And thus it
also was, either by imitation or tradition, amongst the Gentiles. Their Princes
being Patres Patriae, and consequently in loco Patrum-familias, the
Grandfathers of all families in their Dominions, did also exercise the Priests,
Office in their solemn sacrifices, Iethro the father in law of Moses, who
Exodus 2. 16.
in the Text is called the Priest of Madian, is in the Margin of our Bibles,
called the Prince. And Anius Aen^id. l. 3.
in the Poet, is set out for both; Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum Phoebique
Sacerdos.

After when as the house of Jacob was grown great and numerous, and settled by
the Lord himself into the body of a Church; it pleased the Lord to signify by
Moses how he would be worshipped: to prescribe certain Rites and forms of
sacrifices, and for those sacrifices to appoint both Priests and Altars. These
sacrifices were divided into (...), or gratulatorie, such as was that of Noah,
before remembered; and expiatorie, or (...), which did relate to Christ our
Savior, as types of that most perfect expiatory sacrifice, which in the
fullness of time he was to offer on the Cross, for the sin of man. Which
practice of the Jews, abstracted from the end to which by God it was intended,
was generally in use also with the Gentiles: whether delivered to them by
tradition from their predecessors, or that it was dying spark of the light of
Nature, or that they took it from the Jews, whose Apes they were, needs not
now be questioned. Suffice it, that however they could not reach the height of
the true religion, nor knew not the intent of those frequent sacrifices which
were imposed upon the Jews; yet they would come as near it, as they could.
And therefore as they had their sacrifices, so would they also have their
Temples, their Priests, and Altars: places selected for divine worship, and
Ministers appointed for those places, and Altars upon which to minister, being
of like antiquity. The several gods in Rome, the Temples unto them belonging,
the Altars in those Temples, and Colleges of Priests attending on those
Altars, are things so generally known; that it were loss of time to insist
upon them. The like may also be observed in all other places, and of all Idols
whatsoever. For whatsoever the Idol represented, and by whomsoever it was
worshipped, if it were once set up and honored as a Deity, it drew along with
it all those necessary attendants, which were by God himself thought fit to
wait upon the true religion. The Groves and high places, the Priests and Altars
destinated to the service of that foul Idol Baal, mentioned in the holy
Scriptures, were proof enough of this, were there no proof else. But these
things being notiora, Pat^rc. Hist.
quam ut stylo egeant; I pass them over with this note: that there was never
any Nation, but had some religion, nor any religion (of men civilized) but had
Altars, Priests and Sacrifices as a part thereof, or as dependants thereupon.
Which mutual agreement between Jew and Gentile in those outward things,
although not in the end proposed: made them both severally persecute and deride
the Christians, as men of no religion, having (as they conceived) no Temples,
Altars, Priests, nor Sacrifices, and so by consequence no God.

For when our blessed Lord and Savior had by that one offering of himself
once for all, H^b. 9. 12. and 10. 14.
perfected for ever all them that are sanctified; and by his own blood entered
into the holyplace, and obtained eternal redemption for us: there was
forthwith an end of all those sacrifices in the law, by which this one of his
had been prefigured. They had been only given Col. 2. 17.
in umbra, as a shadow of the things to come: but when the body came it self,
the shadow was unserviceable, and for^hwith vanished. Yet did not Christ
deprive his Church for ever of all manner of Sacrifices, but only abrogated
those which had been before; which if continued, might have been a strong
presumption of his not coming in the flesh: in which respect, those, and all
other Perniciosas and mortiferas esse Christianis. Hie^. Ep. ^d August.
Ceremonies of the Jews, are by the Fathers said to be, not only dangerous,
but deadly, to us Christian men. The Passion of our Savior, as by the Lords
own Ordinance it was prefigured to the Jews in the legal Sacrifices, a Part
ante; so by Christ's institution, is it to be commemorated by us Christians, in
the holy Supper, a Part post. A Sacrifice it was in figure, a Sacrifice in
fact; and so by consequence, a Sacrifice in the commemorations, or upon the
Post-fact. A Sacrifice there was among the Jews, showing forth Christ's death
unto them, before his coming in the flesh: a Sacrifice there must be amongst
the Christians, to show forth the Lords death till he come in judgment. And if
a Sacrifice must be, there must be also Priests to do, and Altars whereupon
to do it: because without a Priest, and Altar, there can be no sacrifice: Yet
so that the precedent sacrifice was of a different nature from the subsequent:
and so are also both the Priest and Altar from those before: a bloody sacrifice
then, an unbloudy, now; a Priest derived from Aaron then, from Melchisedech,
now; an Altar for Mosaicall sacrifices then, for Evangelicall now. 1 Cor. 11.
23, 24, 25.
The Sacrifice prescribed by Christ, Qui novi Testamenti novam docuit
oblationem, says Irenaeus l. 4. c. 32. who the same night in which he was
betrayed, took bread, And when be had given thanks, he brake it, and said,
Take, eat, this is my body which is broken for you. Do this in remembrance of
me. Likewise also he took the Cup when he had supped, saying, This Cup is the
New Testament in my blood, do this as often as you drink it, in remembrance
of me. Which words, if they express not plain enough the nature of this
Sacrifice, to be commemorative, we may take those that follow by way of
Commentary Ib. v. 26.
: For as often as ye eat this bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the
Lords death till he come. Then for the Priests, they were appointed by him
also, even the holy Apostles who being only present at the Institution,
received a power from Christ to celebrate these holy mysteries in the Church of
God. A power not personal unto them, but such as was from them to be derived
upon others, and by them communicated unto others, for the instruction of Gods
people, and the performance of his service. Though the Apostles at that time
might represent the Church of Christ, and every part and member of it; yet this
gives no authority unto private men, to intermeddle in the sacrifice, but unto
the Apostles only, and their successors in the Evangelicall Priesthood. Our
Savior has left certain marks of characters, by which each member of the
Church may soon find his duty. For the Apostles and their successors in the
Priesthood, there is an edite and bibite, an eating an drinking, as private
men; men of no Orders in the Church: but there is an Hoc facite belonging to
them, only, as they are Priests under, and of the Gospel. Hoc facite, is for
the Priest, who has power to consecrate; Hoc edite, is both for Priest and
people, which are admitted to communicate: and so is the Hoc bibite too by the
Papists leave. Were it not thus, but that the people might hoc facere, take
bread, and break, and ^lesse it, and distribute it unto one another; we
should soon see a quick come off of our whole religion. The people then,
being prepared and fitted for it, may edere and bibere, but they must not
facere; that belongs only to the Priests, who claim that power from the
Apostles, on them conferred by our Redeemer. Last of all for the Altar, we
need not go far. S. Paul, in whom we find both the Priest and Sacrifice,
will help us to an Altar also. He calls it once a Table, and once an Altar
V. 21.
a Table in the tenth of the same Epistle, non potestis mensae Domini
participes esse, ye cannot be partakers of the Lords Table, and the table of
Devils; an Altar in the last of the Hebrews, V. 10.
Habe^^us Altar, we have an Altar whereof they have no right to ^ate that
serve the Tabernacle: an Altar in relation to the Sacrifice, which is there
commemorated; a Table in relation to the Sacrament which is thence
participated. Nay, so indi^ferent were those words to that blessed spirit,
that, as it seems, he stood not on the choice of either: but used the V. B.
Mont^gues App. p. 288.
word Table to denote those Altars on which the Gentiles sacrificed to their
wretched Idols; which he calls mensa^ Daemoniorum, the table of Devils, in the
Text remembered.

If we consult the Fathers who lived next those times, we find not that they
altered any thing in the present business, for which they had so good
authority from the Lords Apostles; but without any scruple, or opposition (that
we can meet with) used, as they had occasion, the name of Sacrifice, and
Priest, and Altar, in their several writings. Not that they tied themselves to
those words alone, but that they balked them not when they came in their way,
as if they were afraid to take notice of them. Cap. 3.
Denis the Areopagite (if it were he that wrote the books de Ecclesiastica
Hierarchia) has in one chapter, all those names of Priest, Altar, Sacrifice,
(...), in his native language; Sacerdos, Altar, Sacrificium, in the
translation: the Altar being honored with the attribute of (...), or divine;
the Sacrifice with that of (...), or most pure and holy. These works of
Dionysius, Monsieur du Moulin, does acknowledge to be very profitable, Vtilia
sane and plena bonae frugis, but withal thinks Sed posterioris avis. Tract.
de Al^, cap. 7.
they are of a later date. And therefore on unto Ignatius, of whom there is
less question amongst learned men: who in his several Epistles uses the
aforesaid names or terms, as being generally received, and of common usage.
First for the Altar, the Doctor showed you p. 46.
in his Coal, that it is found there, thrice at least, (...) ad Magnes. (...),
ad Philadelph. one altar, and one Altar in every Church: and (...), Gods Altar*
in his Epistle ad Tarsens. what is objected against these, we shall see
hereafter. So for the Minister, he calls him, (...), or Priest, which your good
friend Vedelius translates Sacerdos, Epist. ad Philadelph.
(...). Excellent (or estimable) are the Priests and Deacons, but more the
Bishop. In the Epistle ad Smyr^enses the same word occurres, to signify the
Priest, or Minister of Christ's holy Gospel: as also that of (...), rendered by
your Vedelius, Sacerdotium, by us called the Priesthood. Last of all for your
sacrific^, the same Ignatius ad Smyrrens.
gives it for a rule, as the times then were, that it is not lawful for the
Priest without the notice of his Bishop, (...), either to baptize, or offer, or
celebrate the sacrifice. Where by the way, we may perceive how much the
Cardinal was mistaken, in that he tells us for a certain, abslinuisse non
solum a vocabalo templi, sedetiam sacerdotii. Bellarm. de Cult. Sanct. l. 3. c.
4.
that the Apostles and most ancient Fathers of the Church, as Justin, and
Ignatius, did purposely abstain from the names of Priest and Priesthood, as
they did also from that of Temple: ne viderentur adhuc durare Iudaicae
ceremoniae, lest otherwise the Jewish ceremonies might be conceived to be in
force. It is true, that for the most part, Ignatius use^^ for the minister, the
word (...), or Presbyter, from which the French derived their Prebstre, and we
thence our Priest; but does not bind himself unto it. No more does Justin
Martyr neither: for having laid this for a rule, that, God accepts no
sacrifices but from his own Priests only; (...). In dial. ad T^yphomem.
he adds that he admits of all those sacrifices, (...), which Jesus Christ
commanded to be celebrated in his Name: and are accordingly performed of all
Christian people in the holy Eucharist of bread and wine. Performed in every
place by all Christian people, as it is an Eucharist, (...)
a sacrifice of praise and thanks to Almighty God, testified in and with a
participation of the outward elements: but celebrated by the Priest, and
especially as it is a sacrifice commemorative of the death and passion of our
Lord and Savior; who only have a power to consecrate those elements, which do
exhibit Christ unto us. As for the Canons of the Apostles, which if not writ
by them, are certainly of good antiquity, (and for the first 50 above all
danger of discarding) the Doctor told you p. 47.
in his Coal from the Altar, that the word (...) did occur in the third,
fourth, and fifth. And now he tells you into the bargain, that in the third
Canon you shall find mention of the sacrifice, (...). and in the fourth of the
oblation (...). All which assurance in this cause will fall, if you compute the
time, within the first 200. years, which you so much stand upon, and bate you
50. of your tale. So that you will not find, whatsoever you say, Let. to the
Vicar. p. 75.
that in the Christian Church, the name of Table is 200. years more ancient
than the name of Altar: both being of an equal standing, for ought I can see,
and both used indifferently.

Next these succeeded Irenaeus, of whom the Co^^. p. 46.
Doctor told you, that he did prove the Lords Apostles to be Priests, because
they did Deo and Altari servire: attend the service of the Lord, and wait upon
him at his Altars. What you except against in this, we shall see anon. Mean
time you may take notice here, that we have found in (...), both a Priest and
Altar: and think you that he will not find us a Sacrifice also? Look on him
but a little further, and he will tell you this, that there were sacrificia in
populo, sacrificia in ^cclesia, sacrifices in the Jewish Church, and sacrifices
in the Christi^n church: and Sed species immu^ata tantum. lib. 4. c. 34.
that the kind or species was only altered. The kind or nature of which
Christian sacrifice he tells us of in the same chapter, viz. that it is an
Eucharist, a tender of our gratitude to Almighty God, for all his blessings;
and a sanctifying of the creature to spiritual uses. Offerimus ei non quasi
indigenti, sed gratius agentes donationi ejus, and sanctificantes creaturam. In
this we have the several and distinct Offices which before we spoke of: a
sanctificatio creatur^, a blessing of the bread (for Quemad^odum enim qui est a
t^rra panis, percipiens vocationem Dei, jam non communis panis est, etc.
bread it is he speaks of) for holy uses, which is the Office of the Priest,
no man ever doubted it: and then a gratiarum actio, a giving thanks unto the
Lord for his mavelous benefits, which of the Office both of Priest and
people. The sanctifying of the creature, and glori^ying of the Creator, do
both relate unto Offerimus: and that unto the Sacrifices which are therein
treated of by that holy Father. So for Tertullian, the Doctor noted that he
tells us of the Altar twice, Si and ad Aram Deisteteris, in his Book de
Oratione, cap. 14. In that de poenitentia he remembers us of those that did
adgeniculari aris Dei, Standing before the Altar, at some times; kneeling
before the Altar at other times: but both before and at the Altar. And for the
name of Priest, however the Cardinal was of opinion, that the Apostles and
firstfathers of the Church did purposely forbear it, as before was said: yet
he has found at last, Iam satis perspecta differentia inter Iudaeos and
Christian^s. ^ell. de cult. Sanct. l. 3 cap.. 4
that Tempore Tertulliani, in Tertullians time, (the difference Iam satis
perspecta differentia inter Iudaeos and Christian^s. ^ell. de cult. Sanct. l. 3
cap..4
between Jews and Christians being well enough known) the name of Priest
came to be in use; and for the proof thereof referres us to his Books, de
velandis virginibus, de monogamia, and alibi: And therefore thither I refer
you. Origin next in course of time, has an whole Homily on the 18. Chapter of
Numbers, entitled Hom. 11. Vol. primum, p. 209.
de Primitiis offerendis. It is not to be thought that he composed that Homily
of purpose, to advance the reputation of the Jewish Priesthood: nor does he,
if a man would think so, give any countenance thereunto. And why? Pleading
expressly for the maintenance of the Ministers of Gods holy Word, he calls them
in plain terms, Sacerdotes Evangelii, Priest of the Gospel, affirming
first fruits to be due unto them at the least de congruo. Would you his own
words? take them thus; Decet enim, and utile est, eti^m Sacerdotibus Evangelii
(N. B.) offerri primitias. Would you the reason of it also? Because he says,
the Lord appointed, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the
Gospel, and they that Minister at the Altar, should live of the Altar. Where
if you should suspect that he does mean the Jewish Altars, himself shall
take you off from that fond suspicion. Et sicut hoc dignum and decens est, etc.
and as (says he) it is a fit and worthy thing that it should be so, so on the
other side, (...) is unworthy and unfit, if not utterly impious, that he which
honors God, and comes into his Church, Et scit Sacerdotes and Ministros
adsistere A^tari, and knows that the Priests and Ministers do wait upon the
Altar Et aut in verb^ Dei, aut ministerio Ecclesiae deservire, etc. Ibid.
and labor in the Word and Ministry, should not devote unto him the first
fruits of the land wherewith God has blessed him. In the whole drift of that
which follows, he drives so clearly at this point, that it is needless in a
menner to look for more; yet in his tenth Homily on the ninth of Joshua he is
more particular and exact, than before he was: For speaking of some persons who
were mere out-side-men and no more than so, he thus describes them; viz. Vt ad
Ecclesium veniant, and linent caput suum Sacerdotibus. In Ios. c. 9.
That they came diligently to the Church, and made due reverence to the
Priests, attended all Divine offices, honored the sevants of the Lord,
Adornatum qu^que Altaris vel Ecclesiae aliquid conferant, and did contribute
somewhat also to the ornament of the Altar or the Church. I hope there is proof
enough for Priests and Altars, and somewhat also for the maintenance of those
Priests that waited at the Altars, in the time of Origin. Nor will I instance
further in the Fathers of those Primitive times, than S. Cyprian only: and in
him only in those places to which you were directed in the Coal from the Altar,
p. 46.
where you were told, that l. 1. c. 7. in the Epistle ad Epictetum, it was
called Altar Dei, Gods Altar: and that there somewhat more occurred concerning
Altars in the 8. and 9. Epistle of the same book also. Only I cannot choose but
tell you, that in the last of those remembered, we have not found an Altar only,
but that there is a Sacrifice and a Priest to be found there also. For there
we have a maxim Divino sacerdotio ^onorati. lib. 1. ^p. 9.
concerning those which are promoted to the holy Priesthood, and in actual
Orders, that they ought only Altari and sacrificiis deser^ire, to attend the
Altar and the sacrifices, and be devoted to their prayers and orizons to
Almighty God. Thrice in the same Epistle we find punctual mention of
Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars; enough of conscience to declare what was the
usage of the Church in S. Cyprians time.

Which being so, a question may be justly made, how it should come to pass,
that the Apologeticks of those very times, should so unanimously concur
against the being of Altars in the Christian Church: especially that Origin,
who is so much for it in his Homilies, should be so much against it in his
Contra Celsum. Orig. l. 8.
Celsus objected it against the Christians, (...), that they declined the
building or setting up of Altars, Images, and Temples. Caecilius in the
dialogue made the same objection: And having said not long before, Templu ut
b^sta despiciunt, that they (the Christians) despised the Temples of the Gods
(conceive it so) as funeral piles; Minut. ^elix cited p. 157.
makes this Quaere after; Cur nullas aras habent, templa nulla, nulla nota
simulacra? what was the reason why they had, nor Temples, Images, nor Altars:
not why they had no Altars only, as you make him say. The like is commonly
objected from Arnobius also; Contr. Gent. l. 2. cited by B. Jewel, to which
the letter does re^erre.
Nos aceusatis, quod nec templa habeamus, nec imagines, nec aras: in which the
words are changed a little, but not the matter of the accusation. Now as the
objections seem to oppose directly, what ever has been said before concerning
Altars: so the Respondents answers seem as much to cross what ever has been
said concerning Sacrifices. Origin answers for his part, (...) cited p. 110.
that the Altar of a Christian was his understanding, from whence he offered to
the Lord (...), the most sweet and pleasing sacrifices of prayers, and a pure
conscience. Octavius cited p. 157.
much to the same purpose, that the most acceptable sacrifice to Almighty God,
was bonus animus, and puramens, and sin^era conscientia; and briefly, Sic apud
nos, religiosior ille est qui justior.
that he was counted the most religious toward God, which was most just and
upright toward man. So much Octavius says indeed, yet not enough, it seems,
to serve your turn; and therefore you must needs corrupt his text with a false
translation: making Octavius say, that with them the bottom of the heart
supplies the Altar. Whereas you find not such a word in all that period of
Litabilis Hostia* before remembered: no Altar there, but that you have nor bonum
animum, nor puram mentem; no nor sinceram conscientiam neither, in these
wretched shifts. And last of all, Arnobius being asked the question, Whether
the Christians thought Lib. 7. in initio. cited p. 116.
Sacrificia ^ulla esse omnino facienda, that there was no such thing as
sacrifice to be done at all; is made by you to answer nulla, no, none at all:
a saying of (d) Lactantius being patched unto it, viz. not any coporeall
sacrifice, but hymns and prai^e. What ever you may find in Lactantius
elsewhere, certain I am, that you find nothing to this purpose in all that
place which you have noted in your margin, being lib. 6 cap. 23. though
peradventure you have studied it more thoroughly, that any other Book or
Chapter, which concerns this point. Or if Lactantius say it elsewhere, which
we contradict not, being so like to that which is affirmed by others, of, and
about those times: yet might you have perceived in him, an answer to your own
objections drawn from him, and them. The Question was, whether or no, the
Christians had any Sacrifices; No, says Lactantius, as you cite him, no
corporeal sacrifices. Lactantius says not of the Christians; that they had no
sacrifices; but no corporeal ones. You were, it seems, so busy on some
corporeal sacrifice, which you encountered with in the foresaid Chapter, that
you regarded not the answer to your own objection. Nor did the Doctor
otherwise reply to those allegations, which you produced from Origin, and
Arnobius, out of Bishop Jewel, and from Arnobius here in the place, than what
you make Lactantius say, if you cite him rightly Coal. p. 46.
: viz. that they, (the Christians) had no Altars for bloody and external
sacrifices, as the Gentiles had. Corporeal sacrifices, says Lactantius;
bloody and external sacrifices, says the Doctor: Not bloody or external
sacrifices, as you make him say p. 153.
; and then fly out upon him, as your custom is, and put him to this wretched
choice, either to come to that for which you have been wr^^gling all this
while, viz. that they (the Primitive Christians) had no Altars for external
sacrifi^es; or else to show that ever one father or schoolem^^ did teach a
nec^ssitie of an external Altar for internal Sacrifice. Let the poor Doctors
( And) stand still, and he will find you Altars, in the Primitive Church, for
vis^^le and external sacrifices, though none for bloody and external
sacrifices. The like may be replied to that which you produce from Minutius
Felix; Cur (...) ^ullai habent, why they had no Altars. Altars they had, but no
such Altars as Cecilius spoke of, none for bloody sacrifices of sheep and
oxen. Had you but looked a little forwards you would have found amongst them
both Priests and Bishops; Alii ^os feruntipsius Antistitis and sacerdotis
colere, etc.
and therefore by your own rule Altars also: the Priest and Altar being
relatives, as you often tell us. Your Argument, drawn from a cavil p. 56. 57.
of Julian the Apostata; that witty prin^e (for sooth) as you please to call
him; was not thought worth an answe^, when proposed by him* S. Cyrill who made
answer unto all the rest; to his objection of not erecting Altars (as Iustit.
of the Sacr. lib. 6. c. 5.. 15.
my Lord of (...) rightly note^h) does not say one word. Iuli^ns objection was
about such sacrifices (as your self confess) in which the Jews had an
agreement in some particular with the Pagans* and therefore his objection must
relate to such Altars also. For that the Christians had their Alt^r^, for the
Mystical sacrifice, Julian knew full well, being a Reader of the Church, when
he was a Christian: and having, when he was a persecutor, defiled the Altars of
the Christians, (...). Orat. 2. in Iulianum.
designed for their most pure and unbloudie sacrifice, (...) with prohibited
blood; as (...) complains. As for your observation out of Plin^^s Epistle,
drawn from p. 158. 159.
the r^cke indeed, as you truly say, there is nothing in it worth the marking.
For if that, neither the Apostataes, nor the tortured Virgins, confessed any
thing of the Christian Material Altar; you can no more conclude against having
Altars, than against having Reading Pewes and Pulpits, whereof they did
confess as little in their examinations. And I must tell you one thing more,
that if you urge these tex^s in earnest, as if you though they would or could
conclude against having Altars, you may as well produce them, on your second
thoughts, against having Churches: which is the next news I expect to hear
from you. But of this more hereafter in our 7. Chapt.

As for the sacrifices mentioned in Minutius Felix, and before him by Origin,
in that (...), it is not, nor was ever questioned, but that the sacrifices of
each ^hristian privately, were of a mere spiritual nature. The Doctor named
you some of them in his Coal from the Altar, p. 8.
viz. the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, Heb. 13. 15. as also the
oblation of our whole selves, oursoules and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy,
and lively sacrifice to Almighty God, (...). 12. 1. These and all other
sacrifices of that nature, being spiritual merely, need no material or
corporeal Altar. The readiest way by which to offer them to the Lord our God,
is first to sacrifice them on the Altar of our heart by faith, and afterward
to lay them on that Altar, by which they may be rendered acceptable in the
sight of God, even on Christ our Savior. But then the Doctor said withal,
that the Church allowed of a Commemorative sacrifice also, for a perpetual
memory of Christ's precious death, of that his full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world, to be
continued till his coming again. The former sacrifices, being merely of
spiritual nature, the Lord expects from all his people severally. Every man is,
himself, a Priest, one of the Royal Priesthood mentioned by S. Peter, in this
sense, and in relation unto these spiritual and internal sacrifices; which he
is also bound to offer to the Lord his God continually, at all times, in all
places, and on all occasions. No wood so wide, nor den so dark, nor sea so
spacious, which may not be a Temple, for these devotions; and in the which we
may not find an Altar, for these sacrifices. And these are they, done in In
quo accedamus fide and spiritual^ cultura, in veraci cord, sine simulati^ne,
in satisfactione fidei, quia nihil est visibile horum, neque Sacerdos, etc.
Ambr. in Hebr. 10.
the singleness of heart, without hypocrisy and guile, whereof there is not
any thing visible, neque Sacer d^s, neque Sacrificium, neque Altar, no more
than is the Altar, on the Priest* or Sacrifice, as S. Ambrose tells us. But so I
trow it is not in the mystical sacrifice, that of the Commemoration of the
death and passion of our Lord and Savior; which purpo^ely is represented unto
the eye, that it may sink the deeper into the heart. The breaking of the
bread, and the effusion of the wine, are they not sensible representations of
his death for us* the offering up of his body on the cross, and shedding his
most precious blood for our redemption? Which being visible in it self, and
purposely so celebrated, that it may be visible to all the congregation; comes
not within the compass of those sacrifices which S. Ambrose speaks of: though,
like a false gamester you have cogged a die, and made S. Ambrose say what he
never meant. For tell me of your honest word, does the good father speak there
of this mystic^ll sacrifice, that which the Priest did offer on the Alt^rs in
the (...) God? or those which every priva^e man did and might offer on the
Alt^r of his (...), by ^aith? Does V. p. 118. Where he is made to say, nihil
hic visibile.
he say, Nihil hic visibile, that here ( i. e. in this Co^memorative sacrifice)
there is nothing visible, neither the Priest, the Altar, nor the (...)? Or
says he, Nihil horum est visibile, that of the things before remembered, there
is nothing visible, (...) of the spiritual worship, done in the singleness of
the heart, without hypocrisy, and in full confidence of faith? For shame deal
better with the Father^, how ill soever you deal with that poor fellow, whom
you have in hand. S. Ambrose could not say, (the times, in which he lived,
considered) that in the Representative sacrifice by the Church then celebrated,
there was nothing visible: for in those times, the Priests and Altars both were
at their full, moun^ed unto their height for reputation and esteem; as you
know right well. When therefore it is said in the Apo^o^eticks of those times,
that they (the Primitive (...)) had (...) (...), images, nor temples, it must
be answered with (...) to those times in the which they lived. And so the
Doctor answers to them in his Coal from the (...), p. 45. 46.
First, out of Bishop Jewel, that then (...) fear of Tyrants, were feign to
meet together in private houses, in vacant places, in woods and forrest^, and
caves under the ground. Your self have told us of your self, (though you have
christened your discourse by the name of the holy Table) that p. 140.
you are not so unreasonably tied to one Table; but if the woman were driven
into the desert, you could be content with the green grass. And then, why
may you not conceive, that on the like distress, the grass should be to them
in stead of an Altar, as well as unto you in stead of a Table. The Doctor
answered secondly, that when they durst adventure to build them Churches, they
neither were so gorgeously nor so richly furnished, as were the Temples of the
Gentiles. And therefore Origin, and Arnobius (and whosoever of them speak in
the self same key) are not to be interpreted, as if the Christians had no
Churches, or at the least no Altars in them: but that their Churches were so
mean, that they deserved not the name of Temples; and that they had no Altars
for bloody and external sacrifices, as the Gentiles had. Hospinian, on whose
judgment you do much rely in other matters, could easily have told you (and
questionless you saw it in him, though you conceal it wilfully for your poor
advantages) that in the Non nego tamen habuisse primitivam ecclesiam ante
Constantin^m, Altaria seu aras. de orig. Altarium. p. 99.
Primitive Church, before the time of Constantine, the Christians had their
Altars, both name and thing: and for the proof thereof does cite Tertullian,
lib. de poenitentia. Cyprians Epistles, lib. 1. Epist. 7. and 9. and also, lib.
3. Epist. 13. All that he stands upon is this, Eae autem ^rae non fuerunt
lapideae, nec fixae, that the said Altars were not made of stone, and fastened
to some certain place, as was appointed not long after by Pope Silvester; and
as Durandus and the rest of the Roman Ritualists would have them now. Altars he
grants, but wooden Altars; which being once devoted to that holy use, might
easily be removed from place to place, as the necessities of those times did
indeed require. No sooner was the Church settled and confirmed in peace, but
presently the Altars also were fixed and settled.

Now for the nature and condition of this Commemorative or representative
sacrifice, which we have traced from the first Institution of it by our Lord
and Savior, to the times of Constantine, and found both Priests which were to
offer, and Altars upon which they were to offer it to Almighty God: we cannot
take a better and more perfect view thereof, than from Eusebius, who has been
more exact herein, than any other of the Ancients. In his first book de
Domonstratione Eva^gelica, he brings in this prediction from the Prophet Esaias,
that in that day shall there be an Altar to the Lord in the midst of the
land of Egypt, Es. 19. 19. Then adds, that if they had an Altar, and that they
were to sacrifice (...), etc. cap. 6.
to Almighty God, (...), they must be thought worthy of a Priesthood also. But
the Leviticall Priesthood could not be of any use unto them, and therefore
they must have another. Nor was this spoke, says he, of the Egyptians only,
(...).
but of all other nations, and idolatrous people; who now pour forth their
prayers, not unto many Gods, but to the one and only Lord: and unto him erect
an Altar for reasonable and unbloudie sacrifices (...), etc. (...) in every
place of the whole habitable world, according to the mysteries of the New
Testament. Now what those mysteries were, he declares more fully in the tenth
Chapt. of the said first book. Christ, says he, is the propitiatory Sacrifice
for all our sins, since when even those amongst the Jews are freed from the
curse of Moses law, (...), celebrating daily (as they ought) the commemoration
of his body and blood, which is a far more excellent sacrifice and
ministry, than any in the former times: Then addes', that Christ our Savior,
offering such a wonderful and excellent Sacrifice to his heavenly Father for
the salvation of us all, appointed us to offer daily unto God the commemoration
of the same, (...), for and as a Sacrifice. And anon after, that whenever we
do celebrate (...), the memory of that Sacrifice on the Table, participating
of the Elements of his body and blood; we should say with David, Thou preparest
a Table for me in the presence of mine enemies, thou annointest my head wih
oil, my cup runs over. Wherein, says he, he signifies most manifestly the
mystical unction, (...) and the reverend Sacrifices of Christ's Table, where we
are taught to offer up unto the Lord, by his own most eminent and glorious
Priest, (...).
the unbloody, reasonable, and most acceptable sacrifice all our life long.
This he intituleth (...).
afterward the sacrifice of praise, the Divine, reverend, and most holy
sacrifice, the pure sacrifice of the new Testament. So that we see, that in
this Sacrifice prescribed the Christian Church, by our Lord and Savior, there
were two proper and distinct actions: The first, to celebrate the memorial of
our Saviors sacrificie, which he intituleth, (...), the commemoration of his
body and blood once offered; (...), the memory of that his Sacrifice; that is,
as he does clearly expound himse^fe, that we should offer (...), this our
commemoration for a Sacrifice: The second, that withal we should offer to him
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, which is the reasonable Sacrifice of
a Christian man, and to him most acceptable. Finally, he joins both these
together in the Conclusion of that Book, and therein does at full describe the
nature of this Sacrifice; which is thus as follows. (...), etc. Therefore,
says he, we sacrifice, and offer as it were with Incense, the memory of that
great Sacrifice, celebrating the same according to the mysteries by him given
unto us, and (...).
giving thanks to him for our salvation; with godly hymns and prayers to the
Lord our God; as also offering to him our whole selves, both soul and body,
and to his high Priest, which is the Word. See here, Eusebius does not call it
only the memory or commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice; but makes the very
memory or commemoration, in, and of it self, to be a Sacrifice which instar
omnium, for, and in the place of all other Sacrifices, we are to offer to our
God, and offer it with a (...), the Incense of our prayers and praises.

This was the doctrine of the Church in Eusebius time, touching the Sacrament
of the body and blood of our blessed Savior. Of any expiatorie Sacrifice, of
any offering up of Christ for the quick and dead, more than what had been done
by him once, and once for all, those blessed Ages never dreamed. And howsoever
some of the ancient Fathers did amplify with the choicest of their Rhetoric
the dignity and nature of this holy Sacrament, the better to inflame the people
with a lively zeal, at their partaking of the same: yet they meant nothing
less, than to give any opportunity to the future Ages of making that an
expiatorie Sacrifice, which they did only teach to be Commemorative, or
representative of our Saviors passion. A Sacrifice they did confess it,
Altars and Priests they did allow of, as necessary thereunto; not thinking fit
to change those terms, which had bin recommended to them from pure antiquity.
Those blessed spirits were not (...), contentious about words and forms of
speech, in which there was not manifest impiety. The Supper of the Lord, they
called sometimes a Sacrifice, and sometimes a memorial of the Sacrifice,
(...). and so S. Chrysostom on the ninth Chapter to the Hebrews: Sometimes a
Sacrifice, and sometimes a Sacrament, and so Lib. 17. c. 20
S. Austin for example; for in his Books de Civitate Dei, he calls it a
Sacrifice; Id enim Sacrificium successit omnibus illis sacrificiis veteris
Testamenti, etc. and says that it succeeded in the place of those legal
sacrifices, mentioned in the old Testament. The same S. Austin, as you tell us
p. 109. in the Margin.
, does in the same Books call it a Sacrament of memory, and we will take your
word this once, that he calls it so, (because we know from whence you had it)
though in the place by you cited (being l. 17. c. 20.) there is no such matter:
and I am sure, that in the very same Books it is called Lib. 10. c. 6.
Sacramentum Altaris, the Sacrament of the Altar: which was a very common
appellation amongst the Fathers, as was acknowledged by the Martyrs in Queen
Mary's time. So for the Minister thereof, they called him Soli Episcopi and
Presbyteri, propri^ jam vocantur in Ecclesia Sacerdotes. Augde Civit. D^i, l.
20. cap. 10.
sometimes Presbyter, and sometimes Sacerdos, Elder, or Priest, indifferently
without doubt or scruple: for which see the Margin. The Table, or the Altar,
were to them such indifferent words, that they used both equally: (...), says
Eusebius in the tenth, and (...), says Eusebius in the sixth Chapter of his
fi^s^ de Demonstratione Evangelica: Altars says S. Austin in the tenth, and
mensa, says the same S. Austin in his 17 de Civitate: Orat. de (...)
Gregory Nyssen in one breath does make use of both, and calls the same one
thing, (...), the holy Table, the undefiled Altar: Altars of stone, (...), in
this Gregory Nyssen; Altars of wood, ligna Altaris, Epist. 50.
in S. Austin; both used with such indifferency, that Nyssen calls his stone
Altar by the name of (...), or Table; and Austin calls his wooden Table,
Altar, Altar: So that in all this search into antiquity, we find a general
consent in the Church of God touching the business now in hand: the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper being confessed to be a Sacrifice; the Minister therein,
inti^uled by the name of Priest; that on the which the Priest did consecrate,
being as usually called by the name of Altar, as by that of Table: and you may
^ake this testimony also from the mouth of a Gentile, that the Christians
called their Table by the name of Altar; (...), as it is in Zozimus, lib. 5.
Not an improper Altar, and an improper Sacrifice, as you idly dream of: For
Sacrifices, Priests, and Altars being Relatives, p. 109.
as your self confesses, the Sacri^ice and the Altar being improper, must
needs infer that even our Priesthood is improper also: And we may speak in
proper and significant terms, as the Fathers did, without approving either the
Popish Mass, or the Jewish Sacrifices; from which the Doctor is as far, as
either you that made the book, or he that licensed it, though you have both
agreed together to breed some base suspicion of him p. 76.
, as if he meant somewhat else than for fear of our gracious King he dares
speak out. The Doctor, I assure you, dares speak what he thinks, (though
you, as I persuade my self, think not what you speak:) and will now tell you
what he thinks to be the Doctrine of this Church in this present business,
of Sacrifices, Priests and Altars, that we may see she is no flincher from
the words and notions, no more than from the Doctrines of most orthodox
Antiquity.

And first beginning with the Priesthood, in case you are not grown ashamed of
that holy calling, you may remember that you were admitted into holy Orders by
no other name: Being presented to the B^sh. at your Ordination, Book of
Ordination.
you did require to be admitted to the Order of Priesthood: and being demanded
by the Bishop, if you did think in your heart that you were truly called
according to the will of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the order of this Church of
England unto the Ministry of the Priesthood; you answered positively, that
you did: if you thought otherwise than you said, as you do sometimes, you Acts
5. 4.
lied not unto men, but unto God. Look in the Book of Ordination, and you
shall find it oftener than once or twice, entitled the Office of Priesthood,
and the holy Office of Priesthood: the parties thereunto admitted, called by no
other name than that of Priests: Or if you think the Book of Ordination is no
good authority, (to which you have subscribed however in your subscription to
the Articles;) look then upon the Liturgy, and the Rubricks of it, by which you
would persuade the world that you are very much directed in all this business:
Find you not there the name of Priest, exceeding frequent, especially in that
part thereof which concerns the Sacrament; The Priest standing at the North side
of the Table, -- Then shall the Priest rehearse distinctly all the ten
Commandments, -- Then shall the Priest say to them that come to receive the
holy Communion, -- Then shall the Priest turning himself to the people, give
the absolution, -- Then shall the Priest kneeling down at Gods Board, etc.
Infinitum est ire per singula; It were an infinite labor to sum up all
places of, and in the Rubricks, wherein the Minister is called by the name of
Priest; which being so, as so it is, and that your own sweet self has told p.
109.
us that Altar, Priest, and Sacrifice are Relatives: the Church of England
keeping. still as well the Office of Priesthood, as the name of Priest, must
needs admit of Altars, and of Sacrifices, as things peculiar to the Priesthood:
But not to trust so great a matter to your rules of Logic, we will next see,
what is the judgment of the Church in the point of Sacrifice. Two ways there
are by which the Church declares her self in the present business: First,
positively in the Book of Articles, and that of Homilies; and practically in
the Book of Common prayers. First, in the Articles; Art. 31.
The offering of Christ once made, is that perfect redemption, propitiation,
and satisfaction for all the sins of the whole world, both original and
actual, and there is no other satisfaction for sin, but that alone. This
Sacrifice or oblation once for ever made, and never more to be repeated, was
by our Saviors own appointment to be commemorated and represented to us, for
the better quickening of our faith: whereof if there be nothing said in the
Book of Articles, it is because the Articles related chiefly unto points in
Controversy: but in the Book of Homilies, which do relate unto the Articles,
as confirmed in them, and are (though not dogmaticall, but rather popular
discourses) a Comment, as it were, on those points of doctrine, which are
determined of elsewhere: Hom. of the Sacrament, part. 2. p. 197.
we find it thus: That the great love of our Savior Christ to mankind does
not only appear, in that deare-bought benefit of our redemption, and
satisfaction by his death and passion, but also in that he has so kindly
provided that the same most merciful work might be had in continual
remembrance. Amongst the which means is the public celebration of the memory
of his pre^ious death at the Lords Table: -- our Savior having ordained and
established the remembrance of his great mercy expressed in his passion, in
the Institution of his heavenly Supper. Here is a commemoration of that blessed
Sacrifice which Christ once offered, a public celebration of the memory
thereof, and a continual remembrance of it by himself ordained. Which if it
seem not full enough for the Commemorative sacrifice, in the Church observed,
the Homily Ibid. p. 198*
will tell us further: that this Lords supper is in such wise to be done and
ministered, as our Lord and Savior did, and commanded it to be done, as his
holy Apostles used it, and the good Fathers in the Primitive Church frequented
it. So that what ever has been proved to be the purpose of the Institution,
the practice of the holy Apostles, and usage of the ancient Fathers: will fall
within the meaning and intention of the Church of England.

For better manifesting of the which Intention, we will next look into the
Agenda, the public Liturgy of this Church. Where first we find it granted,
that Preface on Easter day.
Christ our Savior is the very Paschall Lamb that was offered for us, and has
taken away the sin of the world: Prayer of the consecration.
that suffering death upon the cross for our Redemption, he made there by his
own oblation of himself once offered, a full, perfect, and sufficient
sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the (...) of the whole world. And to
the E^hortat^on before the Communion.
end that we should always remember the exceeding great love of our Master,
and only Savior Jesus Christ thus dying for us, and the innumerable benefits
which by his precious bloodshedding he has obtained to us: he has instituted
and ordained holy mysteries, as pledges of his love and continual remembrance
of his death, to our great and endless comfort; ^raier of the consecration.
instituting and in his holy Gospel commanding us to continue a perpetual
memory of that his precious death till his coming again. Then follows the
consecration of the creatures of bread and wine, for Prai^r of the consecration.
a remembrance of his death and passion, in the same words and Phrases which
Christ our Savior recommended unto his Apostles, and the Apostles to the
Fathers of the Primitive times: which now, as then, is to be done only by the
Priest [Then the Priest standing up shall say, (...) followeth] to whom it
properly belongs, and upon whom his Ordination does confer a power of
ministering the Sacraments, not given to any other Order in the holy Ministry.
The memory or com^emoration of Christ's death thus celebrated, is called ^rai^r
after the communion.
a sacrifice, a sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving; a sacrifice
representative of that one and only expiatorie sacrifice which Christ once
offered for us all: the whole Communicants be seeching God to grant, that by the
merits and death of his Son Jesus Christ, and through faith in his blood,
they and the whole Church may obtain^ the remission of their sins, and all
other the benefits of his Passion: Nor stay they there, but forthwith offer and
present unto the Lord their selves, their souls and bodies, to be a
reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice unto him: And howsoever, as they most
humbly do acknowledge, they are unworthy through their manifold sins* to
offer to him any sacrifice, yet they beseech him to accept that their bounden
duty and service. In which last words, that present service which they do to
Almighty God, according to their bound^^ duties, in celebrating the perpetual
memory of Christ's precious death, and the oblation of their selves, and with
themselves the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving, in due acknowledgement of
the benefits and comforts by his death received, is himbly offered unto God,
for, and as a Sacrifice, and publicly avowed for such, as from the tenor and
coherence of the words does appear most plainly. Put all together which has
been here delivered from the Book of Articles, the Homilies, and public
Liturgy, and tell me if you ever found a more excellent concord, than this
between Eusebius and the Church of England, in the present business: Our
Saviors sacrifice upon the Cross, called there, (...), and here acknowledge
to be the perfect redemption, propitiation, and satisfaction for all the
sins of the whole world* There we have (...), mysteries delivered to us by
our Lord and Savior, for a remembrance of that great sacrifice; and here
E^hortation to the ^ommunion.
an Institution of holy mysteries, as pledges of his love, and continual
remembrance of his death. The memory or commemoration of this his death, called
there (...) and Hom. p. 19^
here the public celebration of the memory of his precious death, at the
Lords Table; there (...) here Hom. ibid.
the remembrance of his great mercy expressed in his Passion; there for the
offering of this sacrifice to Almighty God, (...), etc. there was a Priesthood
thought to be very necessary, and here the Priest alone Rubric before the
Consecration.
has power to consecrate the Creatures of bread and wine, for a remembrance of
his death and passion: There the whole action, as it relates to Priest and
people, is called (...); and here Prayer after the Communion.
the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: there (...), and (...) here in the
self same words, a reasonable and holy Sacrifice: There the Communicants do
offer to the Lord (...), etc. and here they do present unto him their selves,
souls, and bodies. Finally, there it is said, (...), that they do sacrifice
unto the Lord the memory of that great oblation: i. e. as he expounds himself,
they offer to him the commemoration of the same (...), for, and as a Sacrifice.
And here Ibid.
we do besee^h the Lord to accept this our bounden duty and servic^, for, and
as a sacrifice, which notwithstanding we confess our selves unworthy to offer
to him. Never did Church agree more perfectly with the ancient patterns.

Yet lest you should endeavor, as you use to do, to cast a mist before the
eyes of poor ignorant people, as if the Church meant nothing less than what
here is said; will you be pleased to look upon those Worthies of the Church,
which are best able to expound, and unfold her meaning: we will beg^n with
Bishop Andrews, and tell you what he says Answ. to Peron. c. 6.
as ^on^erning sacrifices. The Eucharist, says he, ever was and is by us
considered, both as a Sacrament, (...) as a Sac^ifice. A sacrifice is proper
and appliable only to Divine worship. The sacrifice of Christ's death did
succeed to the sacrifices of the old Testament; which being prefigured in those
sacrifices before his coming, has since his coming been celebrated per
Sacrament um memoriae, by a Sacrament of memory, as S. Austin calls it. Thus
also in his answer unto Cardinal Bellarmine, Tollite de Missa
Transubstantiationem vestram, nec diu nobiscum lis erit de sacrificio, etc.
Take from the Mass your Transubstantiation, and we will have no difference
with you about the sacri^ice. Memoriam ib^ sacrific^^ da^us non inviti. Resp.
ad Card Be^. c. 8.
The memory of a Sacrifice we acknowledge willingly, and the King grant* the
name of Sacri^ice to have been frequent with the Fathers. For Altars next. If
we agree ( ^nsw. to Card. Peron. c. ^.
says he) about the matter of sacrifice, there will be no difference about
the Altar. The holy Eucha^ist being considered as a sacrifice (in the
representation of breaking the Bread, and pouring forth the Cup,) the same is
fitly called an Altar; which again is as fitly called a Tabee* the Eucharist
being considered as a Sacrament, which is nothing else but a distribution and
application of the Sacri^ice to the several receivers. So that the matter of
Altars makes no difference in the face of our Church. As Bishop Andrews wrote
at King James his motion, against Cardinal Bellarmine; so Isaac Casaubon writ
King James his mind to Cardinal Peron; and in expressing of his mind,
affirms, Veteres Ecclesiae, Patres, etc. That the ancient Fathers did
acknowledge one only Sacrifice in the Christian Church, which did succeed in
place of all those sacrifices in the law of Moses that he conceived the said
sacrifice to be nothing else, nis^ commemorationem ^jus quod semel in Cruce
Christus Patri suo obtulit, than a Commemoration of that sacrifice which CHRIST
once offered on the Cross to his heavenly Father: De verbo nullam se litem
moturam. Ep. ad Card. Peron.
that oftentimes the Church of England has professed, she will not strive
about the Word, which she expressly uses in her public Liturgy. All this you
seem to grant, but then make a difference between p. 105.
the Commemoration of a Sacrifice, and a commemorative sacrifice: And though
you grant that in the Eucharist there is commemoratio sacrificii, yet you fly
out upon the p. 106.
Doctor, for saying that the Church admits of a commemorative sacrifice; which
is as much, you say, as P. Lombard and all his ragged regiment admit of* If
this be all you stand upon, you shall soon be satisfied. Arch^Bishop Cranmer
(whom you your self acknowledge to be the most learned on this Theme of our
late Divines) distinguishes most clearly Defense of his 5 Book against
Gardener, p. 439.
between the sacrifice propitiatory made by Christ himself only, and the
sacrifice commemorative and gratulatory made by the Priests and people. My Lord
of Durham also does call the Eucharist Of the Remish Sacrif. l. 6. ^. 5.
a representative and commemorative sacrifice, in as plain language verily, as
the Doctor did; although he does deny it to be a proper sacrifice: As for
your Criticisme, or quarrel rather, between a commemorative sacrifice, and a
commemoration of a Sacrifice, which you insist on, it was very needless, both
terms being used by Bishop Andrews (as great a Clerk as any Minister of
Lincoln Diocese) as aequipollent and aequivalent, both of one expression; De
Commemoratione ib. sacrificii seu sacrificio commemorativo. Respons. ad Car.
Bell.
of which see the Margin. But to go forwards with the Sacrifice, my Lord of
Chichester thus speaks unto his Informers: Appello Caesar^m. p. 287.
I have (says he) so good an opinion of your understanding, though weak, that
you will conceive the blessed Sacrament of the Altar, or the Communion Table,
which you please, to be a sacrifice. What do I hear the Bishop say, the
blessed Sacrament of the Altar? And do you not persuade us, or at least
endeavor it, out of his answer to the Gagger, that p. 95.
Gaggers of Protestants call it so, but Protestants themselves do not? It is
true, that in his answer to the Gagger, he has those very words which you
thence produce; the Sacrament (as you call it) of the Altar: but then it is as
true, that he does call it so himself; and is resolved to call it so,
howsoever you like it. Walk you Appe^^^. p. 288.
(says he) at random, and at rovers in your by-pathes, if you please. I have
used the name of Altar for the Communion- Table, according to the manner of
Antiquity, and am like enough sometimes to use it still. Nor will I abstain,
notwithstanding your oggannition, to follow the steps and practice of
Antiquity, in using the words Sacrifice and Priesthood also. Finally, Ibid. p.
286.
he brings in Bishop Morton professing thus, That he beleev^d no such
sacrifice of the Altar, as the Church of Rome does, and that he fancieth no
such Altars as they employ, though he professed a Sacrifice and an Altar. Thus
having plainly laid before you, the Doctrine, Use, and Practice of Antiquity
in the present business, together with the tendries of the Church of England
conform thereto; we will next see what you can say unto the contrary, and what
fair dealing we are like to find in your proceedings.

CHAP. VI.
An Answer to the Cavils of the Minister of Linc* against the points delivered
in the former Chapter.
Nothing delivered in the 31 Article, against the being of a Sacrisice in the
Church of Christ, nor in the Homilies. A pious Bull obtruded on the Doctor by
the Minister of Linc* The Reading-Pew, the Pulpit, and the poore-mans Box made
Altars by the Minster of Linc. An huddle of impertinencies brought in
concerning sacrifice Commemorative, commemoration a sacrifice, and material
Altars. The Sacrifice of the Altar known by that name unto the Fathers.
Arnobius falsified. The Minister of Linc. questions S. Paul's discretion, in his
Habemus Altar Heb. 13. 10. and falsifieth S. Ambrose. The meaning of that Text
according unto B. Andrews, B. Montague, the Bishop and the Minister of Linc.
The same expounded by the old Writers, both Greek and Latin. The Altars in
the Apostles Canons made Panteries and Larders; and ludas his bag an Altar by
this man of Linc. The Doctor and Ignatius vindicated in the three places
touching Altars. The profane Passage in the Ministers Book of a Widow-Altar.
An Answer to the Cavils of the Minister of Linc. against the evidence produced
from Ireuaeus and S. Cyprian. The Ministers ignorant mistakes about the meaning
of Tertullian in the word Ara. Pamellus new reading about Charis Dei, not
universally received. A briefexecitall of the substance in the so two last
Chaepters.

WE ended our last Chapter with the Church of England, and with the Church of
England we must now begin; your method leads me to it, which I mean to
follow, as well as such a broken clew* can lead me, in so confused a
Laberinth as of your compositions: Cap. 6.
And here you change the very state of the question at your first entrance on
the same. The Bishop charged it home, as he conjectured, Letter p.
that if the Vicar should erect any such Altar, his discretion would prove the
only Holocaust to be sacrificed thereon: Now you have changed it p. 102.
to a close Altar at the upper end of the Quire, where the old Altar in Queen
Mary's time stood. This is no honest dealing to begin with. The mention of
close Altars, and Queen Mary's time, comes in here very unseasonably, if not
suspi^iously, only to make poor men afraid, (whom you have throughtly
possessed already with such Panick fears) that Altars and Queen Mary's days
are coming in again amongst us. Nor have you dealt better with the 31 Article
in your own Edition p. 14.
of the Bishops letter, where you have made it say, that that other oblation,
which the Papists were wont to offer upon these Altars is a blasphemous
^igment, and pernicious imposture. These, was not in the Text before, and is
now only thrust into it, to make the Vicar come up close to Queen Mary's
Altars. I pray you good Sir, whar spectacles did you use, when you found
Altars, and these Altars, Papists, and that other oblation in the 31 Article,
wherein my dull and heavy eyes can see no such word? This is another of your
tricks, to make your credulous followers believe, that by the doctrine of the
Church in her public Articles, Papists and Altars are mere Relatives; that so
whosoever shall but use the name of Altar, or speak of placing the
Communion Table Altar-wise, may be suspected presently to be a Papist, or at
least Popishly affected. Nor do I speak this without good authority: For do
not you tell us, that the Fantastical Vicar called his Communion Table an
Altar, as the Papists do, p. 199? and have you not corrupted the Bishops
Letter, to make it say, that Altars only were erected for the sacrifice of the
Mass, p. 16? which was not in the Text before. But Sir, the primitive
Christians had their Altars, when there was no such thing in being, The 31
Article having taken a (...) Popish Lamb. p. 102.
as the Popish Lamb; no such blasphemous figments, and pernicious impostures,
as by the Article are charged on the Church of Rome, in those, by us, rejected
sacrifices of the Mass: So that both I and you, may without danger of revoking
our subscriptions to the Book of Articles, set the Communion Table at the
upper end of the Chancell, there where the old Altar stood in Queen Mary's
time, if you needs will have it so; and yet no more dream of the Popish Lamb,
and those bl^sphemous figments which the Article speaks of, than did the holy
Fathers in the Primitive times; when neither your said Popish Lamb, nor any of
those figments were in repum natura. Now, as you palter with the Article, so
do you only play and dally with the Homily; as one that loves so dearly
well, (whatsoever you say unto the contrary) (...), to make your self merry
with sacred things. You tell us from the Homily, that we must take heed Of the
Sacrament. part. 2. p 198.
lest the Lords Supper of a memory be made a sacrifice: and then proceed p.
103, 104.
, What says the Doctor to this? He says that by these words the Church
admits of a Commemorative sacri^ice. Which said, you make your Readers even
burst with laughter, by telling them, that the poor man has found a true and
real sac^ifice, (in the Book of Homilies) but it is a Bull; a very strange
and hideous Bull which this Calfe makes the Church speak unto (...) people in
her public Homilies. And what is that? As we must take heed, good people, we
apply not the Sacrament of the Supper to the dead, but to the living, etc. so
must we take especial heed, lest of a Commemorative Sacrifice it be made a
Sacrifice. A very (...) it be not (...) Pius Quintus ^is, yet is a kind ^f
pious Bull. p. 104
pious Bull indeed, you speak wondrous rightly; but a Bull only of your own
herd, and only fit for such a Milo as your self, to carry. For tell me, does
the Doctor say, that by these words the Church admits of a Commemorative
sacrifice? On with your false eyes once again, and you will find the Doctor
makes no other answer to your objection from the Homily Coal. p. 8.
, but that the sacri^ice rejected in the Homily, is that which is cried down in
the Book of Articles, which the Epistoler had no reason to suspect was ever
aimed at by the Vicar. Of a Commemorative sacrifice in those words of the
Homily, ^e gry quidem, there. Indeed the Doctor said before, in answer to your
argument from the 31 Article, that though the Church condemned that other
oblation of the Papists, as the Letter calls it: yet she allows of a
Commemorative sacrifice for a perpetual memory of Christ's precious death, of
that his full, perfeft, and sufficient sacrifice, oblation, and satisfaction
for the sins of the whole world. And for the proof thereof referred himself
unto the Prayer of the Consecration; which are not, sure, the words of the
Homily, or by him cited thence, if you mark it well. Or had he said it of
those words in the Book of Homilies, had it been such a strange and hideous
Bull, with four Horns, and I know not how many tails, for you to lead by it
up and do ^ne the Country, for ^he delight and solace of your sportfull
Readers? Could you not paraphase upon it thus? We must take heed good people,
lest the Lords Supper, of a memory be made a Sacrifice: i. e. le^t of a
C^mmemorative sacrifice, it be made propitiatory? No: He that looks for
ingen^ity from such hands as yours, must have less knowledge of you, and more
faith in you, than I dare pretend to. And for your Bull, that was but a device
to make sport for Boys. Showing us so much Spanish in the Margin, you had a
mind to let us see, that you did understand as well their customs, as their
language: and therefore would set out a Fuego de Toros, a kind of Bull baiting
for the Boys, who must be pleased too in this business. You have not studied
all this while, populo ut placerent only, but now and then ut pueris placeas,
and declam^tio fias, as you know, who said.

But would we see a Bull indeed, a Bull set out with flowers and Garlands,
ready for the Sacrifice? Out of your store you can afford us such a one,
though not so pious altogether, as that you sent unto the Doctor. We saw before
how well you pleaded against Altars, out of the Articles and book of Homilies:
and now behold an argument from the Common Prayer Book, which, if the
business be not done already, will be ^ure to do it. For you p. 75. 76.
appeal to all indifferent men, that pretend to any knowledge in Divinity, if
the Reading Pew, the Pulpit, and any other place in the Church be not as
properly an Altar, for prayer, praise, thanksgiving, memory of the passion,
dedicating our selves to Gods very service; and the Churches Box or Basin, for
that oblation for the poor which was used in the Primitive times; as is our
holy Table, howsoever situated or disposed. Nay, you go further, and demand,
what one sacrifice can be inferred out of the Collects read by the Priest at
the (...) which are not as easily deduced (...) of the Te (...) and (...) said
in the Quire, or Reading Pew: whether there be no praying, praising,
commemorating of the Passion, and (...) of our selves no Gods service in those
two (...)* The Fathe^s were but (...) soures in dreaming of one Altar only in
each sev^rall Church* whereas indeed there are as many as we please to make.
Here is the Poore-mans Box, the Communion Table, the Pulpit, and the Reading
Pew, (...) quatuor A^ns: four in a knot, land yet not half enough for so many
sacrifices. And therefore every place, the Bell-free, the Church-por^h, the
(...) house, the seat of every private person, the Vestrie chief of all, and
whatsoever other place a man may ^ancy to himself, are now turned to Altars.
This if we do not yield to at the first proposal, we are pronounced already
to have no knowledge in Divinity; and not to be indifferent men, but parties.
Not so indifferent men as I think you are: nor so well skilled in this new
Lincolnshire divinity, which only you and one or two more of your dear
acquaintance, have been pleased to broach. What need we take this pains to
look after Altars, when by this Boston doctrine the Communion Table may as well
be spared? (...) meae! It always was my hope, that howsoever we lost the
Altar, I might be confident we should have a Table left us for the holy
Sacrament, at least the Sacram (...) it self. But see how strangely things are
carried: Rather than hear of Altars, we will down with Tables; yea with the
Sacrament it self: and let the memory of Christ's passion be celebrated how
it will, or where it will, in the Pew, or Pulpit, the Porch or Bell-free. Is It
not enough to hear it (...) of, but we must come and see it acted? what are
these Sacraments they speak of, but signs, and figures; and by what figure
can they make us be in love with signs? Or say that there be some spiritual
sacrifices expected of us by our God; may we (...) them without material
Tables? yea and without material Churches* on therefore Westwa^d ho, for
Salem, and the free Gospel of New England. This is the knowledge in Divinity
you so much pretend to: which, wheresoever you first learnt it, was never
taught you, I am sure, in any of the books that you s^bscribed to, when you
came to your place. We grant that those two Hymns you speak of, are of
excellent use: and purposely selected for the setting forth of Gods praise and
glory, with an acknowledgement of our bounden duties to him, for his grace and
goodness. But then the Liturgy has taught you, that the Lords Table is the
proper place at which to celebrate the ^emorie of our Saviors passion: (...).
which* the Priest standing at the same, and consecrating there the creatures
of bread and wine, according to Christ's holy institution, does represent unto
the people. And when, in testimony of our common and public gratitude for so
great a mercy, we offer our whole selves unto him* both soul and body, we are
enjoined to do it at or near the same place also* (...).
And here O Lord we offer and present unto thee, our selves, souls and
bodies; here where thou have been pleased to make us partakers of Christ's body
and blood, and sealed unto our souls the benefits of his death and passion.
Will you have more? The ^f the Sac^ament part. 2. p. 203.
Homily has told us, that we are bound to render thanks to Almighty God for
all his benefits briefly comprised in the death, passion, and resurrection of
his dearly beloved Son, the which thing because we ought chiefly at this
Table to solemnize, (mark you that, this Table?) the godly Fathers named it
Eucharistia, that is, thanksgiving. Had I but such a Bandog, as your friend H.
B. this Puritan Bull of yours might be better hai^ed, than his Popes Bull was.
Your Popish lamb and Puritan Bull being both discarded by the Church, may go
both together But I must tell you ere we part, that that which I suspected is
now come to pass, viz. that by your principles, every Cobbler, Tinker, and
other Artizan, may take his turn and minister at and on the holy Altar.

That which you show us next, is but another (...), a quarrel about words and
Phrases; touching the difference between p. 104. 105.
commemoratio sacrificii, and a commemorative sacrifice: the first being used,
you say, by Chrysostom, K. James, and Pet. Lombard, S. Austin, Eusebius, and
the book of Homilies; the later only by this wretched Doctor, and such unlucky
birds as he, the ragged regiment of P. Lombard. Which said, you presently
confute your self, as your custom is, confessing that some p. 105.
few learned men of the reformed Church, do use the name of a Commemorative
Sacrifice; and yet (God bless them) are not brought within the compass of
that ragged regiment. But hereof we have spoke already in the former Chapter.
For Sacrifices next, you cannot possible approve (which p. 10^.
Protestants and Papists do jointly deny) that ever material A^tar was
erected in the Church, for the use of spiritual and improper sacrifices.
Assuredly the Papists have good reason for what they do; and if you grant them
this position, simply, and without restriction; you give them all that they
desire. For by this means they gain unto them all the Fathers, who speak of
Altars, passi^^, in their works and writings; material Altars, questionless,
made of wood or stone. And if material Altars were not made for improper
sacrifices, you must needs gran^ they had some proper sacrifices to be
performed upon those Altars: Besides, in case the note be true, that never
materi^ll Altar was erected for a spiritual and improper sacrifice, and that
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper be but a metaphorical and improper
sacrific^, as p. 141.
you elsewhere say; it may be done as well without a material Table, and any
where as properly as in a material Church. Did you distinguish, as you ought,
between the mystical sacrifice in the holy Eucharist, commemorative and
representative of our Saviors death; and those spiritual sacrifices, which
every Christian man is bound to offer to the Lord, at all times and places: you
would find the vanity and weakness of these poor Conclusions. Yet you go
forwards still on a full careere, and having filled your margin with an huddle
of impertinent quotations, you fall at last on this fine fancy: p. 110.
how that God suffered not the first Ages of the world for 1650. years to
pass away without prayers, and thanksgivings; and yet he suffered it to pass
without any Altars. May a man take it on your word, and not be called for it to
an after reckoning? Did you not say, the Page before, that Altar, Priest, and
Sacrifice were relatives? and find we not in holy writ that Cain and Abel
brought their offerings to the Lord their God? their sacrifices as they are
entitled, Hebr. 11. 4. if so, then by your own rule doubtless, there wore
Altars also. Or if God suffered all that time to pass without any Altars; did
it not pass away without any Tables, or any Churches that we read of? But
see the charity of the man, and his learning too. For if the Doctor will p.
110.
but promise not to disturb the peace of the Church any more, this lusty Lad
of Lincolnshire will find him all the several Altars, which have been spoke
of by the Fathers for spiritual sacrifices. These we shall meet withal
hereafter, amongst your impertinencies. Mean time I pass my word to keep
covenant with you, and promise you sincerely before God and man, that as I
never did, so I never will put my hand to any thing by which the Church may be
disturbed. 1. King. 18. 18.
You know Elijahs answer unto proud K. Ahab; It is not I, but thou and thy
Fathers house that have troubled Israel.

From Altars we must follow you, as you lead the way, unto the Sacrifices of
the Altar. Whereof though we have spoken before enough to meet with all your
cavils: yet since you put me to the question, p. 115.
where you may read this term of mine, Sacrifices of the Altar, if you read
not of them in the Sacri^ices of the Law; I will tell you where. Look through
the book of Genesis, and tell me if you meet not with many sacrifices, and
sacrifices done on Altars, by Abel, Noah, Abraham, Jacob: sacrifices of the
Altar, doubtless, and yet not sacrifices of the Law. The law you know was a
Postnatus, not borne a long time after those good Patriarchs died; you cite the
Cardinal rightly, that all the sacrifices which we read of in the scripture,
were necessarily to be destroyed. But presently you change his terms, and for
his sacrifices in the Scripture, put down your sacrifices of the law; as if
the Scripture went no further than the Law of Moses. If in the ancient Fathers
we do find not in terminis, the sacrifice of the Altar, it helps but little
to your purpose: the Doctor no where saying that he had it from them. And if
they call it not interminis, the sacrifice of the Altar, they call it so at
least ex consequente, when they entitle the Lords Supper by the name of
Sacrifice, and such a sacrifice as is to be offered on a sacred or an hallowed
Altar. And yet to satisfy your longing, it shall be hard but we will find it
for you amongst the Ancients, and not consult the Index neither. For what
conceive you of S. Austin, was not he an Ancient? and yet he calls it so
interminis, without doubt or scruple. Cum ergo sacrificii sive Altaris [N. B.]
^ive quarumcunque eleemosynarum, etc. in the Enchiridion ad Laurentium, cap.
110. of the Edition of Danaeus. Nor shall S. Austin go alone: it being called
so by Eccle^iae mos obtinuit ut Sacrificium Altaris, etc. in Ma^c. c. 44.
Bid, no such very puisne, and that in terminis terminantibus, which is that
you stand upon. But where you add, that possibly the Ancient Fathers could not
have any notice of this sacrifice of the Altar; p. 116.
and for a proof thereof produce a passage from Arnobius: besides, what has
before been answered to the place it self, the Doctor cannot choose but tell
you, that you have used Arnobius worse, than any Gentile would have done.
Arnobius was not asked, as you put the question, What are you Christians to
perform no manner of sacrifices at all? but whether the Christians thought
that no such thing as sacrifice was at all proper to the Gods? Quid ergo?
Sacrificia censetis nulla facienda? as your margin rightly. Nor does Arnobius
answer to the question, as you make him answer, no, not any at all: as if the
Christiaus only had had no sacrifices, or thought no kind of sacrifice to be
a fitting service for the heavenly powers: but ex Varronis vestri sententia,
nulla; none, if we may believe your own Author Varro, a learned man amongst
your selves. Vt vobis non nostra, sed Va^ronis vestri sententia respon^eamus.
l. 7
And this he makes non nostra, none of our opinion; though you most falsely make
it both his and ours, that is, the Christians of th^se times. You must bring
better proofs than this, or else it will be possible enough that the ancient
Fathers might take notice of this Sacrifice of the Altar: which is the matter
you deny, and to make good your negative, have thus used Arnobius.

But, as you say, the Doctor has found it in the Bible for all this, Heb. 13.
10. We have an Altar: And so have you. Do not you find it in the Bible, as
well as he? Yes; but you know the meaning of it better than any Doctor of them
all; better than Doctor Gentium, than S. Paul himself; For in good faith, say
you, p. 117.
if S. Paul should mean a material Altar for the Sacrament in that place
(with reverence to such a chosen Vessel of the Holy Ghost, be it spoken) it
would prove the weakest argument that was ever made by so strong an Artist.
Which said, you descant on it thus: We have an Altar and a Sacrifice of the
Altar, that you of the Circumcision may not partake of. And have you so? That
is no great wonder says the Jew, when abundance of you Christians (the
discipline of your Church being so severe) may not partake thereof your selves.
And therefore you conclude, That for S. Paul to fright the Jews with the loss
of that, which so many millions of Christians were themselves bereaved of, had
been a very weak and feeble dehortation. Is not this V. p. 58. of the holy
Table.
ponere os in coelum, to outface heaven it self, in calling thus in question
the judgment and discretion of that great Apostle: Tu quis es, O homo; what
art thou O man, that thou should dare to dispute with Paul, and that upon
such weak and feeble grounds? For good Sir, tell me where you find that those
degrees you speak of, and that (...) p. 117.
, that creeping on with time and le^sure unto the bosom of the Church; were
known or practiced in the time of this Apostle? Think you the discipline of
the Church was grown to that severitie in so short a time, as that the Jews
might turn it back upon S. Paul, to elude his Argument? That rigor, those
degrees, were never heard of in the Church, till a long time after, though by
you made as old as the faith it self: there being mention in the Acts of many
families baptized, not a few thousands of particular persons, which did not
run through all those wearisome ways, before they were admitted to the
blessed Sacrament. Or were it that those wearisome ways were travailed by the
Christians in the Apostles time, before they were admitted to the Sacrament,
yet were this but a sorry answer to his Argument, how It would prove the
weakest argument, etc. p. 117.
weak soever you conceive it. The Apostles argument is de jure, of a right to
eat; your answer is de facto, of the act of eating. Th^se of the Circumcision
had no right to eat of the Christians Altar; simply and absolutely no right at
all. The Initiati had a kind of right, nay a good jus ad rem, though in re
they had not, and to this jus in re they tended by those steps and degrees you
talk of. Because a stranger has no right to my lands, have my children none?
and yet my children must (...), tarry a while, expect their time, before they
enter into actual possession of them. What a Goliath have we here to encounter
David, what a Tertullus have we found, to dispute with Paul; what a Epiphan.
lib. 1. haer^s. 28. n. 2.
Cerinthus, to make head against S. Peter: yet lest S. Paul should go alone,
you let us have S. Ambrose to bear him company: and hard it is to say which
of the two you use most coursly. You tax S. Paul with weakness, but yet you do
it with a salva reverentia, and with a reverence be it spoken. S. Ambrose
finds not in you so much good manners, whom you have falsified of purpose to
make the Apostles argument as weak, as you say it is. For thus you shut up
your Censura, (or if you please your (...)) of the blessed Apostle. p. (...).
I will conclude with S. Ambrose, That we have nothing visible in all this
disputation of S. Paul, neither Priest, nor sacrifice, nor Altar: And then
produce him in your margin, saying, Nihil hic visibile, neque Sacerdos, neque
sacrificium, neque Altar, in 10. ep. ad Hebr. How you have falsified S.
Ambrose, by turning Horum, into Hic, See the forme^ Chapter.
we have shown before. The Father speaks there only of spiritual
sacrifices; and you will turn his horum into hic, as if he spoke there only
of the mystical sacrifice. And were it hic in the original of S. Ambrose, yet
you are guilty of another falsehood against that Father by rendering it, in all
this disputation. The Fathers hic, if he had said so, must have related to
those points which were debated of, in the 10. Chapt. to the Hebr. whence the
words were cited; and those spiritual sacrifices, which are there described,
you, by an excellent Art of juggling, have with a Hocas Pocas brought it
hither, and make us think it was intended for this hic, this place, Heb. 13.
10. of which now we speak, and which has been the ground of that disputation,
which you conclude with, from S. Ambrose.

Using the Apostle, and the Fathers in so foul a fashion, it is not to be
thought you should deal more ingeniously with their Disciples. The servant is
not above the Master; nor looks for better usage from you, than he has done
hitherto. Having concluded with S. Ambrose, your next assault is on the Doctor:
whom you p. 12.
report to be the first son of the reformed Church of England, that has
presumed openly to expound this place of a material Altar; and yet not
constantly neither. ^b.
Not constantly, you say, but yet so expounded it. I beseech you, where? Not in
the Coal from the Altar, there is no such matter. Take the words plainly as
they lie, you shall find them thus. And above all indeed, S. Paul in his
Habemus altar, Hebr. p. 47.
13. 10. In which place whether he mean the Lords Table, or the Lords Supper,
or rather the sacrifice it self, which the Lord once offered, certain it is,
that he conceived the name of Altar, neither to be impertinent nor improper in
the Christian Church. Find you that he expounds the place of a material
Altar? or that he only does repeat three several expositions of it? Now of
those expositions, one was this, that by those words, we have an Altar, S. Paul
might mean we have a Table, whereof it was not lawful for them to eat, that
serve the Tabernacle. If this be the material Altar, that you complain of in
the Doctors exposition; assuredly he is not the first son, by many of the
Church of England, that has so expounded it. The learned Bishop Answ. to Card.
^eron. cap. 6.
Andrews does expound it so. The Altar in the old Testament is by Malachi
called Mensa Domini. And of the Table in the new Testament, by the Apostle it
is said, Habemus Altar: which whether it be of stone as Nyssen; or of wood, as
Optatus, it skils not. So does my Lord of Lincoln also, one of the sons, I
trow, of the Church of England. Citing those words of Bishop Andrews, p. 120.
you add immediately, that this is the exposition of P. Martyr mentioned in the
letter ( i. e. my Lord of Lincolns letter to the Vicar of Grantham) that as
sometimes a Table is put for an Altar, as in the first of Malachi: so sometimes
an Al^ar may be put for a Table, as in this Epistle to the Hebrews. Next look
into the Bishop of Chichester, Appello Cae^sarem. p. 286.
who plainly tells you, that the Lords Table has been called (...) from the
beginning; not, as some falsely teach, by succeeding Fathers: and that S. Paul
himself may seem to have given authority and warrant to the Phrase, Hebr.
13. 10. The Doctor is not then the first son of the Church of England, that
has so expounded it. Or if he were, he has a second, but such a second as is
indeed Nulli secundus, for some things that I could tell you of, even your good
friend the minister of Lincolnshire, one of the children of the Church, that
writ the book entitled the Holy Table. For presently upon the Bishop of
Lincolns gloss, he adds p. 120.
this de proprio, than the which solution there may be peradventure a more
full; but there cannot be ^ more plain and conceiveable answer. I see you
can make use sometimes of a leaden dagger, I am sure this fellow is a mighty
weak pe^ce to take up this leaden dagger, etc. p. 118.
though, as you tell us, thrown away by the very Papists; yet not so utterly
thrown away, (as within two leaves after you are pleased to tell us) but that
it is still worn p. 121.
by the Jesuits, Salmeron, the Remists, a Lapide, Haraeus, Tirinus, Gordon,
Menochius, (and Cajetan) of which some are yet living, for ought I can hear.
Nor does your Author say, it is thrown away, as if not serviceable to this
purpose: Pella^n. de Missa, l. 1. c. 14.
but only that non desunt ex Catholicis, some of the Catholic writers do
expound it otherwise. I hope you would not have all Texts of Scripture to be
cast away like leaden Daggers, because, Non desunt ex Catholicis, some one or
other learned man give such expositions of them, as are not every way agreeable
unto yours and mine.

Now as the Doctor was the first Son of the Church of England, so was
Se^ulius p. 121.
the first Writer before the Reformation, that literally, and in the first
place did bend this Text to the material Altar. Just so I promise you, and no
otherwise. Or had Sedulius been the first, the exposition had not been so
modern, but that it might lay claim to a fair antiquity. Sedulius lived so
near S. Austin, that he might seem to tread on his very heels; the one
being placed by Bellarmine, an. 420. the other an. 430. but ten years after.
And if the Cardinals note S^ripsit explanation^s in omnes Ep^stolas S* Pa^li,
ex Origin, Ambrosio, Hi^ron^^^, and August^no (...). Ins^ript. Ecc^es.
be true, that he excerpted all his notes on S. Paul's Epistles, from Origin*
Ambrose, Hierom, and Austin: for ought I know, his exposition of the place may
be as old, as any other whatsoever. But for Sedulius, (wheresoever he had it)
thus he cleares the place: Inlocum.
Habemus nos fideles Altar, prae^er Altar Iudaeorum, unde corpus and
sanguinem Christi participamus: i. e. The faithful have an Altar, yet not the
Jewish Altar neither, from whence they do participate of Christ's body and
blood: That is plain enough, and yet no plainer than S. Chr^sost. though you
have darkened him as much as possibly you can, to abuse the Father. p. 122.
Chrysostom expounds it (as you say) of (...), of the things professed here
amongst us: for proof whereof you bring in Oecumenius with his (...), the
Tenets, as it were, of Christian men. So that if you may be believed, the
Father, and his second, do expound the place, of the Doctrine, Tenets, or
profession of the Church of Christ. I^ Hebr. 13. 1^.
First, to begin with Chrysostom, (...) The words you see, put neutrally, and
so translated in the Latin, Non enim qualia sunt apud Iudaeos, talia etiam
nostra sunt: That is, as I conce^ve his meaning, our Sacrifices, or our
Sacraments are not such as the Jewish were, our Alt^r not as theirs, nor any of
our Rites thereunto belonging. My reason is, because it follows in the
Father, (...); so that it is not lawful, no not to the High Priest himself,
to partake thereof. Of what I pray you? Not of the things professed in the
Christian Church? I hope you will not say, but it was lawful to the Priests to
be partakers of the doctrine of our Lord and Savior. Why did the Apostles
preach unto the Jews, in case it were not lawful for them to make profession
of the Faith? Therefore the Father must needs mean the Christians Sacrifices,
(performed upon the Altar which the Apostle speaks of) of which it was not
lawful for the High Priest (continuing as he was, High Priest) to be
partaker. And this I take the rather to have been his meaning, because
Theophylact who followed Chrysostom so exactly Ita Chrysostomum secutus est,
ut ejus abbreviator dici possit. Bell. de scrip. Eccl.
, that he does seem to have abridged him; does thus descant on it. (...),
etc. Having before said ( v. 9.) that no regard was to be had of meats, lest
our own Ordinances [(...)] might be thought contemptible, as things
unobserved; he adds, that we have Ordinances of our own, [(...)] not about
meats, (as were the Jews) (...), but such as do concern the Altar, (...). In
locum.
or the unbloody sacrifice of Christ's quickening body. Of which, which sacrifice
[(...)] it is not lawful for the Priests to be partakers, as long as they do
service to the Tabernacle; i. e. the legal signs and shadows. The like says
also Oecumenius with his (...), which you have Englished Tenets, with the like
felicity, as you did the (...) in Chrysostom. For Oecumenius saying as
Theophylact had done before, because the Apostle had affirmed, That no regard
was to be had of meats, etc. he adds, (...); and have not we also our own
Ordinances or observations? To which he answers with Theophylact, but a great
deal plainer, Yes, (...). not of meats, but of our Altar. If you go down
ward to the Latins, they are clear as day. Haymo who lived about the year
^^0. affirms expressly on the place, Altar Ecclesiae est, ubi quotidie corpus
consecratur Christi; that is the Altar of the Church, whereon the body of
Christ is daily consecrated. And so Remigius, who lived, and writ about those
times; Ha^emus ergo Altar Ecclesiae, ubi consecratur corpus Dominicum; the
same in sense, though not in words, with that of Haymo. This, Doctor Fulk,
almost as great a Clerk as you, conceives to be so really intended by
Oecumenius and Haymo Defense of the transl. c. 17. ^. 17.
, that he reports, that they did doat upon the place; even as you say p. 119.
, the Doctor melts upon the place. But say you what you will. As long as he
can back it with so good authority, the Doctor will make more of Habemus
Altar, than before he did; though you should raise John Philpot from the dead
to expound it otherwise; as near told he did in the Acts and Mon. p. 90. of
your holy Table.

From the Apostles Text, both re and nomine, proceed we to the Apostles
Canons, nomine at the least, if not re also; which, if not writ by them, are by
the Doctor said to be of good antiquity; nor do you deny it: Only you ^ling
them off with a Schoole-boyes jest, p. 170.
affirming confidently, that all good Scholars reckon those Canons but as so
many Pot-gunnes. Not all good Scholars certainly; you are out in that. What
think you of my Lord of Chichester, of whom the Doctor and the Minister of
Linc. too p. 95.
may well learn as long as they live? He, a geod Scholar in your own
confession, does not alone call them the Apostles Canons, Preface to M. Io.
Seldom, p. 53.
but cites the 40 of them, as a full and strong authority to prove, that by the
ancient Canons Churchmen had leave to give, and bequeath their Goods and
Chattels by their last Will and Testament. And this, in his reply unto Io.
Seldom, whom he knew too well, to think he would give back at the report or
blow of a School-boyes Pot-gunne. Next where those three Canons that the Doctor
cited, do speak so clearly of the Altar, and that by the same name, (...),
used by the Apostle to the Hebrews, that there is no denial of it, you fly
unto your wonted refuge, a scornful and profane derision: p* 170.
He that shall read, say you, what is presented on these Altars for the
maintenance of the Bishop and his Clergy, will conceive them rather to be so
many Pantries, Larders, or Storehouses, than consecrated Altars. Persius Sat.
^.
O Curvae in terris animae, and coelestium inanes! So dead a soul, so void of
all celestial impressions, did I never meet with. I am confirmed now more
than ever, for the first Author of the Dresser; otherwise you had never been
allowed and licensed to call it as you do, a Pantrie, or a Larder, and a
Storehouse. I see there is good provision toward, and as much devotion. Your
Pig^on-house we have seen already Cap. 2.
, and Pottage you will serve in presently, if we can be patient. Larders we
have, and Storehouses, and Pantries, which portend good cheer. Think you a
man that hears you talk thus, would not conceive your Kitchen were your
Chapel; the Dresser in the same, your High-Altar; and that your Requiem
Altars were your Larder, Pantrie, and Storehouse? Get but a Cook to be your
Chaplain, and on my life, Comus the old belly god amongst the Gentiles, was
never sacrificed unto with such propriety of V^ensils, and rich magnificence,
as you will sacrifice every day to your Quo^um Deus ^st venture.
god, your Belly. Nor need you fear that your estate will not hold out: I hope
you are a provident Gentleman, and make your Altars bring you in* what your
Altars spend you. For say you not in that which follows, p. 1. 0.
that Judas his bag may with as good reason, as these Tables, be called ^n
Altar? I wonder what fine adjunct you will find out next. You cannot probably
go on, and not set down ad mens^m daemoniorum, that Table of Devils which
Saint Paul speaks of. Judas his bag? Just so, yet you would shift this off
unto Baronius, as you have done the Dresser on the rude people of Grantham.
Baronius, as you say, implies it. Does he so indeed? All that Baroni^^ says,
is this, Ann. A. 57
that those who ministered in the Church, did from the first beginnings of the
Church receive their maintenance from the oblations of the faithful. Immo cum
adhuc dominus supe^stes,etc. And that the Lord himself when he preached the
Gospel, used from these offerings to provide for himself and his. For Judas
(says S. John) bearing the bag, Ea qu^^ mittebantur, portabat, did carry up
and down that store which was sent in to him. What say you? does the Cardinal
imply in this, that Iud^s his bag, may with good reason (any how) be called
an Altar? Take heed of Judas and his ^agge, of Judas and his qualities; for
fear you come unto that end that Judas did.

Your answers to the Doctors allegations from Ignatius, must be looked on next.
And first the Doctor finds, (...) one Altar, in his Epistle ad Magnesios. p.
168.
You answer first, that by Vedelius this is thought to be a supposititious
fragment taken out of the Constitutions of Clemens: and yet proclaim it in
your margin, that this does not appear so clearly to you, as to rest upon it.
You answer secondly, that this was brought in by the Doctor only to make sport.
How so? Because, say you, the Altar there, is Jesus Christ. In that before, you
left Vedelius, your good friend and helper in all this business; and here he
leaves you, to cry quit^. Searching as curiously as he could, what to except
against in all these Epistles, he lets this go by. A pregnant evidence that
he knew not what to say against it. Run, says the Father, all of you as one
man to the Temple of God, (...), as to one Altar, to one Jesus Christ: i. e.
say you, who better understood the Father, than he did himself; run all of
you to one Jesus Christ, as to one Altar. This is your old trick to abuse your
Readers, and mak^ your Authors speak what they never meant. The Father spoke
before of prayer, of common prayers to be poured forth by all the people,
(...) in the self same place, in faith and love. And then exhorts them to
run together to the Church to pray, as to one Altar, to participate, as to
one Jesus Christ, the High Priest of all. Had it been (...), the matter had
been clear on your side. But the distinction and repeating of the preposition,
the (...) and (...), make a different business. The second place produced by
the Doctor from Ignatius, was that Ad Ph^lad.
of (...) where he makes mention of the unity that ought to be retained in the
Church of God; and then brings in amongst the rest, one Bread broke for all,
one Cup distributed to all, one Altar also in every Church, together with one
Bishop, etc. To this you answer, that in the place to the Philadelphians, he
does express himself to mean by Altar, (...), the Council of the Saints,
and Church in general, and not any material Altar, as Vedelius proves at
large. And do they so indeed? That passage which you speak of, is in the
Epistle ad Ephesios. And do you think he tells the Ephesians what he did mean
by Altar in his Epistle to the Philadelphians? This is just like the Germans
beating down of Altars, because the people here in England were scandalized
with them in our country Churches. Then for Vedelius, proves he, as you
affirm, that by Altar here, Ignatius means not any material Altar, but the
Council of the Saints, the Church in general? In the Epistle to the Ephesians
he does indeed correct magnificat (as your own phrase is) and play the Critic
with the Author; making him say, (...), for (...) whereof we shall say more
hereafter in our perusal and examination of your Extravagancies. But in this
place he deals more fairly, and understands him as the Doctor does: for
reckoning up four kinds of Altars in the Primitive Church, he makes the
fourth and last to be mensa Domini, qua utebantur in sacra coena peragenda, the
table of the Lord, used in the ^elebrating of the holy supper. Then adds, that
Hanc mensam Patres interdum etiam Altar vocant* Exercit. 6. ^. 1.
sometimes by the Fathers, this table is also called an Altar, and for the
proof thereof brings in this, (...), which the Doctor mentioned. So that you
have belied the Father and your friend to boot. Lastly, for that of (...), Gods
Altar, in his Epistle ad Tarsenses, the whole place is this. (...), etc. Those
that continue in the state of Virginity, honor ye as the Priests of Christ;
(...), those which are widows indeed, (in the Apostles language) or which p.
168.
uphold their chastity (as your self translates it) honor ye as the Altars
of God. These are his words distinctly, and what ^ind you here? Marry you say,
some knavish scholar exscribed the passage for him to make sport withal: and
that the Altar there intended becomes much better the upper end of his Table,
than the upper end of his Church; a plain widow-Altar; Which said, you bring
in one of your young Scholars with a bawdy Epigramme, unfit to be inserted
into any book of a serious Argument; but more unfit to be approved, allowed,
and licenced, by any Ordinary: But Sir, however you are pleased to make your
self profanely merry in these sacred matters, the place is plain enough to
prove an Altar; and more than so, a reverence due unto the Altar, in Ignatius
time: the men of Tarsus being here advised to honor chaste and virtuous widows,
as they did Gods Altar. And for the widow that you wot of, if you have any
special aim therein (as some think you have) she may return that answer to
you, which once Octavia's Chamber-^^aid Tacit. Ann. lib. 14. prope finem.
gave to Tigellinus; which I had rather you should look for in the Author, than
expect from me.

The place from lib. 4. c. 20.
Iren^eus, by which he proved the Apostles to be Priests, because they did Deo
and Altariservire, attend the service of the Lord, and wait upon him at the
Altar; you make p. 165.
to be an Allegory, and no more than so: But Bishop Montague of Chichester, of
whom the Doctor (as you bid him) will think no shame to learn as long as he
lives, Appello Ca^^em, p. ^^6.
finds more matter in it, and says that Irenaeus, lib. 4. c. 20. spe^keth of
the ministers of the new Testament, not of the old, that they do Deo and
Altari deservi^e: which is the very same that the Doctor said. Are not you
scitus scriptor, a very proper squire, to quarrel with the exposition of a
man, whose books you are not fit to carry? what may be further said out of
Irenaeus for sacrifices, Priests, and Altars, we have shown you in the former
Chapter. Next for Tertullian, the Doctor gave (...). p. 46.
you thence two places, one from his book de oratione, Si and adaram Dei
steteris: the other out of that de poenitentia, Adgenic^lari aris Dei. Not to
say any thing in this place of the St^tions mentioned in the first of those two
passages [ nonne solemnior erit statiotua, Si and ad aram Dei steteris?] you
answer first unto the first, p. 160.
that by this Ara Dei, Tertullian in his African and ^ffected style means
plainly the Lords Table. Why man, who ever doubted it? What says the Doctor
more than this? Tertullian (are not these his words?) has the name of Altar,
as a thing used and known in the Christian Church: as, nonne solemnior erit
statio tua, Si and ad aram Dei steteris? what find you there, but that the
Lords Table in Tertullians ^ime, was called Ara Dei, Gods Altar; you might have
saved your labor, of running into France for my As the Lord du Ples^is does
acknowledge. p. 1^0.
Lord du Pl^ssis, unless he could have told you that Tertullian meant some
other thing in his Ara Dei; or that the name of Altar was not a thing then
known and used in the Christian Church. Tertullian did indeed affect a little
of the African, in all his style. But his said affectation does appear in
nothing here, save that he uses the word Ara, when as, in that propriety of
speech which generally was observed in Christian Writers, he should have used
the word Altar. Nor need you take such pains to add some reason for your
opinion, that there by Ara Dei, Tertullian plainly means the Lords Table;
being a matter never questioned. And yet to show your mighty reading, and that
you have a great deal of the Critic in you: you fall into a tale of I know
not what, that Ara in Tertullian does not signify an Altar, but any hillock or
advantage of gro^nd. Once in Tertullian so it signifies, as in that de Pallio.
And therefore must it here be ara Dei, at Gods hillock, or (as your self
translate it after) the rising of Almighty God? But herein you mistake the
point extremely, as in all things else: The proper signification of the word,
is Altar, as you may see in Varro de lingua latina, lib. 5. and Isidore de
Origin. lib. 15. c. 4. used for a bank or hillock by a Metaphor only, as in
that de Pallio. So that to call the Table ara, only because it was a kind of
rising above the pavement; and to call banks or risings aras, because of that
similitude they had to Altars: were to run round in circulo, and borrow
Metaphors from metaphors, ad infinitum. And yet you take away this Metaphor
also, by telling us immediately, that Tertullian by alluding to the
reservations from the Heathen Altars, does call the Communion Table Ara Dei,
Gods Altar. Does he so? That Is well. You give as much in this, as one needs
desire, that were not too insatiably covetous. How you mistake Tertullian in
his reservare and accipere, we shall see hereafter.

For the next place, Adgeniculari aris Dei, you tell us that it is run out of
the text; p. 1^2.
and adgeniculari c^aris Dei put in stead thereof: the alteration being made by
Pamelius, approved by all men else, besides this poor Doctor. Approved by all
men else? most confidently said indeed, but most weakly proved. What think
you of Hospinian, whose judgment you rely upon in other matters of this
nature? Meminit enim and Tertullianus adgeniculationis poenitentium ad aras, in
l. de poenitentia. So he, in his discourse de origin Altarium, published in
the year 1603. What think you of Laurentius Renatus de la Bar, who reads
it, as the Doctor does; Adgeniculari aris Dei; And thereupon inferres, Hic
vides antiquitus, Altaria venerationi fuisse, quibus adgenicularentur: By which
(says he) you may perceive that anciently the Altars were had in reverence,
and that the people kneeled before them? What think you of Beatus Rhenanus, who
does not only read it aris Dei, and makes that inference thereupon, which out
of him was taken by de la Bar: but brings a testimony from S. Ambrose, that
in those ancient times they did os^ulis quoque honorare, honor the Altars with
their kisses? What think you, finally, of Stephanus Durantis, which also
reads it, Aris Dei, lib. de Ritib. Eccl. 1. cap. 15? You see Sir, here are
some besides the poor Doctor that approve of the ancient reading: and for your
new readings, as many times they have their uses, so other whiles they make an
Author speak what he never meant: the liberty of correcting and criticizing
being grown so high, and that of falsifying (you know it by your self) so
universal* that the old Copies may be thought to be the truest: And I am
partly in these matters of old Timons mind, who being asked by Aratus g how
he might get a perfect Copy of Homers Works, returned this answer, that he
should look abroad for one of the old Editions, and not look after those of
the new corrections: (...). You see the Doctors are divided, and that both
Readings have their Patrons, and some that lived since the old reading was cast
out of the Text ^pp^sed by all learned men that have lived, since Pamelius
time. p. 165.
by Pamelius, have not for all that taken up his Charis Dei; much less opposed
the old, as you idly dream. As for your sally on the Author of the Latin
determination, which you speak of, p. 163. the Pocket-Author, as you call him,
sicut tuus est mos, according to your wonted fashion of casting dirt on all you
meet wi^h; I leave him to himself; it concerns not me: Aetatem habet, he is
of age to do you reason, as well in this, as in that other quarre^l which you
have against him, and which you fall upon unseasonably, but that you love to be
in action, p. 192. All that I mean to do, is to divide the wind and Sun
between you, and see fair play on both sides, if you should chance to enter
the lists about it.

And so we will proceed unto S. Cyprian, of* whom the Doctor told you in his
p. 4^.
Coal from the Altar, that in his Ep. ad Epictetum, he plainly calls it Altar
D^i* Gods Altar. But there, say you, p. 166*
he means by Altar, Stipes, oblationes, lucra, the contributions, offerings,
and all advantages belonging to the man's Bishopric whom they had suspended.
This you affirm indeed, but with as little proof, as truth. The words are
plainly otherwise, but that you have an itch that will never leave you, to make
your Authors speak what they never meant. Now thus stood the case: One Cypr.
Ep. li. 1. ep. 7.
Fortunatianus having Apostated in the time of persecution, and thereupon being
deprived of his Bishopric, would enter on his charge again without more ado,
not being reconciled unto the Church. This the good Father there complains of,
that he should dare to enter on the Priesthood, which he had betrayed, Qu^si
post aras Diaboli, accedere ad aras Dei fas sit, as if it were a thing of
nothing to come immediately from the Devils Altars to the Altar of God. Is this
to talk of offerings, contributions, and matters of profit? After indeed, he
mentions Stipes and Oblationes, but neither in this very case, nor any thing
unto this purpose; which you know well enough, though contrary unto your
knowledge, you bring in those words to stop a gappe withal, and for no use
else. That in the eighth Epistle, unum Altar, and unum Sacerdotium, does
signify, you say, the sum and substance of the Gospel; why do you not make
use of the same construction for the (...) in Ignatius, before remembered,
rather than run as far as Ephesus for a bald device, to blind the luster
of the place? Both places intimate this only, that in one Church, there was
not, in those early days, above one Altar; and may be serviceable as others
of this nature are, against the Plurality of Masses in the Church of Rome;
many of which you have in Bishop Jewel, Art. 13. 6. But that it should be
thence concluded, that there S. Cyprian only means p. 166.
the sum and substance of the Gospel; is to make aliquid ex nihilo, so it
serve your purpose: Or if it could be thence collected, it could not but be
much unto the honor of the Altar, and the Priesthood, both, that those two
words should comprehend the whole bodies of religion, and yet the Priesthood
and the Alter might stand well enough for all that collection. Nor need we
fear, that following this Interpretation, The Popedom Ibid.
would be set up and erected in every Parish Church in England, because
forsooth the Father speaks of una Cathedra in the words before. Says not
Igna^ius, (...), one only Bishop in a Church, as before was said. Neither of
them I trow endeavored to advance the Popedom, but, that for the avoiding of
schisms and divisions there ought to be one Bishop only within one Diocese;
whereof see Bishop Jewel Article.
passim, in that of the Supremacy: And as one Bishop, so one Priesthood, and
one Altar only in each Church, on the selfsame reason. The like may be
replied to your evasion from S. Cyprians meaning in his Cited in the Co^l. p.
46.
ninth Epistle, of which you tell us, as before, that he means there by Altar
the Ministerial functions and offices. If so, it were but pars pro toto, the
chiefest and most excellent part of the whole Ministry put for all the rest.
But are you sure of what you say? are you sure of any thing? Saint Cyprian
speaks five times of Altars in that one Epistle, four times of Sacrifices and
Altars: Think you he means in every place the Ministerial functions and
offices? What say you then to this? Nequ^ enim meretur nominari ad Altar Dei
in Sacerdotum prec^, qui ab Altar sacer ^otes avocare voluit: What signifies
Altar in the first place think you? What? the material Altar, or the (...)
function: However you may wrest this meaning in the later clause, to the
Priestly function, yet in the first you cannot possibly give him any other
meaning, than that the Priests officiated at the real and material Altar. For
shame d^ale better with the Fathers, and let them speak their minds,
according to the liberty of th^se most pure and pious times; without those base
disg^ises which you put upon them, only to blind your readers eyes, and abuse
Antiqui^ie.

Thus have I given you a brief view in these two last Chapters, of the chief
point in controversy, between the Doctor and your self; and hunted you as
well as my poor wits would serve me, out of all your starting holes. Altars,
and Priests, and Sacri^^ces being Relatives, as you say your self, I have
laid down in the first place the Orthodox and ancient doctrine of the Church,
concerning Sacrifice; followed it in the way of an historical narration, from
Abel down to Noah, from him to Moses, from Moses to Christ, who instituted, as
S. Irenaeus has it, the new sacrifice of the new Testament; novam oblationem
novi Testamenti, in this Fathers language. This sacrifice thus instituted by
our Lord and Savior, the Church received from the Apostles, Quam ab Apostolis
Ecclesiae accipiens, in universo mundo offe^t Deo. Lib. 4. cap. 32.
and offers it accordingly to the Lord our God, throughout the habitable world:
the passage and descent whereof from the Apostles times, until S. Austins, we
have traced and followed. And we have also found, that from the first times to
the last, there was no sacrifice performed without Priests, and Altars;
excepting those spiritual S^crifices, which every man is bound to offer, in
what place soever. All which, both Altars, Priests, and sacrifice, we have
discovered to you in the Church of England, Cap. 7.
out of the public monuments and Records thereof; and that so answerably unto
the Patterns of Antiquity, as if it had been (...) the ancient Fathers, than
the (...) have cleared up those mists, which you endeavored to cast upon the
ancient Writers, that so your Readers might not see the true intent and meaning
of those passages, which concern this Argument; those most especially whereby you
would persuade weak men, such as are bound to take your word without further
search, that in the Primitive Church, there was neither Altar, Priest, not
Sacrifice, truly and properly so called: which what a ruin and confusion it
would bring in the Church of God, taking away all outward worship, enabling
every man to the Priestly function, robbing the Church of all the reverence due
unto it; no man knows better than your self, who have endeavored to promote
that doctrine for this purpose only, that you may be cried up, and honored as
the Grand Patron and defender of men's Christian liberty. Finally* I have
answered unto all those Cavils and exceptions which you had made against the
Allegations and Authorities pressed and produced by the Doctor against the
Writer of the Letter to the Vicar of Granthan; and left him statu quo, in the
same case wherein you found him, all your assaults and stratagems of fraud and
falsehood notwithanding. But this in reference only to the thing it self, that
the Church had Altars in those early and dawning days of Christianity; we will
next look upon the place and situation of them, what you say to that.

CHAP. VII.
Of Churches, and the fashion of them, and of the usual place allotted in the
Church for the holy Altar.
Places appointed for Divine worship amongst the Patriarchs, Jews, and
Gentiles. The various conditions and esta^te of the Christian Church, and that
the Churches were according unto those estates. What was the meaning of the
Apolog^ticks, when they denied the having of Temples in the Church of Christ.
The Minister of Linc. stops the mouth of Minutius Felix, and falsifieth
Arnobius. Altars how situated in the troublesome and persec^ted times of
Christianity. The usual form of Churches, and distinct part^ and places of
them in the Primitive times. That in those times the Altars stood not in the
body of the Church, as is supposed by the Minister of Linc. Six reasons for the
standing of the Altars at the upper end of the Quire or Chancell in the days
of old. Of Ecclesiastical traditions, and the authority thereof. The Church of
England constant to the practice of the former times. The Minister of Linc.
tells a Winter tale about the standing of an Altar in the Cathedral Church of
Dover. The meaning of the Rubric in the Common-prayer-booke, about the placing
of the Table in Communion tim^; as also of the 82 Canon of the Church of
England.

IT is well noted by our incomparable Hoo^ker, That solemn duties of public
service to be done unto God, must have their places set and prepared in such
sort, as beseems actions of that regard. Which laid for his foundation, he
thus builds upon it, that Adam, even during the space of his small continuance,
in Paradise, had where to present himself before the Lord, Genesis 3. 8. that
Adams sons had out of Paradise in like sort, whither to bring their
Sacrifices, Genesis 4. 3. that the Patriarchs used Altars, and Mountains, and
Groves to the self-same purpose, Genesis 13. 4. and 22. 1. and 21. 33. that in the
wilderness, when as the people of God had themselves no settled habitation, yet
were they then commanded by God to make a moveable Tabernacle; and finally,
that the like charge was given them against the time that they should come to
settle themselves in the Land, which had been promised to their Fathers.
Nature informed them in the maine, that proper and peculiar places were to be
set apart to Gods public worship, and God himself informed them in the
circumstance thereof, for the form and fashion, both when the Church was
moveable* and when after settled. The Tabernacle fashioned by his direction, was
a moveable Temple; the Temple fashioned by that pattern, was a settled
Tabernacle. Each of them had their Courts, their Sanctum, and their Sanctum
Sanctorum, according to the several Ministeries by the Law required: which
distribution stood in force, as long as there was any Temple so to be
distributed, and any Ministeries in the same to be performed. A Temple, whilst
it stood, of most rich magnificence; immensae opulentiae Templum, as Hist. lib.
5.
Tacitus most truly called it; and such as Titus labored to preserve with all
might and cunning, at the destruction of the City; knowing right well, (...),
Joseph. Hist. de bellis Ind^^orum.
that the subversion of it would redound unto the loss and prejudice of the
Roman Empire. A Temple on the which the people of the Ie^es had severally
bestowed their costly offerings, as occasion was: and to the which the Kings of
Asia, Ant^q. I^d. lib. 13. cap. 6.
(...), as Josephus tells us, had sent both many and those royal and
magnificent presents, in testimony of their service to the God of Israel. Nor
was it otherwise with the Gentiles, than with Gods own people. At first they
worshipped their Gods sub dio, in the open air: the Grecians sacrificing unto
Aesculapius (...)
on the mountain tops, as the Bithynians did unto all their deities.

Now as they had their high places, their montium cacumina, as mine Author
calls them; so had they groves also as the Patriarks had; and sacrificed unto
their Gods under woods and trees. (...)
The grove of Hercules near Athens, and that of Vesta near mount Palatine,
were very famous in old time^. Some such there was in Carthage whereof Virgil
(...)
speaks, Lucus in urbe fuit media, laetissimus umbra. And Servius notes (...)
upon the place, that Virgil never speaks of groves, but you must take them to
be consecrated; and nunquam sine religione* in his Scholia on the third of the
Aen^ids. So Lucan tells us of the Druydes, Pha^ sal. l. 1.
Nemora alta remotis incolitis Lucis, that they delighted most in high woods,
and private groves: the Oak being principally affected by them, whence (...)
they had their name. But when the Lord had fixed his people in the Land of
Canaan, and given them leave to build a Temple to his name: that grant was
forthwith apprehended by the Gentiles also, in their magnificent structures of
the self same kind. The form and distribution generally the same with that
of Salomons: the Temples of the Gentiles being divided into three parts also;
viz. the Courts or Areas, the body of the same which they called Basilicas, and
last of all their Adyta, or Penetralia. The Areas of their Temples, Rosinus
Aut. Romans l. 2. c. 2.
the Porticos, and the Nave or body of them, were suffered to be used
sometimes for walking, conference, and such civil businesses: but for their
Adyta, Iul. Pollux li^. 2. c. 1. n. 8.
they were conceived to be (...), not to be looked into or touched, but by the
Priests. These (...), the Latins generally called Penetralia, as before was
said: Caesar, Bellicivilis lib. 3.
occulta and remota Templi, the hidden and remote parts of the Temple; and
adds withal quo praeter sacerdotes adire fas non est, that it was lawful
unto none besides the Priests to go into them. Finally, for the costly
offerings bestowed upon them, and those rich presents which occasionally had
been sent unto them: take once for all, that Temple of Apollo in Delphos,
whereof the Historian Justin. hist. ^ib. 24.
thus informs us. Multa ibi and opulenta Regum populorumque visuntur munera,
quaeque magnificentia sui, reddentium vota gratam voluntatem, and deorum
responsa manifestant.

Thus also was it with the Christians in the Primitive times, compelled too
often, to hold their meetings and assemblies, as Bishop Jewel rightly notes
it, in vacant places, in woods and forests, and caves under the ground. And
after as by sufferance or by special favor, they were permitted to build them
Oratories, for the public use: they neither built them in such sumptuous
manner, as might have drawn upon them the Common envy of the Gentiles; or
furnished them in such rich sort as might have been a burden to themselves in
their poor estate. But when the Church was settled, and had got the better hand
of her cruel enemies; Temples in all parts were erected: the whole world
seeming to exult that opportunity was given to pour out its treasures to so
good a purpose. To these three periods, we may reduce what ever is to be
observed in the present business. Touching the first, it is that we are told
by Platina, in vit. Calisti.
Occulta esse omnia, and sacella potius at que etiam abdita, and plerumque
subterranea. Churches they had, places designed and set apart for their holy
exercises; but poor and mean, and almost hidden from men's eyes, agreeable
unto the present state in the which they were. However being destinate to those
holy uses, they were not suffered to be defiled and abused by profane
employments. That of S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11* 22
Have ye not Houses to eat and drink in, discovers manifestly that there was
a difference to be made between house and house, between Gods house and man's,
the places of religious and civil meetings. Now as there was a difference
between house and house; so in the self same house, there was a difference
between place and place: that which was separated for the Priest and the holy
Sacrament, not being to be pressed into by the Common people. And of the
people there were some that might approach more near to the holy places, than
the others could: which is a thing so known, that no man which pretends to
learning did ever doubt it. The second period was when the Church had rest,
what times the Christians set themselves to build them Churches: Churches, I
mean, avowed for such, and publicly frequented for religious meetings,
visible as well unto the Gentiles as unto the faithful, and well known to be
so. The first observed by Polydor Virgil, de Invent. ^^rum. l. 5. c. 6.
to have been publicly avowed in Rome, being that of therm^ Novuti invico
Patritio, consecrated by Pope Pius the first, An. 150. or thereabouts, by the
name of S. Prudentianae. Another Church (but somewhat after this) does Platina
remember in vita Calixti.
to have been built by Pope Calixtus, in regione Transtyberina, and dedicated
by the name of the Blessed Virgin. But for a general view of their works of
this kind, we may best take it from Eusebius, Hist. Eccl. lib. 8. cap. ^.
who speaking of the calm that was between the ninth and tenth persecutions,
informs us of the Christians, that not content with those small Churches which
before they had, they built them fairer, and more large, in every city. But
take his own words with you for your more assurance. (...). Where you may also
see, that they had Churches (...), as before he calls them) in the former
times, but mean and small, agreeable unto those miserable and calamitous
days. Nor was it long before those Churches built so lately, Ibid. cap. 2
were all again demolished by Dioclesian; and so continued till the time of
the Emperor Constantine: what time being raised more beautifully, than before
they had been; they were set out and furnished with all costly furnitures. So
that when Julian was in state, who next but one succeeded Constantine in the
Roman empire, and that the treasures of the Church were made a pray unto the
spoiler: Felix the Proconsul Theodor. hist. eccl. l. 3. c. 11.
could not choose but break out into this expression, (...), behold in what
rich utensiles they do administer to the Son of Marie. Nor was it ever
thought till now, in these later days, that God created such and so many
glorious things, to be served only with the basest.

This groundwork laid, we may the better see what we have to say to those
objections, which are and have been made out of the Apol^geticks of thos^
times, to prove that in those early days of Christianity there were no
Churches. And this I will the rather do, because the Authors which you have
produced against the being of Altars in the Christians Churches, conclude
as well, that then they had no Churches for religious uses: which being examined
in this place, will more clearly manifest what kind of Altars, and what kind
of Churches, were then enquired of by the Gentiles, and in what sense the
having of them was denied by the Christian writers. Now they that gave the hint
unto this surmise, lived either in the heat of persecution, when as the
faithful were dispersed, and neither durst or could be suffered to meet in
public: or else considering that their Churches were but mean and poor, they
did not use to call them Temples; as did the Gentiles those magnificent and
stately structures, which had been consecrated to their Idols. When therefore
they were challenged by the Gentiles to render an account of their religion; and
were demanded why they had no Altars: they were interrogated also why they had
no Churches. Not any of those Authors which you have produced, but speak of one
as well as the other: the objection being made of both, and the answer unto
both set down accordingly. Origin mentions (...), as well as (...). Minutius
Felix, has his Templa nulla, with his Aras nullas: and of Arnobius it Con^.
Gent. lib. 6. in initio.
was asked, cur neque sacras aedes venerationis ad officia construamus; as well
as non Altaria fabricemus. In the reporting of which Authors you leave out
whatsoever does relate to not having Churches; as if the Quaere only were of
not having Altars in those Churches, and therefore cut Minutius off at cur
nullas aras, not suffering him to come forth with his Templa nulla. As for
Arnobius, you deal worse with him, than with Minutius, and make the Gentiles
put the question, p. 156.
why they (the Christians) built no Altars, venerationis ad officia, to
officiate upon in any kind of divine worship: when as the question was not why
they had no Altars to officiate on; but why they had no Churches to officiate
in. Is this fair dealing think you, in a great Professor?

Then for the Answers to these Cavils, in case they must be understood simply
and absolutely, ibid.
as you please to say in the case of Altars: then will it follow thereupon, not
only that they had no Churches, but that they ought to have none neither. You
grant your self, that there were Altars in the Church in Tertullians time; and
Churches you must also grant, because you find it in Tertullian, who makes
mention of them, lib. ibid.
de Idol. c. 7. ad uxorem l. 2. cap. 9. de veland. virg. cap. 3. and 13. and
also in his book de Corona militis, which makes it plain, that whereas Origin
and Minutius Felix lived both after him, and yet reply unto the Quaere of the
Gentiles, that they had neither Temples, nor Altars: it must be understood, not
absolutely and simply, as you simply say, as if they had no Churches, or no
Altars in them; but with relation to those Temples, and those Altars, which
were so honored by the Gentiles. The like is also to be said unto Arnobius,
who living in those very times which Eusebius speaks of, wherein the Christians
did enlarge their Churches, and public Oratories; cannot be understood so
absolutely and simply, as you and Potest intelligi simplicit^r, quod nulla
haberent simpliciter. Harald. in ma^g. 156.
your Haraldus conceive he may; but only in that qualified sense before
remembered. Churches they had for sacred and religious meetings, but no such
stately and magnificent structures as were erected by the Gentiles, to be the
local habitation of their several Idols. And they had Altars too for that
mystical Sacrifice, which had been constantly continued in the Church of God;
but no such Altars as the Gentiles had, and enquired after, which were for
bloody sacrifices of Sheep and Oxen. And this you might have seen in Arnobius
also, but that you use to wink when you meet with any thing you would not
willingly observe. For presently on this, quod non Altaria fabricemus, non ar
as, he adds these words, non caesorum sanguinem animantium demus: which
clearly shows what Altars they were said to want by the Inquisitors.

Thus having found that in the primitive times the Christians had their
Churches, and in them their Altars, our next iuquirie must be this, how, and in
what particular place those Altars were disposed of in the Churches. For that
they had some proper and peculiar place, is not a matter to be doubted. Not
that I think the Altars were so fixed at first, that there was no removing of
them if occasion was; but that there was some certain place allotted to them,
which was reserved for the Priest, and the Administration of the Eucharist: out
of which place they were not to be moved, unless they were quite moved out of
the Church, as sometimes it happened. For that they were not fixed at first may
be well collected from the condition of the Church, which was then still in
motion, and unsettled, the winds of persecution beating as they did, so fierce
upon it. Nor were the Altars only moveable in those first days, but also
portable: and purposely made moveable, that they might be portable, according
to the quality of the times. And if we may rely upon Gabriel Biel, as in this
case I think we may, he tells us of a Table, or Altar, ( Altar ligneum in his
language) v. Hospi. de orig. Altar cap. 6.
whereat the Popes of Rome did use to celebrate the Sacrament: which was
removed by the Priests from place to place, ubicunque episcopus Romanus
latuerit, where ever the then Roman Bishops did retire themselves in times of
danger. Then for the situation of them, whether toward the East, or West, or
any other part of the heavenly bodies, if Walafridus Strabo may be credited;
there was no certainty thereof in the said times neither: the Altars or
Communion Tables being sometimes disposed of de rebus Eccles. cap. 4.
in diversas plagas, East, West, North, or South; and that as there he tells us,
propter aliquam locorum opportunitatem, according to the quality and
conveniencie of the place it self. Indeed it was not possible, as the times
then were, that it should be otherwise. For holding their assemblies, as before
we told you, in private houses, in dens, and cavernes under ground, they were
to make a virtue of necessity, and suit themselves according to the quality of
the place, considering that they could not suit the place to their own desires.
But this held only for a time: no longer than the faithful were in those
extremities, and put unto their shifts, as we use to say. For after when they
were permitted, either on sufferance, or by special favor, to fit their
Churches to their minds, they contrived them so, that in their prayers and
address to Almighty God, they turned themselves unto the East. The Author of
the Questions and Answers ad Orthodoxos ascribed to Iustine, affirms that in
his time qu. 118.
the Christians offered up their hymns and orizons to God, fixing their eyes
(...), toward or on the eastern parts: and ^aith withal, that they received
this usage (...), from the holy Apostles. Apologet. Cap. 16.
And sure I am, that in Tertullians time the Christians were accused of
worshipping the Sun: for which there was no other ground, but that they
turned unto the East in the times of prayer. Inde suspicio quod innotuerit nos
ad Orientis regionem precari, as he there informs us. Which being so, it is not
to be thought but that the Churches were contrived and built accordingly, fit
to the posture of the people in the times of prayer. Not that they were not
built in any place, at any time, in any other form or fashion, but that it was
thus generally, and for the most part, (...), in all parts of Christendom,
from those times downwards. And so it is resolved by de rebus Eccl. Cap. 4.
Walfridus Strabo, usus frequentior est in Orientem or antes converti, and
pluralitatem ecclesiarum maximam eo tenore constitui.

For further proof of which, let us but look upon the forms of our ancient
Churches, and we shall find that generally they are built in one uniforme
fashion: which fashion questionless was borrowed from the pattern of the first
Churches erected in the primitive times. Baronius tells us of some Churches
Baron. Ann. Anno. 57.
in his time standing, quae temporibus Constantini fuerunt a fundamentis
extructae, which had been built from the foundation, in the time of
Constantine: and differed nothing in the form, either for situation or
distinction, from those which have been since erected. And we may probably
conclude with him, that those then built were built according to the ^orme of
those which were demolished not long before, in the time of Diocletians fury:
cum eadem in iis officia essent obeunda, exerce^dae functiones, a^ mysteria
consummanda; the self same Offices, functions, and mysteries, being to be
performed in them both alike. Now for performance of these functions, offices,
and mysteries, the Churches were divided into several parts: two of the which
are most considerable in our present business. Of these the greater was called
(...), the nave or body of the Church; the other (...), which we call the
Quire, or Chancell: the body for the most part, standing toward the West: the
Quire or Chancell toward the East. And howsoever it was and might be
otherwise in some few particulars; yet it was usitatior mos, the general usage
of the Church, Epist. ^2.
as Paulinus has it, to place the Quire or Chancell in the Eastern part.
Within the body of the Church, they had their Auditorium, their place for
reading of the Scripture, and so much of the public Offices, as might be heard
by those whom they called Catechumeni, that were instructed in the faith, and
not as yet admitted unto the Sacrament of Baptism. The Quire or Chancell set
apart for the performance of those rites, i^ which they placed the greatest
mystery of their profession, which was the Sacrament of the body and blood of
our Lord and Savior: A difference or distinction not took up in the latter
times, but such as may plead strongly for as much antiquity as any other
custom in the Church besides; and in the which they were directed as well by
Gods command, as by natural reason. For in the Taberna^le built by Gods own
appointment, and fashioned by his own direction, there was a Sanctum
sanctorum, a place more holy than the rest; selected by the Lord for the most
excellent part of the Jewish ceremony, which was the expiating of his people.
For which, if God thought fit that there should be a proper and selected*
place, and that the same should be secluded from all other use: the Christians
by the self same warrant might in their Churches have a Sanc^^m Sanctorum
also, for the commemorating of that expiation, which was in fact made for us by
our Lord and Savior. Besides, the Gentiles, had in their several temples,
their Adyta, or Penetralia, as before was said: wherein their greatest
mysteries were performed and celebrated. Tota in Ad^tis divinitas, adv. Valent.
cap. 2.
says Tertullian of them. In those they placed their deities, and in those
their Altars. Excessere omnes, Adytis arisque relictis, Dii quibus imperium hoc
steterat, Virgil. Aeneid.
as the Poet has it: which clearly shows their Altars were disposed of in
their in most Adyta. And should you say that by this reason, the distribution
of our Churches into a body and a Chancell, would savor too much either of the
Jew or Gentile, you might betray your folly, but not hurt the cause. For
there is no question to be made but many Temples of the Gentiles were, without
any alteration of the Fabric, converted into Christian Churches. Nor can you
show a reason for it, why it should be more stood upon, as the times then were,
to build new Churches of that fashion which the Gentiles used; than to use
those very Churches which the Gentiles built. And for conformity with the
Jews, you find that answered to your hand by a Hooker. ^. 5.
judicious Divine indeed, who counts it no less grievous fault, for any King
to build his house according to the model of Salomons palace; than for the
Christians in contriving of their Churches, to have an eye upon the fabric of
K. Salomons Temple.

Now where it is affirmed in the Bishops letter, that anciently the
Communion-Tables stood in the midst of the Church; and for the proof
thereof, the Vicar was referred to Bishop Jewel: before we come to an
examination of the proofs there offered, Art. 3.. 26.
we will propose some reasons why it could not be so. And first we find it
granted by that Reverend Prelat, Bishop Jewel, that wheresoever the Altar
stood, it was divided with railes from the rest, whereof it was called
Cancelli, a Chancell, and commonly of the Greeks Presbyterium, for that it was
a place specially appointed unto the Priests and Ministers, and shut up from
all others, for disturbing the holy Ministry: Which given for granted we
proceed, and will show some reasons and authorities that the said Chancell or
Presbytery was not, as he conceives, in the middle of the Church, but a
distinct part and member of it, at one end thereof; and yet I would not have
you t^inke, but that I hold as reverend an opinion of Bishop Jewel, as you, or
any other, be he who he will. My first authority shall be taken from the
instance of, and in the Emperor Theodo^ius, which himself there makes. The
Emperor Theodosi^s having been long prohibited the Church, upon that great
and rash Massacre of the Thessalonians, and afterward admitted to Theodor.
hist. Eccles. ^. 5. c 17.
communicate: at his first entrance in the Church, casts himself down upon
the Pavement. After, the Offertory coming on, (...), he went into the
Sanctuary; and having made his offering, (...), continued still within the
same, near the partition or Cancelli: Which being noted by Saint Ambrose, he
signified unto him by his Deacon, (...), that those Inferior parts were only
proper to the Priests, and to no man else. Now that which in Theodoret is
called (...), in lib. 7. c. 25.
Sozomen is called (...), the Quire or Chancell, who adds withal, that in
Constantinople the Emperor had his seat in the said (...), during the
celebrating of the holy Sacrament; that so some difference might be made
betwixt himself and common persons. But this being not the use in Millaine,
Saint Ambrose alloted him a place (...), within the body of the Church, (...),
immediately before the bars that severed the Church and Chancell. And this
he did, that so the Emperor might have place before the people, as had the
Priests before the Emperor. This clearly shows, that the Pres^yterium, or
Chancell, was not in the middle of the Church, but was distinct and severed
from it at one end or other; for otherwise how could the Emperor have ^ place
between the people and the Priests, before the Chancell or Cancelli; in case
the Chancell stood in the very midst of the Church, and all the people round
about it. My second reason shall be taken from a like story of Nicephorus lib.
6. c 33.
Numerianus, one of the sons of the Emperor Carus, who coming into the Church
at Antioch, whereof Saint Babylas was Bishop, and having a desire to behold
their mysteries, quasi per transennam, privily, as if peeping through a
Lattice, was presently rebuked by the Bishop for the said attempt. Now had the
Quire or Chancell stood in the middle of the Church, and only railed about, so
that every man might see what was done within; Numemerianus needed not to have
peeped as through a Lattice to behold their doings: for being once within, it
was no difficulty to discern what they were about. Thirdly, it may be proved
from that which was before related from Baronius, who tells us of some Churches
standing in his days, which had been founded in the time of the Emperor
Constantine, and differed nothing in their form, either for situation, or
distinction, from those since erected. And fourthly, from the description of
the ^tately Temple of S. Sophia, built by Justinian the Emperor: of which
Procopius does inform us de Aedificii Justin. lib. 1.
, that the Quire or Chancell, wherein the holy mysteries were celebrated, did
stand directly to the East: For having before described the Nave or body of the
Temple, both for length and breadth, he adds, Ea autem quae ad solemn Orientem
vergunt, ubi Deo sacr^ peraguntur, hoc modo aedificata sunt; which he goes
forwards to describe: but what need more be said, than you say your self, who
have so fairly, for this point, slipped your own neck out of the Collar, and
left your L. the Bishop in the lurch? For whereas he refers the Vicar unto
Bishop Jewel, to see how long Communion^tables have stood in the middle of the
Church: you put it to the question p. 218.
, whether it be such a new thing in Israel, that the Tables heretofore, and
the high Altars afterward did stand in the midst of the Church or Chancell.
The middle of the Church or Chancell, is not the middle of the Church; and so
you bid good night at once to both the Bishops. The Altar then stood not in the
body of the Church, but in the Chancell, which was the first thing to be
cleared.

Next, that the Altar or Lords Table was placed in the upper end of the Quire
or Chancell, may be made evident by many plain and pregnant reasons, which we
will marshall ascendendo, from this time upwards. And first, it may be proved
from the general usage at this time in the Church of Rome; which in those
outward forms, no doubt, relates unto the use and practice of the Ancients:
For why should we conceive, that keeping still the ancient fashion in the
contriving of their Churches* they would desert the a^cient fashion in the
disposing of their Altars. Conceive me, that it was thus generally, and for
the most p^rt, as you report me very rightly, p. 40. and (...), as before I
said. Secondly, from the words of Walafridus Strabo, where he de rebus. Eccl.
cap. 4.
informs us, that in Saint Peter's Church in Rome, Altaria non tantum in
Orientem, sed etiam in ali^s parts esse distributa; The Altars stood not only
toward the East, but in other places: and this he makes to be a particular
case, differing from the general usage. The like to which may be observed in
his instances of the Pantheon in Rome, and that built by Helena in Jerusalem,
being both round; as also that he seeme^h to apologize for them, who propter
aliquam locorum opportunitatem, were fa^ne to set their Al^ars otherwise than
the custom of the Church permit^ed. Now Walafridus Strabo dyed, as your self
accounts it p 219.
, Anno 846. or thereabouts. Thirdly, from the division of the Quires
themselves, in which did first accurre the Stalls or seats appointed generally
for the Clergy; next above that, the Bishops Chair, and then the (...), the
Altar-place, or that whole space which was allotted purposely, and solely for
the Lords Board, or Altar, call it which you will, which was distinguished from
the rest of the Chancell, by Railes or Curtains. For it appears most
manifestly in the ancient writers, as viz. (...) in the Counc. La^d^. Can. 19
that (...), did not only signify the Altar or Lords ^oord it self, but the
whole space and place thereof; which by the Latins was sometimes distinguished
by a proper name, and called Altarium. Fourthly, from that which does occur
in Socrates, concerning the disposal of the Altars in the Church of Antioch,
Hist. Eccl. l. 12. cap. 24.
which therein generally differed from all other Churches. How so? (...)* Would
you his meaning in these words? take it according as you find it in Nicephorus
of Langius translation; Hist. 1. Ec. lib. 12. c. 34.
Sacra enim Ara non ad Orientem, sed ad Occidentem versus coll^cata ^ue^at;
because the Altar was not placed toward the East, but toward the West.
Cassiodore in his lib. 9. c. 38.
Tripartite History, renders this place with more advantage. In Antiochia vero
Syriae, Alta ^ non ad Orientem Ecclesiae, sed magis a^ Occidentem habent; in
Antioch they have their Altar, not at the East end of the Church, ( ad Orientem
Ecclesiae) but rather bending toward the West: which makes it plain, in my
conceit, that generally in other places the Altar stood ad Orientem Ecclesiae,
at the Eastern end. Fi^tly, from that which is affirmed by Bish. Jewel, Art.
3. divi^. 26.
Who tells us that the Quire or Chancell, (and consequently the Altar, and the
Altar-place) as it may be gathered from Saint Chrysostom, at certain times
of the service, was drawn with Curtains. Now if the Holy Table stood in the
middle of the Chancell, and was thus hanged about with Curtains; there being
space enough within for all the Priests and Deacons, which attended at the holy
Ministry; you cannot but conceive in your imagination, that it must needs be
very unsightly, and take up much more room, than in a Chancell could be
spared. But let the Table be disposed of at the upper end, and then a Traverse
Curtain drawn between the Table and the people; and both those
inconveniences will be avoided, which before I spoke of. And last of all, it
may be pleaded from a constant custom of the Christians, in praying toward
the East, Apolog. c. 16.
Ad Orientis regionem, as Tertullian has it; ad solam Homil. 5. (...) ^umer.
Orientis partem, as it is in Origin: which, though many reasons are assigned
by Bellarmine, Baronius, and others of the Church of Rome; yet, I conceive,
there cannot a more probable reason be given thereof, than from the placing of
the holy Table at the East end of the Church: For that being thought to be
more sacred than any material thing besides to the Church belonging, had a
far greater measure of reverence and devotion conferred upon it. (...), a
reverent salutation of the Table de Hierarch Eccles. c. 2.
in Dionysius; (...), an honor proper to the Altar, in ad Tarsens.
Ignatius; and geniculatio ad Ar^s, a bowing of the knee before it, in de
poenitent.
Tertullian. And therefore in what place soever it was placed or situated,
there were the peoples eyes most like to be fixed and settled, and their aspects
turned* that way in the time of prayer; as being that which they most longed
for, and looked after, and of the which they most desired to be partakers.
Add here that Damascen observes, (...). etc. de Orth. fid. lib. 4. c 13.
that when our Savior Christ was upon the Cross, his face was Westward,, so
that all they that looked upon him, or desired to see him, did look toward
the East; which were it so, the Altar being so lively a representation of the
Cross of Christ, might be disposed of so in the Church or Chancell, as that
the people should look Eastward, that desired to see it: and if placed
Eastward for that reason, then doubtless in the uppermost and most eminent
place of the Quire or Chancell, so that no man who ever should have place
beyond it. For if that any man had had place beyond it, either he must not pray
toward the East, as the others did; or praying toward the East, could not see
the Altar, which was most looked after by all the rest.

Now whereas you desire p. 123.
the Doctor not to forget to tell you in his next book, where God or his
blessed Son, or the Apostles, or the Fathers after them, or any Council, or
any Canon law, or so much as a Popes Bull, has commanded any Christian Church
to set their Altars all along the wall: I answer you by asking another
question, where you can find it was commanded, that Christians should pray with
their faces Eastward. Things that have generally been received in the Church
of Christ, are generally conceived to have been derived from Apostolical
tradition, without any special mandat, left in Scriptis, for the doing of
them. Praying directly toward the East, is by some Fathers, as qu. ad Orth.
118.
Justin Martyr, and de Sp. S. cap. 27.
S. Basil, conceived to be of that condition; and Damascen conceives so too, de
Orthod. Fid. lib. 4. cap. 13. Why may we not conceive the like, of setting up
the Altar all along the wall, that it has been commended to us, if not by
Apostolical, yet questionless, by Ecclesiastical tradition. (...), as the
said de Orth. fid. l. 4. cap. 13.
Damascen has truly noted. Many things come unto our hands by a successionall
tradition, for which we cannot find an express command in any of those ways
you speak of: which yet we ought to entertain, ex vi catholicae
consuetudinis, by reason of the said tradition, and continual custom. Of
which traditions there are many which still retain their force amongst us in
England: particularly those which are most pertinent to the present business,
viz. the turning of our selves unto the East, in our public prayers; and the
disposing of our Churches accordingly. And why not then in placing of the holy
Table, or Altar also? This Church, the Lord be thanked for it, has stood more
firm for Apostolical and Ecclesiastical traditions since the Reformation,
than any other whatsoever of the Reformation. Nor in the times before can you
find out any, that stood more strongly for and in the Churches customs. If
you have found, after much study and long search, a p. 224.
round Church in Cambridge, and a round Temple in London; can you conclude from
thence, that generally our Churches here* have not been built according to the
Ancient patterns? if not, how excellent a discourse do you show your self in
the application. You might as well have gathered, that all the Churches in
Cambridge, do stand North and South, because you find it so in Emanuel
College: or that all the Ministers in Lincolnshire are perfect in the arts of
railing, falsifying, and deceiving, because you know of one, that is. But that
fine story which you tell us p. 223. 224. ex Bed. his^. l. 2. c. 3.
of S. Austins Altar, is indeed your masterpiece: and therefore I will tell it
in your very words, because its your desire we should mark it well. You say,
that Austin the Apostle of the Saxons placed his first Altar in the Cathedral
Church at Dover, dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul: and that he placed this
Altar, in medio sui pene, almost in the very midst thereof, and dedicated it to
the honor of S. Gregory the Pope: and that the Priest of the place does on
that Altar every Sabbath day perform the agends of this Austin and S. Gregory.
Hereupon you infer, as by way of Triumph, And shall we believe that, no
Church of all the English nation, did imitate herein her first Metropolis? It
is impossible it should be so. Impossible indeed, if it be true, as you have
told us: but for our comfort, there is not one word true, in all this story.
Nor do I think that you intended it for any thing, but a winters tale; to
drive away the cold within a chimney corner, when th^re is no fire. For so
ridiculous a confidence have you told it with, as they have the hap to hear it
( auditum admissirisum, and you know what follows) will catch themselves an
heat with laughing. To take a view thereof, per parts, Where, I beseech you,
did the man ever hear of a Cathedral Church at Dover? the Author whom you
follow, does call it Doroverni, Canterbury, in that very Chapter; and Regia
civitas, the Regal city, lib. 1. cap. 33. Secondly, the Cathedral Church at
Canterbury was not dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul, but, as your Author
tells, li. 1. cap. 3^.
in nomine sancti Salvatoris, Dei and Domini nostri Jesus Christi, unto the
honor of Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior: and is called Christ's Church to
this day. As for the Church you mean, dedicated to S. Peter and S. Paul, that
was a Monastery Church, and no Cathedral; which, from the founder afterward,
was called S. Austins. Thirdly, it is not said in Beda, that Austin the Apostle
of the Saxons did place this Altar, in that Church: but only, Habet haec in
medio sui pene Altar, that in that Church there is an Altar, placed almost in
the middle of it; but by whom God knows; the Church not being Quod ^a necdum
fue^at per^^cta nec dedicata. lbid.
finished when this Austin died. Fourthly, your Author does not say that the
said Altar was S. Austins first Altar; no such matter neither; the placing of
that Altar was no leading case: but only habet haec Altar, that Edition, and
no otherwise, In the body of the Church, or of the Chancell. p. 206. I see your
fingers are so nimble, here can nothing escape you. Then for the body of the
Church, however it was put unto the Question, p. 76. in the (...) from the Alt.
and p. 19. of the holy Ta^le
in the Bishops letter, that being the Rubric says, the Table shall stand in
the body of the Church, or of the Chancell, wh^re morning and evening prayer he
appointed to be said; and being that morning and evening prayer be appointed to
be said in the body of the Church (as in most country Churches we see it is)
where should the Table stand most Canonically? yet you recant it in your book.
You tell us that the Writer of the letter did p. 203. 204.
never imagine, that the Table should stand most Canonically in the body of
the Church: but only that the Canons allow it not to be fixed to the end of
the Quire; but to be made of moveable nature, to m^et with those cases in the
law, in which without this transposing thereof upon occasions, the Minister
cannot be heard of his Congregation. This is but small amends, save that you
let us therein see, you are irresolute in your self, and know not unto what to
trust. It Is true, the Rubric sounding one way, and the continual practice of
the Church another way; it might perplex as wise a man, as I know who is, to
find out the intention of the Rubric, and the reason of it. Yet would you give
me leave to use a brief conjecture, and not upbraid me for it in your next
assault, I should make bold to tell you my opinion in it. Bucer, a moderate and
ingenious man, in his survey or censure of the first Liturgy, Censura. cap. 1.
p. 457.
observed that all divine Offices were celebrated in the Quire, or Chancell; In
chorotantum, sacra representari, which he conceived to be a Popish custom,
Quam pri^um and severissime corrigi. Ibid.
(perhaps because it might ascribe unto the place and Priest some inherent
sanctity) and wishes that a sharp and sudden remedy should be provided for
the same. Hereupon in the second Liturgy, the appointing of the place for
morning and evening prayer was left unto the Ordinary: and as it seems by
this Rubric, the holy Sacrament was to be there administered, where he so
appointed. Whether it has been practiced accordingly, I cannot positively say;
but if at all, it was aut raro aut nunquam, a thing seldom seen: and possibly
the very Order might as much take off the opinion of inherent sanctity (if
that were then the matter questioned,) as the execution. Which were it so, the
reason of the law being ceased, the law cease also. But this I only offer as
a Consideration, and no more than so.

Then for the 82. Canon, there it is said, that in the time of the Communion,
the Table shall be placed in so good sort within the Church or Chancell, as
thereby the Minister may more conveniently be heard of the Communicants, in his
prayer and ministration, and the Communicants also more conveniently, and in
more number may communicate with the said Minister. Now hereunto the Doctor
answered, Co^l. p. 50.
that this was a permission rather, that so it might be, than a command, that
so it should be: and a permission only in such times and places, where
otherwise the Minister cannot conveniently be heard of the Communicants. The
writer of the letter seems to grant as much, where he affirms, the Let. to
the Vicar. p. 70.
placing of the Table Altar-wise is the most decent situation when it is not
used, and for use too where the Quire is mounted up by steps, and open, so
that he which officiates may be seen and heard of all the congregation. If
so, then certainly the Canon is not binding for all times and places, for then
there was an Altar. Fifthly, you find it not in Bed^, that the Agenda of Pope
Gregory, and the said S. Austin, were celebrated by the Priest of the place
every Sabbath day (as you mean Sabbath day, and would have ignorant people
understand your meaning) but only every Saturday, per omne Sabbatum. It had
been very fairly done, had you expressed your Authors proper Latin, in as
proper English; and called it Saturday, as you ought to do, speaking in
English to the people, who as they are not p. 54.
all Geometricians, so are they neither all such Latinists as to descrie your
falsehood in it. But we must take this for another of your Helenas to please
the Puritans: who now are furnished with an Argument, to prove that the Lords
day was called the Sabbath, and so reckoned in the time of Bid; and therefore
not so late an Vpstart, as some men have made it. Last of all for your strong
conclusion, that it is utterly impossible, that no Church of the English nation
should imitate herein her first Metropolis: when you have proved that the said
Church there mentioned, was the first Metropolis, we will tell you more. Mean
time the most that you have got, (besides the sport that you have made) is*
that the Altar in a private Monastery, did stand in medio pene sui, almost in
the midst thereof: which possible might be, because the Church not being
finished when S. Austin died, was not completely finished, neither, when Bid
wrote the story. However it is there related, as a particular and extraordinary
case: and extraordinary cases make no general usage, unless it be with such
a disputant as you, who like a drowning man, are fain^ to lay hold on every
thing.

Now from the evidence that* you brought us, touching the Ancient standing of
the Altars, in the Church of England, in point of practice: we must proceed to
see what is determined of and for it, now in point of Law. For if the present
Law be contrary to the ancient practice; the ancient practice must give way,
and the Law shall carry it. Now for our better understanding how the Law has
ordered it, the Bishops Coal. p. 76. and holy ^able. p. 19.
letter to the Vicar of Gr. referr's us to the Rubric, and the Canon; we will
look on both. And first beginning with the Rubric, it is ordered thus, that
Rubric before the Communion.
the Table at Communion time, having a fair white linen cloth upon it, shall
stand in the body of the Church, or in the Chancell, where morning and evening
prayer be appointed to be said. So says the Rubric; and for the former part
thereof, there is not any thing that can serve for your present purpose. The
Table, in Communion time, does stand in the Chancell: though it stand
Altar-wise, close along the wall: and in the Chancell too, i. e. in the most
eminent part of it. The writer of the letter saw this well enough: and to avoid
the consequence could find no better shift upon the sudden, than to corrupt
the Rubric, which was done accordingly. For in the Coal. p. 76.
letter to the Vicar instead of in the body of the Church, or in the Chancell,
we had it, in the body of the Church, or of the Chancell: as if the Rubric did
appoint, that in those places where the Communion was administered in the
Chancell, the Table should be placed at that time in the body of the Chancell.
It Is true, your new Edition reads it, p. 19.
in the Chancell: but then it is as true, that in your book you fall upon the
former fault, and read it, in the body of the Church or Chancell, p. 44. and so
you do again, fitting the Canon to the Letter, of the old the writer of the
letter would be no good Canonist, but rath^r a directive Canon, to guide us as
occasion is, and as may be convenient for the Communicants. Now where you fall
upon the Doctor, for saying it is a matter of permission rather than command:
because, p. 205.
say you, the Reverend house of Convocation is not convened to make
permissions, that men may do what they list* but to make strong and binding
Canons, to be obeyed by all the subjects, and pursued by all the Ordinaries of
the Kingdom: In saying this, you do not only thwart your Bishop, but confute
your King. For if it be to be pursued by all the Ordinaries in the Kingdom,
ill did the Bishop state the Question, in saying the Table might stand Altar
wise at the upper end of the Quire or Chancell, in ca^e the Minister may be
seen and heard of all the Congregation. And on the other side, you both confute
the King, and your self to boot. The King, in that he has determined, that
placing of the Table in Church or Chancell, as both the Rubricke and the Canon
have resolved therein, is to be construed only a thing of liberty. And being a
thing of liberty, is left unto the Judgment of the Ordinary, both for the
thing it self, and for the time when, and how long, as he may find cause.
Your self, in that you have selected that particular passage p. 59.
for your Euge tuum, and honored that alone with your mentis aureae verba
bracteata; as before was noted. Besides, you may observe in the Declaration,
that those who pleaded for the Appellants in S. Gregory's case, urged not the
Canon or the Rubric, for strong and binding laws, as you please to call them:
but only urged them to this purpose, that Coal from the Altar. p. 65.
they did give permission to place the Table where it might stand with most
fitness and convenience. So that you see, the Canon and the Rubric are
permissions only, and not commands; which is but what the Doctor said: and
which you see confirmed by your Lord the Ordinary, the Advocates in the plea
aforesaid, the King, qui tot imperat legionibus; and which is most of all, Your
self. Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
Quod si nec ^ratris, nec te mea gratia tangit,
At Coeli miserere tui.
Besides, the Canon being general, was so to be drawn up, as it might meet
with all particular cases of what sort soever. Now you know well enough, that
in some Churches there are no Chancels, and most especially in those of a
latter building: and some such you may find in London, if you please to look.
So that in case the Canon had named only Chancels, it might have left some
Churches without Communions, because they had no Chancels in the which to
celebrate; and so by consequence there had been no remedy, in and by the
Canon; if the Communion should not be duly ministered by the Priest, or not so
frequently received by the people, as it ought to be.

CHAP. VIII.
An answer to the Minister of Lincolns Arguments against the standing of the
Lords Table at the upper end of the Quire.
The Minis^er of Lincoln forsakes his Bishop, about the placing of the Altar in
the body of the Church. The Altar in Eus^bius Panegyric, not in the middle of
the Church. The Ministers confidence and ignorance, in placing the Alt^r of
incense close unto the va^le. Tostatu^ falsified by the Minister of L^ncoln.
(...) in the fifth Council of Constantinople, and the meaning of it. The
Minister of Lincoln at a loss in his Critical learning, both Greek and Latin.
Varro corrupted by the Minister of Lincoln. Saint Austin what he meant by mensa
illa in medio constituta. Albaspinus falsified. Durandus sets the Altar at the
upder end of the Quire. The testimony of S^crates and Nicephorus, asserted to
the Doctor from the Ministers Cavils. The Altars how now placed in the Gre^k
Churches. The weak authorities produced by the Minister of Lincoln, for placing
of the Table distant from the wall, and some of them corrupted also. The
general Prec^dents of the Minister, for placing of the holy Table; forged: as
also a^e the Acts of the Council of Millaine under Borromeo. The Minister
confesses guilty, and confutes himself of falsification. Many particular
Precedents brought in; most of them counterfeit and forged; and altogether
conclude nothing to the point in hand. The Minister of Lincoln against himself.

HAving made search at home, and not found any thing unto the contrary, either
in the Rubric or the Canon, but that the Table may be placed where the Altar
stood; and that as well in the Communion time, Cap. 8.
as at other times: we must next take a view of what you have to say for the
ancient practice. Not in the Church of England, that you have done withal
already, and done it bravely too, no man ever better: for you have found a
Monastery, and that hardly finished, wherein the Altar, upon some special and
extraordinary reasons, did stand in medio pene sui, not in the middle of the
Church, as the letter goes, but almost in the middle of it. In that which
follows we must travel after you, over all the world: First taking a review
of those authorities which were related to in the Bishops letter, and answered
by the Doctor in his Coal from the Altar. The writer of the letter, to let the
Vicar see, p. 77.
how long Communion Tables had stood in the midst of the Church, (not in the
midst of Chancels or Churches, as you make it now, p. 207.) referred him unto
Bishop Jewel. The testimonies there produced Jewel Art. 3. divi^. 26
are from Eusebius, Augustine, Durandus, and the fifth Council of
Constanrinople. Beginning with Eusebius, Coal. p. 53. and 54.
he tells us of the Church of Tire, that being finished and all the seats
thereof set up. (...), the founder after all, placed the most holy Altar in the
midst thereof, and compassed it about with rayles, to hinder the rude multitude
from pressing near it. Now hereunto the Doctor answered, first that the Altar
though it stood along the Eastern wall, it may be well interpreted to be (...),
in the middle of the Chancell, in reference to the North and South, as it since
has stood. And secondly that were it otherwise, yet it were only a particular
case of the Church in Syria, wherein the people being more mingled with the
Jews than in other places, might possibly place the Altar in the middle of the
Church, as was the Altar of Incens^ in the midst of the Temple, the better to
conform unto them. And this he was the rather inclined to think, because that
Church in the whole structure of it, came very near unto the model of that
Temple: the Gate or entrance of the same being (...) directly open to the East,
as was that of Solomon's. Now you reply unto the first, (after a scoff or two
bestowed on the simple Doctor) that you had thought p. 208.
the Panegyrist in Eusebius had been describing in that place a brave
Chancell, set all about with seats and other Ornaments, and that he had placed
the Altar in the midst of that Chancell. The Bishop of Lincoln had small reason
to approve of this, had he so thoroughly perused your book, as the License tells
us. He sends the Vicar unto Bishop Jewel, to learn how long Communion Tables
have stood in the middle of the Church: and you confute both him and Bp.
Jewel, by placing of the Altar in the midst of the Chancell. Do not you talk
of Butter think you, when he spoke of Cheese. For contrary to what he purposed,
and I am not Salaried to defend the writer of the le^ter, in all words and
syllables. p. 45.
you were Salaried to defend, we have here found an Altar in the midst of the
Chancell, instead of a Communion Table in the middle of the Church. But
howsoever being placed (...), in the midst of the Chancell, you cannot think,
that he does mean by middle, there, the middle between North and South. How
so? Because, say you, in case that Altar had stood along the Eastern wall, and
in the middle of the wall, p. 209.
a Grecian would not say that it stood (...), but (...), over-aneanst the
middle of the wall: even as the Septuagint describe the situation of the Altar
of Incense, to be (...), over-aneanst the veil of the Temple. Why man? I trow
you cannot say of any thing that stands close unto the middle of a wall, and
is built up to it, as commonly the Altars were; that it is built (...),
over-aneant the middle of the wall. That form of speech would fit far better
with the Communion Table, placed exactly in the midst of the Chancell. For
then it would be placed (...) over against the middle of the Eastern wall. You
might have found this in your own instance of the Altar of Incense, said to be
placed (...), over against the veil of the Temple, standing a pretty distance
from it, and not p. 210.
close to the veil, as you unlearnedly relate. But this debate about the
placing of the Altar of Incense will fall more properly within the compass of
your reply unto the Doctors second Answer; to which now we hasten. Only I tell
you by the way, that if the Pa^egyrist could not set the Table close along the
wall, p. 208. 209.
in the middle between North and South, without a painted Sea-card of the
winds, and the four points in heaven; as you are pleased to laugh it out: he
must make use no doubt of the same invention, to place it in the very midst of
the Chancell. Where, you say, he placed it. Your other flamme, is more
impertinent, and absurd. For though all substantial bodies here on earth, are
equally measurable by those four points in heaven, as you truly say: yet your
illation thereupon, that it is not conceivable how this Altar should stand in
the middle between North and South, rather than in the middle between East
and West, is so ridiculous; that no man but your self would have ventured at
it. For when we talk of setting up a Table in the midst of a Room, between
East and West: I trow you do not think, but in that room, it may stand rather
in the middle between East and West, than in the middle of the same between
North and South: though it stands equally distant from all four points, in the
heavenly bodies.

Then to the Doctors second answer, you reply and say, that like p. 209.
unto a child in a sandy banck, he pulls down with one hand, what he had built
up with the other. Why so? Because in case you did not like his former answer,
you might see something else for your satisfaction. Call you this pulling down
with one hand, what he had built up with the other? I see the Doctor cannot
please you, say he what he will. But being said, what answer do you make unto
it? Marry you tell us out p. 209. 210.
of Adricomius, that though Tire was in Syria, yet were the people thereof
never mingled with the Jews, nor the Jews with them, until their embracing
of the Christian faith, after the utter ruin and subversion of that Nation. Why
man? And does the Doctor tell you, that the said Church or Temple in Eusebius,
was built before the ruin of that Nation, or before any of the Jews had
received the faith? You could not be so ignorant as not to know by course of
story, that the said Church was built above 200. years after the ruin and
subversion of the Jewish Nation: and therefore it would best become you, either
to speak more to the purpose, or to hold your peace. Yes that you will you say.
And rather than the Altar in Eusebius shall l stand in the middle of the
Chancell, to carry some resemblance to the Altar of Incense, you will remove
the Altar of Incense from the midst of the Temple, where it stood (...), over
against the veil, as before you said; and place it close unto the veil, where
never any man did place it, but your self alone. For tell me, and this Altar
was close unto the veil, as Tostatus and Ribera do fast^n it, p. 210.
do Tostatus and Ribera fasten this Altar to the veil, as you please to tell
us. Not fasten it to the veil, that's flat: for it was Exodus 30. 4.
made with rings and staves, to be removed (as you are pleased to have the
Communion Tables) as occasion was. Then for your placing of it close along the
veil, you find no warrant in the Scripture. The Latin reads it, Contra
velum; our English books before the veil; close unto it, you, that better
understand the text, than all translatours whatsoever. Then for in Exodus 30.
Tostatus whom you cite for fastening it unto the veil, all he says is this:
Dicitur Altar istud esse contra velum, i. e. ante velum. That Altar is here
said to be against the veil; that is, before it. What else? Hic ponitur situs
hujus altaris, scilicet in qua part Sanctuarii poneretur. Here is described
the situation of this Altar, namely in what part of the Sanctuary it was
placed. Is this to set it close unto the veil, and there to fasten it? we may
conjecture how you use Ribera by your fair dealing with Tostatus, whom you
thus abuse. Besides, your self has told us, that the Altar of Incense did p.
210.
stand between the Table on the North (you mean the Table of Shewbread, do you
not?) and the Candlestick upon the South: and I presume you will not say, the
Table of the Shewbread, and the Candlestick did stand close unto the veil, or
were fastened to it. But for these things, the Altar, and the Table, and the
Candlestick, how they were disposed of in the Tabernacle: you may consult the
Schemes thereof in Torniellus, Ann. M. 2544. where you will find the Altar
stood not close unto the veil, but a good distance off, toward the nether
end, though not exactly in the midst. You might as well have let the Altar in
Eusebius stand close along the wall, in the middle between North and South, as
the Doctor placed it; as have betrayed your ignorance, both in the Criticisme
and the fact, to so little purpose; yea and your honesty to boot. And here I
would have left you and Eusebius, but that you will not let the Doctor go away
with any thing. For whereas the poor Doctor said, that the Gate or entrance of
this Church, like that of Salomons Temple, was unto the East: you say it is not
true that the Gate or entrance of t^ is Church, is sa^d to b^^pen to the East.
p. 210.
it is not true, and that there is not any such thing in Eusebius. You grant
that the (...) or the Portico was toward the West; the leading way or entrance
into the Court, or Churchyard, as we call it now: And think you they went
round about the Church, to find another way at the further end? Besides, you
might have found, if you would have sought, that there were three doors into
the very Church it self, all of them in the Eastern end, (...), as Eusebius. l.
10. c. 4.
the Author has it. Finally, whereas you had said before, that there p. 210.
was nothing true in all this relation, but that the word Altar is named in
Eusebius; now you have taken from him that comfort also: that Altar being by
and by (you say) interpreted, to be a metaphorical Altar, even (...), the
sanctification of a Christian soul. You might as well have said, the Temple
there described is a Metaphorical Temple: because the Panegyrist descanting
upon it, compares the Soul unto that Temple, as the sincerity thereof to the
holy Altar.

We have been long about Eusebius, but will be brieser in the rest; as brief
as possibly we can, your old tricks considered. The next that follows is the
first Council of Constantinople, as it is called in Bish. Jewel, being that sub
Agapeto and Menna, as the Doctor had it. Here you p. 211.
conceive you have him at a fine advantage; Agapetus being dead before that
Council sat; and Menna Patriarch of Constantinople presiding in it. But Sir,
you cannot choose but know, that howsoever Agapetus died before the sitting of
the Council: yet it was called especially by his procuring; (being then at
Constantinople) although he lived not to see the effects thereof: his Legates
also being there, by virtue of a Commission to them made, when he was alive.
And this was possibly the reason, why Binius in the top of every page
throughout the Acts of this whole Council, being 112. in all, sets it Sub
Agapeto and Menna, as the Doctor did: your next exception, if it be not better,
will be worse than nothing. The place alleged by Bishop Jewel, is this, that
Tempore dyptichoram, at the Reading of the Dypticks, the people with great
silence drew together round about the Altar, and gave ^are unto them. The Greek
text has it, (...). and to that phrase the Doctor answered, that p. 54. 55.
howsoever (...), in it self did signify a Circle; yet (...), could not be
properly interpreted round about the Altar, so that there was no part thereof,
which was not compassed with the people. This he illustrated with a like phrase
in our English Idiom, of the kings sitting in his throne, and all his noble men
about him: and by the very saying in the Greek text of the Revelation, (...),
round about the throne. Against this you have said but little, though you spend
many words about it. All your great Grammar learning, out of Eustathius, and
Hesychius, Tully, and Budaeus, excellent Critics all; that circles are exactly
round, Circular* which h^th in it no c^rner at all. p. 212.
without any Corners, and that a Circulos aut semicirculos consectari. ibid
Circle differs from a semicir^le; is but your wonted art to divert the
business. For did you not observe that the Doctor granted it, that (...) of
and in it self did signify a Circle? If so, what needs all this ado? The
thing in question is not what (...) signifies, or whether Circles are not
round: but whether that (...), can any way infer that the Altar stood in the
midst of the Church, so that the people, if they would, might run round about
it. For this you bring no proof, but that p. 211.
you thought the Throne in heaven had been safe enough, and that it needed not
a wall to rest upon. Why, who said it did? That in the Revelation, was only
brought for illustration of the Phrase, (...)* not for the situation of the
Altar against a wall. But then you say, the Angels may as conveniently be
thought to compass it about, as to cast themselves into a half mo^ne before
the presence of Almighty God: and that all interpreters do so expound it. You
speak of all interpreters, but you name us none; which shows your all is very
nothing: for where you have a store, we are sure to find it in the margin,
how little soever to the purpose. But Sir, the Doctor speaks there (...), 1.
Cor. 15.
after the manner of men, touching the reference which the Prophet had in his
description of the Throne in Heaven, unto the thrones of Kings on earth. And if
you speak, or apprehend him speaking in that manner; it would be very hard for
you to untie the knot, and show us and round about the thron were four beasts
full of eyes Apoc. 4. 6.
how four beasts, though never so full of eyes, could compass round the
Throne in a perfect Circle. Nor does that fragment which you bring us from S.
Basils Liturgy, (...), say more than what the Doctor told you from the
Revelation, that all the Angels stood round about the throne, Apoc. 7. 11.
though Gentian Hervet, as you say, has rendered it in orbem, which you
translate in a ring or perfect Circle. For your (...) p. 214.
in S. Peter's Liturgy, you might do well to keep it by you, till the
authority of that and other Liturgies affabulated to the holy Apostles, be
agreed upon. And had I thought you would have taken them for current, I would
have shown you more in them for Priests and Altars, than you can do with your
(...) for placing the said Altars in the midst of the Church. However, by your
own confession, we have found an Altar in S. Peter's Liturgy: and therefore to
dispute ^dhominem, the name of Table is not 200. years more ancient in the
Christian Church, than the name of Altar. The compassing of the Altar p. 214.
in S. Basils Liturgy, is an allusion only to the Phrase in the book of
Psalms: and so is that also in the epistle of Synesius, if such thing be in
him: you have referred us in your text, to p. 214.
one of his Epistles, but you tell not which. And in your Margin tell us that
it is in constitut. habita ad Thatalaeum, but I find no such thing in his
Epistles. But so or not so, all is one with you; and with me too in this
particular, being thus answered to your hand. Last of all for your passages in
S. Chrysostomes Liturgy, where it is said, the Deacon fumes the holy Table,
(...), round about, and (...), in all the circuit or compass thereof, as your
self translate it; that might well be, and yet the Altar stand all along the
wall. For with a Censer in your hand, you could make shift, no doubt, to cense
or fume the holy Table, in all the circuit or compass of it; and yet not take
the pains to go round about it: even as they do, at this day in the Church
of Rome. But I must tell you by the way, that you have falsified your Author,
or at least chopped him off, having more to say. For p. 64. whither you refer
us, he speaks of censing of the Altar, (...), you say well in that, but then
he adds. (...), after the manner of a cross; which overthrowes your whole
design. For take it, as the Father means it, and it is no such
impossibility, as you think it is, but that a single man These are but sing^e
men, and cann^t possibly be expo^nded to go about the Alia, in the D^ctors
absurd interpretation. ^. 214*
may do it; and fume in the Altar in a cross: and therefore the poor Doctors
interpretation not so absurd, as you would make it. The Doctor will stand close
enough to his interpretation, till you bring stronger Arguments, and more fair
dealing to remove him from it. You show your self on all, and on no occasions
to have some smattering of the law, and therefore cannot choose but know, that
in defect of an appearance, a Jury in some cases may be up ex circumstantibus:
for which see, 35 H. 8. c. 6. 2 Edw. 6. c. 32. and 5. Eliz. c. 25. and 14.
Eliz. c. 9. And yet I trust you will not say, the Judges that determine in writ
of Nisi prius, sit in the middle of the town Hall wheresoever they come;
because the people are conceived to be circumstantes. None but this Minister
of Lincolnshire would commit these follies. And yet it is no wonder neither:
for you have given us centum tales, in stead of december.

Having made sport, (to keep us to your own sweet langugae) in the Greek with
the Council of Constantinople: we must next see p. 214.
you do as much in Latin, with S. Augustine. The place from him alleged by
Bishop Jewel, is this; Christus quotidie pascit: Mensa ipsius est illa in
medio constituta. Quid causae est, O audientes, ut mensam videatis, and ad
epulas non accedatis? i. e. as he translates it, Christ feeds us daily: and
this is his Table here set in the midst. O my hearers, what is the matter, that
ye see the Table, and yet come not to the meat? To this the Doctor Coal. p. 55.
answered, that mensa illa in medio constituta, in not to be interpreted the
Table set here in the midst; but the Table which is here before you: and this
according to the Latin phrase afferre in medium, which is not to be construed
to bring a thing precisely into the middle, but to bring it to us, or before
us. In your reply to this, you trifle as before you did, (...). And because
every Schooleboy p. 215.
knows, that literally and grammatically, medium does signify the middle
part or space; therefore afferre in medium cannot signify to bring a thing
unto us, or before us. This said, you make another sally, to show your
Critical learning (you have such store of it) touching the derivation of the
Greek word (...) out of Scaliger, and the latin word Mensa out of Varro, which
was at first, say you, called Mesa, from the Greek word (...), because this
Vtensil, says Varro, is ever placed in the middle space between us: so that
according to this great and ancient Critic, it cannot properly be called a
Table, unless it be placed, as Saint Austin reports it, in medio, in the
middle. Would you would leave this Critical learning, except you were more
perfect in it. All that you find in Varro is de lingu. la^. lib. 4. n. 2^.
no more than this, that mensa escaria, a board for meat, is called Cibilla,
and that it was once square, but afterward made round: Et quod a nobis media,
a Graecis (...), mensa dici potest. Find you in this that the latin word for
a Table was not always Mensa; but at the first Mesa? So you would make your
Readers think, that cannot every day consult the Author; and for that purpose
you have falsified him in your margin accordingly; and made him say p. 215. in
margin.
what is not in him, viz. Mesa, quod a nobis media, a Graecis (...), mensa dici
potest. But the first Mesa is your own, no such thing in Varro: and
consequently Mesa was not the first Latin word for Table as you have falsified
the Author, only to place it in the middle. Neither does Varro say, that Mensa
was derived from the Greek word (...), more than from the Latin: and further
adds another reason of the name, which you would not see; and that is, quod
ponebant pleraque in cibo mensa, because that on the Table the meat was served
out by measure. Every man had his own dimensum, as the word still holds. So
then, it may be called a Table, although not placed in the middle. Your
Grammar learning being shown, we must next take a turn in your Divine and
Theological Philology: where we are told p, 216. 217.
of Audientes, genuflectentes, competentes, and intincti, several kinds of
Catechumeni, in the primitive times; as if those names had never been heard
of, but amongst the fennes: you would be thought to lie at wrack and manger
with Lady Philology, though you never kissed her. For had you but the least
acquaintance with her, you would not run into those errors which you do
continually. You tell us of these Audientes, that p. 217.
if the Table were in the Chancell, they could not be admitted to draw so near
as to see and view it: and therefore make Saint Austin say, that is the Lords
Table there, which you see placed in the midst of the Church. Why? could they
not more easily see it in the midst of the Church, than if it had been in the
Chancell? Were they so Eagle-sighted a far off, and could they not discern it,
if placed nearer hand? This is a mystery indeed, above my capacity. Perhaps you
think, that commonly, and at other times, it stood in the middle of the Church:
but when the Catechumeni were driven forth, and the holy Sacrament to be
administered, it was removed into the Chancell. And then consider with your
self, how fitly you would have the Table to be set at other times in the
upper end of the Chancell; and be brought down in time of the Communion into
the body of the Church. Next you have made S. Austin say, that if these
Audientes could but by chance get a glympse of the holy Table, they were
instantly (all discipline notwithstanding) to be baptized: and yet Saint Austin
says expressly, ut mensam videatis, that they did see the T^ble, though they
came not to it; nor do we find they were baptized so presently on the sight
thereof. Therefore to set the matter right, I rather should conceive that the
word illae there, is of specall efficacy: and points not to a Table, which was
then before them, (for then haec mensa est ipsius, might have been more
proper): but to some Table further off, in the Quire or Chancell, made ready
for all those that purposed to Communicate; which the said Catechumen! might
see, though they came not near it. And so Saint Austin in these words,
Mensa^ipsius est illa in medio constituta, must be thus interpreted; His Table
is that yonder which is now in readiness. What is the matter, O you Audientes,
that you can look upon the Table; and yet not fit and prepare your selves to be
partakers of the banquet. As for your note from Observat* l. 2. cap. 2. cited
p. 217.
Albaspinus, that if the Audientes should but get a sight of the holy Table;
they were all instantly to be baptized: you do most shamefully abuse that
learned Bishop; who was too great a scholar to be so mistaken. And therefore
take along that passage for a close of all, to which you point us in your
margin: where you shall find he speaks not of their getting a glympse the holy
Table, but of the holy mysteries celebrated on the Table. Si cui contigisset
Catecumeno, casu aliquo, aut sacrificiis interesse, aut occulis sacra illa
intueri, (call you this a Table) cum protinus sacro font abluendum esse, Such
a notorious falsifier of all kind of Authors, did man never meet with.

Next for Durandus, it was observed out of him by Bishop Jewel, that the
Priest turning about at the Altar, does use to say, Aperui os meum in medio
Ecclesiae: which proves not, as the Doctor said Coal. from the Altar. p. 56.
that the Altar stood in the midst of the Church; but that the Priest stood at
the midst of the Altar. You know this well enough, that the Priest does stand
so; but you must needs say somewhat, what soever you know: and therefore bring
Durandus p. 226.
to expound himself. Well then, what says Durandus to it. Per Altar Cor
nostrum intelligitur, quod est in medio Corporis, sicut Altar in medio
Ecclesiae. By the Altar is to be understood our heart, which is in the midst of
the body, as the Altar is in the midst of the Church. This is almost the only
place you have cited fairly in all your book: and in congratulation to your
self for your honest dealing, you presently fly out on the poor Doctor, as
if there were no sensible sacrifice, nor material Altar: because Durandus in
his way of Allegories, compares the Altar to our heart. Just thus before you
dealt with the Panegyrist in Eusebius; and too ridiculously in both. Therefore
to let your Allegories pass, as not considerable in this case, we must reply
unto the words. And here I will make bold to tell you, that by in medio
Ecclesiae here, Durandus does not mean the middle of the Church, that is, the
body of the Church: but which I know you mean to laugh at, the middle of the
upper end of the Quire, or Chancell; there where the Altar stood in those times
he lived, and long before him. Will you the reason why I say it? then look into
the former Chapter, where he will tell you of those rayles, or bars, which
part the Altar (or the Altar place) from the rest of the Quire: as it is now in
our Cathedrals, and many others of this kingdom. Cancelli quibus Altar a
Choro dividitur, separationem significat coelestium a terrenis. And so the
Altar stood not in Durandus time, in the midst of the Church, but generally at
the end* of the Chancell, and thus much briefly for Durandus.

For those exceptions which you make against the testimony produced by the
Doctor Coal. p. 56.
from Socrates and Nicephorus, about the standing of the Altars in Antiochia;
we must needs run them over for your satisfaction, though not worth the
while. What they affirm herein, we have at full laid down in our former
Chapter: Cassiodore being there brought in, into the bargain. The first thing
you except against, is that the place he cited from Nicephorus 228.
is not to be found lib. 12. c. 24. but lib. 12. c. 34. This is another of
those malicious falsifications that you charge him with, p. 58. and and I
beshrew him for this t^ick. p. 228
you beshrew him for it, here. p. 228. A very easy error if you mark it well;
and such as Printers will commit, do we what we can. But it was found, it seems
at last; that is well: more than man can say, of you and your quotations, I am
sure of that: And so the wretched Doctor has dealt with Socrates also, Ibid.
citing him right, you say, in Latin, cap. 21. whereas it is the 22. Chapt. in
the Greek. It would be well if you would cite your Authors right in any
Language; or else find greater matters to except against, before you quarrel:
yes that you will you say. For these Historians do not note those rites of the
Altars of the City of Antioch, as different from all other Altars, or from the
general practice of the Church: but that they differed in those rites from the
Church of Rome, only, as Josephus Vice-comes proves at large. What ever
Vice-comes proves in other places, I am sure he proves it not in the place you
cite; being de Missae Ritib. l. 2. c. 5. in which there is not one poor word
that reflects that way. Nor will I take the pains to search, if he says it
elsewhere. For whatsoever he says in that, he can never prove it: the Authors
being so express in the affirmation. (...), as it is in Socrates; contrarium
ab aliis Ecclesiis situm, the translatour reads it, diversum prorsus quam
alibi situm, so Nicephorus has it. The words are general enough, without
relation any way to the Church of Rome. Now where you say, p. 229.
that neither Socrates nor Nicephorus, do say that the Altars did stand
Westward; that Socrates does not speak of the position of these Altars, but
the Churches only; and that Nicephorus adding besides his Author, the posture
of the Altars, does presently correct himself in the words of Socrates: all
these are worse than so many mistakings, as you have made them in the Doctor,
they are wilful falsehoods. For does not Socrates affirm, (...); and does
Nice^horus say otherwise, than Sacra ara non ad Orientem, sed ad Occidentem
versus, collocata fuerat? what find you in Nicephorus like a recantation,
passing directly from these words to another matter? For shame presume not thus
on the credulity of your Readers: and think not all the world so stupid, as to
be cheated with your fair words, and a loaded margin. The rest of your
exceptions are so slight, they need no reply. The Doctor says not as you p.
229.
charge him, that all the people in Syria, might possibly place the Altar in
the midst of the Church: but spoke it only of the people of the city of Tire.
And for the pudder that you make about the meaning of the word (...), which is
another smack of your critical ignorance: be pleased to know, that without
an^ wres^ing of the word, the Alta^s may be said (...) to look toward the
East; as well as that Priests looked that way, which did officiate at them, or
upon them. And if you will vouchsafe to look in Strom. l. ^*
Clemens of Alexandria, you will there find that the word (...) is so used.
(...). So he in reference to some ancient temples built amongst the Gentiles.

Thus having saved the Doctor harmless from your vain assaults; we will next
see, what you have studied of your own against the standing of the Altar, at
the East end of the Church. Where I must tell you your particular instances
will prove but weak and silly Arguments, like the Cathedral Church at Dover,
or the round Church of Cambridge, which we met with lately. That which you
tell us from the Greek Churches is indeed considerable, if it were as true. You
tell us out of Gentian Hervetus, p. 213.
that in the (...) or Chancell there be two Altars, whereof the greater stands
in the midst of that Room, and the less close by, at the left side of it. Yet
Bishop Jewel in his 13. Art. being of the Plurality of Masses, cites many of
the Ancient Fathers that say, there is but one Altar in every Church: and then
concludes with Gentian Hervet; In Graetorum templis unum tantum est Altar,
idque in med^o choro aut Presbyterio. Not in the middle of the Church then, we
have gained so much: and we have reason to believe it was not in the middle of
the Chancell neither. One of you I am sure is out with your Gentian Hervet,
touching the number of your Altars: and think you, that you are not both out in
the placing of them? No certainly say you, that cannot be, p. 213.
because the setter forth of the Greek and Latin Liturgies, has affirmed as
much: viz. that there be in those Churches two Altars, the greater in the
midst, and called the holy Table, the lesser called the Prothesis, o^ Table
of Proposition. And then you bring in Claudius Saints, to tell us, that in the
Greek Temples, there is but one high Altar, and that placed in the midst of the
Quire. You should do well to reconcile your witnesses, before you bring them
to give evidence. Claudius Saints, as you cite him, has told us of one Altar
only; the setter forth of the Greek and Latin Liturgies, as you please to
call him, tells us of two; but places, as you cite him, the greatest only in
the midst: and Gentian Hervet setting the great Altar in the midst, has placed
the least close by it, at the left side of the greater. Your self and Bishop
Jewel with your Gentian Hervet, and Gentian Hervet with your setter forth, and
his Claudius Saints, agree but very ill together. We might do well to keep
them without fire and candle, till they agreed upon their verdict: but we will
take an easier Course, and dismiss them presently. And first beginning with
your Claudius Saints, you cite him p. 214. in margin.
in his Edition of the Greek Liturgy at Paris, 1560. but you cite neither
page, nor place where a man may find it. Indeed it was most wisely done to
conceal the matter; that so your Reader might be drawn rather to take it on
your word, than take the pains to look for it upon such uncertainties. But
howsoever being looked for, and looked for with a diligent and care^ull eye; we
must return non est inventus, no such words in Saints. Next for the setter
forth of the Greek and Latin Liturgy, you might have done us a good turn to
have told his name: at least not to have sent us to enquire for him in p. 213.
in margin.
the Biblioth. vet. Patrum, Tom. 2. in Annot. without more punctual direction.
You mean, I trow, the setter forth of the Liturgies in Greek and Latin; and
them we find indeed in the second Tome of that edition. But when you talk I
know not how* of a setter forth of the Greek and Latin Liturgies, and send us
to the Biblioth. vet. patrum, Tom. 2. you bid us look into a place where no
such man was ever heard of: the Greek and Latin Liturgies not being found in
the second of those Tomes, but in the sixth. I see you were resolved that
whosoever traced you, should have much to do. But having found your Author
out, we find you had good reason to conceal his name, and give us such
obscure directions for the finding of him. For Genebrard whom you blindly call
the setter forth of the Greek and Latin Liturgies, has told us such a tale as
will mar your markets. de ritib. Graecorum, at the end ^f Sacra m*steriorum
ante consec^atorum.
For he divides their Churches into these five parts: the first called (...),
the holy Tabernacle, so called quod gradibus in illam scandatur, because it is
mounted up by steps; and this is entered into by none but the Priests. The
second he entituleth (...), the Quire or Chancell (properly and distinctly so
entitled) Locus Clero and Cantoribus deputatus, a place assigned ^or the
clergy and the singing men. The third was (...) or the Pulpit-place, where the
Epistles and Gospels were read, and Sermons preached unto the people. ^he
fourth called (...) or the body of the Church, wherein the people had their
places, both men and women, though distinct: and last of all the (...), or
place for Baptism, near which stood the Penitents. Now for the Altars which
he speaks of, they stood not, as you make them stand, (...) in the Quire or
Chancell, distinctly and properly so called, and much less in the middle of
it; but in the upper part thereof, mounted up by steps (and severed from the
rest by a veil or curtain) which place was therefore called (...); i. e. the
Altar-place, the (...) or Altarium, which ^ cap. 7.
before we spoke of. Illic sunt duo Altaria, there, in that upper end, above
the steps, stood those two Altars which you talk of: not in the middle of the
Chancell as you falsely say. And there, the greater of the two did stand in
medio, in the middle between North and South as they still continue: the lesser,
which he calls the Prothesis, standing on the left side thereof, and thereon
stood the bread appointed to be consecrated, till it was offered on the Altar.
Nor does he say, the greater is in the midst, and called the holy Table, and no
more but so: but majus est in medio, (...), sacra mensa, etc. the greater of
them is in the midst, and is called the Altar, the holy Table, the Holy of
Holies, with many other names which are there attributed to it. Where you may
see, that (...) has precedencie of sacra mensa, though you are pleased to
leave out Altar; as if he called it only the holy Table: this said, your
evidence out of Gentian Hervet will be easily answered. And here I cannot
choose but tell you, that herein you have shown most foulely, either your
ignorance or your falsehood. If you conceived that (...) there did signify the
whole Chancel, then it shows your ignorance: if that you knew it signified no
more than the upper part, in quod gradibus scanditur, and yet set down with In
the (...) or Chancell the^e be two Altars, of which the greatest stood in the
midst of that Room. p. 213.
in the (...) or Chancell, as you have translated it, then you show your
falsehood. And so I leave you with an Vtrum horum mavis accipe; make your best
of either: or if you will, take both; being both your own. The (...) which you
find in Gentian He^vet, is that which you had met with in your setter forth, a
place distinguished from the Chancell, and raised above it, within the which
the said two Altars stood, which your Author speaks of; and stood, as you were
told before (one of your Authors borrowing from the other both his words and
matter,) though indeed one of them was no Altar, but a Table only; a Table
either of proposition, or of preparation, no great matter which.

Next let us look upon the Latins, and their use herein, from whom the
English first received the faith of Christ, as your self confess, calling
their Austin, the Apostle of the Saxons. p. 223. And herein to begin with, we
have gained thus much, that neither the Tables heretofore, nor the high Altars
afterward did stand in the midst of the Church or Chancell; but or at least
wise so far^e from the wall, etc. p. 218.
so far from the wall at least, as the Priests and Deacons might stand round
about them. We hope you will come home in time. First you had placed the Altar
in the middle of the Church; then you removed it very fairly into the middle of
the Chancell, and now you have advanced it so near the wall, as there is only
room for the Priests and Deacons to go between. I find you coming on apace,
but that shall not help you: for I am bent to trust to nothing that you say,
till I have examined it, no though it made unto my purpose: Now for the proof
of this, you bring us in some Authors, and some precedents. Amongst your
Authors, p. 219.
Walafridus Strabo has been heard already, who says no more, but that in the
first times the Altars in the Church were placed ad diversas plagas, according
as, poor men, they could fit themselves, but makes the general use to be
otherwise, as before was said. And so do (...)
Bellarmine, and Suarez too, two other of your Authors, as it relates unto the
Churches, which generally, they say, are built ad orientem, some few excepted,
which could not otherwise be erected? But Bellarmine, I assure you, does not
speak one word in the place ^y you cited, touching the fixing of the Altars in
any posture; propter commoditatem loci, if the convenience of the place require
it. That Is an addi^ion of your own, no such thing in Bellarmine. And howsoever
Suarez seem to look that way, yet he acknowledges withal, that placing of
the Altar at the East end of the Church, was the ancient Custom. For
Vice-comes, he does take it as you say, for a very clear and indubitable
as^ertion, Altaria medio in templo allocata fuisse, that Altars were placed
heretofore in the midst of the Church. And he does take it too, I say, for as
indubitable, and as clear, Vicecomes de mi^^a^ ritib. l. 2. cap. 21.
non nisi Constantini temporibus coepisse Christianos missam public in
Ecclesia con^icere, that till the time of Constantine the Christians did not
celebrate the Sacrament in their Churches publicly: but neither you nor I am
bound to believe him in it. No matter how he says it, but how he proves it.
p. 219.
Your Aloysius Navarinus comes in here impertinently, who on these words,
Circundabo Altar tuum, says, that their situation was such in former times,
that the Priests might compass round about the holy Altar. But good Sir tell
me in your next book, of what Priests he speaks. For that the Altar stood so in
the law of Moses, we know well enough; and the Priests compassed them about, we
know that also. But that the Altars stood so in the Christian Church, you do
not tell us from your Author: which is a pregnant argument, tha^ it is not in
him? p. 220.
But, as you say, the maine authority you rely upon, is the Pontifical:
wherein the Bishop is enjoined in three several places at the least, to
compass the Altar round about, or circumcirca: which were it fastened to the
wall, were as you say impossible for a man so to do. Just so. But tell me in
good earnest, do you conceive the Bishop is enjoined in the Pontifical, to go
round about the Altar, (as you mean round about it, when you tell us so)
because you find it, Pontifex circuit ter Altar, once; and circuit semel,
twice, as your margin rightly. The circumcirca, is your own; and none of the
Pontificals. And for the compassings there spook of, they must be taken in
circuitu possibili, to compass so much of it, as may be compassed. And so you
must interpret another passage in the said Pontifical. viz. Thurificat Altar
undique ad dextrum and sinistrum latus, ante and desuper, p. 2^3. and 232. of
my Edition being of Paris, Anno 1615. Vndique there implies as much as
circumcirca, and yet you find not that the Bishop is to cense or fume the
further part thereof. Why so? because he could not come to do it. If not to
cense it, then certainly much less to compass it about, as you mean
compassing. Compare your Circuit, with my undique, and tell me what you think
of this proper Argument, upon wiser thoughts.

From Authors you proceed to Precedents, p. 218.
Precedents answering these Authorities in all ages, and in all countries
whatsoever. In case your Precedents serve your turn no better than your
Authors did, there is never a Scriveners Clerk in London, but will show better
Precedents for a poor Noverint Vniversi. And of this quality is your first, a
general Precedent, a perfect Noverint Vniversi. For as you say, you were
extremely laughed at by all strangers, for making unto them such a foolish
question, as they deemed it. And like enough, I would have laughed at you my
self, had I heard you ask it: for never did so great a Critic ask so poor
a question. I know your meaning yet, however. You would be thought to have
been laughed at, for thinking that the Altars generally stood at the East end of
the Church: but if you asked the question, you were only laughed at by the
strangers, for thinking it a matter questionable, that they should stand in any
other place than that. And though I take this for a tale, a very winters tale,
fit only to be told by such a confidence as yours: yet being told by one of
the right faction, no doubt but it will pass for current, and find a credence
among those who are not able to distinguish between chalk and cheese, but
swallow all that comes before them. Your Noverint Vniversi being sealed and
delivered, we should look forwards to the rest of your observations; but we
will borrow leave a while, to look upon the Church of Millaine, and on the
Reformation made therein, by the great Cardinal Borromaeo. It seems, before
his time, Council. Mediolanens. 4. de Capelli^ and Altar.
that there had been some Altars raised in very inconvenient places: some near
the Pulpit; some near the Organs; some against one pillar, some against
another; and some near the door: yet find I none particularly under the
Reading Deske, nor do I think that you can find a Reading Deske in any of the
Millaine Churches. p. 75. 76.
Only because you said before, that the Pulpit and the Reading Pew might be
called Altars no less properly than the Holy Table: you would now show an
Altar near the Reading Deske, in hope the Reading Deske may one day become an
Altar. I hope you cannot hence conclude, that the High Altar stood
indifferently in any part of the Church; or that in those small Churches
wherein there was one Altar only, that one and only Altar stood as it happened in
the body of the Church, under p. 221.
the Organ-loft, the Reading Deske, the Pulpit, or you know not where. There Is
none so ignorant of the world abroad, but knows that in the greater Churches
there were several Altars, none of the which come under our consideration, but
that one Altar, which was disposed of in the Chancell. Your Pillar-Altars, and
your Chappell-Altars were of another nature, and had their several places in
the Church, according as they might be s^tuate with the most convenience. But
so, I trust it was not with the High Altar, as they call it. And yet in this
you tell us, if we may believe you p. 221*
that in the severe reformation which that Cardinal made in all the Churches
of the state of Millaine, he does require that there be left a space of eight
Cubits at the least, between the High Altar and the Wall, to admit the
assistance of more Priests and Deacons at feasts of dedication, and other
appointments of solemn Masses. If this were true, it were enough, we would
seek no further. But there is nothing true in all this story. The distance that
you speak of, was not between the Altar and the Wall; but between the Altar
and the Rail, quod septum ab Altari co^gruo spatio dis^et, the rail, or
bars, and not the wall; as in the fourth Council of Millaine, published by
Binius, being the extract of those Acts, to which you send us. But lest we
should fall short of our present purpose, which is to set you for^h unto the
world, for the most notable Counterfeit of these later Ages; we will be bold
to borrow help from your own dear self, against this man of Lincolnshire
that so abuses his good Authors. You cite us in this place, Acta Eccles.
Mediolan: part 4. lib. 10. de fabrica Eccles. and page 48. of your holy Table,
you cite the very same again. But there you sing another song, and report him
rightly in these words. When you build an High Altar, there must be from the
foot or lowest degree thereof, to the rayles that enclose the same, ^ight
Cubits and more, if the Church will bear it, that there may be room for the
clergy to assist, (as sometimes is required at solemn Masses.) Ovid Metamor.
Et me mihi per^ide prodis, me mihi prodis ait? What have we here, ^he
Minister of Lincolnshire, confessing guilty? His Author wronged in one place,
and most miraculously righted in another? Now fie upon thee that coul^st not
keep thine own counsel; but must needs blurt out all, though against thy
self. And so Ex ore tuo inique Iudex. The space you talk of was, as you see,
between the Altar and the rail; and not between the Altar and the wall,
which was the matter to be proved. The Cardinal was too good an Antiqu^rie,
to make so great a distance as you falsely charge him with, between the Altar
and the wall. And though he was not sainted, Made a Saint it s^emes f^r t^ is
se^vice. p. 221.
as you idely dream, for taking down those petit Altars in his Church of
Millaine: yet such a reverend esteem the Popes had of him, that the whole
Thuanus hist. l.
order of the Humiliati was suppressed for ever; only because one desperate
knave amongst them, made an attempt upon his person.

This said, those few particulars which you have to show, might very easily be
granted, and do no prejudice at al to the cause in hand: and it were not amiss
to do so, but that you falsify your Authors with so high an impudence* in some
of those particulars, which you have to show. Your instance of an p. 220.
Ancient Marble Altar, in the middle of the Catacombe, we will freely yield
you? For say you not your self, that it was a place, in which the ancient
Bishops of Rome were wont to retire themselves in time of persecution? If so,
it was well they had an Altar. Those were no times to be sollicitous about the
placing of the same, as before we told you. Next in Saint Peter's Church in the
Vatican you have found an Altar, called Altar Maggiore; but the worst is, you
know not where to place it. The Italian Author whom you p. 221.
cite, tells you the posture of this High Altar, was in the midst of the Quire:
and yet Chemnitius, whom you cite p. 222. and allow of too, has placed it ante
Chorum, before the very Quire. This, as you say, was not observed by your
former Author; you say true indeed. Your former Author, if you report him
right, has placed it in the midst of the Quire, and therefore could not well
observe that it stood before it. But stand it where it will, what are you the
wiser? Do you not find in de rebus Eccl. cap. 4.
Walafrid^s Strabo, that in this very Church there are many Altars, some placed
toward the East, and some in others parts thereof: Altaria non tantum in
Orientem, sedetiam in alias parts esse distributa. And find you not also in
Examen Council. Trid. pars. 4.
Chemnitius, that in that very Church there are an hundred and nine Altars; and
then no marvel if some of them stand in the middle of the Quire, and some
before it. Nor does Chemnitius speak at all of that Altar Maggiore which
before you spoke of, for ought there appears; but only tells you, apud Altar
ante Chorum, that before the Quire there was an Altar. And, which most clearly
shows your falsehood, he most perfectly distinguishes that before the Quire
from that under the which Saint Peter and Saint Paul lie buried, which your
Italian Author speaks of, by the number of Indulgences. You might have spared
Chemnitius well enough, for any service he has done you; but that you love to
clog your margin. And for Saint Peter's Altar, place it where you will, either
in the middle of the Quire, or before the door, you cannot thence conclude
that there was no High Altar anciently at the East end of the Church; no more
than if a man should say, there is an Altar in the middle of King Henry the
Seventh his Chapel at Westminster, ergo there is no Altar at the East end of
the Quire.

From p. 221*
Italy your Books transport you into Germany, and there you heard another
winters tale, of that alacrity which Witikind the ancient Saxon found in the
face of Charles the Great, when he began to approach that Table which was in
the midst of the Church. For this you cite Cran^zius in Metrop. l. 1. c. 24.
but there is not one word that reflects that way in all that Chapter, nor indeed
could be, if you mark it; the Emperou^ Charles being dead and buried Chapt.
^8. That which you mean is Chapt. 9. (should (...) (...) you for this mistake)
and there indeed it is (...) in this sort: Postea vero mensam adieras^* Templo
mediam, it a hilari mihi conspectus ^s vultu, etc. that the good Emperor
changed his Count^^ance, at his approach unto the Table. How ^eated? Templo
mediam* What in the middle of the Church? I cannot tell you that. For then he
would have said, in medio Templi, and not Templo mediam. The Table Templo media
was the High Altar out of question, and stood as now it does at the upper end
of the Quire: and yet was Templo media just in the middle to the Church* or
^any man that coming from the lower end, did approach unto it. Nor does
Hospinian tell us, p. 2^^*
as you make him tell us, that in the Reformation which the Helvetians made at
Tig^re, (so great a Clerk as you should have called it Zuric^) An 1527. they
found that in old time the Fo^t had been situated in that very place, where
the Popish High Altar was then demolished. (...) de Origin^ Altarium. ca. ^*
only says, Non obs^uris not is deprehensum esse, that it was so conje^tured
by certain signs* And think that those signs might not deceive them.
Besides, Hospinian speaks not of the Popish High Altar, but calls it only the
High Altar, Al^a^^ summum. Popish was ^oysted in by you, to make poor men
be^eeve that all High Altars, were ipso facto, Popish Altars, and therefore
ipso facto, to be demolished. Such excellent arts you have to infuse faction in
men's minds, as never any man had more. From Germany you pass to France, where
you find nothing for your purpose. You p. 222
are informed, you say, that there they do not fasten their High Altars to the
wall; but the lesser or Requiem Altars only. I dare be bold to say, no man
ever told you so: the contrary thereunto being so apparent; as I my self can
say, of my own observation. So that your general being false, that which you
tell us of the rich Table in the Abbie Church of S. Den^s, will conclude no
more, than your Cathedral Church at Dover. And yet you tell us false in that
too. For that the Table is p. 223.
not laid along the wall, but stands Table-wis^, you find not in the Theater,
cited in the Margin: that you have added of your own. Nor does the Inscription
which you bring, prove that it stands Table wise: for the Inscription may as
well fit an High Altar now, as a Communion Table heretofore. Besides, how ever
it and by the inscription, must needs have been used for a Communion Table
heretofore. p. 223.
was used before, in case it be not used so now, it makes no matter how it
stands. For if it be a Table only, a fair rich Table to ^eede the eye, and
not employed in any of their religious Offices: place it in Gods name how you
will; and make your best of it having placed it so. p. 223.
The ho^y Altar in the same Church placed before the Tomb of Charles the bald,
stands, as you say, in a manner in the midst of that room. Not in the midst
expressly, but in a manner in the midst. Neither so, nor so. For the said holy
Altar, as they call it, stands against the wall, (...) of the Chapel being
behind it* (a place appointed for the Sacrist) according, as you cannot choose
but have observed, in many of our Cathedral Churches in this Realm. And these
indeed, are n^ strange postures in that Country; you say right in that: but
very wrong as you intend it, as if it were not strange in France to have the
Altars* stand in the midst of the^r Churches Both the rich Table that you speak
of, and the holy Altar as they call it, stand there no otherwise than other
Altars, both in France, and elsewhere: which I can say of certain knowledge,
having marked them well.

The other three rich Tables which you tell us of, p. 224. 225.
two of them in Const^ntinople, and one in Rome, conclude as little to your
purpose: there being no proof brought that they stood Table-wise, or were not
laid along the wall; but only your mere say-soes, and some bold conjectures.
Nay it appears most plainly, in tha^ wherein you instance first, that it was
made to stand against a wall, and in no place else. For it is said of that
incomparable Lady Pulcheria, and not Pulchelia, as you call her, the Emperors
Sister, that making such a costly and magnificent piece of work as the Table
was: Sozomen. lib. 9. C. 1.
she caused to be inscribed on the Front thereof, that all might read it,
(...) the purpose of the gift, and true intentions of the giver. Had it been
then the use of the Church in* Constantinople, to place the holy Table like a
Comm^^^on Table; no doubt but that she would have caused the said Inscription
to be made accordingly. Not on the Front thereof, for Front it could have
none, except you please to call the narrow and by the name of F^ont, (as none
will call it, if you do not;) but round about it. And being inscribed ^ound
about, it might as ^asily have been read, the Table standing Table-wise; as
being on the Front, the Table standing Altar-wise. So that you have found out
an excellent Argument against your self: and we thank you for it. Your
second instance is p. ^25.
of a Table, sent from France, by King Pepin, to the Pope, and dedicated to
Saint Peter. How prove you that this Table was not made an Altar, nor placed
Altar-wise? Marry say you, because the Pope returned this Answer to the King,
that on that very Table he had offered the sacrifice of praise to Almighty
God, for the prosperity of his Kingdom. An admirable disputant. But good Sir,
with your leave, might not the Pope offer the sacrifice of praise to Almighty
God, on any thing but on that Table: or on that Table situate all along the
wall, but in the posture only of a common Table: or not upon that Table,
changed into an Altar? I see you are excellent good at all things; but for
nonsequiturs, a very nonesuch. For your last instance of the holy Table
offered up by Justinian in the Temple of Sophia in Constanti^ople; you build on
this, that the Inscription on the same was engraven (...), round about it* and
therefore could not have been seen, had the said Table been laid ^^ong the
wall. Thus you c^^^lude* and your conclusion, as it should, follows deteriorem
partem, in the worst sense too. Your Circuit, and your (...) have been scanned
already. Nor can you prove by (...) that the inscription on the Table went
quite round about it. It might be done (...), and not circum-circa. Cannot you
walk (...) about an Altar, or if that word offen^ you about a Table placed
against a wall, backwards and forwards, from the extreme corner on the
North-east, to the extreme corner on the South-east, and yet not walk quite
round about it, in a perfect circuit? if no, you understand not what you mean
when you say (...) if yea, then you may find how the inscription might be
engraven (...) on Justinians Table, and yet the Table stand all along the wall.
You see, I hope, by this time, the exceeding weakness of your cause; as other
men may see by this, the extreme foulness of your carriage, in the handling
of it.

But to what purpose tell we you, of what you see: who being nor blind, nor
blinker, as you make the Doctor, do shut your eyes most wilfully that you may
not see; or rather see too well, but will dissemble what you see. Great pains
assuredly you take to prove that the Communion Table ought not to stand at the
upper end of the Chancell: and that it is against the Liturgy and C^nons of
this Church, against the practice of antiquity, yea and against the usage in
the Church of Rome, to place it so. And which is yet more strange, you cast a
scandalous stain on them which opine the contrary, as if they were of very
desperate faith, and corrupt affections. For p. 76. you fling a jealousy
abroad, as if in placing the Communion Table Altar-wise, they meant somewhat
else, than for fear of our gr^cious King they dare speak out: the Mass at
lea^^, no question, who can take it otherwise. And worse than so, p. 204. you
tell us, that these (...) Reformers, though they prepare and l^y (...) for the
same, dare not (for fear of so many Laws and Canons) apparently profess
their Ele^sinian doctrines: and that they are busied as yet, in t^king in the
outworks, that that being done, they may in time have a ^out with the fort it
self: With spite and calumny enough. One that should read these passages,
would think that your self did place a great deal of religion, in these
outward matters: yet such is your ill-luck, or want of memory, or somewhat which
is worse, that you confess in other places, that placing of the holy Table in
the upper end of the Chancell, is of a very mean and inferior quality* not to
be stood upon or gain^said, if it be^ required. For p. 67. you declare your
self, that you would not advise a^y Clergie-ma^ of what degre^ soever, to
oppose his Ordi^ary, eith^r (...) other particular of so low ^ nature* So low ^
^^ture, mark y^u that; and then consider with your self, how little cause you
had, to take so much pains to ^o little purpose* but that you have a mind to
d^stur^ the Church, that you may fish the better in a troubled water. So for
the writer of the letter, he sign^fi^th unto the Vicar, Holy Table. p 12*
that the standing ^f the (...) Table, was ^^to him a thing s^ ^^different,
that (...) offense and umbr^ges were taken by the town against it* he would
neither move it, nor remove it. And you your self have brought him in
discoursing with the men of Granth^m, of the indifferenci^ of this circumstance
in its own nature: as in another place, Against the which he conceived the
Rubric to be very apparent, but h^s Lordships opinion. to be very indifferent.
p. 12.
you make his Lordships opinion to be very indifferent, in the said placing of
the Table, however the Rubric of the Liturgy did seem apparently to be
against it. Nor is he only so resolved in point of judgment, but he is
positive for the ^etting of it Altar-wise, in point of practice: Ibid. p. 12.
the Table, as you tell us, in his Lordships private Chapel being so placed,
and furnished with Plate and Orna^ents above any the poor Vicar had ever seen
in this Kingdom, the Chapel Royal only excepted. A strange tale to tell,
that for the placing of the Table Altar-wise, the Rubricke should be so
apparently against it; and yet his Lordships opinion should be so indifferent
in it: his practice peremptory for the forms observed in the Royal Chapel;
and yet that you should be allowed and licenced to write kim kam, so flatly
contrary to that, which in his own house he approves and practi^eth. More
strange that you should take this pains to falsify your Authors and disturb
the peace and uniformitie of the Church, in matters of so low a nature; wherein
you would have no man disobey his Ordinary. Were you not taken with a spirit
of giddiness, we should have found some constancy in you, though but little
truth. But thus you deal with us throughout your Book; and wander up and
down, you know not whither: the biasse of your judgment drawing one way, and
your zeal unto the faction, pulling you another way. It seems you have been
much distracted, aliudque ^upido, men's aliud su^det: and you are still
irresolute what to do, or think. Though for the present fit, like the mad
woman in the Poet, you set upon the business with a video meliora proboque:
but will deterior^ sequi, do we what we can. In which mad mood no wonder if
you fall into many impertinencies, and extravagancies, to which now we hasten:
and having made a full discovery of you in them, will conclude the whole.

SECTION III.
CHAP. IX.
A brief survey and censure of the first service of Extravagancies, in the holy
Table.
The Ministers extravagancies, one of the greatest part of his whole discourse.
His ignorant mistaking in the Mathematics concerning the inventions of
Euclide, Archimedes, and Pythagoras. The Minister faulters in the original of
Episcopal authority. His ^ringing in of Sancta Clara, and Sancta Petra, for the
Iingle only. The Minister mistakes the case of the German Priests. His ^^vils
at the ^^rme of prayer before the Sermon; and turning toward the East i^ the
Act of Prayer. The Ministers ignorant endeavors to advance the authority of the
Archd^acons. The Minister mistaken in the Diaconico^. What the Diacony was, and
that it adds but little to the dignity of Archdeacons, that the old Deacon
had the keeping of it. The Minister absurdly sets the Deacon above the Priest.
Po^tare Altar, not an honor in the first Deacons, but a service only. The
little honor done by the Minister to the Archdeacons, in drawing down their
petigree from the first Deacons. The Ministers ignorant mistake in his own w^rd
utensil. The Minister subjects the ^riest to the authority of the Chu^chwarden,
and for that (...) Lindwood. His ignorant d^^rivations of the present
Churchwarden from the old O^conomus. The Minister endevows to exclude the
Clergy from meddling in sacular matt^^^; and to that (...) abuses the
authority of the ^^ci^^^ F^thers. His ignorance in the Cat^chisme, and
confident mistakes in that. His heartlesse plea for bowing at the name of JESUS.

LAertius tel's us of Chrysippus the Philosopher, that being a great Writer,
(...)* in vit. Chrysostom.
he took up every thing that came in his way, (...) and swelled his Books with
testimonies and quotations, more then needed. And thereupon Apollodoru^ the
Athenian used to say, that taking from Chrysippus writings, (...), all that was
either not his own, or at all nothing to his purpose; (...), his Papers would
be empty of all manner of matter. Our Minister of Lincoln Diocese is much like
that Author. To make his Book look big upon us, he l^ft out nothing that he
met with in his own collections; or had been sent in to him by his friends to
set out the work: and that it might appear a most learned piece, he has
dressed up his margin with quotations of all forts, and uses. But with so
little judgment and election, that many times he run's away so far from his
may^ bu^inesse, and from the Argument which he took in hand; that we have much
ado to find him. And should one deal with him, according to the hi^^ that we
have given us of Chrysippus; we should find such a full in the mayn bulk of his
discourse, Cap. 9.
that the good man would have a very sorry frame, to support his Table. Such
and so many are his impertinences, and vaga^ies; that the left part of all his
work, is the holy Table, though that were only promi^ed in the T^^le: and we
may say thereof in the Po^ts language, Pars minima est ipsa puella sui; the
dress is bigger then the body. However, that we might not ^eem to have took
all this pains, in a thing of nothing; I have reduced into the body of this
answer, what ever of him I could possibly bring in, though by head and
shoulders: leaving the rest of his untractable extravagancies, such as by no
means could be brought into rank and order, to be here examined by themselves.
In marshalling of the which I shall use no method, but that which himself has
taught me; which is to rank them as I find them, and as they cross me in my
way: taking them page by page, as they are pr^sented to my view; or dish by
dish, as he has set them before us. If you find any thing of the changeling
in him, or that his (...) do not prove as full of ignorance and falsehood, as
his (...) is: I should conceive my time ill spent, in tracing him up and down
in so wild a Labyrinth. Besides, we have in these extravagancies or vagaries,
some fine smacks of Puritanisme, purposely sprinkled here and there to san
ctifie and sweeten the whole performance; and make it ad palatum to the Gentle
Reader. Begin then my dear brother of Boston, and let us see what pretty tales
you have to tell us, for entertainment of the time, by way of Table-talke: for
justifying as you do, the sitting of some men, at the holy Sacrament, I must
needs think you have invited us unto a Common, not an holy Table.

And first to pass away the time till your meat come's in, you tell us two or
three stories, Page 50.
of E^clid^, and his finding out of the Jacobs staff* of Archimedes and his
(...), when being in a brazen Lav^tory, he had found the Cor^net or
circumference of the vessel: and finally of that sad y^^th Pythagoras, Page 51.
who having found in a Diagr^m an eq^^litie of so^e lines in a right ^^gled
triangle, dow^e went a whole Ox to the Gods, for the Inspiration. These are
hard words believe me, and you do very ill to talk in such a c^nting
Language, and that to poor unlearned And that with people that are n^ (...).
p. 52.
people, which are no Geometricians: but far worse, trust me, to betray your
ignorance in so foul a manner, to those that can detect you for a most
confident ign^ro, to trifle thus in matters which you understand not. It is a
good rule and an old, in mathematic is aut scire op^rtet, aut (...). But you
that never cared for any rules, will not care for this. Incomp^r^ble, you say,
Page 50.
was the delight of Euclide, when he had found how to make but a Jacobs staff.
I pr^y you, good Sir, who told you that Euclide made the Jacobs staff* If it
was Jacobs staff, as you say it was; it could not be of E^clides making. And I
would pray you next to tell me, why naming it a Jacobs staff; you put (...) in
the margin. Think you (...) signifies a Jacobs staff? The word you cite from
Plut^rch where indeed it is; but a judicious and learned Mathematician, as you
seem to be, would have considered with Xylander, that (...), is vox nihili, no
word at all, a mistake merely of the transcripts. Then if you read (...), as
the l^arned do, it might be certainly a work containing some practical
The^remes wrought by the Quadrant or Astrolabe, as well as the Jacobs staff.
And then again, if Euclide wrote such Theoremes, it follows not that therefore
he found out the Instrument. Many have told us of the use, but not found out
the Author of it: Geomet^^
though P. Ramus would have told you, had you asked the question* that it* was
called Jacobs staff, Tanquam a sancto Patriarcha illo oli^ inventus. However,
were the difficulties more, and more debated by the learned in those noble
studies, that is all one to you. For like a bold Adventurer, you clap it down a
Jacobs staff, in the Text, and (...) in the margin: and then deride both it
and them, as being Which notwithstanding I can b^^ for 12* P^^ce. p. 50*
but a twelve-penny matter, not worth the speaking of.

From Euclide on to A^chim^des, who washing in a brazen Lavatorie, cries out he
had found it. What had he now found? (...), says your margin rightly: but very
wrongly you translate it, and tell us it was nothing but the Corone^ or
circumference of the vessel. What will you give me to relate the story? Will
you a^sure me on your word, though not worth the taking, that you will never
meddle with the Mathematics, without further study? Well then, thus it was.
Vitruv. l. 9. cap. 3.
Hiero King of Syracusa, put out a Crown to making, of pure gold: and the
Artificer, like a knave, mixed some silver with it. This being informed of,
Hiero would feign know, how much gold had been taken out, and how much silv^r
put in: and desired Archimedes to invent some way for the discovery. He, at a
certain time going into his Bath, observed a quantity of the water to
overflow according to the bigness of his body; whereby he presently conce^ted
a device to solve the Kings Problem^, and cries out, I have found it: i. e. a
way to discover the Artificers theft by the proportion of the water
overflowing; or in the words of your own Author, did you understand him,
(...), a way of meas^ring the Kings Crown; which he did accordingly. I ^ee you
understand the language, as you do the Mathematics: and to betray your
ignorance in both at once, must needs interpret (...) the Coronet or
circumference of the vessel. He found His men (...) g^t he had (...) of go^d,
and it was nothing but the (...) or circumference of the v^ssell. p. 50.
a Coronet of gol^, when he cried out (...): though the invention was not worth
a Tester as you tell the story.

But the sad youth Pythagoras went beyond them all. Did he so indeed? And so do
you too in relating what he invented. It is your masterpiece of Ign^rance; not
such another to be found in all the Country. But what did he? Marry, say you,
having found in a Diagramme an equality of some lines in a rightangled
triangle, down went a whole ox for the inspiration. What said you, an
equality of some lines? How many were they for a wager? There are but three in
all, a triangle can have no more. One is not some; and all the lines in a
right-angled triangle cannot be equal, by no means* it is both false in the
Art, and utterly would take away that excellent invention of Pythagoras. If
then all three cannot have this equality, nor any one of them in it self; it
must be either two or none: you needed not have kept aloof with your equality
of some lines. And to say truth, it is of none. For this invention of
Pythagoras, respects not any equality or inequality of the lines or sides in
a right-angled triangle; but it Euclide, l. ^. Sect. 47.
enquires the (...) or power of these lines: and it demonstrates the square
described upon the line subtending the right Angle, to be ever equal to the
squares of both the other compounded. Now did you either understand the
invention it self, or else what admirable use is made thereof in all the
practice of Geometry, you would not grutch Pythagoras an Hecatombe; a poor Ox^
was nothing: although as you most ignorantly have set it down, an Ox had
been too much by half; A calfe had been enough to offer for such a Bull. Not
such a V. p. 104. of the holy Table.
Pious Bull indeed, as you have found out for the Doctor; but a profane, a
Gentile, and a Pagan Bull.

Your next vagarie is, about Episcopal jurisdiction; which we have met withal
already, as it related unto practice, and the point then in hand between us:
but we must here confer a little, about the institution of it. This you
touch very gingerly; and so, as one may see, you have a good mind to betray the
cause. The reverend Ordinaries, and their calling are founded (as you page 64*
say) upon Apostolical, and ( for all the essential parts thereof) on divine
right. The Reverend Ordinaries? And why not rather, I beseech you, the Reverend
Bishops? Is the word Bishop so distastefull to your holy brethren, that you
dare not use it? Or do you think, you should be out of credit with them, did
you affirm that in plain and positive terms, that Bishops are of Christ's
institution, and de jure divino? It seems you do: and therefore in your Quo
warranto, you ground their calling on Apostolical and upon divine right. On
Apostolical in the first place, as being none of Christ our Saviors
Institution, but only founded by the Apostles, in their administration of the
public government. The Ius divi^^^ comes after, in s^cundis, but in upon the
second: and that in some essenti^ll parts thereof, but you know not what. I
hope there are not many Ministers in Lincol^shir^ of this opinion. For let the
Bishops stand alone on Apostolical right, and no more than so, and doubt it
not but some will take it on your word, and then plead accordingly; that
things of Apostolical institution, may be laid a^ide. Where are their
Ecclesiastical 1 Timothy 5.
wid^wes; what service do the Deac^ns Act. 6.
at the Table now; how many are there that forbear Act. 15. 20.
from bl^^d, and things strangled? Therefore away with Bishops too, let all go
together. And this I take it, is your meaning, though not as to the
Application, yet as to the ground of the Application. I am the (...) to believe
it, because when Bishop Andrews (...) had learnedly asserted the Episcopal
Order to be of* Christ's Institution, I have heard that some who were then in
place, did secretly intercede with King James to have had it al^^^ed; for
fear, forsooth, of offending our neighbor Churches. This ^^are you are
possessed with also: and therefore wa^ve not only the name of Bishop, but the
maine groundworke and foundation upon which they stand: Nay by this note of
yours, Archdeacons hold by as good a claim as the Bishops do. For being
successors, as you say, page 79.
to the primitive Deacons, who were ordained by the Apostles, and Ordinaries
too, they know that too well: what lets, but that they mean themselves for
those Reverend Ordinaries, which were ordained on Apostolical, and ( for the
essential parts of their office) on divine right also. Here is T. C. and I. C.
and who else you will; new England in the midst of old* Yet all this while you
are most orthodox in doctrine, and consonant in discipline to the Church of
England.

Having thus founded the Episcopal calling on Apostolical authority, your
next vagarie is upon the Doctor, for setting up the Vicar above his Ordinary.
How truly this is said, we have seen already. And then you add, that these
judicious Divines that page 71.
tamper so much in doctrine with Sancta Clara, and in discipline with Sancta
Petra, will in the end prove prejudicious Divines to the estates of Bishops.
Here is a fine jingle* is it not, to make sport for boys? who cannot but
applaud your wit, for bringing Sancta Clara, and Sancta Petra, in a string
together. For, good Sir, tell me in a word, what other use was there of S^ncta
Petra; but that you love to play and dally upon words and letters? In all his
book, being in all 27. Chapters, what passage can you find that tends unto
the prejudice of Bishops? Or how does the poor Doctor, or any of those whom
with so high a scorn you call Judicious Divines, complie with any man that
does? Your Sancta Clara, and Sancta Petra make a pretty noise; but it is only
vox, and praeterea nihil.

The Doctor thus shaked up, you go on again unto the point of Jurisdiction;
in which you spend two leaves together, but not one word unto the purpose. You
tell us page 72.
that of old, some Priests of Germany were reprehended by Pope Leo the Great,
because they did presume in the absence of their Bishops, Erigere Altaria, to
erect Altars: then, that page 73.
a single Priest, qua talis, has no key given him by God or man, to open the
doors of any external Jurisdiction, that p. 71.
no man should presume to dispose of any thing belonging to the Church without
the Bishop. What needed this ado, when neither, as you know your self, the
Vicar ever did intend to build an Altar: nor is it as you say your self, in
any of the Bishops powers to do it if they were so minded. So far are you
from giving way, that Bishops, of their own authority, may erect an Altar:
page 67.
that you deny them any authority of their own, to transpose a Table. Nor
do you rightly sta^e the case, in Pope Leo neither. The business was not, as
you dream, that there were some Priests in France or Germany, that encouraged
thereunto by the Chorepiscopi, or Country Suffragans, did presume in the
absence of their Bishops, Erigere Altaria, to erect Altars, No such matter
verily. The thing that Leo was offended at, was that some Bishops of France and
Germany, did oftentimes appoint their Chorepiscopi (who Qui juxta Canones
NeoCaesarienses five secundum aliorum dec^eta patr^m, iide^ sunt qui and
Presbyteri. Ep. 88.
by the Canons of some Councels were no more than Priests) or sometimes others
which were simply Priests, to set up Altars in their absence; and to hallow
Churches: Qui absente Pontifice Altaria erigerent, Basilicasque consecrarent.
As his words there are. The Bishops were in fault here, not the Priests: and
you as faulty full as they, to raise a scandal both on them, and the poor
Vicar, in things of which they were not guilty. So that this needless
disputation might have been laid by, but that it is your fashion ^o wheel
about, that being gotten on the right side, you may show your learning. For
having store sent in from so many hands, you think it would be taken for a
great discourtesie, if you should not spend it.

Your next vaga^^e is about forms of Prayer; at which you have an evil tooth,
that bites close, but deep. The 55. Canon has prescribed a form of prayer,
before the Sermon, according to the form of bidding of prayers, prescribed and
practiced in the reigns of King Henry the eight, King Se^ the I^^unctions of
K. Edw. 6. Qu. Eli. and Latimers Sermon to the Co^vocation.
Edw. the sixth, and Queen Elizabeth. This you turn off with a back blow, as
if you struck at somewhat else: and in a word or two give a fair Item to your
brethren* to use what forms of prayer they list, with a non-obstante. It
seems by you (say you unto the Doctor) That we are b^und only to pray, but
not to speak the words of the Canons, i. e. (for so must be your meaning) as
little bound to the one as unto the other. No man conceives that he is bound
to use in other things no other words then the Canons use, because there is no
Canon that requires it of him: and by your rule we are not bound unto the
forms of Prayer in the Canon m^ntioned, although the Canons do require it. Now
as you fling aside the Canon, and leave your Clergi^-friends a liberty to pray
what they list: so in another place, you cast aside the Churches customs; and
give a liberty unto your Lay-brethre^ to pray how they list. It is an Ancient
custom in the Church of England, that in the times of prayer in the
Congregation, we turn our faces to the East. This many of your friends
dislike, and it is reckoned by H. B. In his (...) Serm^^. p. 129.
amongst those In^ovations, which he does charge upon the Prelates; as if it
were (forsooth) a tying of God to a fixed place. It seems you were agreed
together, he to invent the charge, and you to furnish him with Arguments, to
confirm the same. This makes you far more like Ch^ysippu^, than before you
were* of whom In vita Ch^ysippi.
Laertius does inform us, that whosoever it was that found out the Dogmata,
(...), he had an excellent Art of finding proofs to make it good. Now to make
good this charge of your friend H. B. you tell us page 219.
that it is a Paganish thing to make God more propi^ious in any one corner of
the world then he is in an other* For this you cite these words of Minutius
Felix, viz. Deo cun^ta plena sunt. Vbique non t^ntum nobis proximus, sed
infus^s est. But gentle Sir, those words are spoken in the Author, not in
relation unto the placing of the Altars, or to the peoples turning of
themselves in the Act ^f Prayer: but to the point of having Temples, i^e. such
Temples as were then in use amongst the (...), for the immediate and local
habitations of their God. Which being, as he says, unnecessarie, in regard
that God was every where, and filled all things with his presence; was a good
Answer to the Argument that C^^ilius used* but very ill brought in by you, upon
no occasion. Only you please to intimate unto your dependants (who understand
your meaning at half a word) that as they may pray what they will, for all the
Canon; and h^^ they will, for all the Custom; so they may pray also when and
where they will, for all our Churches. Excellent Doctrine, credit me, not a
New-Englander of them all, could have done it better.

From your unnecessarie discourse about the jurisdiction of Bishops, and these
ba^k-blo^es on the by, we must next ^ollow you unto a more unnecessarie, about
the Office of Archdeacons; which they that perhaps sent you in your notes,
desired to have extremely heightened; but all the proofs they bring to exalt
the same, ^end to the diminution of it. Now for the finding out of that
authority, which you ascribe to the Archdeacons, or rather they unto
themselves, you go as high as the first Deacons Page 79.
(whose ancient power, you say, is now united and concentred in that of
theirs;) and tell us many things that before we knew not. First, take it as we
will, that the very Altar it self with the Rail about it, has been termed
in ancient Councels, the Diaconie, as a place belonging (next after the Bishop)
to the care and custody of the Deacon only. Secondly, that it is affirmed by
an ancient Council, that the Priest can boast of nothing that he has in
general, but his bare name; not able to execute his very Office, without the
authority, and ministry of the Deacon. Thirdly, that in a Precedent of this
very particular, it was the Deacons office, portare, to move and remove the
Altar, and all the implements belonging thereunto, as says Saint Austine. And
thereupon you draw this inference, that from these first Deacons to our present
Archdeacons, Incumbents have been excluded from meddling with the utensils of
the Church, or Ornaments of the Altar: and for the proof hereof, you tell us
in the Margin out of Lin^wood, that they (the Archdeacons) have in charge omnia
ornamenta and ute^silia Ecclesiarum. This is a compound dish, and was perhaps
served in for an olla podrida, or the Grand Sallet of the Feast: and therefore
that we may the better judge of the ingredients, we will taste them severally.

And first you say, the very Altar it self with the ^^ile about it, in ancient
Councels has been ^ermed the Diaconie. This is the first Caper in your
Sallet, and it tastes very high indeed; as high as the Council of Laodicea,
which was before the famous Synod of Nice. Now in this Ca^. 10.
Council it is ordered (...). that no inferior Minister should have place in
the Diaconie, and touch the holy vessels, or the holy utensils. This Canon,
afterward was Council. Ag^th^ns. Can. 6^.
incorporated into those made in a Council held at Agatha or Agde, in Gaul
Narbonnoyse, Anno 506. in this form that follows, viz. Quoniam non oportet
insacratos ministros licentiam habere in secretarium (quod Graeci diaconion
appellant) ingredi, and contingere vasa dominica. Now in all this you are
mistaken very ^ouly; no man ever more. For neither was the Diaconion, the place
between the wall and rail, where the Altar stood: nor do those Canons give the
Deacon any dignity above the Priests; as you intend it. The Diaconion, or
Diaconicon (as the old translation in Binius read's it) or the Diaconie, as you
call it, does signify the Vestrie, and not the Altar place: a room appointed
for the keeping of the sacred utensils, not for the ministration of the holy
Sacraments. And it was called Sacrarium also, as being the repositorie of the
hallowed Ornaments: from whence we have the name of Sa^rist, to whom the
keeping of the same was in fine committed. That living magazin of Learning Sir
Henry Spelman In Glo^^^ 100.
could have told you this; Diaconion and Diaconicum, locus in circuitu
Ecclesiae conservandis vasis Dominicis, and ornamentis Ecclesiae deputatus;
alias secretarium, alias Sacrarium: and this he says with reference to this
very Council of Laodicea, which you build upon. Then there is Josephus Vice
Comes, whom you have magnified to our hand for the page 219.
most learned in ^ur age of all that have dealt with Rites and Ceremonies; who
affirms the same. For speaking of the Council of Agatha or Agde, the second
of the two to which you refer us, De mi^^^e app^r^^u. l. 6. c. 4.
he does resolve of Secretarium, which is there said to be called Diaconion by
the Grecians, that it is the Vestrie* Secretarium i. e. locum sacris
asservandis praestitutum, as he there informs us. Nor can it but seem strange
to any man that has his wits about him as he ought to have, that the Altar
with the rail about it, or the Altar place, should be entitled the Diaconie;
wherein the Deacons had so little, if at all anything to do. But were it so as
you would have it, yet were this little to the honor of the Archdeacons office
as now it stands; and very much unto the Priests. All that is given the Deacons
here is but a trust committed to them above those other Ministers which were
insacrati (as the later of your Councels calls them) not yet admitted unto any
of the holy Orders, or to them only of the lowest or inferior sort, which are
not properly to be called Orders, but rather preparations to them. The washing
of the plate, and laying up the sacred utensils, in their proper places, was
not conceived to be a fitting service for so high a dignity as the holy
Priesthood: and therefore was put off to them, who being in ordine ad
spiritualia, in some degree or way unto it, were thought most fit to undertake
it. So that this charge was plainly cast upon the Deacon, rather to ease the
Priest, and for the honor of his calling; than to give any place or privilege
unto the Deacon, (who, as you might have seen in the (...) etc. Con^. Laodic.
c. 20.
Canon next before, was not to sit down in the presence of the Priest without
special leave) to perk before him. And you have done your Bishop but a sorry
piece of service in giving him Next after the Bishop, p. 79.
a part of so mean a charge, which was conceived to be unworthy of a common
Priest. Polme occidist is amici, Non servastis, ait.

Now as in that that went before, you have betrayed your ignorance, and too
great want of knowledge in Antiquity; so in the next which now succeedes, you
have betrayed a greater want, which is want of honesty. You tell us that the
Pri^st can boast of nothing that he has in general, but his bare name; and
that he is not able to execute his very office, without the authority and
ministry of the Deacon. Without the authority of the Deacon? that were brave
indeed: fit to be said by none but such a Minister as you, who care not what
you say, so you may be heard. The practi^^ in Ad Tarsens.
Ignatius time, was (...), that Deacons should be subject unto the Priests: but
see how strangely things were turned in a little time; the Priests are now
brought under, and forced to yield unto the Deacons. Good Sir, where may one
read of such a Law? Not in the Council of Aquisgrane, or Aken, I am sure of
that, though thither you refer us in your marginall note. In all that Canon
which you cite, the Deaconship is described as a place of Ministry, and not of
dignity. Ipsienim Council. Aquisgranens. Can. 7.
clara voce in modum Praeconis admoment cun^tos. The Deacons, as their Office
is there described, do like so many cryers call upon the people to pray, to
kneel, to sing, to be intent unto the Lessons: they call upon them also, to let
their ears be open to the Lord their God, and are designed to read the Gospel.
Then follows that which is presented in your (...) officium non ha^et, that
without them the Priest may have a name, but not an office: that is, their
(...) and attendance was (...) that without them the Priest could not do (...)
then according to the C^non, that the (...) was not able to exe^^te his very
Office without the (...) of the De^con and you say very well* none (...) you
for it. Thi^ ^oysting in of their Au^^^ity was a trick of yours, one o^ ^ho^e
many tricks (...) And you may now conclude as well* that in some greater
Churches, here in England, the Priest is utterly unable to ex^cute his very
office without the (...) of his Clerk, (...) Cu^ate, because he cannot do i^
so conveniently* without their ^i^isteries: as that the Pr^ests in these days
were an emp^ie name, and could not stir a foot in the dis^harge of their
employments, without ^^tority from the Deac^n.

That which you bring us from Saint Austi^, makes the m^tter plainer, plainer I
mean as to the Priest; and sets the Deacon in his own place, a fair deal
below him. It was the Deacons office (as you Page 79.
inform us from Saint Aug^stine,) (...), to move and remove the Alt^r, and all
the implements the runto belonging. What then? Therefore the P^iests were not
to meddle with the Alt^r, either to love it, or remove it: that appertained
unto the Deacon. But good Sir, let me ask one question? Did this removing of
the Altar belong unto the De^con^, Ministerialit^r* or A^toritative? You cannot
say, that it belonged unto them, A^toritative; because you said before, that it
belo^ged to them, nex^ after the Bis^op A^l the authority then (^f your ^elf say
true) was radically in the Bishop; the Deacon only ^^ved, as he was directed.
And then I would fain know, whether you th^nke that this (...) ^he Altar was so
high an honor* that the (...) durst not look after it, or aspire unto it. You
must (...) say you think so, though you know the (...); or else this tale of
movi^g and re^^vi^^ Altars, were (...) nonsense. Now therefore look upon your
Author, and he will tell you for your learning that it is quite contrary
Quaest. ex ^troque 101.
Qu^ (...) What a strange boldness is it, says the Father; that any man
should fancy an equality between the Priests and their own Ministers? what
rash presumption may we think it to compare the Priests, unto the P^yters of
the Ta^^rnacle, and of the vessels of the same, and such as were employed about
cutting wood. The Deacons in the Church of R^me, though somewhat (...) then
they should be* do not presuso so it in the Congregation: and if they do not
execute all ministerial duties, it is because there are so many Cl^rks besides
them. Nam utique and Altar portarent, and vasa ejus, and aquam in manus
funderent s^cerdoti, etc. For otherwise, says he, they were to carry or
remove the Altars, with all the ^tensils of the (...), and to bring water for
the P^ie^t to wash his hands, according as it is in other Churches. What think
you now? is the removing of the Altar so high a dignity, as you would make the
world believe? If (...), how much more excellent were the Priests, to whom
these mighty men did service; and brought them water for their hands? If no why
do you deal so shamefully with the Ancient Writers, in making them the
instruments to abuse your Readers? But this is so inveterate in you, it will
never out.

(...) exhibited, that he ^ay see in what estate things are, whether worse or
better* Your Author says no more then this* and this is very small amends for
the disgrace you did them, in your former follie^.

Nor does this reach neither to entitle them to any power of moving and
removing the* holy Table, which was the thing by you most aimed at. The
Constitution speak's of ornaments and utensils, of Books and Vestments. To
which of all these ^oure think you, can you reduce the Altar, or the holy
Table? No doubt but you will reckon it amongst the utensils of the Ch^^^h* nay
(such is your gross ignorance) you think it would become the place exceeding
fitly. No word more frequent in your book, then that of utensil* by which you
mean the holy Table. And if it were not p^uper is numerare pecus, I could as
easily set down how many times that word is used in your learned labors; For
in this shorf discourse, this w^rd Altar is thun^red out 105 ^everalltimes.
etc. p. 192
as you have found how often that of Altar is in the D^termination that you wot
of* His Altar was more proper then your utensil, and might be used ten times
for once, without any absurdity: whereas it had been childish and absu^d in
you, to use your utensil, once only, in that sense and meaning. By utensils
your Author means not, the holy Table, or the holy Altar, take which word you
will, (nor never did man use (...) so but your (...) self:) but for the
Vessel, Patens, Chalices, and the rest* which are (...) to the same. And so
you find it in (...)
the Gloss* if you p^ease to look. (...) Next time you write, or print, let
me beseech you to leave out this word* as being worn (...) by your much using*
and use those terms which either are commended to you by the (...) (your own
rule, if you can remember) or generally were received by the ancient Writers.

But go we after you, in your vagaries. As you have brought the Priest to be
inferior to the Deacon: ^o you will do your best, to bring him under the
Churchwarden. God help poor Priests that must be under so many Masters;
Churchwardens, Deacons, and who else soever you shall please to set above them.
But this, you say, is no new matter: p. 80.
Churchwardens having been of old, the Bishops hand to put all mandates in
execution, that may concern the utensils of the Church. For proof of this,
your Margin tells us, Oeconomus [est] cui res Eccl^siastica gubernanda mandatur
ab Episc^p^: that the Churchwarden is an Officer to whom the government of
Ecclesiastical matters is committed by the Bishop. A very honorable office.
You could not have bestowed a greater power, upon the Chancellor himself. And
the Churchwardens are to thank you* that to advance their place and credit,
stick not to (...) your Authors, and to strain your conscience: and that too
in so foul a manner, that in my life I never knew an equal impudence. There Is
no such thing in Lib. 3. de (...) re^^^ent.
Lindwood, whom you have ^ited for your Author. That adjunct ab Episcopo, is
yours, not his, then the O^conomus there mentioned, is no Churchwarden, but
either a Farmour or a Bayliffe* and last of all, the Res Ecclescas^ica which is
therein mentioned, has no relation unto the ut^nsils of the Church; but
merely to the Tithes and profits. I must lay down the ca^e at large, the
better to detect your most shameless dealing. ^he constitution is as
follows. First for the title, Rectores non residentes nec Vicarios habentes
(...) That Parsons not being re^ident, nor having any (...) upon their (...),
shall by their (...) (be they as they prove) (...) The body of the (...) in
(...), though more full in words. (...) Now that we may the better know, what
is the meaning of the word (...), we are thus instructed in the (...). What
(...) Episcopo.? No such matter, not one word of that* That Is an old trick of
yours, and most (...) yours, of all the men I ever deal with. How then? why by
the Rector only? Is he not called both in the title and the Text, (...), his
own (...) So al^o in the Gloss. Dicitur (...) And what to do? Either to farm
their profits of them, or to collect and manage their profits, for them. (...)
and sic bona Eccl^siastica administrent. So that you have at onc^ imposed four
falsehoods ^n your Readers. For first, here is no Chur^hwarden, but a Bayliffe,
or a Farmour; nor he appointed by the Bishop, but by the Parson; and being
appoin^^d medleth not in any thing which does concern the (...) of the Church,
but the profits of the Parsonage: nor finally is here any word of executing
(...) but only of maintaining h^spitalitie* If this b^ all you have to say, I
hope the (...) may hold his own, without being overawed by the (...) of the
Parish; how great soever you would make them.

O but this i^ not all, say you, for the Churchwarden i^ an Ancient Gentleman,
come of a great piggehouse, and co^en Germ^n to the Bishop, at most once
removed. For you p. 80* (...)
conceive our Latin Canons now in force, by calling him O^cono^us, make him
relate unto that (...) Ecclesiastical Officer, famous in the (...) and Latin^
Councels: next, that of old, he was* as now, a Layman, some domesticke or
kin^^a^ of the Bishops, that managed all things belonging to the Church
according to the direacion of the Bishop* still you are out, quite out in every
thing you say. The (...) are not now in f^rc^, as to the phra^e and Latin of
them. For they were pa^^ed in English* in the Convocation, and confirmed in
English by King James: the Latin transl^^ion of them is of no authority, of
no force at all* And if you will needs borrow arguments from an identitie of
names, you should have first consulted the Civil Lawy^^s, who would have told
you, that Gardi^^^^ Ecclesi^, is a more proper appellation of and for the
Churchwarden, then your (...). Nor do the Authors whom you cite, inform you
that the old Oecon^^^^ was at first a Layman, a friend or kins^^^ of the
Bishops; but a Churchman merely* In Conc. Chalced. Ca^. 26.
(...) unto whom you send us, tells us plainly, that at the first the Bishop h^d
the absolute and sole disposing of the revenews of the Church: (...), no man,
nor friend, nor kinsman, nor domesticke, for ought there appears, being privi^
to i^: Which when it brought some ^eandall and complaint upon the Bishop: it
was ordained in the Counc^ll of Chal^edon, Can. 26. that the supreme
administration of the Churches treasury should still remain in him, as before
it was, but that ^e should appoint some one or other ^o be of counsel, with
him in his actions. And from what rank of men* should they take that choice?
Not (says your Author) from their domestics, or their kinsmen, (...), but
from the Clergy of the Diocese. Find you in this* that anci^ntly these
Oeconomi were Laymen, of the Bishops kindred? I thought you had be^ne better
at a petigree, then I see you are. Otherwise you would never have derived our
present Churchwardens from those old Oecono^i, That th^se ^^urchwa^den^ f^^m
that time (...), etc. p. 81.
those Clerg^e^men Churchwardens, as you please to call them* of which if there
be anything remaining in the Church of England, you have it in the Treasures of
Cathedral C^urches.

The Deacons and the Churchwardens being thus advanced, it is no wonder that
the Priest be left to his med^tations: as one that is no more then a dull
spectatour, and has no sphere of activitie to move in. O Godblesse p. 62.
say you, all good holy Churchmen from such a misadventure; with contempt
enough. God bless them too, say I, from all such Ob be not ^o ^^rd^ hearted
(...) mercil^ss^. etc. p. 63.
merci^esse and hard-hearted men, (by whomsoever they are licensed) who labor
to advance in this sort the authority of Churchwardens, or any other of that
nature, so high above their Minister. Never did Clergie-man, so licensed and
allowed of, speak so contemptiblie of the Ministry, as this man of
Lincolnshire: who though he bragges elsewhere of his p. 83.
buenas entranas (as the Spaniards speak) those good and tender bowels which
he has within him; yet the shows little pity of these poor men's cases, which
he exposes thus unto scorn and laughter. But it is true, and always was,
that a man's enemies are those of his own house: and we may speak it in the
words, though not the meaning of the Prophet, Perditio tua exte est, that thy
destruction is from thy self, O house of Israel. This cry, like that about
the Piety of the times, being taken up, we shall be sure to meet withal in
every corner of your book: as if there were no life in the game you follow, if
piety and the true promoters of it, should not be kept upon the sent. Nay you
go so far at the last, that you disable Clergymen in a manner, from being
Executors and Over seers of men's wills and Testaments: telling page 167.
us of a passage in S. Cyprian, which looks much that way, that it takes the
Doctor by the nose, as one that cannot endure to be a looker on, and confined
only to his ministerial meditations. However other of your passages might
escape the Licenser; I cannot choose but marvel that he winked at this, being
so contrary unto his practice. For did he not when he was in place, put many a
Churchman into commission for the peace; not thinking it so great an avocation
from their studies, but that they might do well with both. And have you never
been Executor or over-seer of any man's last Will and Testament; and found it no
such heavy load, but that a man might bear it with content enough? But why do
I propose these questions, when you proclaim him for the Licenser of your holy
Table, whose private practice in his Chapel, is so repugnant to the purpose
of your whole discourse. But being licensed, printed, published, and scattered
up and down the Kingdom (as such things fly far:) no doubt but you have
made good game to all the brethren of your party; who are now authorized by so
good authority, to turn their Ministers out of all employment, yea in such
things as do concern his Church and calling; and bid him get him home to his
meditations. Sponte sua properant. The people are too forwards in themselves
upon these attempts: and you might well have spared the spur, but that you
think they make not haste enough, because you outride them.

Butyetwell fare your heart, you will say nothing without Fathers, though they
say nothing for your purpose. S. Ambrose, as page 81.
you say, complains of the like complainers of his time, who held that the
^tudie of the holy Scriptures was but a dull and idle kind of employment. Are
you sure of that? The Father there says nothing of the like complainers. There
was no occasion why he should. The Priests were then in too great honor, to
be controuled and baffled by inferior Officers. Nor were there any Bishops
then that labored to suppress their Clergy (or allowed others so to do) by
putting them into the hands of the V^strie Elders. That which S. Ambrose
speaks of there, is that some men preferred the active kind of life, before
the contemplative; the doing of the works of righteousness, before the study
of the Scriptures. In Psalm. 118. Sermon. ^1.
Nos autem ociosos nos putamus, (...) verbo tantummod^ studere videamur. What,
stops he there, as you have made him? I have before heard of a Gagger of the
Protestants; but here behold a Gagger of the holy Fathers. The Father sure
proceeds as follows, Et pluris aestimamus ^os qui^perantur, quam eos qui
studiu^ veritatis congn^scendae exercent. Had you gone forwards as you ought,
you would have found but little comfort from S. Ambrose. For mark how your
conclusion follows on his words. S. Ambrose tells us of some men, who did
prefer an active life before a contemplative* Erg^ according to Saint
Ambrose, the Minister must be confined to his meditations, and suffer the
Churchwardens to rule the roast. p. 8^.
S. Basil, he is brought in next, to bid his Clergy take especial heed, that
their Martha be ^ot t^oubled with many things. Admit that true. What then, Erg^
the Clergy must sit still, permit the people to do all, and rest themselves
content with being lookers on, the dull spectatours of their active
undertakings. But know you what you say, or rather what the Father says in the
place you cite? Those Reg^l^ fusiores whither you refer us, concern Monks,
not Priests; those which did live in Monasteries, not those that had the Cure
of Souls: which makes some difference in the case. But this is not all. The
question S. Basil. regul. fu^ior* 20. p. 454.
there proposed is thus. (...), what order they (the Monks) should follow in
entertainment of Strangers. To this the Father answers, that their
entertainment should be moderate, and very little, if at all, above their
ordinary dy^t. And then come in those words which you have cited in your
Margin* (...), that Christ gave Martha little thanks for being so busy and
distracted about her entertainment of him. What think you now? Is this to bid
their Clergy take especial heed, that their Martha be not troubled about many
things. i. e. that they refer all to the Churchwardens, and suffer them to do
their pleasure in matters which concern the Church? Last of all for Synesius,
he is brought in too. p. 82.
You have a very strange Commission, that you can call in all the Fathers with
a testificandum; and when you find they can say nothing, yet set them down
amongst the number of your witnesses, and give it out that all goes with you.
Were it not for this trick, the cause would quickly have been tried, and never
got such hold in the common vogue. What would you have Synesius say? Marry you
send him in a ticket, and tell him that he must deliver upon his oath, that he
conceived it fitter for an Egyptian then a Christian Priest, to be
over-troubled with matters of wrangling. This if Synesius should affirm, yet
it would little help your cause, and that your Partisans would report, that
such a Reverend man as Synesius was, has sworn directly on your side. But
there is no such matter neither. All that Synesius says is this, (...), Ep. 57.
that in old times the same men were both Priests and Judges; that then both
the Egyptians and the Hebrews, for a long time (...), were under the command
and empire of their Priests; that Christ had severed the two offices; and
therefore that Andronicus (to whom that Epistle is inscribed) should not
endeavor to unite them. Nor does he go thus far in fine, allowing not much
after, that those who have abilities to discharge both callings (though he
confessed it of himself, that he was no such man:) (...) lbid.
might both execute the Priests office, and yet bear rule also in the
Commonwealth. So that this place serves very ill, to bind the Clergy to refer
all matters of and in the Church, to the disposal of the Churchwardens, or
other Elders of the Vestrie: but might have served exceeding fitly (were it not
for the close at last) to bar them from employments in the Civil state; for
which use questionles^e it was here cited.

But howsoever you mistake, corrupt, and rather then the life would subborn the
Fathers, yet one may charitably presume that you are perfect in your
Catechism, and will not falsify any thing which you bring from thence. I do
most infinitely desire to find some truth in you; but I know not where. You
charge the Doctor for reporting, that by a Statute still in force, the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper is called the Sacrament of the Altar: though it
be most true. And then P. 95. 96.
you add, that presently after, this Act was revived by Queen Elizabeth (i. e.
the Act about the Sacrament of the Altar) there was at the same Session an
addition made to the Catechtsme (and that likewise confirmed by Act of
Parliament) whereby all Children of this Church, are punctually taught to name
our two Sacraments, Baptism, and the Lords Supper* Which said, you draw up
this conclusion: So as this judicious Divine was very ill Catechized, that
dares write it now, the Sacrament of the Altar. Bringing the Doctor to his
Catechism, a man would swear that you were excellent therein your self. But
such is your ill luck, that you can hit the ma^ke in nothing. For tell me of
your honest word, when you were Catechized your self, who taught you
punctually to name the two Sacraments, Baptism and the Lords Supper? Marry
say you, the Catechism in the Common Prayer book, in the addition made unto
it by Queen Elizabeth, and confirmed by Parliament. I will joyn^ issue on that
point, and lay my best preferment against yours, that you were never taught so
in that Catechism. I see it is good sometimes, to have a little Men learned
only in unlearned Liturgies. p. 85.
learning in unlearned Liturgies. You were past age, good man, to be taught
your Catechism, when that addition was put to it. Look into all the Common
Prayer books of Queen Elizabeth's time; and if you find me that addition to
the Catechism, in any of them, I will quit the cause. Not one word in the
Churches Catechism, in all her reign, that does reflect upon the Sacraments,
the number of them, or the names. That came in afterward upon occasion of the
Conference at Hampton Court: Conf. p. 83.
where you have it thus: Next to this Doctor Reynolds complained that the
Catechism in the Common Prayer book was too brief, for which one by Master
Nowell late Dean of Paul's was added, and that too long for young Novices to
learn by heart: requested therefore that one uniforme Catechism might be made,
which and none other should be generally received: and it was asked of him,
whether if to the short Catechism in the Communion book, something were added
for the doctrine of the Sacraments, it would not serve. You may perceive by
this, that till that time, Ann^ 1603, there was no such addition to the
Catechism, as you idly dream of: which all the Children of this Church (your
self especially for one) were taught when they were children, and required to
learn it. Nor was this Catechism so enlarged, confirmed by Parliament; you are
out in every thing: but only by King James his Proclamation, which you may
find with little labor, before your Common Prayer book, if at lest you have
one. You are so full of all false dealings with all kind of Authors, that
rather then be out of work you will corrupt your very Primmer. Non fuit
Autolyci t^^ piceata manus: Like him that being used to steal, to keep his
hand in use, would be stealing rushes.

And now we thought we should have done. For seeing after all this
entertainment, that you were putting your self into a posture, and began to
bow; it was supposed you would have said grace, and dismissed the company. But
see how much we were mistaken. The man is come no further then his po^tage, in
all this time. His stooping only was to eat, and not to reverence. Being to
speak of Altars, mentioned in the Apostles Canons, he call's them Larders,
Storehouses, and P^ntries; or if he speak of the Communion Table, placed
Altarwise, he call's it dresser. Now coming, though unnecessarily, (his
Argument considered) to speak of bowing at the name of JESUS, he cannot but
compare it to For he was serving in his first mess of pottage. p. 100.
a mess of pottage: and coming so opportunely in his way, he cannot choose
but fall upon it. One would conjecture by his falling to, that he did like it
very well: but if we note the manner of his eating, there is no such matter.
For mark we how he ^all's upon it Take them Donatus far me. p. 99.
Giving those proud Dames to Donatus, that practice all manner of Courtesies, or
Masks and Dances, but none by any means for Christ, at their approach to the
holy Table: he add's, that this come's in as pat as can be. How so? Marry say
you, the Doctor was serving in his first mess of Pottage, and the Bishop (as
the saying is) got into it, and has quite spoiled it by warning a young man
(that was complained of for being a little santasticall in that kind) to make
his reverence, humbly and devoutly. Does this come in so pat, think you? The
Vicar was no prond Dame, was he? Nor did the Alderman complain of him, for his
light behavior in bowing toward the holy Table, but in bowing at the name of
JESUS. Yet on you run, from bowing toward or before the Communion Table, to
bowing at the name of JESUS, as if both were one: both warranted or enjoined
rather by the same Canon and Injunction; though you had said before, that
bowing, P. 99.
though to honor him, and him only in his holy Sacrament, is not enjoined by
the Canon. But being fallen upon the dish, do you like the relish? No, You must
like no more of it, then the Bishop does. The Bishop he must have it done, to
procure devotion, not derision: and you will have us keep old Cer^^onies, so
that we taint them not P. 100.
with new fashions, especially ap^sh ones. Would you would tell us what those
apish fashions are, that we should avoid; or persuade him to tell us what we
are to do, to avoid derision of and from the scornful. All our behavior in
that kind, will be accounted apish, by such men as you; and being ex tripode
by you pronounced for apish, must needs procure d^rision from such men as they.
A lowly and accustomed reverence, to this blessed name, we have received, you
grant, from all Antiquity: but when we come to do that reverence, you dislike
it utterly. Two P. 101.
sorts of bowings you have met with in the Eastern Churches; the greater when
they bowed all the body, yet without bending of the knee, lowly and almost to
the Earth; the lesser when they bowed the head and shoulders only. But then
again you are not certain whether that any of these were used in the Western
Church, and by them delivered over unto us. So that you like nothing but P. 100.
to make a courtesy; and yet not that neither if it be not a lowly courtesy.
Now to see men and amongst men the Priests, make a lowly courtesy, Only by
bending of the knee, without the bowing of the whole body, or the head and
shoulders; must needs be taken for a new and an apish fashion, fit to procure
derision only and not devotion: and so you leave no reverence to be done at
all. Assuredly you mean so though you dare not say it. For having slubbered
over so great a point, in that slovenly fashion, you p. 101.
shut it up with this proportionable close; and so much for your preamble, that
is your Pottage. I see you mind your belly, and therefore we will step down
unto the Hatch, and send you up the second course of your Extravagancies: which
how well you have cooked, will be seen apparently, when we are come to
execute the Carvers Office.

CHAP. X.
The second service of Extravagancies, sent up and set before his guests by the
Minister of Lincoln.
The Metaphorical Altar; in the Fathers, good evidence for the proof of Real
Altars in the Church. Ignatius corrupted by Vedelius* My Lord of Chichesters
censure of Vedelius. The Minister misreports Saint Bernard, and makes ten
Altar^ out of four. A new original of the Table in the Christian Church, from
the Table of Shewbread; the Ministers fumbling in the same, deserted by those
Autors that he brings in for it. The Minister pleads strongly for sitting at
the holy Sacrament; and for that purpose falsifieth Baronius, misreports Saint
Austin, and wrongs Tertullian. The Benedictines sit not at the Sacrament on
Maundy Thursday. Of the Seiur de Pibrac. The Minister advocates for the Arians,
and will not have them be the Authors of sitting at the holy Sacrament; and for
that cause deals falsely with the Polish Synods which impute it to them. Three
Polish Synods ascribe the sitting at the Sacrament to the modern Arians. Cap.
10.
The ignorance of the Minister about accipere and reservare in Tertullian. What
the Stations were. Lame Giles. The Minister slights the appellation of the
second Service as did the Writer of the letter, and brings in several
arguments against that division. The Ministers ignorance in the intention of
the Rubri^ks. Of setting up a Consistory in the midst of service. The authority
of the Priest in repulsing unworthy persons from the Sacrament; defended
against the Ministers. He sets a quarrel between Cathedral and Parochial
Churches; and mistakes the difference between them. The Injunctions falsified.
Of being ashamed at the name of the Lords Table. The Minister ashamed at the
name of Altar. Of pleasing the people; and the Ministers extreme pursuit
thereof. The Minister falsely charge on the Doctor, a foolish distinction of
the Dyptychs. The conclusion.

NOw for your second course, it consists most of Lincolnshire provision, such
as your own home yields without further search, some sorts of fish, as Carpes,
and many a slipperie Eele, but foul abominable; foul forgeries, foul
mistakes, foul dealing of all kinds what ever. Nor can I choose but marvel,
that in such verietie, there should be neither knot nor good-wit, or any thing
that is rare and dainty: all ordinary foul, but yet foul enough. To take
them as they lie in order, (for I was never curious in my choice of diet) the
first that I encounter with, is a Quelque Chose, made of all Altars; a stately
and magnificent service, ten of them in a dish, no less. And this you usher in
with great noise and ceremony, assuring us, that there we have what ever of
that kind, the whole world can yield us. If any of us have a mind to offer any
spiritual sacrifices, of one sort or other; What if I find you severa^^
Altars f^r all these spiritual sac^^fices in the ancient (...), p. 110.
the ancient Fathers have provided you of several Altars for them all: so
many, that God never required more for these kind of sacrifices. Take heed you
fall not short of so large a promise, for you have raised our expectation to a
wondrous height. But such is your ill luck, that vaunting so extremely of your
great performances; you perform nothing worth the vaunting. For neither are
these, several Altars, which you have set forth; n^r have you set forth all
the Altars that are presented to you by the ancient Fathers: and lastly, were
they either all, or several, they conclude nothing to your ^urpose. Your
purpose is, to show unto your credulous Readers, that there is no material
Altar to be used in a Christian Church: and for a proof thereof, you ma^e a
muster of all those several Metaphors and Allegorie^, which you have met with
in old Writers, concerning Altars. This, did you weigh it ^s you ought,
crosses directly all your purpose; and at one blow casts down that building,
which you so labor to erect. All Metaphors and Allegories must relate to
somewhat, that is in being: and when a thing is once in being, several wits
may descant, and dilate upon it, as their fancy serves them. I hope you will
not think that there was no such thing, as the Garden of Eden; no such
particular Vestments for the Pries^s, or sacrifices for the people; because the
ancient Writers, some of them at lest, have drawn them into Allegories; or can
a^^ord you at first word, a Metaphorical Ephod, a Met^phoricall P^sch, or a
Metaphorical Paradise. You know what ^^imme devices may be found in Durand,
about the Church, the Quire, the Altar, the ornaments and utensils of earth,
the habit of the Priests, the Prelate; and whatsoever does pertain unto a
Church, to the very Bell-ropes. And yet you would be (...)
laug^t at by all strangers, more then you were, when you demanded how the
Altar stood in foreign Churches; should you affirm that in the Church of
Rome, whereof Durand was, ther^ neither was a Priest, nor Prelate, neither
Quires, Altars, Churches, or any ornaments or utensils to the same belonging.
Or to come nearer to our selves, there is a book enti^uled Catechismus ordinis
equitum Periscelidis, written long since by Belvaleti, the Popes Nuncio here,
and published in the year 1631. by Bosquierus: wherein the Author makes an
Allegory on the whole habit of the Order, the matter, color, fashion,
wearing, to the very girdle. And were not you, or he that should approve you in
it, (...) p. 81.
a wise piece indeed, if on the rea^ing of that book, you should give out,
that really and materially there is no such habit, worn by the Knights of that
most honorable Order, as vain men conceive: but that their habit is, as some
made the Saint, only an allegory, a symbol, or a metaphore. So that if all
you say were granted, and that your ten tropicall, metaphorical Altars, were
ten times doubled; that would make to the prejudice of that real and material
Altar, which has continued in the Church of Christ, since the Primitive times.
Nay, as before I said, those metaphors conclude most strongly for a real
Altar; as the conceits of Bel^^aleti, Durand, and some ancient Fathers, do for
the realtie of those several subjects, on which they did express their
fancies.

This said, we might put by this service, as not worth the tasting; made rather
to delight; the eye with various shows, then to feed the stomach: but we will
fall aboard however, were it for nothing but to show what Quelque chooses you
have set before us. Now the first Altar of your ten, p. 110.
is Ignatius his Altar, the Council of the Saints, and the Church of the
first-begotten. For this you send us to his Epistle ad Ephesios, where there
was never any such matter to be found, till your good friend Vedelius brought
the old Father under his correction, and made him speak what ever he was
pleased to have him. Ignatius, were he let alone, would have told another tale,
then what you make him tell between you. For there he tells you of those men,
that separate themselves from the communion of the faithful, and do not join
together with them (...), in N^^ consentit in voluntate sacri^iciorum, a^
Vedelius translates it.
a consent of sacrifice, and in the Church of the first-begotten, whose names
are written in the heavens; This by a sleight of hand, is finely altered by
Vedelius, and for (...), we must now read (...), in the Council of the
Saints, as you translate it. A pretty criticisme, but as too many of them are,
more nice, then wise. For which and other his corrections of, and annotations
on that Father, I rather choose to leave him to my Lord of Chichester, whom I
am sure you know to be well versed in that kind of learning; then take him
unto task my self. And he will tell you, if you ask him, Appar. primus number.
47.
Audacem illum and importunum Ignatii censorem, nec quicquam attulisse ad
paginas suas implendas, praeter inscitiam and incuriam, and impudentiam
singularem, dum ad suum Genevatismum ^ntiquitatem detorquet invitissimam, etc.
According to which Character you could not possibly have met a fitter
Copesmate; one every way more answerable to you, in all those excellent
qualities, which are there recited.

Of your next nine, four of them are the very same, only brought in in
several dressings, to beguile the Reader. p. 110. 111
The second, (...), which you translate (and be it so) the commanding part of
the reasonable soul, which is Origens Altar; your p. 111.
third, (...), (...) righteous soul, which is C^emens his Altar; the fifth,
(...), the sincerity of the mind, which is the Panegyrists Altar; the sixth,
Cor nostrum, or S. Austins Altar: these are but several expressions of the
same one thing. The reasonable soul, the righteous soul, the sincerity of
the soul, are but the several habitudes of the same one soul: And for the
heart, that also must be understood spiritually, and so become a soul in fine.
For if you understand it literally and materially, you overthrow your whole
design; in finding us a material Altar, for a spiritual sacrifice, against
the which you have so learnedly declared before. Now it is worth your marking,
that all these Authors (except Clemens) do frequently in other places of their
writings, inform us of the Altars in the Christian Church, material Altars
either of wood or stone; for the officiating of Gods public service: as we
have showed at large in our second Section. Nor are you other then a trifler to
produce them here, as if they knew no Altars in the Church for the mystical
sacrifice, but those which you have shown us from them for spiritual
sacrifices. The same may be affirmed of your seventh, the memory, which is
Philo's Altar; and of the tenth, that our faith p. 112.
S. Hieromes Altar. Philo, and Hierome both, acknowledged several, real, and
material Altars, in their several Churches: though in the places by you
cited, they solace and delight themselves in conceits and allegories. So that
of all your Altars we have left but three, the fourth, eight, and ninth; and
two of them will in conclusion prove but one. Of these the fourth is every
place, Hol^ Table. p. 111.
(a most excellent Altar) wherein, say you, we offer unto God the sweet
smelling fruits of our studies in divinity. And this you make Eusebius his
Altar. Now if one ask you what you mean by this every place, I know you
cannot choose but say, that you mean the Pulpit, if not the tables end in some
secret Conventicle: every place wherein you offer unto God the sweet smelling
fruits of your studies in Divinity. But you find no such matter (...)
in Eusebius, nothing that any way concerns your studies. For then, none but
such learned men as you, could make every place an Altar, for spiritual
sacrifices; as all men may, in the true meaning of your Author. Of offering up
your studies, and the sweet smelling fruits thereof (most fragrant fruits
indeed, if you well consider it) not one word says he. Your eighth, S.
Bernards Altar, is, as you say, the Son of God, become the Son of man.
Which howsoever it be true, as to the thing it self, and in that metaphorical
sense as the former were: yet have you no such Altar, in S. Bernard; your very
Margin says the contrary. Your Author says p 111. in m^rgine.
Altar Redemptor is humilis incarnatio: not that our Savior God and Man, is
become our Altar; but that the Incarnation was our Saviors Altar. Or had S.
Bernard said so, as he might have done, then had it been the same with Aquinas
his Altar, or the ninth of yours, which is the Son of God in heaven. I trust
you will not separate the Son of God become the Son of man, from the Son
of God now in heaven; as if our Savior had not took his body with him, to the
heavenly glories. Which if you do not, as you cannot (and I have so much faith
in you, as to think you will not) you might have either reported S. Bernard
rightly, or quite left him out. There Is none that does defend the material
Altar, or thinks the name of Altar may be given to the holy Table* but falls
down prostrate at this Altar: as being that one and only Altar which
sanctifies all our spiritual sacrifices, and divine oblations, and makes them
acceptable in the sight of God the Father. Yet this concludes no more, that
there should be no Altar in the Church, for the mystical sacrifice; because
our high Altar is in heaven, Altar nostrum est in coelis, as Li. 4 c. 34.
S. Irenaeus has it: then that you may conclude that no man has a natural
father, because we have one Father which is in heaven, our Pater noster qui est
in coelis, as the Scripture has it.

In the next place you set before us a pretty quillet: the holy Table p. 123.
in the Christian Church, not being exemplified, as you say, from the square
Altars, Exodus 27. but from the long Table of the Shewbread which stood in the
Temple, Exodus 25. This is good fish indeed, if it were well fried; but upon
better view, proves not worth the eating. You say the holy table in the
Christian Church was not exemplified from the square Altars in the Law: and yet
you tell us, p. 126. that by the Canons of their Church, that very form is
required amongst the Papists, and to them you leave it. You might do well,
before you make it proper to the Papists, and to them alone, to have considered
of the form of the ancient Altars; and told us what those Canons were, and of
what antiquity, that do so enjoyne it. You point us in your Margin, unto
Suarez, in tertiam partem: as good and punctual a direction to find out the
Canon, as if you had enjoined us to enquire for your House in Lincolnshire, and
never told us what is your name. Then for the Table of Shewbread, to which you
do refer the original of the holy Table, you flutter up and down, as one
that knows not what to trust to: as most an end they do not that propose new
fancies. For p. 125. you bring in the conceits of two Jewish Rabbis, tending
you say, unto your purpose. How fo? Ezekiel. 4. 22. (it should be 41. 22.) it is
thus written, And he said unto me, this is the Table before the Lord, meaning
without doubt the Altar of incense. You say exceeding right in that, the Table
spoken of by the Prophet, is the Altar of incense: but what has that to do
with the Table of Shewbread? This you confirm by that which follows. The
question then grows, how the Altar, is called a Table: 125.
and you reply unto it from those Rabbis, that at this day the Table
performs what the Altar was wont to do. Where first you blend together the
Table o^ the Shewbread, and the Altar of Incense, as if both one thing: and
next you make the Rabbis speak of the Christian Table, as if it did perform
what the Altar should, whereas they spoke it of their own. For why should you
believe that any of the Rabbis would conceive so honorably of the Christian
Tables, Ibi. p. 125.
that since the destruction of the Temple, they should become the place of
sacrifice and propitiation. Assuredly the Jews have no such conceit of the holy
Table* and it was done but like a Gentile to report so of them. Last of all,
where before you make the holy Table to be exemplified from the long-table of
the Shewbread, you shut up this vagarie with this handsome close, p. 126.
that the only utensil you relate unto (for the form and fashion of your
Table) is the long-square table of the Incense. Which as it plainly contradicts
what you said before, touching the Petigree of the holy Table, from the Table
of Shewbread, so it confutes the Scripture also: which never told you of a
Table, but an Altar of Incense; or if a Table, yet a square table certainly,
for foure-square shall it be, says the very Text, Exodus 30. 2. So excellent an
invention was your new original of the Christian Table; and so bravely
followed.

But then you say, you have some Authors for it: so you have for every thing,
till it is brought unto the trial. Remember what you are to prove, and then
show your evidence. The point in issue, is that the form and situation of the
holy Table, in the Christian Church, is not exemplified from the square.
Altars, but from the long Table of the Shewbread that stood in the Temple. If
you have any of the Fathers that speak home to this, we are gone in law; but
all your witnesses fall short. Isidore Peleusiota, whom you first bring in,
speaks neither of the form, nor situation of the Christian Table. But when a
doubt was moved by Benjamin a Jew, touching the new oblation in the Christian
Church, that it was done (...) Ep. 401.
in bread, and not in blood, as were the sacrifices of the law: he makes reply
unto the sa^e, that by the law, there were both bloody sacrifices performed
without, (...) in the open Court, and that within the Temple there was a tabe,
(...), not to be looked on by that people, whereon bread was placed. Then
adds, that the said Benjamin was one (...). Ibid.
of those, and that he did not know that truth, which had been hidden in the
law, but was now revealed. This is the total of his evidence. And this makes
nothing for the form and situation of the Table, which was the matter to be
proved; but only that, as he conceived, the Shewbread did prefigurate
som^what, which afterward was instituted in the Christian Church. And let me
tell you as a friend, that if you press this matter hard, as if our Christian
sacrifice did relate to that; you give the Papists more advantage for their
half Communion, then you will gain unto your self, about the form and
fashion of your holy Table. You say indeed p. 124.
it will be long, yer we will bring so clear and ancient an extruction for the
form and fashion of the Altars in Christianity; though you brought nothing
hence for either. When we see more, we shall know better what to answer. To
make a transcript of your allegations, from Irenaeus and S. Ambrose, Origin,
and Hierome, being no more unto the purpose, were only to wast time and paper.
All that they say, is nothing to the form and situation of the holy table, but
to the analogy and proportion, between the bread in the Lords Supper now, and
the Shewbread then: and yet you falsify your Authors also, to make that good.
You tell us out of Irenaeus, that omnes justi sacerdotalem habent ordinem; and
you say true, they are his words. But when you say, all that are justified by
Christ have a Priestly interest in this holy bread: though it be true you say,
had it been your own; yet you untruly father it upon Irenaeus, who in his
fourth book, cap. 20. whither you refer us, tell's us no such matter: The
like may be affirmed P. 125*
of Saint Hierome also, whom you have cited twice for the self-same pu^pose,
viz. In Epist. ad Tit. c. 1* and in Ezekiel. c. 44. though neither in his comment
on that whole Epistle, or in his exposition on Ezekiel. c. 44. or cap. 41. which
was most like to be the place; can we find any thing at all which reflects
that way. But what need further search be made in so clear a case; and such as
does relate so little to the point in hand? Especially since another of your
Au^hors, In Hebr. 9.
Cornelius a Lapide, from whom you borrowed your quotations in the margin, p.
126* out of Saint Hierom, in Malach. 1. Cyrill, Catech. mist. cat. 4. and
Dam^scen, de orthod. fid. i. 4. c. 14. takes these interpretations to be only
Allegories; as indeed they are: Allegorice mensa panum propositionis
significabat mensam corporis and sanguinis Christi: as Tropologice vero
significat opera misericordiae, in Hebr. 9.
in the Tropologicall sense, says he, it signifies the works of mercy. Take
for a farewell to the rest, that if you will derive the form and situation of
your holy Table, from the Table of Shewbread: Your table must not stand at all
within the Chancell, nor in the middle of the Church; but on the North side of
the Church, as you your self have placed it, out of Philo, p. 210. which
though it thwarts as well your own book, as the Bishops letter: Yet you P.
123. 124*
proclaim, you care not how the Altars stood either in the Jewish or Popish
Church; your Table being quite of another race. And take this with you too for
the close of all, that if your Table be descended of the race you mean; it is
more Jewish then the Altar: there being Altars doubtless before Moses Law, but
no Tables of Shewbread. Nor can the Altars be more Popish then your holy
table; there being Altars in the Church when there were no Papists.

I did before conjecture that you had invited us, unto a common, not an holy
Table; and I am now confirmed more in it, then before I was: so strongly do you
plead for sitting at it, and in excuse of them that allow that gesture. A
matter no way pertinent to your present Argument, but that you must fly out
sometimes, to please your followers: who but for such vagaries, would be little
edified. Now for the proof of this, that sitting at the holy Table is nor new,
nor strange; you tell us, Page 132*
that the (...) and the Lords supper were ^^ten for a certain time, at the same
table; and that, for ought appeare's in any Antiquity, in the same posture. At
the same Table, in the same posture; that comes home indeed: but neither you,
nor any one of those who have most endeavored it, have yet made it good. For
your part you refer your self unto Baronius, whom you thus report. Page 132.
in margin.
Vtraque coena jungebatur, which he clearly proves out of Chrysostom in 1.
Cor. Hom. 27. in the beginning thereof. So you, and were it so indeed, yet this
speak's nothing of the posture. But the truth is, you have most shamefully
abused Baronius, and the Father too you find not in Baroni^^, utraque coena
jungebatur, as if the (...) and the Lords Supper, were eaten at the same Table,
and that they made but one continued action only. Nay, you find the contrary
Annal. T. ^. Anno 57.
utraque simul mensa jungebatur, are your Authors words: and you have better
skill in Latin then the World besides, if you can pick me one and the same
table, out of mensa utraque, certainly, mensa utraque does imply two Tables:
and this you could not but have seen in that which follows, communis and
sacra, one common, and the other sacred. Take the whole words together, and you
find them thus. Quoniam utraque simul mensa jungebatur, communis and sacra;
quid in unaquaque prastare deberent admo^^^^. Here are two Tables then, not
one; those Tables of two several natures, and not the same; and therefore the
behavior of the people quid in unaquaque praestare debent, to be more reverent
at the one, then at the other. You have an admirable searching eye, that can
find here both the same Table, and same posture too; but a far nimbler hand,
that could so trimly turn two Tables, into one Supper. But this you say, is
clearly proved out of Saint Chrysostom. What, the same Table, and the same
posture? You are false in this too. Baronius does produce S. Chrysostom to an
use quite contrary. However Christ, says he, began first with his ordinary
supper, and then proceeded to the Sacrament: yet in the following times, they
began first with the holy Sacrament, and after went unto their Love Feasts. And
this is that for which he voucheth the Authority of that Reverend Father,
Peracta Synaxi, post sacramentorum communionem inibant convivium: very plain
and home. Had you dealt half as honestly with Baronius, as he with
Chrysostom, you had been blameless at this time: but then your friends, whom
you strive to please, had lost an excellent argument, for a sitting Sacrament.

From the Church primitive you fall upon the Church of Page 133.
Rome, which does not absolutely as you say, co^dem^ this ceremony of sitting;
for if it did* it would c^ll the Maundie of the Benedictines, who at the lest
once in the year, (that is on Maundie Thursday only) receive the Sacrament in
that posture. If this be all you have to say, touching the indulgence in this
case of the Church of Rome, o^ the general practice of the same; you have got
but little. Only you had a mind to let people see, that the Church of England
was more rigid and severe in this kind, then the Church of Rome. For if the
Church of Rome should connive at this, being a thing of so long continuance,
and done within the walls of a private Monastery; it cannot be drawn into
example, or made a precedent for others to expect the like. But if it chance to
prove, that it is not the Sacrament, but a resemblance only of the old (...)
which on that day is celebrated sitting, by these Benedictines; have you not
then deluded us, in a shameful manner? Bullinger thus relates the matter, De
orig. errorum circa coenam ^. 4.
that on that day, the Gospel of Saint John being read publicly by the Deacon,
in the mean time, ordine dispositis mensis convivae assident, the guests sit
down in order, at their several Tables. What then? Frangentes panem azymum,
and calicem invicem propinantes, etc. Breaking unleavened bread and drinking
unto one another, they keep on foot some tracts of the ancient supper. What
think you now? Is this a Sacrament or a common Supper; done in the Church, or
in the Refectory? I hope you will not say, that they had mensas dispositas,
several tables in the Church, and those ready furnished; or that they did
invicem propinare, drink to one another in the holy Sacrament. Quanta de spe,
how great a fortune are you fallen from; that thought to gain such mickle meed
for this good service? But yet you will not leave us so P. 133.
This custom, as you tell us, mounts hig^er then Saint Benedict, to S. Austins
time. This custom? what. Of sitting at the Sacrament upon Maundie Thursday? No
such matter verily. Saint Austine says no more then this, that Epistola 118.
some, (and those against the general custom) did think it lawful on that
day, to receive the Sacrament after other meats. Not that they did receive it
so, but that they thought it lawful to receive it so, ut ^ost alios cibos
offerri liceat corpus and sanguis Domini, as the Father has it, which makes (I
trust) as little for sitting at the Sacrament at that or any other time; as
that for which you falsified Baronius, has made for all times.

But you go higher yet, and tell us that it was the general practice of the
Gentiles, to worship sitting: that so it was enjoined the Page 134.
Romans by an express law of Numa Pompilius; and that it seems to be the
custom of the Greeks also, by an old Quatrain of the Seiur de Pibr^c. How old
I pray you was that Quatra^n? Not many thousands sure, nor many hundreds, no
nor many stories. The S^iur de Pibrac as I take it, Thuanus hist. sub. H. 3.
was Chancellor to King Henry the Third of France; and so his Quatrain could
not be very old, if you mark it well. And yet you thought it questionless to
be very ancient. You had not told us else P. 135.
that the Apostles of Christ were not to learn ceremonies out of the laws of
Numa, or the Quatrains of Pibrac. Most learnedly resolved. They might as well
have learnt divinity from the man of Lincolnshire, as ceremonies from the
Quatrains of the Seiur de Pibrac. You tell us further in your margin, P. 134.
how that Tertullian makes it a general posture for all Pagans: so he does
indeed. De Orat. c. 12.
Perinde faciunt nationes, as his own words are. But then you had done well to
have told us also, how highly he condemns it in them, and how irreverent he
conc^ived it, assidere sub aspect^, contraque aspectum ejus, to sit them down
under the no^es (as we use to say) of those very Gods Quem cum maxim
reverearis and venereris. ^ de ^rat. cap. 12.
whom they did worship and adore. This had been some fair dealing in you,
could it have stood with your design, of justifying the use of sitting in the
holy Sacrament. Nay more then so, you say of Cardinal Peron, that he brings a
passage out of Tertullian, to prove that some of the ancient Christians did
adore, sitting: and that this position of theirs, this sitting, Tertullian did
not blame. Not blame? Why man, Tertullian mentions it for nothing else, but to
reprehend it. Nor was it then a custom to adore sitting, as you say.
Tertullian never told you that; nor the Cardinal neither. Ibid.
But adsignata oratione, assidendi mos est quibusdam: some men as soon as they
had done their prayers, were presently upon their breech: as you would have
them now at the prayers themselves. Never did any wretched cause, meet a fi^t^r
Advocate. You would persuade us, that there is* P. 136.
little fear, that here, in England, the people will clap them d^wne upon
their breech, about our holy Table: so I hear you say. But by those many
libel^^us and seditious Pamphlets that have been scattered up and down, since
your book came out; we find the contrary. Perhaps the goodness of their
Advocate makes them more forwards in the cause. I hope you know your own
words, and in them I speak, telling you, P 132.
If you were a scholar, you would have been ashamed to write this Divi^itie.

For foreign Church^s next, you tax the Doctor, as if he did P. 135.
conclude the Ceremonies of so many neighboring Protestants to be unchristian
altogether. Where find you such a passage in him? All that the Doctor said is
this, Coal from the Altar, p. 36.
that it was brought into the Churches first, by ^oth the modern Arians, (who
stubbornly gainsaying the Divinity of our Lord and Savior, thought it no
robbery to be equal with him, and sit down with him at his Table:) and for
that cause most justly banished the reformed Church in Poland. And for the
proof of this, he says it was determined so in a general Synod, as being a
thing not used in the Christian Church, tantumque pr^pri^ infidelibus Ari^nis,
but proper to the Arians only. This goes extremely to your heart, so that you
cannot choose but wish P. 137.
that he had spared to abuse that grave Synod, to make them say peremptorily,
haec ceremonia Ecc^esiis Christianis non est usitata, especially as ^ee (...)
in into English, this ceremony is a thing not used in the Christian Church. Why
how would you translate it, were you put to do it. The most that you could do,
were to change the number; and render it, the Christian Churches, for the
Christian Church, which how it would ^dvantage you, I am yet to seek. But being
so translated, what have you to object against it; or to make good, that he
has any way abused so grave a Synod? Marry say you, the Synod says, (...)
ceremonia, licet cum (...) liber^, etc. this ceremony howsoever in its
owne^nature it be indiff^^^ent and free, as the rest of the Ceremonies etc.
Which you say, sweetens the (...) very much. And so it does indeed, sweetneth
it very much to them which have a liberty to use i^: but not to them who are
restrained to another gesture. Nor had you noted it, being so impertinent, but
that you would be thought a Champion for men's Christian liberty, as before I
told you. Next you object (...)
they do not say it is a thing not used in the Christian Church, (that being a
corruption of the Doctors) but that it is not used in the Christian and
Evangelicall Churches, nostri consensus, which agreed with them in the Articles
of Confession. If so, the Doctor was too blame, and shall cry peccavi. But it
is you that finger and corrupt the Synod. The Doctor took it as he found it.
Synod. (...).
H^^c ceremonia, (licet cum caeter is libera) Ecclesiis Christianis and
coetibus Evangelicis ^on est usitata; are the very words. If you can find
nostri consensus there, it must be of your own handwriting. There is no such
matter, I am sure, in the printed books. It Is true, that in the former words it
is so expressed, ne sessio sit in usu ad mensam Domini, in ullis ^ujus
consensus Ecclesiis, that sitting at the Lords Table be not used in any of the
Churches of their Confession. That Is national* as unto themselves. But then
the reason follows, which is universal. Haec enim ceremonia, etc. because
that ceremony was not used in any of the Christian Churches, or Evangelicall
assemblies. This is the place the Doctor pres^ed; and you can find no
consensus nostri there; I am sure of that: Nay, it had been ridiculous nonsense
(such as you use to speak sometimes) if it had been so. Now where you tell the
Doctor, P. ^37.
that he ^^ole this passage from the Altar of Damascus; and having (...) it did
co^rupt it ^ he must needs answer for himself, that it is neither so, nor so
Altar Damasc. P. 751. (...).
The Altar of Damascus does report the place, in terminis, as it is extant in
the Synod; and as the Doctor laid it down in his (...) Altar No^ did he ever
know (...), till you d^rected him unto it.

But ^o or not so, all is one in your opinion. P. 138.
For both the Altar and the Coal are quite mistaken, as you give out, in
thinking that the Synod did ever say, that this ceremony was brought in or
used, by the (...) Arians. Neither brought in, nor used? that were strange
indeed. What is it then that they intend? Only, say you, that it is Arianis
propria, a thing fitter for the Arians, who by their doctrine and ten^ts placed
themselves cheek by joule with the Son of God then for devout and humble.
Christians, compassed about with neighbors so fundamentally here^icall. P. 139.
And this you say, the Altar espied at last, to be the meaning of the Synod,
that sitting was proper to the Arians, not by usage, but secundum principia
doctrinae suae, by the principles of their doctrine only; and so conclude,
that contrary to all truth of story, the Doctor makes it first brought in by
the modern Arians. Had you looked forwards in the Synod* you had found it
otherwise. For there it follows, Synod. V^lodis^^^iens. in Harm. Confess.
that sitting at the holy Sacrament first crept into their Churches, potiss.
mum occasion and auspicio illorum, etc. especially by occasion and example of
those men, which miserably had fallen away and denied the Lord that bought
them. Nor was it so resolved* in this Synod only, Anno 1583. It was concluded
so before In Harmon. Confess. cap. 4.
in the Synod of Petricone, in the year 1578. that sitting at the Lords Table
was first taken up by them, who rashly (...) every thing in the Church, and
ignorantly imitating Christ's example, were fallen off to Arianisme* But I will
lay you down the words for your more assurance. Sessionis vero ad mensam
domini, etc. illi inter nos primi Authors extiterunt, qui omnia temere in
^cclesia immutantes, and sine scientia Christum quasi imitantes, nobis ad
Aria^ismum perfidi (...) facti sunt. That Is all that has relation to the point
in hand. The rest which is cut off with an etc. is a touch only on the by,
that the said sitting was repugnant to the use of all the P^aeter ritus in
omnibus per ^uropam Evangelicis eccles^is vulgo consuetos. ib.
Evangelicall Churches throughout Europe. What follows next upon this
declaration of the Synod? Quar^ hanc propria^ ipsis, etc. Wherefore to leave
this gesture as proper and peculiar unto them Vt Christum, ita and sa^ra ejus
irreve^en^er tr^ctan^^ bus, ibid.
who handle both our Savior and his Sacraments with the like irreverence; and
being in it self, uncomely, irreligious, and very scandalous withal unto
simple men. Nay, before that, Anno 1563. it was determined to this purpose also
in another Synod at Crac^vi^, that if perhaps any did use to sit at the Lords
Supper, ceremoniam eam Arianabapt^st is relinquant, they should desert it
utterly, Cap. 6. in ^^rm. ^o^fess.
as proper and peculiar to the Arian Anabaptists. This makes it clear as day,
that sitting at the Lords Table, was brought into the Churches first, by the
modern Arians. That which you interpose touching John A Lasco is not worth the
while. He P. 138.
was not settled in Poland, as your self affirm, until the year 1557. which
was but six years before the Synod at Cracovia, wherein this gesture was
condemned of Arianisme. Nor was he settled then indeed, if you consider the
Epistles unto Calvin, which your self has cited: things not succeeding there,
Vtentioni^s Calvino, Anno 1557. in Epl. Calvin.
says Vtentionius, to their hearts (...) furiose se opponit Satan propagationi
regni Christi* so furiously does the devil oppose the propagation of Christ's
kingdom. But settled or not settled, all is one for that. The Arians were here
started up before his coming: nor have I such a reverend opinion of John A
(...), but that some principles of his might tend that way also. And so I leave
you to consider, whether the Arians or the Puritans are most bound unto you,
for standing up so bravely to defend t^eir cause.

That which comes next to hand is (...), a fo^le mistake or two, about the
ancient practice of the Church, and Tertul^^^^ meaning. You say, P. 161.
that in Tertullians time, they did not (as we now do) eat the consecrated
bread upon the place, but accipere and reservare, re^erve it, and carry it home
with them. You make this general, that they did not as we do^ now* that is not
eat the consecrated bread upon the place, whereas indeed it was but in
particular cases: either in times of persecution, when they could not meet so
often as they would, for fear of troubles; or in the Stations, or days on
which it was not lawful to worship kneeling. In the first case, they did
accipere and reservare, receive it of the Priest at Church in several
portions, and then reserve it, that is, take it home, and eat it there, at
such times as they thought most fit for their ghostly comfort: and this they
did especially, that they might be sure to have it for their last viaticum, at
the approach of sudden unexpected dangers. This they did use to eat in secret,
before other meats, as is apparent by that passage Ad uxorem lib. 2.
in Tertullian, Nonne sciet maritus quid secret^ a^te omne^^ cibum gustes? But
this is no good proof I trust, that therefore in the Church, they did not ^ate
at all; because they did reserve some part to be eaten at home. That were to
overthrow the nature of the holy Supper, and make the Communion to become a
private eating. In the next case, being that of Station, which you with
confidence enough, have ma^e to be a fast or P. 160.
public meeting, (as if there were no public meetings but on Fasts, nor Fasts
but on a public meeting:) it was ordered thus. There were some certain times,
in which it was not lawful to worship Di^ dominico de geni^ul (...) adorare
n^fas e^^e duc^mus: eadem immunitate, a P^s^ha ad Pentecosten g^uidemus.
Tertul. d^ Cor. M^lit.
kneeling, as vis. every Sunday in the year, and the whole time from Pasch to
Pentecost. Now in those days of Station, or standing days, at which the
people might not kneel, in the receiving and partaking the holy Sacrament;
they rather chose to forbear the Communion, then to take it Quod sta^^o
solvenda sit accepto (...) dom. Id (...) orat.
standing. Which being well known unto Tertullian, he wishes them to come,
though they might not kneel, and take it standing at the Altar, [ Si and ad
aram Dei steteris:] and to reserve and take it home, and eat at their own
houses, kneeling, according unto their desires. By doing which, accepto corpore
Domini and reservato, by their receiving of it in the Church, and carrying of
it home to eat it there, they should Vtrunque salvum est, and participatio
^acri^^cit, and executio officii
salve all fores: participate of the sacrifice, as they ought to do, and yet
retain the old tradition, in those days of Station. This if you understood
before, you did ill to hide it; if not, you are a little wiser then before you
were.

The next that comes before us is a covered dish, and being uncovered, proves a
Gelly, P. 172*
a Claudius Gellius in your language, a lame Giles in ours. Who this lame Giles
should be, you cannot guess you say, but indeed you will not. Lame Giles his
haltings is the title of a book set out by Master Prynns, against Giles
Widows of Oxford: wherein the Doctor first encountered with the name of
Dresser, applied to the Communion Table standing Altar-wise, and of the which
he thought him to have been the Author, till he observed it in the Letter to
the Vicar of Grantham, being the antienter of the two. But this is but a copy
of your countenance. You have not so small interest in Master Prynne, as not to
be partaker of his learned labors; though you seem loath, both here and
elsewhere, that any thing of his, should be either pinned or prinned on you, or
any friend of yours whoever.

This dish being thus uncovered, and set by, let us now fall more roundly to
your second service. In the beginning of your book, you tell us that the
Doctor p. 3.
faines, that the writer of the letter does slight, but fails, for he does
cite and approve the appellation of second service. The Bishops In the Co^l^
from the Altar, p. 71.
letter has it thus. The Minister appointed to read the Communion (which you
out of the book of Fast, in 10. of the King, are pleased to call second
service.) And toward the latter end, Ibid. p. 77.
either in the first or second service, as you distinguish. Is this to cite and
to approve the appellation: Yes, that it is say you, and more. For the good
writer of the letter, finding the P. 173. 174
Vicar used it (as it seems) in his discourse, and that the neighbors boggled
at it, excuses it as done in imitation of that grave and pious book. That
grave and pious book, good Lord, how wise you are upon a sudden, and yet how
suddenly do you fall again to your former follies* That book, as grave and
pious as it is, was never intended (as you say in that which follows to give
Rubrickes to the public Liturgy; and therefore howsoever the Fast-booke calls
it (so grave and pious though it were) let never any Country Vicar in Lincoln
Diocese presume to call it so hereafter. Just so you dealt before with his
Majesty's Chapel. Having extolled it to the heavens, and set forth all things
in the same, p. 34.
as wisely and religiously done: yet you are resolute, that Parish Churches,
are not, nor ought not to be bound, to imitate the same in those outward
circumstances. A grievous sin it was no doubt, for the poor Vicar to apply
the distribution of the Service, in the book of Fast, unto the book of
Common Prayer: and it was very timely to be done, to excuse him in it, as if he
did relate only to the Book of Fast. Else who can tell, but that the Alderman
of Grantham and the neighbors there, might have conceived he used it p. 174.
in imitation of the two Masses used of old; that viz. of the Catechumeni, and
that of the Faithful: neither of which, the Alderman (a prudent and discreet,
but no learned man) nor any of his neighbors had ever heard of. Great reason
to excuse the Vicar from so foul a crime; which God knows how it might have
scandalized poor men, that never had took notice of it, till it was glanced
at in the letter.

The Vicar being thus excused, you turn your style upon the Doctor, for
justifying the distribution of the Common Prayers* into a first and second
service. You said even now, that you approved the appellation; yet here you
give us several Arguments for reproof thereof. For first, say you, p. 174.
the Order of Morning Prayer, is not (as the poor man supposes) the whole
Morning Prayer, but a little fragment thereof called the Order of Matins, in
the old Primers of King Henry the eight, King Edward the sixth, and the Primer
of Sarum, what no where else? Do you not find it in your Common Prayer book,
to be called Mattins? Look in the Calendar for proper Lessons, and tell me,
when you see me next, how you find it there? Matens and Evensong, ^aith it
there; Morning and Evening Prayer, says the Book elsewhere* which makes, I
trow, the order of Morning prayer to be the same now, with the order of
Mattins, and that in the intention of the Common Prayer Book, not in the
Ancient Primers only. Not the whole Morning prayer say you, but you speak
without book: your book instructing you to find the full course and tenor of
Morning and Evening Prayer throughout the year. Yet you object, that if we
should make one service of the Mattins, we must make another of the Collects,
and a third of the Leta^^e: and the Communion at the soonest will be the
fourth, but by no means the second service. Why Sir, I hope the Collects are
distributed, some for the first, and others for the second service: there is no
particular service to be made of them. And for the Letanie, comparing the
Rubric after Quicunque vult, with the Queens Injunctions, that seems to be a
preparatorie to the second service. For it is said Cap. 18.
there, That immediately before the time of Communion of the Sacrament, the
Priests with other of the Quire shall kneel in the midst of the Church, and
sing or say plainly the Letany, etc. And you may mark it in some Churches,
that whiles the Letanie is saying, there is a Bell tolled, to give notice unto
the people, that the Communion service, is now coming on. Secondly, you p. 174*
object, that by this reckoning, we shall have an entire service without a
prayer for King or Bishop; which you are bold to say, and may say it boldly, is
in no Liturgy this day, either Greek or Latin. Stay here a while. Have you
not found it otherwise in your observations? What say you then to these? O Lord
save the King, and then, Endue thy Ministers with righteousness. Are these no
prayers for King or Bishop? Those which come after in the Letanie, and that in
the prayer for the Church militant; ^re but the same with these, though more
large and full. Thirdly, say you, p. 175.
the Act of Parliament does call it service, and not services; therefore (for
so you must conclude) there is no distribution of it to be made into first and
second. So in like sort say I, the Act of Parliament does call it An Act for
un^for^itie of Common prayer and Service, etc. 10. El. c. 2.
Common Prayer, and not Common Prayers: therefore (upon the self same reason)
there is no distribution to be made of prayers for plenty, and prayers for
peace, prayers for the King, and prayers for the Clergy, prayers for the ^ick,
and prayers for the sound, and sic de caeteris. Lastly, you make p. 175.
the true and legal division of our Service, to be into the Common-praier, and
the Communion: the one to be officiated in the Reading Pew, the other at the
holy table, disposed co^veniently for that purpose. If so, then whe^there is no
Communion, which is you know administered but at certain times, then is there no
division of the service, and consequently no part thereof to be officiated at
the h^ly table; which is expressly contr^ry to the R^brick after the Communion.
You are like I see to prove a very able Minister, you are so perfect in your
Portuis.

But now take heed, for you have drawn your stre^gths together, to give the
poor Doctor a greater blow, accusing him of p. 176.
conjuring up such doctrine, as might turn not a few Parsons and Vicars out of
their Benefices in short time. How so? Why by encouraging them, in a Book
printed with License, (I see you are displeased at the license still) to set up
a consistory in the midst of divine Service, and to examine in the same the
worthiness of all Communicants. The Doctor finds it in his Rubric, that so
many as intend to be partakers of the holy Communion, shall signify their
names unto the Curate over night* or else in the morning before the beginning
of Morning Prayer, or immediately after. From whence, and from the following
Rubricks, the poor Doctor gathered, Coal. p. 2^
that in the intention of the Church there was to be some reasonable time,
between Morning Prayer and the Communion. For otherwise what liesure could the
Curate have to call before him notorious evill^livers, or such as have done
wrong to their neighbors, and to advertise them not to presume to come unto
the Lords Table: or what spare time can you afford him, between the Reading
Pew and the holy Table, to reconcile those men between whom he perceives
malice and hatred to reign, etc. as he is willed and warranted to do, by his
Common Prayer Book. Call you this setting up a Consistory in the midst of
Service? You might have seen, but that you will not, that here is nothing to
be done in the midst of service: but in the middle space of time, between both
services; when as the people are departed, and the Curate gone unto his house.
This was the ancient practice of the Church of England. The Morning prayer, or
Matins to begin between six and seven; the second service, or Communion
service, not till nine or ten: which distribution still continues in the
Cathedral Church of Winchester, in that of Southwell, and perhaps some others.
So that the names of those which purposed to communicate, being signified unto
the Curate, if not before, yet presently after Morning Prayer: he had
sufficient time to consider of them, whether he found amongst them any
notorious evil livers, any wrong-doers to their neighbors, or such as were in
malice toward one another, and to proceed accordingly, as he saw occasion. All
this you wipe out instantly with a dash of wine, Ovid. epist. Penelop.
Exig^o Pergama tota mero, as the Poet ha^h it: as if the notice given unto the
Curate was for nothing else, p. 176.
but that provision might be made of Br^od and Wine and other necessaries for
that holy mystery. And were it so, yet could this very ill be done, after the
beginning of Morning Prayer (as Immediately after the beginn^ng of Morning
Prayer. p. 177.
you needs will have it.) For would you have the people come to signify their
na^^ies unto the Curate, when he was reading the Confession, or perhaps the
Paternoster, or the Psalms, or Lessons; and then the Curate to break off, as
often as any one came to him, to bid the Churchwardens take notice of it, that
Bread and Wine may be provided. Besides, you must suppose a Tavern in every
Village, and a Bak^r two: else you will hardly be provided of Bread and Wine
for the Communicants, in so short a space, as is between the beginning of
Morning Prayer, and the holy Sacrament. Nay, not at all provided in such cases,
but by Post and Posthorses, and much inconvenience; the Market Towns being far
off; the ways deep and mirie: which what a clutter would make especially upon
the Sabbath, as you call it; I leave you to judge. Assuredly what ever your
judgment be, you are a Gentleman of the prettiest and the finest fancies, that
I ever met with.

Thus deal you with the other Rubricks, and wrest them quite besides their
meaning; especially the third, which concerns the repulsing of those which
are obstinately malicious, and will by no means be induced to a reconcilement.
You tell us only of the second, which requires the Curat P. 177.
to admonish all open and notorious evil livers, so to amend their lives that
the congregation may thereby be satisfied: that it were most ridiculously
prescribed to be done in such a place, or in so short a time; and therefore
that it is intended to be performed by the Curate upon private conference with
the parties. Good Sir, who ever doub^^d it, or thought the Church in time of
s^^vice, to be a fitting place for personal reprehensions? So that you might
have spared to tell us, your P. 181.
(...) laudable practice, in not keeping back, but only admonishing p^blicke
off^nders upon the evidence of ^act, and that no^ publicly neither, nor by
name: unless there had been somewhat singular in it, which no man ever had
observed but your own dear self; and that to be proposed as an I^stituti^
sacerdotum, for all men else to regulate their actions by. But for the third,
you say that it directs the Curate how P. 177.
to deal with those, whom he perceives by intimation given, and direction
returned from his Ordinary, to continue in unrepented hatred and malice: whom
having the direction of his Ordinary, he may keep from receiving the Sacrament,
and that in an instant without chopping or dividing the divine service. And
then, that otherwise it were an unreasonable and illegal thing, that a
Christian man laying open claim to his right in the Sacrament, should be
debarred from it by the mere discretion of a C^rate. Po^r^ Priests! I lament
your case; who are not only by this Minister of Lincoln Diocese, debarred from
moving and removing the holy Table: but absolutely turned out of all authority,
from bindring scandal^^s and unworthy persons to approach unto it. That Is by
this Minister conferred on his P. 178.
Deacon also: because forsooth it did belong unto the Deacon* to cry, (...),
look to the door^s there, to the doors* and to take care, the Cate^^^meni,
and those which were not to communicate, should avoid the Church. O saclum
insipidum and infacetum! Such a dull, drowsy disputant, did never undertake so
great an Argument. As if the Deacon did these things of his own authority; not
as a Minister unto the Priest, and to save him a labor. That which comes
Su^rez. Domini^us a Soto and others p. 179. 180.
after from the Jesuits, and other Schoolmen will concern us little who are
not to be governed by their dictates and decisions, but by the rules and Canons
of the Church of England. Now for the Rubric, that says thus. The Curate
shall not suffer those to be partakers of the Lords Table, betwixt whom he
perceives malice and hatred to reign, until he know them to be reconciled:
and that of two persons which are at variance, that one of them be content to
forgive the other, etc. the Minister in that case ought to admit the penitent
person to the holy Communion, and not him that is obstinate. So for the Canons,
they run thus. Can. 26.
No Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiving of the holy Communion any
of his Cure which be openly known to live in sin notorious without
repentance; nor any who have maliciously contended with their neighbors,
until they shall be reconciled; nor any Churchwardens or Sidemen who wilfully
incur the horrible crime of perjurie, in not presenting as they ought: nor
Canon. 27
unto any that refuse to kneel, or to be present at public prayers; or that be
open depravers of the Book of Common Prayer; or any thing contained in the
Book of Articles, or the Book of ordering Priests and Bishops, or any that have
depraved his Majesty's Sovereigne authority in causes Ecclesiastical etc.
Here is no running to the Ordinary By intimation given, and direction received
from his Ordinary, etc. p. 177.
to receive direction what to do, but an authority le^t unto the Priest without
further trouble; and more then so No Minister shall in any wise, etc. as in the
Canon.
a charge imposed upon him not to do the contrary. Only it is provided, Canon
27
that every Minister so repelling any, shall on complaint, or being required by
the Ordinary, signify the cause unto him, and therein obey his Order and
Direction. Therein, upon the post-fact, after the repelling, and on return of
the Certificate; and not before as you would have it: for proof whereof, with an
unparalleld kind of impudence, you cite those very Canons against themselv^s*
But so extreme a spleen you have against the Clergy, that upon all and no
occasions, you labor throughout your Pamphlet, to lay them open and expose
them to the contempt and scorn of the common people.

Now as you labor to expose the Clergy to contempt and scorn; so you
endeavor, secretly and upon the by, to make the Chapels and Cathedrals guilty
of some foul transgress^on, the better to expose them unto cens^re also. The
Coal. p. 27.
Doctor charged thus on the Epistolar, whosoever he was, in his Coal from the
Altar; and you confess the action in your holy Table. For reckoning it p. 2.
amongst the Doctors faynings, that the writer of the Letter would cunningly
draw the Chapels and Cathedrals to a kind of Praemunire, about their
Communion-tabl^s: you answer that he fayles, for the writer confesses he does
allow and practice it. Allow and practice it? What it? It is a relative, and
points to that which went before; viz. a cunning purpose and intent to draw
Chapels and Cathedrals into a kind of Praemunire; which you acknowledge in
plain terms, the writer does allow and practice. Lactant. ^. 2. c. 1.
Adeo veritas ab invit^^ etia^ pectoribus ^rumpit, said Lactantius truly. It
seems your book was not so tho^^wly perused, as the License intimates: for if
it had, this passage had not bin so left to bewray the business. Yet you fall
foul upon the Doctor, and reckon it as one of his extravagancies, P. 182.
that he should charge the writer for making such a difference between the
Chapels and Cathedrals ^n the one side, and the Parochials on the other, (in
the point of Altars;) the Laws and Canons (in that point) looking
indifferently on all. Which said, you tell him of some special differences
(which he knew before) made by the Canons themselves, between Cathedrals and
Parochial Churches. But Sir, the question is not of those things wherein the
Canons make a difference, as in Copes, monthly Communions and such like, which
there you instance in: but in those things wherein they make no difference, as
in placing of the table. And yet you are besides the ^ushion too, in stating of
those very differences, which your self proposes. One difference that you
make between them, is in the place of reading the Letany; which is officiated,
as it ought, would be found no difference. You know that in Cathedral
Churches, the Letanie is said or sung in the middle of the Quire, where Morning
and Evening Prayer are appointed to be said: and you may know, that in all
Parish Churches by the Queens Injunctions, (which you have given us for a
Canon) the Priests with others of the Qu^re, shall kneel in the midst of the
Church, (where Morning and Evening Prayer are said) and sing or say plainly and
distinctly the Letanie set forth in English. Another difference that you make*
is that Cathedrals are excepted from delivering to the Queens Commissioners,
the Ornaments and Jewels of their Churches: the Articles expressly naming the
Church-w^rdens of every Parish only. Not to take notice of the s^quele, which
is weak and wrested, we will reply unto the Fact, and tell you plainly, there
was no such matter, as delivering to the Queens Commissioners, the ornaments or
jewels of the Parish Churches; which you would gladly thrust upon us. All that
you find In^unction 47.
in the Injunction, (to which you send us) is that the Churchwardens of every
Parish, shall deliver unto the Visiters, the Inventories of Vestments, copes,
and other ornaments, Plate, Books, especially Grayls, etc. apperteining to
their Church. You see that not the Ornaments themselves, but the Inventories of
them, were to be delivered to the Queens Commissioners. No^ had you so
expressly falsified the Queens Injunction, but that you find the Piety of the
times inclining to ado^^e the Churches: and you would fain cast somewhat in the
way to hinder the good work which is now in hand; by telling those which love
to ^eare it, that in the reformation made by Queen Elizabeth, all Ornaments
were took away, as tending unto Popery and Superstition.

The lowest dish of all, as lest worth the looking after, is an extravagant
wild f^wle, which either has no name, or is ashamed of it. The Writer of the
Letter had said Coal p. 74. 75.
unto the Vicar, that he did hope he had more learning, then to conceive the
Lords Table to be a new name, and so to be ashamed of the name. This, says the
Doctor, Coal p. 43.
might have well been spared, there being none so void of pi^tle and
understanding as to be scandalized at the name of the Lords Table; as are some
men, it seems, at the name of Altar, saving that somewhat must be said, to
persuade the people that questionless such men there were, the better to
indeere the matter. Now you reply, to the last clause of being scandalized and
ashamed at the name of the Lords table; that Holy Table. p. 192.
surely of that kind there are too many in the world, some calling it a
profane Table, as the Rhemists; others an ^yster-bo^rd, and an oyster table;
the Vicar, if his neighbors charged him rightly, a Tresle: and you know who a
Dresser, why was that left out? This said, you fall upon the Author of the
Latin determinat^on, only to make the m^n suspected of b^ing ashamed of the
name of Table: and then upon the Church p. 194.
of Rome, as being (you say) the true Adversary, that the letter aimed at, for
leaving out of her Canon (in the Reformation of the Missall by Pope Pius
Quintus) this very name of the holy Table, against the practice of all
Antiquity, and precedent Liturgies. But Sir consider in cold blood, that that
determination came not out, till five or six years after the Bishops letter.
Your self has given it for a rule, p. 82.
that as all Prophets are not Ordinaries, s^ all Ordinaries are not Prophets:
and therefore cert^inly the writer of the letter being no Prophet, as you say,
could not at all reflect on this determination* Then for the Church of Rome,
that comes in as idly: just as the Germ^ns were brought in, to beat down all
the Altars there; because the Country people here were scandalized therewith in
their Parish Churches. Whether the Church of Rome be ashamed or not, at the
name of Table, is not material to this purpose: the letter being writ in
English, and scattered up and down amongst English men; and therefore had you
brought us some of them, that had conceived the Lords Table to be a new name,
or were ashamed thereof, you had then done well. Which since you have not done,
but wandered up and down in a maze, or circle* (...)

I ^ee you will be served in state: your second course being took away, there
is a banquet yet remaining; some sweet meats from Placentia, and a piece of
(...)* There is a (...) in the maine discourse, and an (...) in the ordering of
it both of them intermixed so artificially, that it is hard to be discerned,
whether of the two be most predominant. But here, you give it clear for the
^t p^pulo (...) yea and ut magno in populo too, to make sure the matter* not
only justifying your own poor endeavors in that kind, but falling foul
upon the Doctor, because he joins not with you in the undertaking. p. 201.
You tell us, that the first Prot^s^a^^s of the Reformation had a better
opinion of the common people: and that the first inducements of King Edward and
his most able (...), to (...) the Altars and place holy Tables, (...) up
superstition in the minds of these, (by him, the Doctor so much despised)
commont people. What an opinion the first Protestants had of the common people,
is not now the question, but whether in their labors to reform the Church,
and root up superstition, they had relation to the humor of the people, or the
glory of God. If you could show us, that King Edward and his most able
Council* (as in your odious manner of comparisons you are pleased to style
them) aimed at this only, in that act of theirs, populo ut placerent, to
please the people: you had said somewhat to the purpose. But you had laid
withal a greater scandal on that King, and his so able Council, then all
your wit and learning would be able to take off again. If not, why do you
bring King Edward and his able Council upon the stage, as if they could say
somewhat in your defense, when they had no such meaning as you put upon them*
The people then, as it appears in the story, were so averse from that Act of
the King and Counsel, that they were feign to set out V. Acts and mon. part ^.
p. 700.
certain considerations to prepare them to it, and make them ready for the
change, which they meant to make. Call you this pleasing of the people? It was
indeed pretended, that the change would be for the peoples good, and to root up
superstition out of their minds: but nothing less intended then the peoples
pleasure. An honest care that all things may be done for the common good, for
training up the people in their obedience to Gods Commandments, the Kings just
government, and the Churches orders; no man likes better then the Doctor. If
this will please the people, take me with you, and you shall never want a
second to assist you in it. And this is that placenti^ which the Apostle has
commended to us by his own I Cor* 10* 33.
practice, first; I* please, says he* all men in all things, no^ ^ee king
(...) profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved: and next by way
of precept Romans 15. 2.
or direction, Let every (...) please his neighbor for his good to
edi^^cetion. If you observe these rules, and look not after your own profit,
applause, or popular dependencies* but the edification of the people only,
that they may be (...)* you have Saint Paul, both for your warrant and e^ample.
The Doctor had not faulted thus either in you, or in the write (...) the
letter, had he found it in you. But on the other side, ther^ is (...)
popularity which some men affect (...), an art to feed the peoples humor, that
they themselves may be borne up and hoisted by the p^oples breath: and this
appears every where, as well throughout that letter, as your whole discourse.
This was the disease of Mark* 15. ^ 5.
Pilate in the holy Gospel. Of whom it is recorded there, that to please the
people, he released Barraba^ unto them, and condemned Jesus: and this the itch
of Dio^rephes L p. 3.
in S. John's Epistles, who loving to have the pre-eminence amongst ignorant
people, disparaged the Apostles, and pra^ed openly against them with malicious
words. In these designs to court the favor of the people, by casting scandals
on the Church, and the public government; and by that means to be admired and
honored for a Zealoue Minister, and a stout Patriot for the public; for a
Plutarch. i^ Demosth.
(...), as the Historian, or a Isocrat. ad N^coc.
(...) and (...) in the Orators language, the Doctor leaves you to your self.
You may draw after you, if you please, Horat.
A^b^bajaru^^ collegi^, and h^c genus o^ne, the love and favor of the
multitude for a day or two: but you will find it a weak staff to rely upon,
though it may serve to puff you up, and make you think your self to be some
great body. The Doctor has no such designs, and therefore n^^ds not take
those courses: knowing especially that Saint Paul has said, that if I yet
pleased men, I should not be the servant of Christ.

But Hor. de art Poet.
(...) You that did never any thing in ^ein, except a little ^or vain-glo^y;
have better studied those deep points, then the Apostl^ did or could^ and have
found out a way so to serve the Lord, that you may please the people too. And
therefore Mait^ ^anto Pa^t^ simple S^int Paul, (I hope you can remember your own
sweet words) that could not so well time it, as to se^ve t^o masters. How ^arre
you are the servant of Christ, I have not to do with; look you to that but how
far you have labored to please the people, that I can tell you p^esently
without more ado. What made you undertake this Argument, being* for ought you
would be known of, no party in it: was it to show your zeal and service unto
Christ, or to please the people? What makes you speak so slightly of the
Institution of Episcopal power: and having spoke so sl^ghtly of it, what makes
you speak so doubtfully of the present government, as if all things were
carried with an higher hand then they ought to be, rather with canon shot then
with Canon law: was it to s^rve Christ, (...) who had beforehand, as you say,
(...) down de facto: was not this done to please the people* Such pleasers of
the peoples humors, we have too many in this kingdom: and you, I take it,
l^ke Mutatu^ Curio in the Poet, are Momentu^que fu^^ mutatus Curio re^um* Luca.
I. 1.
(...). And yet you might have done all this, wothout exposing the poor Doctor
to the common (...) if so many p. 201.
provisionarie Saints of God, so many nerves and sinews of the State, so many
arms of the King to defend his friends, and offend his enemies; were by hi^
called in scorn, and for ^ant of ^it, po^re people. Good Sir, a word or two in
private. Think you that there are no provisionarie Saints, no ^erves and
sinews of the State, none of the Kings Ar^es in the Town of Grantham? and yet
Coal. p. 76
the Bishop (...) his Vicar, that it were fitter that the Altar should stand
table-wise, then that the Table be erected Altar-wise, to trouble the p^ore
Town of Grantham. The Doctor took his phrase from thence, and only turned
those words upon him (if you mark it well) which he had found there to his hand.
Nor are you very free from so great a fault, in calling those provisionarie
Saints, sinews, and nerves and Arms, the The rude people replying ^e should
set up no Dressers of ^words etc. p. 6.
rude people of Grantham. Or if you needs will make him mean it of the people
generally, tell me, I pray you what is the difference (for I know it not)
between the people and the sub^ects. If none, as surely none there is, how
durst your mothers son in such a sta^e as this, in such a Church as this, and
under such a Prince so beloved as this, call the said Saints, Arms, Nerves,
and Sinews, for want of wit, or something else, Poor subject that are (...)
poor Subjects. It Is true, you make them fair amends, by giving them ^om^
secret notice, of their authority and power in the civil government:
concluding that extravagancie with the p. 202.
(...) man, Iraser pop^lo R^man^ (...) But Sir, I hope you do not make your
p^^re Sub^^cts in England, any way equal to the people in the state of Rome,
who were so formidable (...) that time to all Kings and Princes, Justin. hist.
li. 29.
ut (...) aliquen^ juxta ^orum (...) of the state, was in the people at that
(...), when this speech was used* and so your application of it in this place
and time, must needs be either very foolish, or extremely factious.

(...) Here you report his words aright, which you do not often; but then most
sh^mefully mis-report his meaning. The Doctor does not there lay down a
definition of the Diptychs, as you falsely charge him; but only does expound
the word, as it related to the case which was then in hand. You may remember,
that the Bishop had sent the Vicar unto Bish^p Jewel, to learn how long
Communion Tables had stood in the middle of the Church* and Bishop Jewel tells
him of a p^ssage in the fifth Council of Constantinople, where it was said,
that tempore Diptychorum cucurrit ^mnis cum magno silentio circumcirca Altar.
i. e. says he, When the Lesson or Chapt^r (...) a reading, the people with
silence drew together (...) about the Altar. Now when the Doctor comes to scan
this passage, not taking any notice of this mistake in Bishop Jewel, he
concludes it thus. Coal. p. 55
So that for all is said in the fifth Council of (...), the Altar might and
did stand at the end of the (...), although the people came together about it,
to hear the Dip^ychs* i. e. the (...) of those Prelates* and other persons of
(...) note, who had departed in the ^aith. (...) to be his definition of the
Diptychs; a very ^oolish one, you say* and fool^sh it had been indeed, had it
been laid down there for a definition. (...) did you m^^ke it as you should,
you would h^ve (...) that it was never meant for a d^finition of the Diptych^
generally; but only for an expos^tion of the word, as in that place (...) if
you look into the Act. 5. (...) 1753.
(...) (...) hear the Diptychs; and then, (...), etc. that the recital being
made of the four holy Oecumenicall Synods, as also of the Archbishops of
blessed memory, ^uphemius, (...), and Leo, the people with a loud voice made
this acclamation, (...), Gl^rice ^e to thee O Lord. This is the truth of the
relation in that Council. And I would feign learn of you, being so great ^
Clerk, how you can fault the Doctor for his exposition of the word (...), in
that place and ^ime: when there was only read ((...)) the commemoration of
those Prelates, Leo, Euphemius, and Macedonius, and other persons of chief
note, those which had had their interest in the said four Councels, which were
all departed in the faith. You were near driven to seek a concluding
quarrel, when you pitched on this. Only you were resolved to hold out as you
had begun: and as you en^red on the business, with a false story of the
Vicar; so to conclude the same, with a false clamor on the Doctor. But Sir,
let me advise you, when you put forth next, to show more candor in your
writings, and less shifting wit. Otherwise, let the Dip^ychs* have as many
leaves as any of your Authors old or new have mentioned to you: your name will
never be recorded, but on the backside of the book; in case you do not find
a room in the The last was enumeration of some notori us and (...) people,
and^. p 236.
last column of the four, which you have given us from Pelargus. And so I
shut up this debate with that Patheticall expression wherewith Octavius did
conclude against Ceci^ius. Quid ingrati sumu^? quid nobis invidem^s, s^ veritas
d^vinitatis aetate nostri temporis maturuit? Fruamur b^no nostro, and recti
sententiam temperemus: co^ibeatur superstitio, impiet (...) expiet^^, (...)
Rel^gio ser^^tur. Why are we so ungrateful, why do we envy one another, if the
true worship of the Lord, be grown more perfect in our times, then it was
before? Let us enjoy our own felicity, and qui^tly maintain that truth which
we are possessed of* let superstition be restrained, impiety exile^, and true
Religion kept inviolable. This if we do endeavor in our several places, we
shall be counted faithful Stewar^s in our Masters house; and happy is the
servans, whom his L^ra when he comm^th sha^ find so doing. Amen.

FINIS.
Errata.
SEct. 1. p. 5. l. 16. for ratione, r. rationale. p. 44. l. ^ for etc. r. and
ib. l. 24. de. But, p. 54. ^. 14. for take notice r. take no notice, p. 56. for
1542. r. 1 552. p. 73. l. 3. dele and, p. 74. l. 18. for (...), r. (...), p.
85. l. 29. r. (...). p* ^8. l. 7. dele though* p. 99. l. 5. for his, r. the, p.
100. l. 3. dele and of the 82 Canon, p. 103 l. 1. for pass, r. passed.

Section 2. p. 7. l. 31. for an r. and ^. p. 10. l. 2. for your, r. the, ib. l.
30, dele and p. 16. l 25. for the r. this, p. 40. l. 10. for (...) r. (...) p.
46. l. 1. for find not, r not find, p. 54. l. 32. for ne^re r. we ^re p. 66.
l. 23 for this r. thep. 86. for which r. of which p. 88. l. 15. r. discourser.
p. 90 l. 23. for the Altar, r. an Altar p. 93. l. 27. for Altar-wise, r* where
the Altar stood. p 106. l. ^0. for in the Altar, r. the Altar, p. 110. l. 8.
for cu^, r. (...).

Sect. 3. p. 5. 6 for (...), r. (...). p. 7 l. 26. dele that. p. 8. l. 1. dele
in, p. 24. l. 16* r. Treasurers, ib. l. 22. dele O. p. 28. l. 14. for and r.
but. p. 37. l. ^5. for to, r. nothing to. p. 40. l. 1. dele that. p. 46. l. 28.
make a full point at too. p. 49. l. 22, for stories, r. scores. ib. l. 50. k.
the 3, r. Chancellor to the Duke of Anjou, brother of King H^nr^ 3. etc. p.
53. l. 26. for Petricone, r Petricove. p. 54. l. 8. for to, r. we ibid. l. 28.
for V^entionius, r. Vtenhovious. 56, r. Prynne, p. 62. l. 16. for two, ^. too
p. 6 5. l. 19. for thus r. this.


