A Curtain Lecture.

When Wives, preach it is not in the Husbands, power
To have their Lectures end within an hour:
If He with patience stay till she have donn,
She Will not conclude till (...)


A CURTAIN LECTURE: As it is read By a Country Farmers wife to her Good man.
By a Country Gentlewoman or Lady to her Esquire or Knight. By a Soldiers wife
to her Captain or Lieutenant. By a Citizens or Tradesmans wife to her husband.
By a Court Lady to her Lord.
Concluding with an imitable Lecture read by a Queen to her Sovereign Lord
and King.

LONDON, Printed by ROBERT YOUNG for John Aston, 1637.

To the generous Reader, but especially to Bachelours and Virgins.
THis Age affording more Poets than Patrons (for nine Muses may travel long
ere they can find one Mecoenas) made me at a stand to whom I might commend the
dedication of this small Tractate, especially bearing this Title. To any Matron
I durst not, though never so modest; lest her conscience might allege unto her
she had been guilty of reading the like Lectures. To a Married man I feared to
do it, lest having been often terrified with his Curtain clamours, I might
rather add to his affliction, than insinuate into his affection. Therefore to
you, O single Batchelours, and singular Virgins, I recommend both the patronage
and perusal of these papers; and the rather, because in you it can neither
breed distrust, nor beget distaste; the Maids not coming yet to read, nor
the Young men to be Auditors. But howsoever I proclaim this work free from
all offense, either to the single, or the double. Marriage is honorable, and
therefore I say unto thee, Marry: fear nothing, Audaces fortuna juvat: for it
may be suspected, if there were fewer Bachelours there would be more honest
wives; therefore I say again, Marry at all adventure. If thou have children,
think them thine own, though they be not: thou art sure to have a wife of
thine own, though the issue be another man's. Be valiant, fear not words, they
are but wind, and you live at land, and not at sea: with which admonishment,
and encouragement withal, I bid you generously farewell.

T. H.

The Contents of the book comprised in these following Chapters.
CHAP. I. RAre things in women. Nature teaches them modesty. Of those that
inveigh against their sex. Many illustrious women remembered as presidents for
others to imitate. Fol. 1 CHAP. II. Of Virginity, and the excellency thereof.
The punishment of the incestuous Vestalls. How chastity was honored amongst
the ancient Spartans. How far Virgins may extend their words, writing, or
gestures. 24 CHAP. III. Encouragement to young Virgins and Damosells to behave
themselves well in their single estate, that they may become eminent Wives and
Matrons, by the example of others drawn from div^rs selected histories. 48
CHAP. IV. Of election or choice before marri^age. The conveniences and
inconveniences belonging unto marriage disputed, and compared with the honor
and dignity thereof. 72 CHAP. V. How Parents ought to dispose of their
Daughters The miseries of enforced contracts. The manner of marriage amongst the
Romans, the ancient Britans, the Gauls, the Germans, etc. 96 CHAP. VI. How
marriage is solemnized am^ngst the Russians, the Gauls, the Assyrians, the
Greeks, the Namasanes, the Scots, etc. The honor of marriage, and of twelve
impediments that may hinder it. 119. CHAP. VII. What manner of Lectures wives in
the Country read to their husbands. The several dispositions of wives, and
humors of husbands, illustrated by diverse selected histories. The morosity of
the marriage bed. 114 CHAP. VIII. The love that ought to be betwixt man and
wife. A reason given why women speak more and much louder than men. Of a simple
married woman. Diverse other histories of pleasant passages in the Country. 170
CHAP. IX. How Curtain Lectures are read in the City, and how severally read by
sundry Tradesmens wives, with variety of delightful histories to that
purpose. 192 CHAP. X. Pleasant discourse betwixt a Noble man and a Merchant.
Lectures read by Country Gentlewomen and Ladies to their Esquire^ and Knights.
By the Soldiers wife to her Captain or Lieutenant. And of Court Ladies to
their Lords. 218 CHAP. XI. Twelve things that have bin the Authors of much
mischief. Of the famous and notorious scold Xantippe, the wife of Socrates.
And of a Curtain Lecture read by a Queen to her husband, worthy all good and
virtuous women's imitation. 241
FINIS.
A CURTAIN LECTURE.
CHAP. I.
Rare things in women. Nature teaches them modesty. Of those that inveigh
against their sex. Many illustrious women remembered as presidents for others
to imitate.

IT was the opinion of Pythagoras that a serpent is engendered from the marrow
in the back bone of a man deceased, and cast into the fields without burial:
upon which it is observed, that as the fall and death of man came by the
serpent, so the life of the serpent comes by the death of man. And since the
first backsliding of Adam there has been such an antipathy betwixt the seed
of the woman and the serpent, that if the naked sole of her foot shall tread
upon his head, though never so lightly, yet the weight thereof is more
ponderous and fatal unto him, than if he were beaten with mallets, or a rock
or mountain should precipitate it self upon him; for with her bare touch he
instantly expireth. But if he shall but bite the heel of a man (for at that
still is his aim) the poison disperseth it self through all the parts of his
body, from which proceeds speedy and inevitable death.

A second thing worthy remarke is, to consider how provident nature has been
to teach women bashfulnesse and modesty in their lives, by concealing their
immodest parts after their deaths: for it is familiar amongst us, that if a man
be drowned, his gallis no sooner burst, but he rises with his face upward: but
if a woman perish in the water, she swims with her face downward: of which some
give this reason, Omne leve fertur sursum, etc. As every light thing naturally
ascends up into the air, and that which is weighty stoopeth it self down to
the earth; so a man being broad and heavy in the shoulders, and but thin and
light in the breasts, the more ponderous parts sink, and those less heavy
appear above the waters: when on the contrary, a woman being narrow and spare
shouldred, but more fleshie and tumerous in the breast, by the weight thereof
they smother and obscure her modest cheeks in the water, as if even in death
she apprehended that the rest were unseemly to be exposed unto the air.

But in this my progress intended to the praise of their much honored sex, I
encountered with many difficulties and interposures able to deter me from my
purpose; for in turning over the leaves of some both modern and foreign
writers, I have met with so many satyricall invectives aimed directly against
it, and some of them so pathetically bitter, that I am half persuaded they had
quite forgot themselves to have been borne of mothers. Mantuan in one of his
Eclogues writes thus: Foemineum servile genus, etc. which in my thoughts, in
the generality is so adverse to all charity, and refractory to common
experience, that I am loath to make it vulgar, or teach it to speak our
English language. Plautus in Milite says, What thing can be worse or more
audacious than a woman? And in Bacchid. Nothing is more tempting or contagious
to the life of a young man, than the opportunity of night, the operation of
wine, and the blandishments of a woman. Ovid in his first book of Elegies,
though not in the same words, yet includes the same sense: and these, with many
other, he reckons, not as accidents appertaining to some, but adherents
belonging to all; as borne with them in their infancy, increasing with them in
their growth, and inseparable from them till their last dissolution: others for
diverse irregularities task them in particular. Ovid tells us there is no heed
or regard to be taken of their tears, as commanding them at their will, and
exposing them at their pleasure. Neve puellarum lacrymi^ moveare caveto, etc.
With women's tears be not thou moved at all,
For as they please they keep or let them fall.
And in another place: What cannot Art? They to deceive poor men
Have learnt by practice how to weep, and when.


Elsewhere he inveigheth against their fantastical habits, paintings, borrowed
or bought hair, etc. Some call them unfaithful, light, inconstant, as
Catullus: others more moveable than the winds, as Calphurnius: some hold their
society merely unnecessary, as that an house or family is much better and
more quiet without them. Plautus says, Mulier recte olet cum nil olet, a woman
is then at the best when she is not at all. Again, a question being asked
whether it were better to marry with a maid or a widow? Answer is returned,
Malum quod minimum est, id minimum est malum. He that can avoid their
fellowship, let him shun it; let him beware the day before, that he repent him
not the day after. Of their frowardness and perverseness Terence admonishes
us, saying most truly and essentially, I am acquainted with the wits and
dispositions of women; they will not when thou would, and when thou would
not, then they will. Of their wrangling and litigiousnesse Iuvenal thus
speaks: Nulla fere causa est in quam non foemina litem, etc.
There is no cause in Court, nor act in State,
From which a woman cannot ground debate.
And to that purpose he introduces one Manilia, a bold-fac't Roman Matron,
who being full of cont^oversie, and through her wrangling having many suits in
agitation, blushed not in open Court to be her own Advocate, and plead her
own causes in public assemblies. They are further challenged to effacinate
the hearts and spirits of the most valiant, to tame even the Giant tam^rs;
neither their manly courage nor invincible puissance being ^ble to resist their
whorish seducements: for so says Seneca in Hercule furente.

Many more to this purpose I could produce in priorem partem, but I am afraid
lest these few may (to some) appear too many. I^ therefore follows that these
discouragements past over, I come now to emboldening and animation; which I
shall better illustrate by pr^sident and example. For, as Epicuru^ says, more
faith is to be given to example than precept. And Seneca in his Epistles says*
long is the journey that is taken by precept, but short and speedy that which
is proposed by example. Omphulus in his book De imitatione thus discourses:

The greatest commendation both of ingenuous arts and civil actions is
comprised within the limits of imitation: the study of which, either in
managing public or private affairs, begets in us both an alacrity and
magnitude. For by calling to remembrance the famous and notable acts of
illustrious persons, and conforming our selves unto all such things as were in
them worthy both of observation and imitation, it inflames us with a noble
desire, and an exurgent ambition, by their president and examp^e to aspire unto
that celsitude of honor and renown* to which they arrived before us. This
counsel I therefore purpose to follow: and, beginning with those created in
the beginning, d^aw a president of good women, even to these our later ages.

Adam and Evah were our first parents; and he who gave names to all the
creatures of the earth, called her Hevah, which implies, the mother of mankind;
from whom are descended even those degenerates that so maliciously calumnizethe
sex: just like the young Ass colts, who having sucked their fills, kick their
dams; for so it was said of Aristotle for spurning at his master Plato, from
whom he had sucked and drawn all his rudiments of Philosophy.

But as there was an Evah by whom sin came into the world, to the utter
subversion of the soul of man; so likewise there was a Mar^e, the pure,
blessed, and immaculate Virgin, through whom was repaired and restored what in
the other was fo^feited and lost. To fetch our imitable women as far as from
the time of the first Patriarks: Abraham had a Sarah, and Isaac a Rebecca. Come
to the Judges: Lapidoth had a Debora, who was a Prophetess, and a deliverer of
I^rael. We read that Ioachim had a Susanna, and that churlish Nabal had a
liberal minded Abigail; and of Manasses widow Judith, who taking upon her a
masculine spirit, Virago-like cut off the head of Holophernes.

Come to the national Kings: Ulysses had a constant Penelope in Greece, and
King Priam was the husband of a fertile Hecuba in Asia. Amongst the Romans
Julius Caesar, the first perpetual D^ctatour, had an indulgent Calphurnia; and
Augustus his Successor a Matron-like Livia. In the time of the Consuls,
Collatine might boast of an un^imitable Lucrece; and the first Africanus of a
Tertia Aemilia, for her virtues scarce to be paralleled. Strabo tells us of an
Arte^isia, Q^eene of Caria, the illustrious wife of King Mausolus; and Livy,
Frontinus, and others, of an excellent Chiomara, the wife of Origiant^s Regulus.

Come to the ancient and grave Philosophers: Plato had his Astionissa, and
Aristotle his Hermia; the famous Physician Nicostratus, his Antecyra;
Periander, one of the seven Sages of Greece (as Pythenetus Lib. de Aegina
relates) was enamoured on the virtuous Melissa; and the grave Socrates (as
Xenophon makes mention of him) was devoted to the love of Theodota; and the
famous Marcus Cicero to his Terentia, etc.

If we examine the ancient Poets, not one of them but had a Mistress whom to
celebrate. Amongst the Romans, Tibullus had his Delia, Lucan his Argentaria,
Horace his Lycinia, Terence his Leucadia, Propertius his Hostia, Cornelius
Gallus his Lycoris, and so of the rest.

Amongst the I^alians, Dantes had his Beatrix, Petrarch his Aureta, etc. And
amongst the Spanish Poets, Crespi Valladaura, Sezephia Centella, Guid^
Cavalcante, Almudavar, Bonavida, Lopez del Vigo, with infinite others, all
eminent Poets: and not one of them, whose pen was not employed in the laborious
encomiasticke of some excellent Lady or other.

The like I may say of the Germans, as Johannes Gulielmus Rosbachius, Matthias
Baderus, Lambertu^ Ludolphus, Frenzekius, Franciscus Modius, Bebel^lius, etc.
Amongst the French, Marrot, and others. And of our English, I will only, at
this time, memorize two; famous Mr. Edmund Spencer, magnified in his Gloriana;
and the most renowned Sr. Philip Sidney, never to be forgotten in his Pamela
and Philoclea.

Nay, none of these Satyrists against women, but with easy examination, I
could bring their own works to witness against themselves; but more needful
occurrents take me off from them: I will therefore leave them to their
contradictions, with that of Terentius, in the Prologue to his first Comedy
called Andraea: -- ut quiescant porro moneo, and desinant
Maledicere, malefacta ne noscant sua.
I warn them their ill speeches to forbear,
Lest of their own ill deeds they further hear.
For it is the fashion of many to pry, and seek to have a deep inspection to
the actions and behaviors of others, whilst they are merely careless and
negligent in managing of their own manners and deportment: which Horace
ingeniously observes, and with which I conclude this Chapter: -- Egomet mi
ignosco Maevius inquit,
Stultus and improbus hic amor est, dignusque notari.
Maevius does say, My self on my self dote;
But foolish is this love, and worthy note.
When purblind thou, thine own cheeks can not see,
Why do thou look so fixed on him or me?
For now thine eyes so nimble sighted are,
The Eagle or the Serpent to out-stare.


CHAP. II.
Of virgintie, and the excellency thereof. The punishment of the incestuous
Vestalls. How chastity was honored amongst the ancient Spartans. How far
virgins may extend their words, writings, or gestures.

BEfore I come to dissect, or take upon me to anatomize the conditions o^
^wives, it lies in my road^ way to speak something of virgins; for all women
were first maids before they came to be married. One says of women in
general, that they are wonders in nature, if they would not wrong nature. And
another, that they be admirable Angels, if they would not be drawn with
Angels to become Devils. And of virgins thus: If they be fair, they are to
be won with praises: and if coy, with prayers: if they be proud, with gifts:
if covetous, with promises. And as it is natural in them to despise what is
offered, so it is death to them to be denied what they demand. Some compare
their hearts to the Cotton tree, whose fruit in the bud is as hard as a bullet
of iron, but being ripe, it brings forth nothing but soft wool. But give me
leave a little to deviate, and leave them for a page or two, to speak
something of the excellency of virginity it self.

Pope Gregory has these words; Quanquam laudationem virginitatis non suscepi,
expressionem tamen, etc. Though I have not undertook to give virginity the
due praise, yet I will afford it some expression* and first show you in what
country she was bred, and by what parent begot. If that be our country where
our dwelling is, then is Heaven the mansion of chastity. It has here a
pilgrimage, there a permanence. For what is virginal chastity, but an
integrity void of all contagion? And whom can we call the father thereof, but
the immaculate Son of God, whose flesh saw no corruption, and whose Divinity
was not sensible of putrefaction? How great then is the honor of virginity,
when our blessed Savior, a virgin, came of a virgin? A virgin the Mother, a
virgin the Son, begot of his Father before all worlds, borne of his Mother in
the world; the first proceeding from his eternal goodness, that the second
might be conducible to our everlasting glory. So likewise the holy Mother
Church, his Spouse, is immaculate in her conception, and yet fruitful in her
issue, a Virgin in her chastity, a Mother in her children: being a virgin she
generateth us, not by the aid of the flesh* but by the assistance of the
Spirit; not with the throws and pains of the womb, but by the joys of
Angels: she gives us suck, not with the milk of the breast, but the doctrine
of the Apostles. A virgin is the daughter of Sion, a virgin is the new
Jerusalem, into which no flesh can enter that is common or unclean.

Note but how far the name and virtue of virginity ex^endeth: for though
amongst those that be married, the title and honor se^meth to be lost, yet
ought we to know that every chaste soul, which abstaineth from things
unlawful and forbidden, keeps it still. For the Church, which consists of
young and old, male and female, married and unmarried, every member thereof is
honored with that sacred title, Virgin.

For many causes (says Johannes Episcopus) did the Savior of the world choose
to be borne of a wife espoused to an husband: first, to take away all
aspersions that might be alleged against her by the Jews, who urging the
strength of the Law, would have stoned her, being the punishment imposed upon
an a^dulteresse: next, to prevent all occasions from immodest virgins, lest
they should listen unto any false suspicious rumors, by which our blessed
Savior might be injured or defamed: that in going and returning from Egypt,
she might have the company and comfort of her husband Joseph, not a protector
only, but a witness of her continued virginity; as also to beguile the
Devil, the open adversary of all mankind, who by reason of her marriage,
might be in some hesitation and doubt whether she were a virgin, and therefore
grow diffident whether our blessed Savior were the Son of God, or no.

Pope Leo, Parturiente Maria, natus est nobis Dei filius, etc. Mary being
delivered, or bringing forth, to us and for us was borne the Son of God;
borne of an untoucht woman, that his humane birth might assure us that he was
perfect man, and her immaculate virginity confirm to us, that he was perfect
God; of whom Maxinus Episcopus to this purpose testates.

Though when he was borne, earthly swathings contained him, yet that he was
not of earth, heavenly signs witnessed of him. Whilst he lay in the cradle, he
shined in the clouds; he cried as an infant amidst the Jews, he reigned as an
Emperor amongst the Gentiles: whilst he sucked amongst the Bethlemites, he
was a worshipped^ and adored by the Chaldeans; when he was visited by
Shepherds, he was honored by Kings; when he was obscure in the stable, he was
visible amidst the stars. He was poor in habit amongst the Jews, he
appeared in glory amidst the Gentiles.

Therefore (says a learned Father) let all virgins rejoice, for Mary the
blessed virgin has brought forth; let all widows be glad, for Anna the widow
acknowledged Christ in his infancy; let all wives exult, for when Mary came to
visit Elizabeth, the wife of Zacharias, the babe sprang in her womb; let all
children give praise, for Jesus himself has vouchsafed to become a child; let
all old men give thanks unto the Lord, for old Simeon did not depart the world,
till his bodily eyes had seen his spiritual salvation: and this shall suffice
for a sheet-discourse, concerning the honor and virtue of (never too much to
be praised) virginity.

The Romans so honored chastity, that such of the Vestall virgins, as were
known to violate their strict vows of virginity, were called incestuous
(which word comes of Caestus, a virginal girdle, never untyed but on the night
succeeding the day of marriage): and being convicted of the fact, their
judgment was to be buried alive. They were Votar^sses, sacred to the Goddess
Vesta, which implies as much as Earth; for Vesta and Earth are all one: as Ovid
Fastor. lib. 6. with great elegancie delivers it in these words: -- Ne viva
defodietur Humo:
Sic incesta perit; quia quam violavit, in illa
Conditur: and tellus Vestaque Numen idem est.
No Vestall Priest, to break her vow be said,
Lest she (yet living) in her tomb be laid:
The injured Earth, th'Incestuous must devour,
Because the Earth and Vesta are one power.
Moreover, their persons were had in such reverence, that the people gave them
almost divine adorations, and the Senators and Princes at meeting gave them
way.

Amongst the Laws that Lycurgus made, one was, that no virgin, of what estate
or condition soever, should have any dowry allotted her to her marriage: and
being demanded the reason thereof, he made answer; lest those that be rich
should be desired for their wealth, or those that want be despised for their
poverty: so that by marriage, the Maid and not her means, beauty and virtue
would be acquired solely. He also appointed at what years either sex should
marry, which was at a mature age* that from able bodies might be propagated
the stronger issue. Neither would he suffer them to bed together the marriage
night, unless by stealth, but to keep the Bridegroom and the Bride (if it
were possible) many nights asunder, by conference and company: and being asked
the cause thereof, he made answer, Because they should still prevent satietie,
keep their bodies strong and in health* which would preserve their love fresh
and new, prevent distaste, and continue indulgence.

Unguents and tinctures he banished the City, imposing mulcts and fines on all
those who were found to use them: and in his days, such was the rare modesty
both of their virgins and matrons, as that adultery was so little practiced,
that the name thereof was not known amongst them. For Plutarch in Lacon.
Apotheg. reports, that a stranger asking one Geradata, a matron of the old
Spartane race, what punishment their Laws inflicted upon adulterers? She made
answer, Lycurgus had made none, for there was no such monster to be found
amongst them. But he replying: but say any such should be, how then? Why then
(says she) he must be fined to give a Bull with so long and large a neck,
that shall stretch over the mount Taygetus, and drink of the river Eurota.
Which hearing, he said, that was a thing impossible. As impossible a thing
(said she)* it is in Sparta to find an adulterer or adulteress.

Now whether it be lawful or comely for a Vestall, or professed virgin, or any
other, in her single and uncontracted estate, to be pleasant in looks, free
in language, wanton in carriage, to poetize, or the like, (howsoever she be of
modest and chaste condition) may be any just taxation of her continence, it is
a question disputable. Seneca in his controversies, speaks of a Vestall
virgin, who but for writing this verse, Felices nuptae, moriar nisi nubere
dulce est. was summoned into open Court, and pleaded against in these or the
like words: Felices nuptae,.i. happy are those which be married. These be the
words of one that longs for marriage, which the Vestalls ought not to do. And
Moriar*.i. may I die but: in which she prefers humor before honor, and
lewdness before life. Nubere dulce est sweet it is to marry: which implies
she is either raptured with the thought o^ what she has already proved, or
extasi'd with the conceit of that she has no^ yet tri^d: neither of which
pollutions ought to be (...) one of her profession. Sha^ the magistrates submit
the maces? the Tribunes the types of renown? Sha^ the Consuls and Preto^s
Dictators and Flamins, giv^ way to her in the Forum? Shall any one of her
contagious humors be held capable of such canonical honor? The Vestall
Priests protest seldom, or (if at all) by the Goddess Vesta: but Let me die:
Does not this show that Vesta's living fires are now quite extinct and dead in
her? Let me die but: In these words proclaims she not that she preferres the
spotted bed of the married before the un^efiled alt^r of the Goddess? whom I
invoke to be as rigorous in punishing, as she has been rebellious in
provoking her. Beseemes it a Recluse to become so rude? or a Votaresse to show
her self so full of vanity? What, a Virgin to versifie? Shall that hand*
only reserved to offer (...) the Temple, now be officious in penning nothing
bu^trifles? Or if she have a mind to write in praise o^ marriage, why makes
she not chaste Lucrece her Theme, and her imitable death her Argument? O thou
worthy of all sever^ punishment, that holde^^ any thing dearer to thee than
thine own sacred Priesthood! But to marrie^ thou say it is pleasant, it is
sweet. How expressly uttered, how intimately concealed! as impudently
proclaimed, as incontinently apprehended. Being one that undoubtedly having
done the act, now most undecently seems to delight in the ill. Nay such a one
as may be truly called Incesta, who though she never did the deed, yet in her
heart has desired it.

This was (I must confess) enforced to the full: but in stead of playing the
Advocate, and showing what answer she might make for her self, I will break
off with this gentle admonition: If one facetious line, wri^ (perhaps) rather
to show her wit than any wantonness, and that any charitable censurer might
rathe^ impute it to fancy tha^ folly, might be so traduc^ and far stretched,
as no^ only to blemish the fame, but take away the life of so respected and
reverent a person as a Vestall; how charie ought all Virgins to be? how
careful and cautelous in all their deport^ments? to be wary in the^ words, and
weighty in their writings, that their countenances bewray no lightness, their
eyes no looseness: that their carriages be not complementall, but courteous:
their gestures not gross, but gracious: their language fashionable, not
frivolous: And to the name of Virgin still remember to add that best becoming
attribute and character, Virtue. Observing these and the like, there is no
doubt but as in your single estate you live like excellent maids, so the time
will come when you shall become eminent Matrons.

CHAP. III.
Encouragements to young Virgins and Damosells to behave themselves well in
their single estate, that they may become eminent Wives and Matrons, by the
example of others, drawn^ from diverse selected Histories.

TO encourage all maids how to behave themselves, that they may be the better
married (for as yet they are not come to the rudiments of reading a Curtain
Lecture, for that only belongs to wives; the very name whereof will instruct
them soon enough (if not too soon) in the practice:) I hold it not
impertinent to the present tractate in hand, to show you an history or two (and
those not common) how some Virgins, but of mean condition and quality, have,
by their virtues merely, and generous behavior, attained to great preferment
and honor: for variety of History, intermixed with discourse of times, makes
the Argument less tedious to the Reader. Thus therefore it happened, Pulgotius
the Historian being my Author, who remembers me of one Galdrata Bertha, the
daughter of a private Florentine, but of extraordinary beauty and virtue.

It so happened, that the Emperor Otho, the fourth of that name, upon some
urgent occasion coming to the great City of Florence, he was entertained with
all the sumptuous and triumphall shows which could be then provided, as best
suiting with a State Imperial. He being one day abroad to take the air, a
great confluence of people gathered about him, of all degrees, to behold his
person, whom till then they had never seen, and to bestow on him for his
welcome into the City, the loud acclamation of Ave Caesar. Amongst all the
other Virgins and Damsels there assembled, he cast his eye upon this Galdrata
Bertha, and on the sudden was much taken with her beauty; in so much that, not
able to mother his affection (for he had taken a most especial notice of her)
after he had retired himself unto the Dukes Palace, where he was at that time
bounteously feasted, he began openly at the table to speak of this Damsels
beauty, giving her a character of prioritie before all that he had before time
seen.

Her father, whose name was Bellincionus, there attending at the table, finding
by the Emperors description that there was no other likelihood but that it was
his daughter of whom he gave such an extraordinary approbation, because he
reflected upon her stature, feature and habit, sends for her privately to
Court, and commands her by the duty of a child, all delays set apart, to make
there her present and personal appearance. To which the innocent Damsel
(ignorant, and no way suspicious of any such treason intended against her
chastity, especially from a father) assented, and came. The banquet being
ended, and the table withdrawn, the father (worse than the Roman Cabbus or
Phuillus, branded with eternal infamy, who though honored with the style of
Equites Romani, either for gain or flattery were guilty of their wives
prostitution) he (I say) whispered the Emperor in the ear, and told him that
he would presently bring him into the company and acquaintance of her whose
beauty and feature he had so liberally extolled. The Prince gladly embracing
the motion, he retired him into a private and remote chamber, where she was
attending her fathers command; the Emperor at the first enterview
acknowledging her to be the same: when the most unworthy Parent of so
accomplished a child, thus said unto him: Lo here the Virgin by you so much
praised ready to prostrate her self to your Majesty, whom you may with all
freeness kiss and embrace at your pleasure. At which words Otho, almost
extasi'd, came toward her to take her by the hand, and proceeded further to
have touched her lips: but she astonished and abasht at her fathers unnatural
levitie and besenesse, denied the Emperor her right hand, and with her left
modestly put him back, uttering these words: With pardon to your high and
sacred Majesty (Royal Sir) neither of these your fair proffers it lies in me
to grant you, having made betwixt my Savior and my self such an irrevocable
vow and contract, that I will never lend that hand or these lips to any, of
what state or condition soever, whom I shall not undoubtedly know to be my Lord
and Husband: (at which the father frowned) and she further proceeded and said
(falling low upon her knees, and many tears dropping from her eyes) He only
insidiates my life that se^kes to take away the least part of mine honor; and
there she paused. Which in the apprehension of the Emperor was uttered with
such a bashful shame, and well-becomming modesty, that in the Prince it took
a very sudden and solid impression; who comparing the villainy of the father
with the virtues of the daughter, and setting the base Pandarisme of the one
against the rare prudence of the other, it compelled him into a divided and
distracted countenance. For with a stern and supercelious brow bent against
him, but a smooth and unwrinkled front applied unto her, he made this reply,
aiming his speech unto her: Delicate and sweet Virgin, are you then already
disposed of? or by private contract engaged to any man? To which she with a low
and well-beseeming obedience answered, that she had not as yet devoted her
self unto any. Will you then (replied the Emperor) fair Damsel, give me
leave to provide you of an husband? Who answered unto him, that it might
appear in her great rudenes and indiscretion withal, not to agree to such a
motion, and therefore with all obedi^nce, submission, and grati^ude, she
surrendered her self wholly to his Highness choice, assuredly presuming that
since he himself was endued with such rare continence and virtue, he could not
choose but be ^ble to distinguish the like in others; holding it a great
felicity and fortune that a Prince of his known piety and goodness, would be
so gracious as to solicit in that nature for his so unworthy and dejected
handmaid. Which language was delivered with such discretion and mod^stie, that
Otho was therewith much taken; when presently calling for a Gentleman of
especial remark, who waited on him in his chamber, called Guido Germanic^s, of
a no^le House and Family, whom he much favored; he told him* that he had at
length found out a gift to reward him, and to remunerate his long and faithful
service; such a one as might be^ome the giver, and (withal) prove worthy his
acceptance: and in the closure of these words presented unto him the Virgin
Galdrata Bertha. These two at the first enterview so well loved and liked, for
as Ovid says, None ever loved that loved not at first sight. that by their
mutual consent they were in a royal assembly publicly contracted by Caesar,
who gave her for her dower that spacious valley which lies beneath the hill
Casentius, and the fields called Agri Aren^in^, which soon after he made an
Earldom, and conferred that noble Title upon him; and from these two
succeeded the famous and warlike family of the Guidons (so renowned in
history) which has continued unto many sucessions.

Paulus Aemilius tells us that Manesteus the Athenian, and son to Iphicrates
that famous Captain, took unto his bed a maid of a foreign Country, but so
low degreed that the history affords her not so much as a name: who though she
was poor in estate, yet was she rich and abundantly qualified both in the
riches of the body and the mind. The son being demanded which of his two
parents he affected most, his father or his mother? he made answer, that in his
fi^iall duty and affection he gave the precedence unto his mother. But he that
proposed the question, knowing the difference in their birth^ and breeding,
demanding the reason thereof, he gave him this satisfaction; True it is (says
he) that m^ (...) her h^th made me an Ally and Countriman of Thrace, but my
mother has made me an Athenian, and the son of a noble Captain.

Bersane was the daughter of one Arbassus a private soldier in the Camp of
Alexander, who, as Quint. Curtius, and Aul. Gelli^^, affi^me, was of sweet
grace, and amiable aspect, that like the Sun appearing out of a cloud, so out
of the darkness of her neglected fortune there shone such a majesticall
luster, that he who was then the worlds sole Monarch, preferred her before the
wife and beautiful daughters of Darius, whom he had late vanquished: in so
much that it is related of him by the forenamed Authors, that after his first
familiarity with her he was never known to cast an incontinent look upon any
other, nor to have congresse with any third, only his wife Roxana, and this
Bersane, whom he commended to his Queen, and made her his ^ole companion.

It is likewise reported of the famous Rhodope, that she was at the first but
servant to Iadmonsamius the Philosopher, yet by her amiable feature and
dexterous carriage she afterward was advanced to such honor as to be wife
unto Psammeticus King of Egypt.

Lardana, from whom the renowned family of the Heraclidae boast their descent,
was a Damsel of a very low and mean parentage, and indeed no better than an
handmaid and servant, yet by her rare and unmatchable virtue she after raised
her fortunes to the eminence to be a fruitful seminary of many noble and
renowned Gentlemen; for so Herodotus witn^sseth of her in his Eutarpe.

Pysostrates, as Phelarchus historifies, matched himself with a Virgin of rare
beauty, but her birth so obscure and ignoble, that the stori^ affords it no
name; yet after, she by her wisdom and counsel adv^nced him from being a
Gentleman of private condition, to a Monarchall government. Of her Clademus in
his book^ entitled Redd^tionum, reports, that she was for sta^e a Juno, for
wisdom a Pallas, for beauty a Venus, and worthy to be styled the daughter of
Sacrates. It is moreover said of her, tha^ she dealt Scepters, and disposed
Crowns at her pleasure; so great was her power in the place in which she
governed.

I will end with Asputia the daughter of one Hermotinus a man of low condition
(as Aelianus the approved Histo^iographer in his book De varia Historia
relates) who being snatched from the arms of her father by a Persian soldier,
was for the excellency of her feature and beauty, by him presented to King
Cyrus the son of Darius and Parasatides. Her virtuous education, unmatchable
beauty, singular modesty, and approved wisdom, were the immediate steps to
purchase her such favor with the Persian Monarch, that he not only made her
his Empress, but so tenderly aff^cted her, that notwithstanding his choice of
wives, and multiplicity of concubines, from the first hour that she grew into
his knowledge and acquaintance he never embraced the company of any other
woman. And after the death of Cyrus, whose funerals she bewailed with
unspeakable sorrow, being afterward as highly favored by Artaxerxes who
succeeded him in the Empire, who desired to make her a partner in his bed and
Throne; yet was it with long suit from him, and great unwi^lingnesse in her,
before she could be won to participate in either of them.

And these out of infinite I have collected only to show unto you that
Virgins, howsoever obscurely descended, who from their Ancestors could neither
boast of wealth or Gentry, yet by their virtues, beauty, and generous
behavior, have not only attained unto matches of most especial remarke, but
some also to dignities imperial.

Famous unto all ages, even to the perpetuity of memory, shall be that great
Arch-champion of virginity, Virginius, that brave Roman knight, whose name was
given him in his childhood as a good omen, presaging what a defender of
chastity he would after prove who because his sole and only daughter. Virgini^
should not fall into the hands of Appius Claudius one of the Decemviri, to b^
vitiated and dishonored when he perceived by the corruptnesse of the Judge and
the perfidiousnesse (...) the false evidence, that (...) was ready to fall and
suffe^ under his cruel mercy, (...) the open face of the (...) at the bar at
which her cause was then pleaded, ^e ^lew her with his own hands, so vindicate
her inno^ence; desirous rather (as Valerius reports of him) of ^n innocuous
child to be the deaths-man, than the father of a defiled daughter: of whom
Silius Italicus l. 13. Bell. Punico thus speaks: -- Virginia juxta Cerne,
cruentato vulnus sub pectore servat.
Behold before thee where Virginia's placed,
Her white breast with a griefly wound defaced.
The bloody knife does witness the sad stroke,
Which freed her body from lusts servile yoke:
Whose modest innocence so far extends,
Her fathers act she in her death commends.


CHAP. IV.
Of election or choice before marriage. The conveniences and inconveniences
belonging unto marriage disputed, and compare^ with the honor and dignity
thereof.

BEfore I come to wedlock it self, it is very pertinent that I speak
something of choice before marriage. Says one, Liber esse non potest cui
affectus imperant, and cupiditates domi^nantur: he cannot be truly said to
have a free choice and election, in whom his affections rule, and his appetites
govern. The Queen Artemisia being asked by one of her Nobility what choice
should be used in love? replied, All persons ought to imitate the skillful
Lapidaries, who measure not the nature of the gem by the outward hew, but the
inward virtue. We have an old Adage frequent amongst us, which for the most
part proves true, that choice is soonest deceived in three things; namely, in
Brokers wares, Courtiers promises, and Women's constancies: therefore it is good
for all men to look before they leap; for it is generally found, Qui non ante
cavet, iste
Passus erit quod sit triste.
That man deserves of ^orrow double share,
Who once forwarn'd, will after not beware.


In choosing a wife, look not upon the feature of the body, but search into
the fancies of her mind; and take her not for her outward person, but her
inward perfection. For if thou make election of beauty, it fades; if of
riches, they soon waste; if of fame, it often proves false; if of virtue, that
only continues. For as Theopompus tells us, If the eye be the chuser, the
delight is short; if the will, the end is want; but if reason, the effect is
happy. And Bias, one of the Grecian Sages, was wont to say, that he that
marries himself to a fair face, oftentimes tieth himself to a foul
bargain.

But there are some that scarce will admit of any choice at all, and say, Who
that is free will willingly run into fetters like a fool? For whosoever makes
himself a Captive without constraint, incurreth the imputation either to be
counted wilful or witless: and amongst such, one deeply entire unto me, who
was in a great hesitation whether to marry or no, showed me a fancy of his
written to that purpose, which was as follows: What kind of wife were I best
wed? A maid?
She Is young perhaps, and knows not how to trade.
A widow? Who stale leavings can endure?
One old? Thou of a crabbed match art sure?
One fruitful? Numerous issue will ask cost.
One barren? Youth and strength in vain are lost.
One rich? She Will domineer, and master prove.
One poor? Whom want oppresses who can love?
One mute? Her tongue will not delight mine ^are.
A prater? That Is a burden I most fear.
One fair? Such aptest are to be misled.
One foul? She Is tedious both to board and bed.
No marriage then, I Will keep my single state,
Since on a wife so many dangers wait.
But if heaven will that I ^ Consort have,
O grant me one that is pious, wise, and grave.


So much for choice: I come now to discourse of marriage it self, and the
inconveniences and conveniences thereof. For though Diogenes the Cynick
Philosopher was of opinion, that for a young man to marry it was ever too
soon, and for an old man always too late; and Euripides the Tragic Poet
calls it an evil, yet to be desired; and that S^obaeus says, a woman brings
but two joyful days only in her whole life time, which are, the day of her
marriage, and the day of her death; and that Thales seeing Solon lament the
death of his son, gave him no other comfort than this, that for the like reason
only he had refused to marry; and that Cleobulus meeting his son in the way,
having finished the nuptial ceremony, presented him with a branch of
Hen-bane; thereby intimating, that his sweet meat must be served in with sower
sauce, and a terrible tempest was to succeed so temperate a calm: yet we read
on the contrary part, that Lycurgus the famous Lawgiver branded all such with
infamy as refused to marry. And the Caspians made an edict, that whosoever
past their years singly, and did not contract matrimony before they came to
fifty, in all feasts and assemblies such should have the lowest and most
dishonorable places allotted them, as those who had neglected their prime and
most flourishing time of their age, and done a thing merely repugnant to
nature.

Homer tells us that the Grecian Ladies in his days held wedlock in such
adoration, as they reckoned their years from their marriage, not their birth:
and we Christians hold, that our spiritual marriage is contracted in baptism,
confirmed in godly life, and consummated in a repentant death. Now concerning
whether it be necessitous or no, it may be thus disputed:

Matrimony is therefore to be esteemed and honored, as being first ordained in
Paradise, and since continued upon earth, and in a pious gratitude returns us
many pious and gracious children, to be made Citizens and Saints in heaven. It
purchases man the name of father here below, as a type of that great and
Almighty Father above: here generating, as he there creating. God made nature,
man here maintains her: and to such things as else would perish by time (by
his posterity) he gives perpetuity. Marriage puts fortitude into man, to fight
boldly in the defense of his King and his Country. For who can be a coward,
fearing his wife and children may be made captives? It makes men wise, as
careful to provide for them: it begets temperance, and out of voluptuousness
breeds modesty: for it limiteth lust within law, and prescribes a moderation
to pleasure, which in it self being damnable, is by matrimony made ^ufferable.

Now if some shall object and say, Though marriage with peace may be called the
worlds Paradise, yet if it be with shrife, it may be termed the lives
Purgatory; and that all such as marry in haste may repent at leisure: and some
to the like purpose, may quote Terence in Adelphis, in these words: Duxi
uxorem, quam ibi non miseriam vidi? etc.
What have I got by marriing of a wife,
But misery to attend me all my life?
Children I have, and that is another care:
The charge to keep them makes me poor and bare.
In toil and travel all my time I spend,
But of my tedious labor there is no end.
Now I am old, and for my age thus spent,
What Is my reward, but hate and discontent?


Many no doubt have for these and the like fears bin afraid, and forborne to
marry at all, thinking with Plautus, that he who desires to entangle and
intricate himself into a world of troubles, may provide himself of a ship to
guide, or a wife to govern. Another will say, he that takes one who is fair
and false, weddeth himself unto a world of miseries; or if to one as virtuous
as beautiful, yet in possessing a woman he at the best enjoys but a needful
evil. To such it may be thus answered, that in this they rather accuse fortune
than wedlock; for all things that happen cross and averse, are the effects of
chance, not of matrimony. Much better it is therefore carefully to respect
those good things thereon necessarily depending, than timerously to regard the
disasters accidentally reflecting. Admit the worst that can be objected, yet is
not marriage therefore to be neglected; for if in all other courses and
passages of our life we be crossed, shall we therefore be altogether deterred
from prosecuting them, as things accursed?

Examine all trades, faculties, disciplines, or professions: (to instance some
few in behalf of the rest) what practice is it, though the most necessitous
and useful, which may not be cavill'd at, or that we cannot find some color
to accuse? The Husbandman, though the frost prove violent, the snow
unseasonable, the showers intempestive or immoderate, yet does he not therefore
forsake his fields, cease his culture, and despair of an happy harvest.

The Mariner having endured many storms at Sea, in which his goods have been
hazzarded, and his life endangered, does not instantly upon his landing
untackle his ship, and having brought her from the water, break her up to the
fire; but rather proposes to himself those many benefits which may arise by
navigation: as that no profit can be made without peril, and no delightful
gain but with some great difficulty: ^ee considers, that the temperature of
weather succeeds tempests; that wealth comes not by wishing, but watching:
neither can rest in age be procured, where labor and industry in youth is not
practiced.

Wars take away the limbs and lives of many, yet does not that terrify
others from the attaining unto honor by arms: and ^o of the rest. Good things
are not to be forborne for the fear of evils that may ensue, rather the worst
things are to be endured, that the better may be encouraged. Were it not then
absurd that Husbandmen, Navigators, and Soldiers, shall not fo^beare to use
all diligence and exercise in their several qualities? (as no way deterred by
the detriments belonging unto them) and shall any man forbear ma^riage for the
multiplicitie of cares and crosses which some (through their vain and idle
fears) would asperse upon it?

Shall a Virgin fear to marry only with this evasion, Say I should be a
widow; or having children borne, O what a grief it would be to me to see them
buried? Let her know that in this case death is to be blamed, not matrimony;
and she may as well accuse nature for making us men, and not Gods. If either
husband or children die, it is because they were borne, and their bodies
created mortal, and not immortal.

It may be therefore thus further argued, that marriage supplies such
deficiencie in nature: for by a second nuptial the wife loses the name of
widow, and redeemeth not only the late lost name of husband, but to her
children the forfeited name of father: by which marriage makes amends in what
nature seemed to do amiss, and is rather a restoration than a deprivation to
Orphancie and Widow-hood.

If you shall sum up the cares and troubles that depend upon wedlock, set
but against them the profits and the pleasures, and they shall far surmount
them both in nature and number. What greater content to a man, than after the
laborious travells of the day to repose at night in the bosom of a sweet and
loving bedfellow? What more delightful hope than the exectation of an happy
issue? The throws of the mother are forgot in the birth of the child, and the
pleasures of the latter far surmount the pains of the former: the
peevishness of the child's infancy is quite forgot when he begins to prattle.
What comfort their toward youth breeds, and what consolation their more staid
years beget, I leave to their consideration who have been the fruitful
parents of a fortunate progeny.

If then by lawful marriage souls are here inspired upon earth to become
glorious Saints in heaven, and parents (in their issue and succession) imitate
the Creator himself, by giving life to others, that they by an alternate
course, as they receive breath from their fathers, may also return it to their
own children (and so till the last dissolution): if it change the common titles
of man and woman to the honored names of father and mother; if it beget
temperance, providence, and the rest, and make these carnal pleasures, which
are otherwise interdicted and forbidden, honest and legitimate; if the certain
comforts so far surmount all casual corsives, as it is so graciously
honored, why should it not be gen^rally embraced? And though Saint Ambrose
says, Nuptiae terras implent, virginitas Paradi^um; marriage peoples the
earth, but virginity Paradise; yet Saint Austine preferres humble marriage
before proud virginity. I conclude this Chapter with that of Claudian in Europa.

Nascitur ad fructum mulier prolemque futuram.
A woman was made fruitful in her birth,
Still to continue mankind upon earth.
CHAP. V.
How parents ought to dispose of their daughters. The miseries of enforced
contracts. The manner of marriage amongst the Romans, the Muscovites, the
ancient Britans, the Gauls, the Germans, etc.

PLato in his book De Legib. tells us, that mankind is by marriage made
immortal, and lasts for ever: for by leaving children to beget children, the
father by successive genera^ion is made immortal: of which immorta^itie all
such are justly deprived, who abandon themselves to a life single and solitary.
But there ought to be a great care in the Parents in disposing of their
children, the better to continue this blessed perpetuity. The Emperor
Aurelius informs us, that there was a custom amongst the Rhodians, or a
Proverb at least, that the fathers to marry a son need to spend but one day,
but in the disposing of one daughter they ought to consider with themselves ten
years: which were it even in these times carefully observed, and diligently
imitated, might be the prevention of many inconveniences, or rather palpable
mischiefs, of which we have had many woeful examples.

Some through their base avarice, not willing to allow unto their daughters
sufficient dowers. Others (too prodigal) have stretched themselves beyond their
ability and means, to be the ruin of their children by pride, and of
themselves by poverty. Others (ill advised, or too selfe-opinioned) by their
too much dotage on the sons have cast too great a neglect upon the daughters;
by which, as they lose time, so they forfeit duty, and many times chastity: for
when they come to maturity of years, such as their fathers have no care to
bestow, have a will to dispose of themselves; the event of which is for the
most part disaster and penury. Others will enforce them to marry where
themselves like, and not where their children love; the effects of which are
commonly discontent and misery (for inequality either in years, fortunes, or
affections, is the road way to spouse-breach and didivorce: for where there is
disunion of hearts, there must needs be disorders in the house.

How often have forced contracts been made to add land to land, not love to
love? and to unite houses to houses, not hearts to hearts? which has been the
occasion that men have turned monsters, and women devils. I forbear to
instance any, for in nomination of the dead I might perhaps give distaste to
such of the kindred who yet survive, who no question could rather with that the
memory thereof were rather buried than blazed abroad. Further, who shall but
follow the Circuit in the Country, besides these trialls here in the City,
shall seldom find a general Assizes without some evidence or other giv^^ upon
the like tragical accidents. But leaving these, I purpose in the next place to
speak something concerning the ancient ceremonies observed amongst the Romans,
and others, in their contracts and nuptial ceremonies.

The Romans called them Sponsalia, a spondendo, of the vow and promise made
each to other; which words were writ down, recorded, and sealed before
witnesses, and those were called Signatores. Before the ceremony, the Bride and
Bridegroom consulted severally either of them with a soothsayer, to know what
omen should be in their future marriage. Of which Iuvenal in his tenth Satyr
makes mention: -- Veniet cum signatoribu^ auspex..i. The Soothsayer comes with
those that signed to the contract. Aul. Gellius informs us that the young man
gave unto the Virgin a ring, which she ware upon her fourth finger on the left
hand, because to that finger alone (as the best Anatomists tell us) proceeds a
vein that has its original from the heart. The word nuptiae is derived from
nubo, which signifies to cover: and Pliny says, that the woman was presented
unto her husband in a yellow veil, which was called Flamineum (which color is
held to be the emblem of jealousy) and with that she covered her face. And in
regard of the good success which Romulus and his soldiers had in their rape
of the Sabine Virgins, they still continued a custom, that the Bridegroom
should snatch away the Bride from the lap or bosom of her father, mother, or
the next of their alliance and kindred: and after this s^eming violence, her
husband was to part or divide the hair of her head with the point or top of a
spear, with which some Gladiator or Fencer had before been slain, and that
was called Hasta caelibaris. The moral whereof (as the Author informs me)
was, that nothing but such a lance or spear, or such like violence, should
after dis-joine them.

Plutarch in Roman. Quaestion. 87. demands why the Brides hair from the upper
part of the forehead to the crown was separated with such a lance or spear?
Was this (says he) a symbol or emblem that the Romans first marriages were
made by war and rape? Or is this admonition to the Brides, that they being
married unto a wa^like people, should therefore u^e moderation both in their
habit and diet? Or (as Lycurg^s commanded) that all the gates and portalls of
their houses should (without other curiosity) be only figured with the saw and
the axe, to signify that nothing vain or superfluous should enter in at those
doors? Or does it imply (by circumstance) that wedlock ought not to be
dis-joined but by sword and death? Or is it because the spear is consecrate to
Juno, who is also called Pronuba, that is, the Goddess of marriage, all her
statues being pourtrayed leaning upon a lance or javelin? and that she is
called Dea quiritis? and that a spear was anciently called quiris? whence Mars
took his denomination of Quirinus, etc.

The next day after the nuptials was a feast held, to which all their friends
and kindred were invited, and such they called Repotia: their Aruspices or
Witches conjectured of their future good or evil by a Crow, because such is
the consociety of those birds, that if one of the matched couple perish by
accident, the other remains widowed and singular ever after.

There were then several ways by which a Virgin became a man's lawful wife:
The first was called (...), that is, by prescription, that is, if she were
contracted by her Parents or Overseers, and continued with her husband the
space of three entire years, without being absent from him three whole nights
in a twelve month. The second was, Confarreatione, which imports, that when
being married before a Flamine or chief Priest, before ten witnesses, the
married couple eat together of a barlie cake, before used in the sacrifice,
which was called a Far, and the solemnities (as Cicero pro Muraena averres)
were called Farracea, from barley. The third was, Coemptione, of buying and
selling: for the wife bought her husband, under a seeming pretense, with a
small piece of silver. Suetonius speaks of a fourth, which is titled,
Sortitione, which was by lot or lottery. But in the former, which is called
Coemptione, where, by the ancient Roman laws, Nubentes mulieres tres ad virum
asses far solebant. when the women that were to be married brought three
small pieces of money to the Bridegroom, the man was not called by his own
name, nor the woman by hers, but he Caius, and she Ca^a, in remembrance of the
most excellent and virtuous Matron Caia Caecilia, wife to Tarquinius Priscus.
Then the new made Spouse being brought home by her friends to the very doors
of her husbands house, she was to say, Ubi t^ Caius? Hic sum ego Caia: which
Erasmus thus interprets, Ut tu Dominus, ita ego Domina:.i. as thou art
Master, so am I Mistress* and she that was thus married might justly challenge
the title of Matter familias, or, Mother of the household. The Bride was lighted
thither with five torches burning, which did intimate the great necessity that
married wives have of these five gods and goddesses, Jupiter, Juno, Venus,
Suadela, and Diana, otherwise called Lucina.

There were no contracts held to prove successful amongst the Romans which
were not celebrated with the two elements of Fire and Water. It is in one of
Plutarchs Roman questions, What is the reason (says he) that in all nuptials
the Bride is commanded to touch Fire and Water? Is it because the Fire is an
active Element, and therefore represents the man; and the water a passive,
and consequently an Emblem of the woman? Or is it because the Fire
illustrates, and the water purges: therefore the wife ought by all her
endeavors and industry to preserve her purity and chastity? Or is it because
that as Fire without humor to feed loses its fury, and abateth its strength;
and water without some heat grows use-lesse and without motion: so man and
woman, separated and dis-joined, are of no validity and power, but by
conjunction or commixtion of their several faculties, they by offices
belonging unto marriage are made complete and perfect? Or does the moral
extend so far, that the one ought not to forsake the other, but to endure
prosperity and adversity alike, though they be driven to that extremity that
they have no other good thing left them save only Fire and Water to comfort
them? According to that of Seneca the Tragedian, Amor perennis Conjugis castae
manet:.i. The love of a chaste wife lasts for ever. Or as Ovid writ in his
exile unto his wise in these words, Nil opus est morte pro me, sed amore
fideque,
Non ex difficili fama petenda tibi est.
Die not for me, no such thing I desire:
Thy love and faith shall make thy fame aspire.


But to proceed with the Roman Ceremonies: Servius super Aeneid. observes,
that when the woman was brought to the door of the Bride-chamber, she
anointed the posts with oil, and was called uxor, quasi unxor, ab unguendo:
this done, the husband took her in his arms, and lifted her over the threshold
with a seeming violence, because (in modesty) she should not be thought to go
willingly without some force unto the place where she should unloose her
Caestus or Virgin girdle. At her coming in, all the company present called
with a loud voice, Talassio, Talassio: the reason of which clamor Plutarch
renders us in vita P^mp. as also in his 31. Roman question, to this purpose:

In that great rape which the soldiers of Romulus committed upon the Sabine
Virgins, one of the fairest among them being caught up by one of the meanest
soldiers, some of the rest, envying his good fortune, would have taken her
away from him by force; which he perceiving, cried out, Talassius, and that he
was bearing her to Talassius, who was then a prime young Gentleman of the Army,
and of great remarke amongst the Romans: by which clamor he was suffered to
convey her privately unto him. Since which time they have observed in all their
marriages to use the name of Talassius, as in all the Grecian nuptials they
sing Hymen, Hymenaee.

Many other superstitions they have used, which might seem tedious here to
relate, as their Nuptialia dona,.i. Their marriage gifts and tokens, the bed in
which they reposed the first night being called Lectus genialis, or (as some
will have it) Lectus genitalis. And if at any time these were at difference or
dissension betwixt themselves, they repaired to a Temple or Chapel erected to
the honor of a certain goddess called Dea viriplaca, as much as to say, the
goddess pleaseman; where when they had staid a while, and offered such
oblations as were by the Flamines appointed to that purpose, all their jarres
as they were before debated, so they were then and there ended, and they
departed thence well satisfied and reconciled.

CHAP. VI.
How marriage is solemnized amongst the Russians, the Gauls, the Assyrians,
the Greeks, the Namasanes, the Sco^s, etc. The honor of marriage, and of
twelve impediments that may hinder is.

THe manner of solemnizing Marriage amongst the Russians or people of Muscovie
is different from other nations: for the man, though he never in his life time
beheld the woman, yet is he not permitted to have any or the least view of her
when he would solicit her for marriage, but it is done by his mother or next
kinswoman: and when the match is agreed upon, as well by the Parents as the
parties, (for without the consent of the Parents no marriage is held amongst
them lawful) the father and chief friends meet together and conclude about
the dower. It is to be observed, that the Virgin brings the dower, but the
young man makes her no jointure unless she have issue by him, and then she
has full interest in his estate.

And if she were never married before, the Parents and friends enter into bond
that she shall prove a Virgin. The contract thus concluded, they send tokens
the one to the other, but enterchange no looks all this while. The Eeve before
the nuptial day, the Bride is carried either in a Callimago or Coach, or if it
be winter, on a sledd (by reason of the snow and ice) to the house of the
Bridegroom, with her wedding clothes, and the bed on which they are that
night to lie, which for the most part is very rich and costly. That night she
is accompanied with her mother and her other friends, but all this while of him
not seen. The next day she is married in a veil, or rather an hood of knit^
wo^ke or lawne, which covers her from the Crown of the head to the waste.
They and their friends ride all to Church, being well mounted, though never so
near the place, and though they be people of the meanest quality amongst them.
The words and contract, with the ceremonies, as the Ring, etc. are almost one
with ours: and the nuptial knot being knit by the Priest, the Bride comes to
her husband there standing by the Altar, and bows her self as low as to his
foot, in sign of future obedience: in requital of which, the Bridegroom
casts his upper garment over her, as a token or promise that he will from
that time forward shield and protect her.

To these two standing together, come the father and the next allied unto the
woman, and bow themselves to the Bridegroom, and his father and friends do
the like to her, as a tie and union of love and affinity betwixt the two
kinreds and families: to bind which there is a loaf of bre^d presented to the
Priest, who breaks it, and distributeth it amongst them, of which they all
eat, and protest withal, that they are all a^ one loaf made of so many
several grains, or as so many guests invited to one table. This ceremony
ended, the husband takes the wise by the hand, and leads her to the Church
porch, (their fathers and friends following them) where they are met by others,
who present them with bowls and cups of several fashions and siz^^, filled
with Meade and Russwine, whereof the Bridegroom first takes a Chark or
Chalice in his hand, and drinks to the Bride; who opening her hood or veil
below (yet so that her face is still unseene) she pledgeth him: this done, they
part at the Church door, he goes to his fathers house, and she to hers, where
they entertain their friends apart.

At the entering into which houses, corn is cast upon them from the upper
windows, in token of fertility and plenty ever after to attend them. The
evening come, the Bride is conducted to her husbands fathers house, and there
lodged that night, her veil still covering her head. Besides, she is enjoined
from her mother and other Matrons her friends, not to speak one word, because
the husband is neither to see her face, nor hear her tongue, till the next
morrow after their marriage; neither is she that day to speak at all, saving
some few limited words, merely of form, nor three days after. If she
transgress the least of these ceremonies, it is a great dis-reputation to her
all her whole life after.

The third day expired, they depart unto their own house, which is by this time
sufficiently accommodated. And herein is to be observed, that for the marriage
day, and the whole time that the nuptial feast is solemnized, he has the
honor to be called Molodax Knez, that is, young Duke; and she Molodax Knezay,
the young Duchess.

Julius Caesar in the 6. book of his Commentaries tells us, that amongst the
ancient Gauls (which is now the French nation) the husband brought so much
goods, and laid it down, as did amoun^ to the dower which his wife brought with
her, and a just account being taken, the stock was put together, the party
surviving being made full Executour, and possessing both their means to them
and their children.

Cornelius Tacitus gives a noble commendation of the Germans. The wife, says
he, never brings or assures any dower to her husband, but he to his wife,
the Parents, cousins, and friends being present to approve or dislike of all
such passages as are between them: neither is there any enterchange of
love tokens, intending to delicacie, or to corrupt the chastity of the woman;
but his present is a couple of Oxen yoaked, an horse bridled and completely
furnished, with a Sword, Buckl^r, or Target, and a Javelin: neither does she
enterchangeably present him with any gift, save some weapons, either of offense
or defense. And that the wife may not think her self exempted from the ^ares,
travells, and dangers that the husband may either by his industry at home, or
valor abroad incur, these yoaked cattle, the Horse, and weapons of war,
are a remembrance unto her.

There are very few known adulteries committed amongst that great and populous
Nation, for the punishment thereof is very severe and speedy. For she that
shall be found guilty of such an act, her husband causes her to be sh^ven, and
then stripped naked, and after brings her out of his own doors in the presence
of all his and her nearest kindred, then beats her with a battoone through the
streets: for there is no connivence to be used, or pardon to be granted to any
woman who has once violated her wedlock chastity: neither can her youth,
beauty, or riches, though all should meet together in one, ever purchase her to
have the honor of a second husband; so odible and detestable is that sin
held amongst them.

The Assyrians take their daughters with them (when they be marriageable) to
the market, and there such as want wives buy them for their money, or
money-worth. The like is in custom with the Babylonians, and people of Thrace:
so did the ancient Grecians purchase their wives, either for coin, or some
other commodity that was vendible. The like the Indians in many places observe.

Iphidanas the son of Antenor, according to Homer, gave fifty yo^ke of Oxen to
his father-in-law to enjoy his daughter in marriage. In Tapila a great City in
India, situate betwixt the two Rivers of Indus and Hydaspes, they entertain no
wives into their conjugall embraces which they buy not at some price. Strabo in
his book of Geography, lib. 15. informs us, that in some Countries, as
Carthage and others, there was a custom, that if a poor man's daughter by
reason of her poverty could not compass a husband, she was brought to a
public fair or market, with trumpets and loud music before her, and when a
great confluence of people was gathered about her, first her back parts were
discovered bare as high as to her shoulders from her heel, and then the like
before; and if upon that view she were found to be well featured, and no way
defective, at the charge of the City she was to be provided of a husband.

Plato in his sixth book de Legib. writes, lest any man should be deceived in
the choice of his Bride, and so after repent himself when it is too late, that
it was thought convenient, that diverse assemblies of young men and maids should
be permitted to wrestle, and ^rie masteries together, having their bodies naked
from the neck to the waste, as far as modesty would give leave. But St.
Jerome against Iovinian condemns this wanton and lascivious custom, and so
does Clemens Alexandrinus, pedag. lib. 2. cap. 9. and St. Cyprian in his book
De Virgin. habit. in these words, The honor and bashful shame of the body are
both preserved in the modest coverture of the garment. And Blandus supra leges
interposit. cap. 1. writes, that the very fear of shame, without the terror
of death or torment, is sufficient of it self to put off a contract.

The Namasanes, a people of Lybia (as Herodo^u^ informs us) had a strange
custom, to cause the Bride the first night of her nuptials to prostitute her
self to all her guests, and then she was injoined to preserve her chastity for
ever after. The Anthropophagi, the Medes, and some part of the Aethiopians,
after they be once married, are admitted free congresse with their mothers and
sisters. The Arabs make their wives common to all the kindred. The Moors,
Numidians, Persians, Parthians, Garamantes, the Turks, and some Jews, take as
many wives as they can well maintain: and the ancient Athenians made their
wives and daughters common.

It was once a custom i^ Scotland, that the Lord of the soil might lay just
clai^e and title to every Virgins maidenhead, who was to be married within his
Lordship. For by that custom the Tenant held his land; which was after quite
abolished by King Malcoline, who ordained that the new married couple should
redeem her virginity, in which her Landlord pretended interest, with a small
piece of gold, which in many places of the Kingdom is observed even until
this day.

A young man of Lacedemon, being seated in the Theater, when a valiant and
ancient Captain (a single man and Batchelour) but for his valor and famous
achievements much honored by his Nation, came to take his place, to be a
spectator of the sports and games there presented; he denied to give him
place: at which Callidus, for so was the Captain called, much offended at the
arrogance of his youth, gave him course and bitter languag^: to whom he
returned this short answer, Thou have (O great Captain Callidus) as yet
fathered no child, neither accasioned the birth of any, who coming unto my
age, may when I am come unto thine, in this place arise to do me a like honor.

Plato also in his book of Laws, appointed single men no place of dignity in
the commonweal, nor suffered any to be conferred upon them; but caused them
to be more charged with fines and amerciaments than any of the other married
Citizens. Socrates professes of himself, to have learnt more moral
philosophy from women, than natural, of which he made excellent use.

In marriage there is a domesticke Commonweal, in which the Father of the
family may express wisdom, temperance, justice, piety, and all other
virtues: by loving his wife, instructing his children, governing his family,
ordering his affairs, disposing his goods.

The Romans in the year that Quintus Me^ellus was Consul, established many
famous and worthy Laws and privileges, to encourage people to marry, and
especially, unto those who had numerous issue, and great increase of children:
for without wedlock all alliance would be extinct, all Commonweals in short
time decay, and all sweet society be quite abandoned.

There be twelve impediments to hinder lawful marriage, or to dis-annull it
after it be once consummated, which Cardinal Caj^tanus comprehends in these
four verses: Error, conditio, votum, cognatio, crimen,
Cul^us disparitas, vis, ord^, ligamen, honesta^:
Si sis affinis, si forte c^ire nequibis,
Haec socianda vetant conubia, facta ^etracta^^.


Thus paraphrased.

Error, condition, parentage, and vow,
Adultery (the law will not allow
Disparitie in divine worship) and
Violence or force, or where we understand;
In priesthood; there is profaneness, or else where,
False faiths professed, we likewise must forbear,
When there is precontract, for honesty,
Affinity, and disability:
These twelve from present marriage us dissuade,
Or can retract from wedlock when it is made.
I end with this of Socrates: Let men obey the Laws, and women their Husbands,
whose duty is to be wise in speaking, and mild in conversation; circumspect in
promise, and careful in performance; faultlesse in taking, and faithful in
giving good counsel; patient in adversity, and not puffed up in^ prosperity;
somewhat indulgent over his wife, but most industrious in the education of his
children.

And a good wife, according to Theophrastus, must be grave abroad, gentle at
home, constant to love, patient to suffer, obs^quio^^ to her neighbors,
obedi^nt to her husband. For silence and patience are the two i^ dissoluble
ties of conjugall love and piety.

CHAP. VII.
What manner of Lectures Wives in the Country re^^ to their Husbands. The
several dispositions of Wives, and humors of Husbands, illustrated by diverse
selected Histories. The morosity of the marriage bed.

YOu see what marriag^ (...) or at least what it oug^^ to be. But hitherto I
have only read a Lecture unto women, but I come now to show you what manner of
Lectures wives use to read unto their husbands: and for method sake I will
devide them into several heads. And first begin with the Country. I find in a
Prog^ostication or Almanac^e, continued from the date ^^ereof to the end of the
world, written by Iacobus Henrichmanus, and (...) to the generous S.
Christophar^s Baron of Schwarze^^berg: and the illustrious Poet Henric^s
^ebelli^s; to this purpose. In this year, says he, Virgins an^ Wives shall
have long hair and short memories: women shall participate in their
domestical government with their husband^* and strive to rule alike, if not
with precedence; and when they are willing to sleep, whisper many private
lectures in their ears, which they would not listen unto: old strumpets shall
be apt to negotiate betwixt young men and new married wives, to make sinful
bargains: moreover, there are diverse which shall be^ suspected to be honest,
and though they be not so, yet shall they be glad to take the injury upon
themselves.

The same Bebellius, in his fecetiae, says, that from women: themselves he
has received three things, in which there is no credit to be given unto them.
First, when she weeps, because she can command tears at her will: next, if
she feign her self to be sick, for there is no trust to be imposed upon
her till thou see her quite dead: and lastly, if having invited her friends
unto a great feast, she simper or eat nothing, (...) is to be presumed that
she ^ath first dined in the kitchen, or else she has reserved the choicest bit
of all, to please her own palate after the guests be departed.

Four things ^ill a man before his time; a sad or sorrowful family, meat or
drink immoderately taken, a pestilent air, and a fair wife. Four other
things we are also to take gre^^ care, that we fo^beare: first, how we read
another (...) letters, the contents nothing concerning us; next how we meddle
with any thing in a Smi^hs shop, lest (...) burn our fingers; then to b^
careful what we taste (...) light upon poison; lastly, how we adventure upon
any woman, to grow into any private familiarity with her, whose condition^ we
know not. Others have a proverb frequent in their mouths, that those men grow
soon rich, whose Bees prosper and their wives perish; or whose sheep and oxen
th^ive with them, and their ^ives fail them.

If a man would have an exact wife, endowed with all the gifts of nature, the
better to dec^re her, she must have an hand from Prague, a face from Britain
or England, breasts from Austria, a belly from France, a back from Brabant,
white thighs and hands from Colonia Agrippina, feet from the Rhine, pudibu^da
from Bavaria, and nates from Suevia. But from the constitution of the body, I
come now to the condition of the mind.

As there are many sorts of wives, so there are many kinds of husbands: as one
for instance (I begin with the country.) A plain country fellow, upon some
extraordinary occasion coming from plow before his hour, found a young (...)
his neighbors son, (...) busy with his wife, and came suddenly upon them
before they could any way ^vade it; which he seeing, said to his wife, O sweet
heart, what is this I see? could thou not have picked out a more private
place then this? I Will put it to thy self, how scurvily would this have shown,
if any stranger but my self had come in, and seen what I do how? and with
this gentle admonition departed (...).

But all husbands (as I said before) are not of the like temper; for instance:
An handsome country-wife, and well reputed of amongst her neighbors, used
every night as soon as her husband came to bed, to catechize him, what
company he had kept? and how he had spent the day? and still used to keep
him waking past midnight, when the poor honest man, who had traveled hard all
the day, had rather been at rest; and that she would have read him asleep.
But at length observing that she was somewhat precisely given, and that she
used often to go to confession, he began to consider what great sins she might
be guilty of, of which she need so often to desire absolution: and to that
purpose watching the time when she used to go unto her Confessor, he had
gotten into the Church before, and privately hid himself, so near to the
Altar that he might easily hear whatsoever passed betwixt them: and when
amongst other quotidian (or as some call them venial sins:) she began to
proceed further, and say that she had committed adultery with such a man so
often, and so often with such a neighbor: her Conf^ssor began with her and
said, indeed sister the sin of adultery is a great and heinous crime* and
therefore leaving the rest, I will begin to ^llot you penance for that: at
which word the fellow rising out) of his place (...), No good Sir you shall not
need to do that, I pray you absolve her of all the rest of her sins, but for
tha^ of adultery i will give her such penance i will warrant her, that she shall not
need complain, and desire other from you: so taking her by the arm led her
home and basted her soundly.

Poggius the Florentine, an excellent Orator, in his F^cetiis, reports this
story. A woman amongst us (says ^e) (...) so contrary unto her husband in all
things, that whatsoever she had said, how absurd, ^oever it (...)* (...)
maintain it even to death; who scolding and bitterly railing against her
husband, one day amongst many other ^^veries which she gave him to wear for
her sake, she called him lousy knave* (...) which words (...) wondrous (...),
he beat her with his (...), and ^ickt her with his heels; (...): (...) so
tired himself with ^ea^ing her, that he was (...) able to lift his arm so
high (...) his head, and yet vowing to himself that he would then get the
must^ry or never, he b^th ought himself of another (...), and tying her fast
to a cord, let (...) down into a Well, there threatening to drown (...)
unless she would (...) that language: but the more (...) menac't her, the
lowde^ (...) talked, not changing a syllable: at length he (...) body so far
as to the (...), and yet nothing was in he^ mouth but lousy (...), which she
often repeated; he then ducked her over head and ears; when not being able to
speak because the water choa^ed her, what ^she could not do with her tongue
she expressed with her^ fingers, and holding her arms above water, by joining
the nails of her two thumbs together, she did that in action, which she was
not able to deliver in words; in so much that her (...) obstinacy prevailing
above his punishment, he was forced to draw her (...) again, being ever after
a subject to her morosity and (...) Another Country (...) wife, when no
Lecture she could read unto her husband (though (...) him with many* and those
not empty of variety) could prevail with him, when she found that she (...)
not able to being him (...) her own bow, in a (...) malicious despair (...)
river side, and leap^ (...), and so drowned her self. At length the place
being showed to the good man where she plunged in, (...) her body not appearing
(...) the water, he (...) dragge for i^ against the stream; but his neighbors
advising him not to take that course, but rather to search for her with the
stream; he made answer, My good neighbors no such matter, for know that in
her life time she was so obstinate, froward, and contrary to all reason, that
even in death her very body must needs swim against the tide, though it be
preposterous against nature.

This calls to my remembrance that of the Cyn^^ke D^ogenes, who was wont to
(...), he allowed of them who were in a readiness to sail upon the sea, but
sailed not* who were about to gi^e other men's children their breeding, but bred
them not; who advised with themselves to take upon them the affairs of the
Commonweal, but took them not; and who was always toward wiving, but
wedded not: intimating those persons to be wise who run not rashly into such
things of which they have not before made proof and trial. For when men are
once entered into them, they forfeit their own liberty, as not able to retract
or withdraw themselves at their pleasure. Whosoever commits himself to the
mercy of the seas, must stand to the grace of the winds and weather: whosoever
undergoeth public office or magistracy, cannot at his will (...) himself to a
private state and condition of living: and whosoever marries a wife, if he be
said not (...).

The same Philosopher (...) a very fair woman (...) in a^ horse (...) or
(...), he said to one that stood by him, Now surely another cage than that had
been more (...) of that kind: noting that such froward creatures as some women
be, are more fitting to look out of a grate than a casement. The Le^tica in
Greece, which I here call a horse-litter, was a certain manner of ^eat near
unto that fashion; in which noble women and great Ladies were used to be born
through the streets, not by horses, but upon some six men's shoulders; being
made with Lattice windows, and grates cro^^e-barred; which our late Sedans in
some things imitate. Those casements were to open and shut at pleasure, that
they might look and be seen, or not: so that it showed and represented to the
eye the manner and likeness of a cage for birds, or a pen, in which to keep
diverse strange beasts: which was in great frequency among the Grecians. And in
such did the wives of the Areopagitae, or chief S^natours, and other great
Ladies use to be borne through the streets; and in imitation of them,
oftentimes loose and wanton damsells: for great persons cannot devise that for
state, which the proud (how poor soever) will not strive to imitate.

I have read further, of a Countryman, who had a notorious scold to his wife;
and whether he came from the market, or from the field; or whether he sat
down to meat, or prepared himself for bed, she was always thundering in his
ears: nay she would not cease doctrinating him in his neighbors house, but
home and abroad were both alike u^^to her; and still the more he threatened or
cudgeled her, her contumelious railing was still more insolent and l^wd,
abusing him in language by no allowance. At length he thought to try
conclusions, and provided himself of an harsh tuned pipe, on which he could
not play any thing that tended to music; and ever when she began to s^old,
he straight without any reply began to play, but so untunably and shrill, that
it almost drowned her language: this fretted her worse, in regard that he^ gave
her no other answer at all, whereby to give her matter to work upon, in so
much that for very anger and despite she left off railing, and fell to
skipping and dancing: of which being weary, as having tired her self, she flew
up to his face, (...) other (having a shrew to his wife); I marry Gossip, this
is a good sight, it were happy for us in the country if all the rest of our
trees had the like fruit hanging upon them. I conclude this chapter with that
of Iuvenall in his 6. Satyr.

The marriage bed has seldom yet been free
From mutual braules and nuptial calumny;
Sleep in their resting place has no abiding,
She Will keep thee waking with continual chiding.
Jealous she must be thou have gone astray,
Then worse than Tigers (who have lost their prey)
She rages, and t'encourage this debate,
Those children she best loves she will seem to hate.
Some strumpet she will fashion in her mind,
And swear that thou to her art far more kind.
With one or other she up braids thee still,
Then weeps amain, for she has tears at will.
CHAP. VIII.
The love that ought to be betwixt man and wife. Why women speak more and
louder than men. Of a (...) married wife. Diverse other Histories of pleasant
passages in the country.

A Question being asked, why our first and great Grandmother Evah, was rather
in her formacio^ taken out of the side of Adam, than any other part of his
body? It was thus learnedly answered: Because the side is the middle of the
body, to signify that the woman is of equal dignity with the man; and
therefore she was taken not from the head, nor the foot; for she must not be
superior or inferior unto him. It is probable also that she was taken out of
the left side: for the heart of man inclines that way, rather than to the
other; to denote unto us, that man and woman should embrace each other with an
hearty and entire love: and as the left side is the weakest, so the woman made
from thence, is the weaker ve^^ell. Also all male children are conceived in the
right side, and the females in the left: and as the sides are defended by the
arms, so ought a woman to be by her husband.

Another demanding a question, why women were more apt to talk, and for the
most part, make a greater and louder noise than men? Answer was returned, that
for that there was very great reason to be given: for says he, we know that
Adam the first man was created from the dust of the earth, which is of its own
nature, soft, pliant and tractable, and in the handling yields no noise or
sound at all: but the woman was made of a ribbe (a bone taken out of Adams
side) which is of a much harder temper. Now for example, take a bushel bag
or a quarter sack, and fill it with dust, or with flesh, and tumble it or
toss it which way you please, no echo arises from thence at all; but empty
them, and fill them with bones, and so shake and bowlt them together, and you
shall then hear what a rattling they will keep.

Of a more gentle disposition than those before remembered, was she of whom I
now am to speak, who instead of a Curtain Lecture, read by her to her
husband, had a strange one read to her; the manner whereof follows. Not far
from Reevilling, a Town under the Imperial jurisdiction, a very fair country
wench, but very simple withal, who was newly married to one of the young
rusticks there by, some quarter of a year after she had been married, came
to a Friar to be confessed, who casting an adulterous eye upon her, and finding
her by her simple answer to be none of the wisest: the business which she
came for, being quickly run over, he presently fell upon another matter, and
told her that she was run into a great arrerage with him, for not paying him
Tithes. The woman innocently demanded of him what Tithes were due to him? Marry
says he, for every nine nights which thou lie with thy husband, the tenth
is due to me. Truly Sir, replied she, I pray you to excuse mine ignorance, and
heaven forefend but whatsoever should be due unto you from me, should be
fully satisfied. At which he retired her into a sequestered place, and there
abused her honest simplicity. After which returning back to her house, she
began modestly to chide her husband, who would not tell her of those duties and
tithes due to the Friar her Confessor, and so told him all the whole
circumstances before related. The man said little, knowing the weakness of his
Wife, and loath to have his own shame to be made public, yet vowing revenge
in heart; and fearing that being a Churchman, upon his complaint the Friar
might find some favor with the great ones, he bethought himself of a safer
course, and resolved withal to be his own justicer: for, dissembling the
matter, and taking no notice at all of any such thing as passed betwixt the
Friar and his Wife, he made means to infinuate into his more familiar
acquaintance; to which the Friar most willingly assented, because under that
color he might have the freer and less suspicious consocietie with his Wife.
Upon this new acquaintance, the rusticke invited him to dinner, and defired him
to come alone; which was a motion that he willingly embraced. The day was
appointed, and good cheer provided: now the good man commanded his Wife to
reserve all the water she made for two days together, and keep it in a
vessel by it self; which was accordingly done: he invites two or three of
his neighbors, whom he durst best trust. The Friar keeps his appointment,
the dinner is served in, and he set betwixt a couple of them so close that
there was no rising from the table without leave: the first trenchers were not
changed, but the good man takes a deep bowl, and drinks it off to the
Friars welcome (of wine good and wholesome:) the Friar vows to pledge him
supernaculum, and still casting a leering eye upon the woman, which the Host
very well observed; he whispereth to have the Friars bowl brimmed with his
Wives urine: which he taking and tasting, spit it out and said, Now fie, what
tart and unpleasant wine is this? if I should drink it, it would poison me.
The good man replied, Does not then this wine taste you well? He replied, No by
no means: No, says the Host? I Will assure you it was drawn out of the same
vessel from which you received your Tithes; and either drink it off at one
carowse, or be assured that it is the l^st you shall ever swallow. By which
the Friar finding his former villainy discovered, took it off at a draught,
concluding with a sour sauce his former sweet bargain: and being dismissed
thence without any other violence, vowed to himself, never to come under that
man's roof after.

I have read of a fellow who traveled a great part of the world over with a
pair of boots, which he had vowed to part with to no man, but such a one as
had an absolute power and Empire over his wife: he had past through many
Countries, and offered them to all that he met, but no man was either willing,
or else durst not accept them upon these conditions: at length meeting with a
stout fellow, a Blacksmith, he asked him if he would receive them upon the
covenant aforesaid? who answered that he would, and wear them in despite of
all the women in Europe: (now the Smith had put on a clean shirt that morning)
Upon this answer the Traveller replied, Then Friend, here take them to thee,
put them into thy bosom, and bear them home. The Smith replied, Not so, I
know a trick worth two of that: if I should put them into my bosom, and durty
my clean shirt, my wife would not be well pleased with that, for we should
have no quietness in the house for all this day. Which the other hearing,
snatched them away from him, and said, Get thee hence in an evil hour, who
go about to cheat me, being, as all others, afraid of thy wives scolding;
and so left him: nor have I heard whether he has yet delivered them unto any
even to this day.

A Country fellow having married a substantial Farmers daughter, found her
within a twelve-moneth to prove not only an archscold, still thundering in his
ears, but very lascivious and unchaste, of which he had manifest and
infallible proofs; and therefore he took occasion to complain to his
father-in-law both of the morosity and inchastity of his daughter. To whom the
good man gave this comfort; Son, I advise you to have patience, and be content
for a time: she is her mothers daughter right, for just such an one was she in
her youth, for I could neither govern her tongue, nor -- but now she is grown
old, there is not a more quiet and chaste Matron amongst all her neighbors:
therefore arm your self with patience as I did, and I make no question but
when the daughter shall arrive unto her mothers age, your wife will prove as
tractable and quiet as mine is now; and with this cold comfort dismissed him:

Another Rusticke being married to a very handsome piece, grew jealours of a
young fellow a Farmers son, his neighbor (and he had diverse times upbraided
her with him:) at length being angry, she bid him not to fear any such matter
betwixt them, and protested, she had rather prostitute her self to ten
Gentlemen, than to one such clown as himself, or him whom he had so often cast
in her teeth.

Another Country woman, following her husband to his grave, not only wept and
wrung her hands, but tore her hair from her head, uttering such loud cries and
ejulations, that she was much pitied, in regard they feared that the very
sorrow for his death would distract her of her senses. Diverse came about her to
comfort her, and they had much ado to keep her from leaping into his grave.
The like she did coming back. At length one that was a widower, and well
known unto her, stepped toward her to lead her home by the arm, and spoke
diverse comfortable words unto her. To whom she answered, No, she was undone for
ever, for she was left a lone woman, and a widow, and had none to manage her
affairs, or to guide her family. Who replied, Let not that be your care, I am,
you know, a widower, and if it please you to accept of me, my suit is, that I
may be your second husband. To whom she still weeping and howling made answer,
I thank you neighbor for your good will and friendly offer, but indeed you
speak too late, for I have already past my faith and promise to another.

One related unto me of one who pretended great purity and modesty, who could
not endure any u^civill speech or obscene talk, and one indeed whom all the
young men desired their wives to pattern themselves by; she being brought to
bed of a boy, which was her first child, as soon as the child was borne, all
the women came about it, and every one gave their censure of him, and
concluded, it was ^ sweet babe, and like the father: which she hearing,
rowsing her self as well as she was able, said, Why I pray you neighbors,
has it a shaven crown? which put them in mind of a young Friar who had often
before frequented the house.

A Rusticke having the day before beaten his wife for reading a Lecture unto
him somewhat too loud, sent her the next day with a Sow to the market to sell.
Her way lying through a park or thick wood, and she driving the Swine before
her with a cord tied to the hinder leg, a young Clown of her former
acquaintance, and who had long been a suitor to her to corrupt her chastity
(but never prevailing) overtooke her just as she was entering into the thicket;
and having first given her the good morrow, began earnestly to importune her
about his former fuit, alleging, amongst other things, the opportunity of time
and place but she still obstinately denied him, and in such rigorous words,
that seeing her resolution, he forbear to speak of it any further, and began
to talk of other things. But when she perceived they were almost out of the
forest, and that they were ready to come into the open fields, and remembering
how churlishly her husband had dealt with her the day before, she began thus to
break with him, and say, You spoke unto me even now of a business I know not
what, and urged me to a thing which I may be sorry for I know not when; but if
I should now be so mad or foolish to yield to your request, I pray you in the
mean time where can you find a tree in all this (...) to which to tie the Sow?
Which being apprehended by the other, she found occasion to revenge her self
upon her husband. And this is grown to be a common Proverb in other Countries,
But if I should be so foolish as to yield unto you, where in the mean time can
you find a fit tree to which to tie the Sow? From the Country I come now to
the City.

CHAP. IX.
How Curtain Lectures are read in the City, and how severally read by sundry
Tradesmens wives, with variety of delightful histories to that purpose.

THere be four things (says mine Author) which women most covet; To be
beloved of young men, To be the mothers of fine children, To wear rich and
costly clothes, and to domineere and bear rule in their houses.

A Tailor in the City, who kept his wife very gallant (who was indeed a very
choice girl, and well became those clothes which she wore) before he had
been married a full twelve-moneth, perceiving diverse young Citizens, and other
Gallants, often to pass by his door, and sometimes make impertinent business
to his house, he thinking to prevent the worst, called up his wife one day into
a private chamber, and began to question her about sundry things, of which the
woman was merely innocent: all this would not persuade the man, but being
absolutely jealous of her honesty, he began to school her in very rough and
course language; which wakened a fire in her bosom which till then lay hid,
and now brake forth at her tongue. Then she told him what matches she might
have had when she was a maid, and what fortunes she had neglected in making
choice of him* how she might have been married to a man, and now she had cast
her self away upon a Tailor; with the like: in so much that when she had once
begun she knew not how to make an end, but called him fool, and jealous
coxcomb, putting him to such a silence, that he had not one word to utter; but
waiting till the storm was over, he then began to flatter her, and give her
the best language that he could devise, with which they were reconciled
between themselves, and made friends.

He then began to break with her further, that for their continuance of love,
and to avoid all suspicion or controversy that might after arise betwixt them,
she would swear unto certain Articles which he would propound unto her? Who
answered, she would with all her heart; but upon condition, that afterall, he
would swear her also to one thing which her self would propound. Who gladly
answered that he would. This being constantly agreed betwixt them, he began
thus; Sweet wife, will you never depart over this threshold without my leave,
but acquaint me first with the business which you go about? Who answered him,
Sweet husband I will. Next says he, Will you never offer to cast a wanton
glance upon any man? Or whosoever shall offer to tempt your chastity, to
deliver unto me his name? Willingly, says she. Will you also swear, says he,
whilst you live to be true (...) my bed, and never (...) that conjugall tie
(...) is past betwixt u^? Who answered, With all my heart. And observing his
palpable jealousy, asked him if these were all? Who answered, Yes: and
withal sweet wife (says he) now what is that further which you desire that
I should bind you to by oath? Who replied, Only this svveet husband, that
after these oaths taken, you will swear me that I shall not keep any one
of these articles which you would have me sworn to. Which said, she stepped
out of the chamber, down into the kitchen, and left him ruminating upon this
answer.

Another Tradesmans wife (for I will name no particular Trade, to avoid
offense) her husband being at a Fair in the Country, the Foreman of his shop,
whom he had left to manage his affairs at home, cast many a vvanton look
upon his Mistress, and she failed not to answer him with the like: at length
he put on that audacity to move her in the business, but she counterfeited
anger, and seemed altogether averse to his suit, threatening him, if he
persisted to prosecute it any further, she would acquaint his Master with it
at his coming home; which made him at that time to urg^ it no further. But
still such interchange of vvanton glances continued betwixt them, that it
emboldened him in a second encounter: in which he desired her to take the
advantage of his Masters absence; but still she ansvvered him with No; till at
length he urging still further, from No she said nothing at all; which gave
him such encouragement, that the same night, leaving his Mistress making her
self unready in the kitchen, he stole into her chamber, and stripping
himself, got into the bed, and covered himself over head and ears. At length
up comes his Mistress, and having locked her chamber fast to her, unclothes her
self to her next linen; and before the candle was out, opening the bed to
step in, ^pi'd him as he lay: at which she began to rate him, and called him
all the bad names she could (but softly:) at which the fellow, fearing she
would have called out, and made an uproare in the house, and so have taken him
before he was napping, desired her of pardon, and said he would willingly rise
and go from thence unto his own chamber. To whom she replied; Fellow, thou
do not hear me talk of thy rising, nor of thy going hence to thine ow^
chamber, for it is not that which I speak of; but it is thy sauciness and
boldness that I blame, who would offer to creep into thy Masters place
without the consent of thy Mistress. Well, for this time I pardon thee, but
charge you, without first getting my good will, to do so no more hereafter; and
without more words put out the candle, and went to bed to him.

The like to this was related me of another, who importuned his mistress to
lewdness in the absence of his master; to which act she would no way appear
to give any consent at all: but he thinking to prove her to the full, told her
that he had vowed to steal into her chamber that night, nay more, into her
bed. Will thou says she? do it then upon thine own peril, and I will leave
the door open a purpose; but withal I tell thee before hand, I will lay a
knife ready drawn under my beds head, with which (if thou offerest to enter) I
will kill thee. Night came, and she stripped her self, put out the candle, and
went to bed: anon after in comes he* and softly stealing (whilst she
counterfeited a sound and dead sleep) to the bed side, he began to open the
sheets, but finding her not to move at all, doubted to enter, left being
suddenly started, she with the knife might do him a mischief; and therefore
thought to go ^oftly out as he came in: which she perceiving, as if she had
suddenly awaked out of sleep, asked, Who art thou? who is there? He answered
again, It is I. What I, says she again? So he told her his name. And what is
your business here at this time of the night? Marry says he, I had thought to
have come to bed to you, but that I durst not for your knife, and therefore I
am going hence: which hearing, she replied, Now beast that I was to forget the
knife, and leave it below in the kitchen; and therefore if thou should stay
and venture, there could be no great danger in it.

A lusty stout fellow in the Suburbs having a cursed shrew to his wife, for all
his valor could never master her tongue, but early and late she would so
whisper in his ears, that all the whole street might ring of her. At length he
beat her so soundly, that she durst not thunder unto him for some weeks
after; in so much that he verily presumed he had got the victory over her, and
so he stick't not to boast to all his neighbors about: which vexed her not a
little, and therefore she thought in her self, to be revenged upon him at one
time or other, and for that she but waited for some fit oppor^unitie or other.
(...) happened that upon a summer evening, he and his Wife, sitting amongst
others of the neighbors and their wives, she made the motion that they should
go to a sport called All-hid, which is a mere chil^rens pastime; to which
they, then being set upon a merry pin, agreed. Now she had persuaded her
husband to creep into a Sack, which he, in regard of her late conformity
suspecting nothing, was willing to do: and when she had tied the Sackes mouth
fast, she called in two or three of her like conditioned Gossips, to whom she
had acquainted her project, and they every one with a good cudgel did so bast
the gentleman, that he thought his very bones to rattle in his skin; and
notwithstanding all his entreaty or fair promises, they would not let him
out, or suffer him to take breath, till he had sworn unto them, not to take
up so much as a small stick to strike her ever after; to which (being almost
stifled) he was forced to swear; nor did he offer the lest blow after, in
regard of his oath. But not long after, a great Wedding being kept in that
street, and he and his wife invited amongst the rest, after dinner they fell to
dance: amongst the rest he took his wife to task, and being in a measure
where the men are to take the women in their arms, and lift them up from the
ground, he took up his wife, and turning round with her till he came to the
top of the stairs, and then letting her fall headlong, she tumbled down to
the bottom, and great odds she had not broke her neck; and this he did
laughing. But such was her good fortune that she was only bruised, as he had
before been beaten; and finding it no advantage for her further to contend with
him, she submitted her self, and he accepted of her submission; which on
both sides was so unfainedly done, that they lived in great unity and love all
the rest of their life after.

But not altogether to tire the Reader with quarrelling and scolding: I was
told of a very fair virgin of the City, who by her fathers enforcement (but
far against her own mind) was compeld to matched with an ancient and grave
Citizen; who finding her sitting very sad and pensive the same day of her
marriage, came to comfort her: and grasping her about the waste, said, Be of
good cheer my fair wife, an old horse will travel and go through a long
journey as well as a young. At which words she fetching a great sigh, and laying
her hand upon the bottom of her belly, said, I, but I fear Sir, not in this
rode way.

Another Tradesman having a drunken queen to his wife, whom he could never
keep from the alehouse, but whatsoever he got she was ready to spend: or if
she had no money, she would pawn whatsoever was about the house; and
sittippling among her Gossips, sometimes till past midnight, and then be led
home, or carried when her own legs were not able to bear her. And he having
read many a Lecture unto her (as telling her what a loathsome sin drunkenness
was, that the end thereof was no other then hell fire, with the like good
admonitions, but all in vain. Upon a night, when with Ale and hot waters
she was so overcome, that she was brought home both speechless and
senseless, he thought to try a conclusion, if possible it were to ^eforme
it in her: and causing her to be laid upon a cold earthen floor, he made a
great fire, which compast her about, and calling in his neighbors, for whom
he had provided (as for himself) furies coats, and every one with a
firebrand in his hand, attending her awaking; who by reason of the heat which
compast her, rowsed her somewhat before her time, and looking about her, she
began verily to think she was in Hell fire, with which her husband had so
often before threatened her, and the rather, because so many like Devils stood
about her: then fetching a deep sigh, the first words she uttered were, Alas
poor wretched soul that I am, to be thus incompast with the flames of Hell:
Is there never a ghost amongst you all so thirsty as I am now, that will join
their penny with mine, that we may send for a double pot of Ale? At which
the neighbors breaking out into a loud laughter, they discovered themselves
unto her; and finding her no way to be reclaimed, got her to bed, and left
her to be a perpetual torment to the honest man her husband.

(...) has been related to me, that in the time of auricular confession,
three young Citizens wives came to a devoute man, who was their ghostly
Father, to be shriven: and he demanding of them what grievous ^ins they had
committed, says the first, The greatest sin that I suppose my self to be
guilty of, was that upon a time, I took a strange knife which was not mine
own, and put it into my sheath. The good man not much considering upon the
matter, but thinking that young timorous women would take the least error to
be a very heinous offense, past it slightly over, and demanded of the second,
How she had offended? Who made answer that she had put two into hers: he
past her over with the like slightness, and demanded the like of the third?
Who made answer that indeed she was guilty of putting three knives into hers.
Is this all said he? They answered, Yes. Then, says he, I will dispatch you
presently, and having quickly absolved the two first, and coming to the third,
he began to consider with himself, what sheath it was which should hold three
knives, when he never saw any that held more then two and a bodkin; and asked
her what she meant by those knives? To whom she plainly answered, that three
several men had had the use of her body, besides her husband: when presently
finding the error, he called the former whom he had ignorantly absolved, and
said, Get you hence for, three pestilent and cunning baggages; I absolve none
of you all, you have confessed amiss: What, would you make me believe, that
betwixt Penis and Cultellus is no difference? And so unshriven in a great anger
he dismissed them.

CHAP. X.
Pleasant discourse betwixt a Noble man and a Merchant. Lectures read by
country Gentlewomen and Ladies to their husbands. By the soldiers wife, to her
Captain or Leiv^enant. And of Court Ladies to their Lords.

A Nobleman and a worthy Merchant jesting together freely, without any
exceptions to be taken, says the Nobleman to him, I wonder at you Merchants,
who for the most part have very beautiful and fair wives, that dare trust
them here at home, whilst you take such long voyages into Countries so far
remote: surely it cannot choose but be a great trouble to your minds being
abroad, for fear they should violate their conjugall tie at home: when we
Noblemen deal more securely; for if we take a journey either from the Court to
the Country, or from the Country up to the Court, we leave our Ladies well
accommodated and guarded by Servants, Grooms, and Pages. The Merchant
perceiving how he played upon him, said unto him again (by your Lordships
favor, and without offense be it spoken) How comes it to be a proverb, that
Noblemens children are not (for the most part) so well featured and favored,
as the sons and daughters of Citizens? If your Lordship will not be offended, I
can show you the reason. I pray thee do, says the Noble man, I give thee free
leave and liberty to speak. Then thus, says the Merchant, In the absence of
all such Merchants as have houses in the City, it being so populous, there are
choice either of young Aldermens sons, or of such lusty young Gallants as use
to insidiate the chastities of beautiful women in the absence of their
husbands; and they having their choice, will commonly pick out the properest
men to transgress with; and so betwixt them comes a fair and well featured
issue: when you Noblemen taking your journeies, take all your Gentlemen along
to attend you, leaving none with your Ladies, but a Chamberlain, Cook, or a
Coachman, and they in your absence being glad to make use of such course
grooms, I suppose that may be the reason why your children are not so fair
and well favored as ours. At which answer, the Nobleman smiled, and taking the
retort as well as the Merchant did the jest put upon him at first, they parted
without any further excep^ion. But ere I come to the Court, I must first look
back upon the, Country, and see how the Gentlewoman there bred uses to
lecture to her Esquire or Knight: and after how the Soldiers wife uses to
read to her Lieutenant o^ Captain.

An Esquires wife, being an excellent housewife, but of a very loud tongue
withal, used to tax him for being too free in his kitchen, sellar and at his
table; for keeping too many inpertinent servants, too many horses and dogs,
hounds, greyhounds and spaniels, hawks, etc. which drew him to unnecessary
charges. Then laid the law to him, what he might save in the year, which he
vainly and profusely wasted; with diverse other things to the like purpose,
with so often iteration (as preaching still upon one text) both at board and in
bed, that tired with her continual clamours, and withal she often forbearing
his embraces, unless he would reform all things according to her mind, and
leave all his estate to her sole management, he grew not to love her so well as
at the first, and casting his eye upon a pretty slut, his Gardeners wife, he
neglecting his own, grew very much enamored of her, but durst not come to the
house, by reason of his wives jealousy; yet he wrought so by one of his
servants, who dealt for him to the woman, that she was willing to yield to any
thing to do her Master a pleasure, so it might be done safely, and without
suspicion, either from her husband or her mistress. It was then concluded,
that they should meet in a lodge some half a mile from the Manor house, and
to that purpose, he had sent his Gardener some twenty miles out of the town;
and the better to conveigh her thither, he commanded his man to provide a large
basket into which to put the woman, and cover it with strewing flowers, herbs,
and sallets; which was accordingly done. The Master of the house got up early
to keep this appointment: so was the Mistress to dog her husband, as
mistrusting his early rising: and in the way meets this fellow with his basket,
the bottom of which, by reason of the weight of the woman, was quite broken,
and her legs and feet hung down below his knees: which she perceiving, called
the fellow unto her, and asked him what he had in his basket? Sallets
Mistress; says he: Sallets, and nothing else? Nothing Mistress, says he,
but herbs and sallets. Well says she, carry them to your Master, and tell
him from me, this is a fish day, and bid him beware what flesh he tastes
with those sallets. The fellow nothing perceiving all this while* makes way to
the lodge, and delivers his burden; the Gentlewoman follows, and before her
Husband discovers the woman. The cause was at first somewhat bitterly debated
betwixt them; but all the choler being vented, they fell to a more mild
atonement: in which it was concluded, He would ever after forsake his lust, so
long as she would forbear her Lecture.

A Knights wife in the Country was perfect in the same doctrine, and read it as
freely as the former; and tiring him one morning with a tale of an hour long,
he not interrupting her in one syllable, she vexing all this while that he made
her no answer, at length for mere weariness she gave over. Then he knocked as
loud as he could, till one came up: he then commanded him to call up the
servants of the house, menservants and maidservants, up into the chamber, and
that instantly: who presently ran down as he was commanded; she in the mean
time wondering what it might mean: (I forgot to tell you that he bade them to
bring their Church books with them.) Well, all of them came up thus
accommodated, and demanded what his Worships pleasure was? Marry (says he)
this was the cause I sent for you, my wife has preached to me a very learned
Sermon, in which she borrowed somewhat of the houre-glasse, and exceeded her
time, and it is but now ended, and I desire it may not go off without a
Psalm; and therefore says he (and was going on) when she interrupting him,
said, Get you all down about your several affairs, and that I charge you
instantly, or you shall hear from me in another kind. Which they incontinently
did: when she, ashamed of the ^ricke he had put upon her, desired him to use it
or the like no more, and she would never trouble him either in his nights sleep
or his mornings rest after.

I come now to the Soldiers wife. It is recorded of a brave and noble Captain
to have a brauling shrew to his wife, from which turbiflency he could by no
gentle means reclaim her; and therefore he so awed her with threats and
menaces, and now and then with a kick or a blow, that she was forced to give
her unseasonable Lectures quite over. Then she going often to confession, still
when she came to her ghostly father, in stead of her own faults reckoned up
all that she either knew or could devise of her husband. In so much that the
good man meeting with the Captain, gave him courteous admonitory counsel, as
to leave drinking, swearing, rioting, and the like; by which the Captain might
perceive that some or other had complained of him. Not long after, the woman
insinuates with her husband, that for any thing that had ever past betwixt them
either in words or blows, in which she was the sole sufferer, she did heartily
forgive him, and desired the like forgiveness from him, if by her loud tongue
she had any way offended him, promising a reformation of all her misdemeanors
for ever after; and therefore that lasting unity might continue betwixt them,
she desired him to go to her ghostly father, and heartily confess him of his
sins, which would be a mean to ratify and confirm all conjugall love betwixt
them. The Captain was persuaded, and went, and coming before the grave
Churchman, told him he was desired to come unto him, and now being here (says
he) I would know what your will is with me. Who said, I would wish you to
consider with your self, and rub up your remembrance, and calling to mind all
your sins and offenses, riots and disorders, and what else; for which
(repenting of them unfeignedly) I will give you present absolution. Nay if that
be all (said the Captain) that labor is saved already, and needs no second
iteration; I know you are my wives Confessor, and she has told unto you all
my sins, and more than I ever did or thought to do already: and so bluntly
left him.

A brave Lieutenant amongst many other wounds lost an eye in the wars, and
afterward retiring himself into his own Country, where he had some means to
live on, bethought himself, after all those tumultuous dangers past, to betake
himself to a peaceable and quiet life; and to that purpose intended to marry.
A match was presently offered him, a Virgin (supposed) both of good feature and
competent dower. The marriage day came, and was past with great joy and
solemnity, and the Bride and Bridegroom (according to the custom) brought to
their bed. The curtains were drawn, and they left to their rest; when he
coming to do the office of an husband, perceived she had bin before
devirginated, and was not a true maid; and thrusting her from him in great
anger, said, A way thou strumpet, I took thee for a perfect Virgin, and now I
find thee to be a woman flaw'd and unperfect. Who boldly answered him again*
And is not the match equal* since I have accepted of the^ being maimed, and
wanting one eye? But (replied he) I received my hurt from mine enemy. And I
(answered she) received th^^ which so much troubles thee from my best friend.

I must be sparing to speak of the Court: yet no question even your Court
Ladies are women, and have tongues, though they know by their noble breeding
better how to govern them, than others, who have not had their generous
education and breeding. Amongst the rest, I have read one short story in an
approved Au^hor, that a Basket-maker in the country, having with his best care
and cunning made an end of an extraordinary Basket, which had been bespoke, and
finding it finished to his own desire and fancy, (his wife then sitting by him)
he said, Now God be thanked, I have finished my Basket, and I pray thee wife say
so too. But she being ref^actory and obstinate, held her tongue; and the more
he entreated her, the more adverse she was to him, giving him foul and course
language. Which (...) not able to endure, fell upon her with a good cudgel,
and beat her till she was forced to cry out. A Noble man coming then by
accidentally, with a great train a^ his heels, finding her weeping, began at
first to commiserate the woman, and to chide the man for striking her: but
being by him truly informed of the cause, he commended the fellow for justly
correcting her dis^^ bedience, and told her (...) had her mends in her (...)
hands: so left them; and rid home to his house. At supper he related all the
circumstance (before discoursed) to his Lady, and asked her opinion of the
matter. Who answered, The Basket-maker was a Knave to offer to beat his wife
upon so slight an occasion. Who replied unto her, Why Madam, would you be so
perverse and obstinate unto me, if I should command you to speak these words?
Indeed my Lord, answered she, I would. How, says he? I charge you to say these
words before all this company, God be thanked, I have finished my Basket. Who
answered again, My Lord I will die before I will do it. At which he
mightily enraged; rose from the table, and taking a battoone in his hand, had
he not been held by maine force by his noble guests and his Gentlemen about
him, there had been as great a fray betwixt them, as there was with the
Basket-maker and the shrew his wife. Now what manner of Lecture she read after
to her Lord I cannot relate, being then not present to hear it.

CHAP. XI.
Twelve things that have been the Authors of much mischeife. Of the famous and
notorious scold Xantippe. A Curtain Lecture read by a Queen to her Husband,
worthy all women's imitation.

TWelve things have bin the Authors of much mischief: Age without wisdom:
Prudence without employment: A Master of an house without a family: Pride
without riches: Riches without honor: Nobility without virtue: A people
without awe: A City without Laws: Office without clemency: Youth without
fear: A religious life without peace: A woman without shame.

And such an one was Xantippe, the wife of Socrates; of whom we will speak
something, only to show that there have been scolds of old as there be now.
Some report that he kept two wives at once, the one Myrtho, the other the
aforenamed Xantippe. And to a friend of his, earnestly demanding why he kept
two such women at once, under one roof; especially being scolding queanes,
ever brauling and chiding, and did not beat them out of his doors, and confine
them his family? he made answer, These women teach me at home, the patience
that I must use in sufferance abroad: for being thoroughly exercised with these,
I shall be the better able to endure the morosity of others.

Upon a time, when Xantippe in the open Market place had plucked his cloak
from his back, and such of his friends as saw it, said unto him, Why Socrates
do you not correct this impudent outrage in her, and chastise her soundly for
it? replied to t^em, Yea marry, that were a jest indeed, that when we two be
together by the ears, all the whole market folk looking uponus, may cry, Hold
thine own Socrates, To him Xantippe: by which means we shall be made a
derision to all men.

Another time, one Euthidemus a Philosopher, and one of his most intimate
friends, coming from the wrestling place, S^crates meeting with him, invited
him home to supper; the meat being set on the table, and they being in an
earnest discourse, more minding to argue than to eat; Xantippe being therewith
very angry, rose up from the place where she sat, and wished them choked with
their prating, if they would not fall to their victuals whilst they were hot,
giving her husband very bitter and despightfull words: but they by custom
being nothing therewith moved, talked on: which she seeing, tipped up the table
over and over, and flung down all that was upon it to the ground, and so went
out of the room. But when Euthidemus, being very much moved therewith, offered
to rise up and to depart the house: Nay stay good friend, says Socrates, what
harm has she done? did not the like thing happen unto you the last time you
bad me home to dinner, when an hen leaping up amongst us, cast down and
spoiled whatsoever was upon the table? yet did we who were then your guests
only laugh at the accident, and neither fret nor fume as you now seem to do.

The same Socrates, after he had endured his wives bitter railing in the
house, at last being wearied therewith, he went out, and sat upon a bench that
sided the street door. She at his departure being much more incensed, in
regard of his silence and quietness, as giving her no more argument to speak
of; she presently (seeing where he sat) went up into the garret, and poured
down a chamber pot full of stinking water upon his head: at which those that
passed by fell into a great laughter; which seeing, he laughed as loud as they,
and said, Nay, I thought ve^ily, and was confident thereon, that after so loud
thunder there must needs follow a violent shower of rain. But I have done with
Socrates, wishing that all such as have the like shrewes as he had, might be
endued with the like patience to endure them.

I come now (and that I propose to be the conclusion of this work) to tell you
of a curtain Lecture, read by a virtuous Queen to the King her Husband;
super-exceeding all the former, and worthy the observation and imitation of all
good women, of what estate and condition soever. The History thus follows.

Amongst the Kings of Arragon, there was one Don Pedro (vulgarly Don Peter) the
seventh of that name; but before his Inauguration, Count of Barcellonas, who
took to wife a beautiful young Lady called Donna Maria, daughter to the
Earl of Mount Pesulia, and Nephew to the Emperor of Constantinople; who
notwithstanding she was plenally furnished with all the accomplishments both
of nature and grace; as knowing that beauty annexed with virtue purchases
praise with immortality, and that (as another says) if chastity and good name
be lost, there is nothing left in women that can be praise-worthie; and that
she knew withal, that true virtue was the beauty of the soul, the grace of
the body, and the peace of the mind; and that it might be said of her, as
Seneca in Hercule Furente speaks of Megera the wife of Hercules: Gravent
Catenae corpu^, and long a fame
Mors protrahatur lenta, non vincit fidem, etc.
Although my body be oppressed with chains,
And famine by a lingering death constraines
My weary life, no violence shall decline
My faith from thee, I Am still ( Alcides) thine.


Notwithstanding all this goodness inherent to her greatness, the dissolute
King, growing neglectfull of his first fair choice, bends his inordinate
affections fully upon fresh change. He sleeps now only in the bosoms of
Catamites, and base prostitutes; whilst her company and consociety is both at
board and bed quite abandoned.

But the good Queen, less troubled with the want of his board or bed
fellowship, than grieved with the despair she had of hopeful and princely
issue; knowing, as Basil says, that barren marriage is seldom without
braules, she bethought her self, how by redeeming the one, she might recover
the other. And to that purpose she dealt privately (being wonderously for her
virtues sake beloved of all) with one of the Pages of the Kings bedchamber,
whom he most employed in his private prostitutions, to bring her covertly to
the Kings bed, to supply the place appointed for one of his best loved
mistresses. This was as effectually performed, as considerately plotted: so
that the King once more enjoyed his Queen, and was as prodigal of those
favors to her, as he pretended to another.

The morning growing on, and he now sufficiently sated, hastens her departure,
both for his own honor and her credit. But she taking hold of the present
occasion, began to discover her self in these or the like words, and read unto
him this short Lecture: My gracious Lord and Husband, if I have offended you in
the fervencie of my love, I here voluntarily submit my self to the ty^annie of
your hate: yet if it please you considerately to examine the cause of my hither
com^ing, it was neither to quench any immoderate desire in my self, nor envy
to intercept any of those favors you intended unto another: it was not lust,
but love, hoping that this nights unexpected passage may bless us with issue,
and beautify the Kingdom with a joyful heir. For why should strangers
inherit, where there is yet hope left that we may have of our own to succeed.
Nor will I leave your side till you call into your chamber some persons of
honor and ^rust; to the end that if heaven be so gracious unto us, that royal
fruit (by me so much desired) may ensue by this adventure, the world by their
testimony may take notice, that it is legitimate, to crown me with the name of
an happy Mother; and not adulterate, to brand me with the title of a lewd and
lascivious strumper.

The King, though he seemed somewhat troubled at the first, yet better
recollecting himself, was not any way displeased with the Q^eenes honest
deceit: but presently called in two Gentlemen of his chamber, as witnesses of
that truth; considering it touched his own honor as much as the Queens
desire. The event of this stratagem proved fortunate, both to the Parents and
the kingdom: for by that meeting she conceived with child, and according to
the season of women was delivered of a son, on the first day of February in
the veere of Grace 1196. The Father and Mother, when the solemnity of his
Baptism was to be celebrated, differing about the name, they caused twelve
torches of equal length and making to be alighted at once, they bearing the
names of the 12. Apostles; with this omen, that the name of that torch which
was first burnt out, should be given to the Infant: which happened to be
that of S. James; and so was he called James, being the chief Saint whom the
Arragonians celebrate.

He proved a rare and an unparalleld Prince, as well in foreign wars as
domestic government: he was beneficial to his servants, and bountiful to his
soldiers: his courage was full of constancy, and continued without change;
proving such an one as Socrates characters for valiant. Great attempts he
undertook without diffidence, and managed them without fear. Making
invasion upon the Mores, he pierced with a great army the I Will of Majorque,
then in their possession, and after many skirmishes brought it under his own
subjection. He invaded Carihage, and made his name famous in Africa.

He had a fair and fertile issue, sons and daughters. His eldest was Don
Peter, who succeeded him in the kingdom of Arragon: his second, Don James,
whom he made King of the two Isles, Majorque and Minorque: his third was
Archbishop of Toledo. His eldest daughter, Donna Tollant, was Queen of
Castile: the second, Donna Isabella, Queen of France: the third, Donna Urracha,
was married to Don Emanuell Prince of Castile. His son Don Pedro espoused
the daughter of the King of Navarre. Great pity therefore it had been that the
meeting of that happy night had been intermitted, in which the royal father
of so kingly ^ progeny was begot. He lived 72. years, and died ^^^ligiously,
retiring himself to a sequestered life. For being troubled with a gri^vous
disease, which man him unable for governmen^ he disposed of his scep^^ and
estate, and expired in the City Valentia in a Monast^ry, in the year 1266.
abo^ the beginning of August.

I need not to have travell^^ so far for an history to (...) purpose, when our
ow^^ kingdom has afforded ^work^ like, betwixt persons of (...) greatest
quality, who by the like slight practiced by (...) forsaken Ladies, have not
^eene only a means of re^onciliation, but of happy propagation and issue.
Great ^hen has been the virtue and patience of those noble Matrons, to suffer
such corrivalship, in conniving at their own maidservants and Gentlewomen;
considering that (as Crates says) nuptial faith is seldom violated without
revenge. Besides, there can be no greater temptation to corrupt the constancy
and loyalty of a married woman, than when she perceives her husband to
discharge upon her his discontents and virulencies, and reserve all his time
and consocietie for the person of another.

Aristotle affirms, th^^ man or woman is worthy to be accounted stout, bold
and valiant, who do no^ only with patience, indu^^ injuries and rebukes of
fered them, but strive to repay the best good for the worst evil. For
patiencei of such similitude, and nee^^ alliance unto fortitude, th^^ she is
either her sister or her daughter. And thoug^ this virtue (as Cicero says)
being often provoked with injuries may break out into fury; yet in such
distraction, it is good for wronged women, to think upon the worst how to
better it, and to wish the best with intent to further it, and whatsoever shall
happen patiently to endure it. For the only remedy for injuries, is to study
how to forget them. I conclude with the Emperor Aurelius, who tells us, that
it is more safety to forget a wrong than to revenge it; to suffer infirmities,
and dissemble mishaps: the one is the office of a constant sick man, the other
of a cunning Statesman. But for a wife to bear with the weakness and
imperfections of (...) husband, is the true Character of a wise and virtuous
woman.

Gaudet patientia Duris.
FINIS.

