The play of the wether. A new and very merry interlude of all manner wethers
made by John Heywood.

The players names.
Jupiter a god. Merry report the vice. The gentylman. The merchant. The ranger.
The water myller. The wind myller. The gentylwoman. The launder. A boy the
lest that can play.
Iupyter, Right far to long as now were to recyte
The ancient estat wherein our self has reyned
What honor what laud given us of very right
What glory we have had duty vnfai^d
Of each creature which duty has constrained
For above all goods syns our fathers tale
We Iupyter were ever princypale.
If we so have been as truth it is in deed
Beyond the compass of all comparyson
Who could presume to show for any mede
So that it might appear to humayne reason
The hye renoume we stand in at this season
For syns that heaven and earth were first create
Stood we never in such tryumphant estate.
As we now do where of we would report
Such part as we se mete for time present
Chefely concerning your perpetual conforte
As the thing self shall prove in experymente
Which hyely shall bind you on knees lowly beute
Soolly to honor our hyenes day by day
And now to the matter give ear and we shall say.
Before our presens in our hye parlyament
Both gods and goodesses of all degrees
Has late assembled by comen assente
For the redres of certain enormities
Bred among them through extremities
Abusede in each to other of them all
Namely to purpose in these most special.
Our foresaid fathers Saturny and Phoebus
Eolus and Phebe these four by name
Whose natures not only so far contraryous
But also of malice each other to defame
Have long time abused right far out of frame
The dew course of all their constellacyons
To the great damage of all yerthly nacyons.
Which was debated in place said before
And first as became our fether most aunciente
With berd e white as snow, his locks both cold and hot
Has entered such matter as served is intent
Lauding his frosty mansyon in the fyrmament
To air and yerth as thing most precious
Pourgynge all humors that are contagyous.
How be if he alleges that of long time paste
Little has prevailed his great dilygens
Full often upon earth his fair frost he has cast
All things hurtful to banyshe out of presens
But Phoebus entendynge to keep him in sylens
When he has labored all night in his powers
His glarynge beams maryth all in two hours,
Phoebus to this made no manner answering
Where upon they both then Phebe defied
Each for his part leyd in her reprouynge
That by her showers superfluous they have tried
In all that she may their powers be denied
Where unto Phebe made answer no more
Then Phoebus to Saturn had made before.
Anon upon Eolus all these did fle
Complaining their causes each one a row
And said to compare none was so even as he
For when he is dysposed his blastes to blow
He suffers neither son shine, rain nor snow
They each against other, and he against all three
Thus can these four, in no manner agree.
Which seen in them self and further considering
The same to the redres was cause of their assemble
And also that we evermore being
Beside one puysant power of deite
Of wisdom and nature so noble and fre
From all extremities the mean deuydynge
To peale and plente each thing attemperynge.
They have in conclusyon holly sundryd
Into our hands as much concerning
All manner of wethers by them engendryd
The full of their powers for term everlasting
To set such order as stands with our pleasynge
Which things of our part no part required
But of all their parts right humble desired.
To take upon us whereto we did assente
And so in all things with one voice agreeable
We have clearly fynyshed our foresaid parleamente
To your great welthe which shall be fyrme and stable
And to our honor far inestimable
For sing their powers as ours addyd to our own
Who can we say know us as we should be known.
But now for fine the rest of our entente
Wherefore as now we hither are descended.
Is only to satysfye and content
All manner people which have been offendyd
By any wether mete to be amendyd
Upon whose complayntes declarynge their grefe
We shall shape remedy for their relefe.
And to give knowledge for their hither resort
We would this before proclaimed to be
To all our people by some one of this sort
Whom we list to chose here amongst allye
Wherefore each man auaunce and we shall se
Which of you is most mete to be our eryer.

Here enters Merry report Merry report. Brother hold up your torche a little
hyer
Now I beseech you my lord look on me furste
I trust your lordshype shall not find me the wurste.

Iupyter. Why what art thou that approchest so nigh.

Merry report. Forsothe and please your lordshype it is I.

Iupyter. All that we know very well, but what I.

Merry report. What I, some lay I am I perse I
But what manner I so ever be I
I assure your good lordshype I am I.

Iupyter. What manner man art thou show quyckely.

Merry report. By god a poor gentylman dwells her by.

Iupyter. A gentylman thy self brings witness nay
Both in thy light behauour and array
But what art thou called where thou do resort.

Merry report. Forsothe my lord master Merry report.

Iupyter. Thou art no mete man in our besynes.
For thine appearance is of to much lyghtnes.

Merry report. Why can not your lordshype like my name
Mine apparel nor my name another.

Iupyter. To none of all we have devotion.

Merry report. A proper lycklyhod of promocyon
Well than as wise as ye seem to be
Yet can ye se no wisdom in me
But syns ye disprayse me for so light an elft
I pray you give me leave to praise my self
And for the first part I will begin
In my behauour at my coming in
Wherein I think I have little offendyd
For sewer my curtesy could not be amendyd
And as for my seure your servant to be
Might ill have been mist for your honesty
For as I be saved if I shall not lie
I saw no man sewe for the office but I
Wherefore if ye take me not or I go
Ye must anon whether ye will or no
And syns your entente is but for the wethers
What skyis our appyrell to be fryse or fathers
I thynhe it wisdom syns no man forbad it
With this to spate a better if I had it
And for my name reportynge all way truly
What hurt to report a sad matter merely
As be occasion for the same entente
To a certain wedowe this day was I sent
Whose husband departed without her wittynge
A special good lover and she his own swettynge
To whom at my coming I cast such a figure
Mynglynge the matter according to my nature
That when we departed above all other things
She thanked me hertely for my merry tidings
And if I had not handled it merely
Perchaunche she might have take it heuely
But in such facyon I coniured and bound her
That I left her meryer then I found her
What man may compare to show the like comfort
That daily is showed by me Merry report
And for your purpose at this time meant
For all wethers I am so indyfferent
Without affection standing so up right
Son light, moan light, ster light, twy light, torche light,
Cold hete most dry, hayle rayn frost snow, lightni^g thu^d
Cloudy, mysty, wyndy, fair, foul above heed or under
Temperate or distemperate what ever it be
I promise your lordshyp all is one to me.

Jupiter. Well son considering thine indyfferency
And partly the rest of thy declaracyon
We make the our servant and immedyatly
Well would thou depart and cause proclamacyon
Publyshynge our pleasure to every nacyon
Which thing ones done with all deligens
Make thy returns again to this presens.
Here to receive all sewters of each degree
And such as to the may seem most metely
We will thou bring them before our majesty
And for the rest that be not so worthy
Make thou report to us effectually
So that we may here each manner sewte at large
Thus se thou depart, and look upon thy charge.

Merry report. Now good my lord god our lady be with ye
Friends, a felyshype let me goo by ye
Think ye I may stand thrustynge among you there
Nay by god I must thruste about other gere

Merry report goes out. At the end of this staf the god has a song played in
his torn or Merry report come in. Iupyter. Now syns we have thus far set
forth our purpose
A while we woll withdraw our godly presens
To enbolde all such more plainly to disclose
As here will attend in our foresaid pretens
And now according to your obediens
Rejoice ye in us with joy most joyfully
And we our self shall joy in our own glory

Merry report comes in. Merry report. Now syrs take heed for here comes
gods servant
Auaunte cartely keytyfs auaunt
Why ye dronken horesons will it not be
By your feaythe have ye another cap nor knee
Not one of you that will make curtesy
To me that am squyre for gods body
Regard ye nothing mine authority
No welcome home nor where have ye be
How be it if ye axyd I could not well tell
But sure I think a thousand mile from hell
And on my faith I think on my conscience
I have been from heaven as far as heaven is hens
At Louyn, at London, and in Lumbardy
At Baloocke, at Barforde, and in Barbary
At Canturbery, at Couentre, at Colchester
At Wansworth, and at Welbecke, at Westchester
At Fullam, at Faleborne, and at Fenlowe
At wallyngeforth, at wakefelde, and at waltanstowe
At Tawcon, at Typtre, and at Totnam
At Glouceter, at Gylforde, and at Gotham
At Hartforde, at Harwyche, at Harcowe on the hill
At Sutbere, at Suthampton, at shoters hill
At Wallyngham, at wittam, and at werwycke
At Boston, at Brystowe, and at Berwycke
At Grauelyn, at Grauesende, and at Glastenbery
Ynge Gyngyange Iabyerde the paryshe of Butlbery
The devil him self without more leisure
Could not have gone half thus much I am sure
But now I hane warned them let them even chose
For in faith I care not who win or lose.

Here the Gentylman before he comes in blows his horn. Merry report. Now
by my troth this was a goodly herynge
I wont it had been the gentylwomens blowynge
But it is not so as I now suppose
For women's horns soundes more in a man's nose.

Gentylman. Stand ye merry my friends euerychone.

Merry report. Say that to me and let the rest alone
Syrye he welcome and all your meyny.

Gentylman. Now in good sothe my friend god a mercy
And syns that I mete the here thus by chance
I shall require the of further acquaintance
And preuely to show the this is the matter
I come to sewe to the great god Jupiter
For help of things concerning my recreacyon
According to his late proclamacyon,

Merry report. Mary I am he that this must speed
But first tell me what be ye in deed.

Gentylman. Forsothe good friend I am a gentylman.

Merry report. A goodly occupacyon by saint Anne
On my fathe your mashype has a merry life
But who makes all these horns your self or your wife
Nay even in erneste I ask you this question.

Gentylman. Now by my truth thou art a merry one.

Merry report. In fatyhe or us both I think never one sad
For I am not so merry but ye seem as mad
But stand ye stylt and take a little pain
I will come to you by and by again
Now gracious god if your will so be
I pray ye let me speak a word with ye,

Iupyter. My son say on let us here thy mind.

Merry report. My lord there standethe a suter even here behind
A gentylman in yonder corner
And as I think his name is master horner
A hunter he is and comes to make you sport
He would hunte a sow or twain out of this sort.
Here he points to the women
Iupyter. What so ever his mind be, let him appear.

Merry report. Now good master horner I pray you come nere,

Gentylman. I am no horner knave I will you know it.

Merry report. I thought ye had, for when ye did blow it
Hard I never horeson make horn so go
As lefe ye kyst mine ars as blow my hole so
Come on your way before the god Iupyter
And there for your self ye shall be sewter.

Gentylman. Most mighty prince and god of every nacyon
Pleases your hyghnes to vouchsaue the herynge
Of me which according to your proclamacyon
Does make apparaunce in way of besechynge
Not sole for my self but generally,
For all came of noble and ancient stock
Which forte above all does most thankefully
Daily take pain for wealth of the comen flock
With delygent study always deuysynge
To keep them in order and unity
In peace to labor the encres of their living
Whereby each man may prosper in plente
Wherefore good god this is our hole desiring
That for ease of our pains at times vacant
In our recreacion which chefly is hunting
It may please you to send us wether pleasant
Dry and not mysty the wind calm and sryll
That after our hounds yournynge so merely
Chasynge the dear over pale and hill
In herynge we may follow and to comfort the cry

Iupyter. Right well we do perceive your hole request
Which shall not fail to rest in memory
Wherefore we will ye set your self at rest
Till we have hard each man indifferently
And we shall take such order universally
As best may stand to our honor infynyte
For wealth in common and each man's synguler profit

Gentylman. In heaven and earth honored be thy name
Of Iupyter whom of his godly goodness
Has set this matter in so goodly frame
That every wight shall have his desire doubtless
And first for us nobles and gentylmen
I doubt not in his wisdom to provide
Such wether as in our hunting now and then
We may both tayse and receive on every side
Which thing ones had for our said recrearyon
Shall greatly prevail you in proferrynge our health
For what thing more needful then our preseruacyon
Being the weal and heddes of all commonwealth

Merry report. Now I beseech your mashype whose head be you.

Gentylman, Whose head am I, thy head what say thou now.

Merry report. Nay I think it very true so god me help
For I have ever ben of a little whelpe
So full of fansyes and in so many fyttes
So many small reasons and in so many wits
That even as I stand I pray god I be deed
If ever I thought them all mete for head
But syns I have one head more then I knew
Blame not my reioysynge I love all things new
And sure it is treasour of heddes to have store
One fear can I now that I neue could before.

Gentylman. What is that.

Merry report. By god syns ye came hither
I can set my heed and my tail together
This head shall save money by saint Mary
From hensforthe I will no Potycary
For at all times when such things shall myster
My new head shall give mine old tail a glyster
And after all this then shall my hedde wait
Upon my tail and there stand at receyte
Sir for the rest I will not now move you
But if we live shall smell how I love you
And sir touching pour suit, here depart when it please you
For be ye sure as I can I will ease you.

Gentylman. Then give me thy hand that promise I take
And if for my sake any suit thou do make
I promise thy pain to be required
More largely than now shall be recyted.

Merry report. Alas my neck, gods pyty where is me head
By saint Yue I fere me I shall be ded
And if I were me think it were no wonder
Syns my head and my body is so far a sonder
Master person now welcome by my life
I pray you how does my maystres your wife

Enters the Merchant. Merchant. Sir for the presthode and wife that ye
allege
I se ye speak more of dotage then knowledge
But le pas sir I would to you be suter
To bring me if ye can before Iupyter.
Yes mary can I, and will do it in deed
Tarry and I shall make way for your speed
In faith good lord if it please your gracyous godshype Merry re.
I must have a word or twain with your loldshyhe
Sir yonder is another manin place
Who makes great suit to speak with your grace
Your pleasure ones known he comes by and by.

Iupyter. Bring him before our presens sone hardely

Merry report. Why where be you shall I not find ye
Come away I pray god the devil blind ye.

Merchant. Most mighty prince and lord of lords all
Right humbly be secheth your majesty
Your merchant men through the world all
That it may please you of your benygnite
In the daily danger of our goods and life
First to consider the desert of our request
What wealth we bring the rest to our great care and gryfe
And then to reward us as ye shall think best
What were the surplusage of each comodyte
Which grows and increases in every land
Except exchange by such men as ye be
By way or entercours that lies on our hand
We fraught from home things whereof there is plents
And home we bring such things as there be scant
Who should before us Merchants accounted be
For were not we, the world should wysh and want
In many things, which now shall lack rehersall
And preuely to conclude we beseech your hyghnes
That of the benefyte proclaimed in general
We may be part takers for comen entres
Stably shynge wether thus pleasynge your grace
Stormy nor mysty the wind mesurable
That sauely we may pass from place to place
Berynge our selles for speed most valeable
And also the wind to change and to turn
East, West, North, and South, as best may be set
In any one place not to long to soiourne
For the length of our viage may lose our market.

Iupyter. Right well have ye said and we accept it so
And so shall we reward you or we go hens
But ye must take paciens till we have hard mo
That we may indifferently give sentens
There may pass by us no spot of negligence
But justly to judge each thing so vpryght
That each man's part may shine in the self right

Merry report. Now sir by your faith if ye should be sworn
Hard ye ever god speak so syns ye were borne
So wise to gelitelly his words be showd.

Marchaunte I thank his grace my sewt is well bestod.

Merry report. Sir what vyage entende ye next to go.

Marchaunte. I trust or inydlent to be at Syo.

Merry report. Ha ha is it your mind to sail at Syo
Nay then when ye will, by lady ye may go
And let me alone with this, be of good chere
Ye may trust me at Syo as well as here
For though ye were fro me a thousand mile space
I would do as much as ye were here in place
For syns that from hens it is so far thither
I care not though ye never come again hither.

Merchant. Sir if ye remember me when time shall come
Though I requyte not all, I shall deserve some.

Exeat Merchant. Merry report, Now fare you well and god thank you by saint
Anne
I pray you mark the fasshyon of this honest manne
He puts me in more trust at this metynge here
Then he shall find cause why this twenty year.

Here enters the Ranger. Ranger. God be here, now Christ keep this company.

Merry report. In faith ye be welcome even very skantly
Sir for your coming what is the matter.

Ranger. I would feign speak with the god Iupyter.

Merry report. That will not be but ye may do this
Tell me your mind I am an offycer of his

Ranger. B ye so, mary I cry you mercy
Your maystershype may say I am homely
But syns your mind is to have reportyd
The cause wherefore I am now resortyd
Pleases it your maystershype it is so
I come for my self and such other mo
Rangers and kepers of certain places
As forestes, parkes, purlewes and chases
Where we be charged with all manner game
Small is our profit and great is our blame
Alas for our wages what be we the nere
What is forty shyllynges or five mark a year
Many times and often where we be flettynge
We spend forty pens a piece at a sitting
Now for our vauntage which chefely is wyndefale
That is right naught there blows no wind at all
Which is the thing wherein we find most grefe
And cause of my coming to sewe for relefe
That the god of pyty all this thing knownuge
May send us good rage of blusterynge and blowynge
And if we can not get god to do some good
I would hyer the deuyil to run through the wood
The roots to turn up, the tops to bring under
A myschyefe upon them and a wild thunder.

Merry report. Very well said I set by your charytie
As much in a manner as by your honesty
I shall set you some what in ease anon
Ye shall put on your cap when I am gone
For I se well ye care not who win or lose
So ye may find means to win y^our fees

Ranger. Sir as in that ye speak as it please ye
But let me speak with the god if it may be
I pray you let me pass ye.

Merry report. Why nay sir by the mass ye

Ranger. Then will I leave you even as I found ye.

Merry report. Go when ye will no man here has bound ye.

Here enters the water myller and the Ranger goes out. Water myller. What ye
devil should skill though al ye world were d^^
Syns in all our speaking we never be hard
We cry our for rain the devil sped drop will cumme
We water myllers be nothing in regard
No water have we to grynde at any stynt
The wind is so strong the rain can not fall
Which keeps our myldams as dry as a flyn^
We are undone we grynde nothing at all
The greatter is the pity as thinks me
For what avails to each man his corn
Till it be ground by such men as we be
There is the loss if we be forbonre
For tourhynge our selves we are but drudges
And very beggars save only our tole
Which is right small and yet many grudges
For grynden of a busshell to give a quarte bole
Yet were not reparacyons we might do well
Our mylstons, our whele, with her kogges, and our tryndyl
Our floodgate, our mylpole, our water whele
Our hopper, our extre, our yren spyndell
In this and much more so great is our charge
That we would not recke though no water ware
Save only it touches each man so large
And each for our neighbor Christ byddeth us care
Wherefore my conscience has prycked me hither
In this to sewe according to the cry
For plente of rain to the god Iupyter
To whose presence I will go even boldly.

Merry report. Sir Idoute nothing your audacite
But I fere me ye lack capacite
For if ye were wise ye might well espy
How rudely ye err from rules of curtesye
What ye come in revelling and reheytynge
Even as a knave might go to a bear beytynge.

Water myller. All you bear record what favor I have
Herke how familearly he calls me knave
Doutles the gentylman is universal
But mark this lesson sir you should never call
Your fellow knave nor your brother horeson
For naught can ye get by it when ye have don.

Merry report. Thou art another brother nor fellow to me
For I am gods servant may thou not se
Would ye presume to speak with the great god
Nay discrecyon and you be to far od
Byr lady these knaves must be tied shorter
Sir who let you in, spoke ye with the porter.

Water myller. Nay by my troth nor with none other man
Yet I saw you well when I first began
How be it so help me god and holydam
I took you but for a knave as I am
But mary now syus I know what ye be
I must and will obey your authorytie
And if I may not speak with Iupyter.
I beseech you be my solyciter,

Merry report? As in that I will be your well wyller
I perceive you be a water myller
And your hole desire as I take the matter
Is plente of rain for encres of water
The let where of ye affirm determynately
As only the wind your mortal enemy.

Water myller. Troth it is for it blows so alofte
We never have rain or at the most not often
Wherefore I pray you put the god in mind
Clearly for ever to banyshe the wind.

Enters the wind myller. Wind myller. How is all the wether gone or I come
For the passion af god help me to some
I am a wind myller as many mo be
No wretch is wretchydnes so wretchyd as we
The hold sort of my craft be all marde at ones
The wind is so weyke it sturrerh not our stones
Nor skantly can shatter the shytren sail
That hangs shaterynge at a woman's tail
The rain never rests so long be the showers
From time of beginning till four and twenty hours
And end when it shall at night or at none
Another begins as soon as that is done
Such revel of rain ye know well enough
Destroys the wind be it never so rough
Whereby syns our mylles be come to still standdynge
Now may we wind myllers go even to hanging
A myller with a moryn and a myschyefe
Who would be a myller, as good be a thief
Yet in time past when gryndynge was plente
Who were so like gods fellows as we
As fast as god made corn we myllers made meal
Which might be best forborne for comone weal
But let that gere pass for I fear our pride
Is cause of the care which god does us provide
Wherefore I submyt me entendynge to se
What comfort may come by humylitie
And now at this time they said in the cry
The god is come down to shape remedy.

Merry report. No doubt he is here even in yonder trone
But in your matter he trusts me alone
Wherein I do perceive by your complaynte
Oppression of rain does make the wind so faynte
That ye wind myllers be elene cast away.

Wind myller. If Iupyter help not it is as ye say
But in few words to tell you my mind round
Upon this condition I would be bound
Day by day to say our ladies sauter
That in this world were no drope of water
Nor never rain but wind continual
Then should we wind myllers be lords over all.

Merry report. Come on and assay how you twain can agree
A brother of yours a myller as ye be.

Water myller. By mean of your craft we may be brothers
But whiles we live shall we never be lovers
We be of one craft but not of one kind
I live by water, and ye by the wind.
Here Merry report goes out. And sir as ye desire wind continual
So would I have rain ever more to fall
Which two in experience right well ye se
Right selde or never together can be
For as long as the wind rules it is plain
Twynty to one ye get no drope of rain
And when the Element is to far oppressed
Down comes the rain and sets the wind at rest
By this ye se we can not both obtain
For ye must lack wind or I must lack rain
Wherefore I think good before this audiens
Each for our self to lay or we go hens
And whom is though weyken when we have fynysht
Leave of his suit and content to be banysht.

Wind myller. In faith agreed but then by your licens
Our mylles for a time shall hang in suspens
Syns water and wind is chiefly our suit
Which best may be spared we will first dispute
Wherefore to the sea my reason shall resort
Where ships by mean of wind try from port to port
From land to land in distaunce many a mile
Great is the passage and small is the while
So great is the profit as to me does seem
That no man's wisdom the welthe can exteme
And syns the wind is conueyer of all
Who but the wind should have thank above all.

Water myller. Amitte in this place a tree here to grow
And thereat the wind in great tage to blow
When it has all blown this is a clear case
The tree remoueth no hear bred from his place
No more would the shype blows the best it could
All though it would blow down both mast and shrowde
Except the shype flete upon the water
The wind can right naught do a plain matter
Yet may ye on water without any wind
Row forth your vessel where men will have her synde
Nothing more rejoices the maryner
Then mean cooles of wind and plente of water
For commenly the cause of every wrache
Is excess of wind where water does lack
In rage of these storms the peril is such
That better were no wind then so far to much.

Wind myller. Well if my reason in this may not stand
I will forsake the sea and lepte to land
In every church where gods service is
The organs bear brunt of half the quere I wys
Which causes the sound of water or wind
More over for wind this thing I find
For the most part all manner mynstrelsy
By wind they deliver their sound chefely
Fill me a bagpype of your water full
As swetly shall it sound as it were stuffyd with woll.

Water myller. On my faith I think the moon be at the full
For franty ke tansyes be then most plente full
Which are at the pride of their spring in your head
So far from our matter he is now fled
As for the wind in any instrumente
It is no percell of our argument
We spoke of wind that comes naturally
And that is wind forcyd artyfycyally
Which is not to purpose but if it were
And water indede right naught could do there
Yet I think organs no such comodite
Whereby the water should banyshed be
And for your bagpyppes I take them as nyfuls
Your matter is all in fansyes and tryfuls.

Wind myller. By god but ye shall not tryfull me of so
If these things serve not I will rehearse mo
And now to mind there is an old proverb come
One bushel of march dust is worth a kings ransom
What is a hundredth thousand bushels worth than.

Water myller. Not one myte for the thing self to no man.

Wind myller. Why shall wind every where thus be obiecte
Nay in the hye ways he shall take a effect
Where as the rain does never good but hurt
For wind makes but dust and water makes dirt
Powder or syrop sir which lycke ye best
Who lycketh not the tone may lycke up the rest
But sure who ever has assayed such syppes
Had lever have dusty eyes then durty lyppes
And it is said syns before we were borne
That drught does never make derth of corn
And well it is known to the most fool here
How rain has pryced corn within thy. vii. year.

Water miler. Sir I pray the spare me a lyteell season
And I shall preuely conclude the with reason
Put case on summers day without wind to be
And ragious wind in winter days two or three
Much more shall dry that one calm day in somer
Then shall those three wyndy days in winter
Whom shall we thank for this when all is done
The thank to wind nay thank chyefly the son
And so for drought of corn thereby encres
The son does comfort and ripe all doutles
And often the wind so leyth the corn god wot
That never after can it ripe but rotte
If drought took place as ye say yet may ye se
Little helps the wind in this commodity
But now sir I deny your pryncypall
If drought ever were it were impossybyll
To have any grain for, or it can grow
Ye must plowe your land harro we and sow
Which will not be except ye may have rain
To temper the ground and after again
For springyng and plumynge all manner corn
Yet must ye have water or all is forlorn
If ye take water for no commodity
Yet must ye take it for things of necessity
For washing for showrynge all fylth clensynge
Where water lacks what bestly being
In brewynge, in bakynge, in dressynge of meat
It ye lack water what could ye drink or eat
Without water could live neither man nor beast
For water preserves both most and least
For water could I say a thousand things mo
Saving as now the time will not serve so
And as for that wind that you do sewe fore
Is good for your wyndemyll and for no more
Sir sith all this in experience is tryde
I say this matter stands clear on my side.

Wind myller. Well syns this myll not serve I will allege the rest
Sir for our will I say mine is the best
My wyndmyll shall grynde more corn in one hour
Then the water myll shall in three or four
Ye more then thine should in a hole year
If thou myghtest have as thou have wyshed here
For thou desyrest to have excess of rain
Which thing to the were ye worst thou coudest obtain
For if thou dydest it were a plain induccion
To make thyue own desire thine own destruction
For in excess of rain at any flood
Your mylles must stand still they can do no good
And when the wind does blow the uttermost
Our wyndemylles walde a main in every cost
For as we se the wind in his estate
We moderour sails after the same rate
Syns our mylles grynde so far faster then yours
And also they may grynde all times and hours
I say we need no water mylles at all
For wyndemylles be sufficient to serve al.

Water myller. Thou spekeste of all and consyderest not half
In boste of thy gryste thou art wise as a calfe
For though above us your mylles grynde far faster
What help to those from whom ye be much farther
And of two sorts if the tone should be conserved
I think ye mete the most number be served
In vales and weldes where most commodytie is
There is most people ye must grant me this
On hills and downs which parts are most varain
There must be fewyt can no mo sustain
I darre well say if it were tried even now
That there is ten of us to one of you
And where should chefely and necessaries be
But there as people are most in plente
More reason that you com. vii. mile to myll
Then all we of the vale shode clyme the hill
If rain came rasonable as I require it
We should of your wind mylles have need no whyt.

Enters Merry report. Merry report. Stop folyshe knave, for your reasonynge is
such
That ye have reasoned even ynonght and to much
I hard all the words that ye both have had
So help me god the knaves be more then mad
Another of them both that has wit nor grace
To perceive that both mylles may serve in place
Between water and wind there is no such set
But each myll may have time to use his fet
Which thing I can tell by experiens
For I have of mine own not far from hens
In corner together a couple of mylles
Standing in a marres between two hills
Not of wherytaunce but by my wife
She is feofed in the tail for term of her life
The one for wind the other for water
And of them both I thank god there stands another
For in a good hour be it spoken
The water gate is no sooner open
But clap sathe the wyndemyll even straight behind
There is good spedde, the devil and all they grynde
But whether that the hopper be dusty
Or that the mylstones be somewhat rusty
By the mas the meal is myscheuous musty
And if ye think my tale be not trusty
I make ye true prompse come when ye list
We shall find mean ye shall taste of the gryste

Water myller. The corn at receyt happily is not good

Merry report. There can be no sweter by the sweet rood
Another thing yet which shall not be cloked
My water myll many times is choked.

Water myller. So will she be thought ye should bruste your bones
Except ye be perfyte in setting of stones
Fere not the lydger beware your conner
Yet this for the lydger or ye have won her
Perchance your lydger does lack good peckynge

Merry report, So says my wife and that makes all our checkynge
She would have the myll peckt, peckt peckt every day
But by god myllers must pecke when they may
So often have we peckt that our stones wax right thynne
And all our other gere not worth a pynne
For with peckynge and peckynge I have so wrought
That I have pecke a good peckynge iron to naught
How be it if I stycke no better till her
My wife says she will have a new myller
But let it pass and now to our matter
I say my mylles lack another wind nor water
No more do yours as far as need does require
But syns ye can not agree I will desire
Iupyter to set you both in such rest
As to your welthe and his honor may stand best.

Water myller. I pray you heartily remember me.

Wind myller, Let not me be for gotten I besecheye

Both myllers goes forth. Merry report. If I remember you not both a like
I would ye were over the ears in the dyke
Now be we ryd of two knaves at one chance
By saint Thomas it is a knauish ryddaunce.

The gentylwoman enters. Gentylwoman. Now good god what a folly is this
What should I do were so much people is
I know not how to pass into the god now.

Merry report. No but ye know how he may pass into you.

Gentylwoman. I pray you let me in at the back side.

Merry report. Ye shall I so, and your forsyde so wide
Nay not yet but syns ye love to be alone
We twain will into a corner anon
But first I pray you come your way hither
And let us twain chat a while together.

Gentlwoman. Sir as to you I have little matter.
My coming is to speak with Iupyter.

Merry report. Stand ye still a while and I will go prove
Whether that the god will be brought in love
My lord how now look up lustely
Here his a derlynge come by saint Antony
And if it be your pleasure to mary
Speak quyckely for she may not tarry
In faith I think ye may win her anon
For she would speak with your lordshypen alone.

Jupiter. Son that is not the thing at this time meant
If her suit concern no cause of our hither resort
Send her out of place, but if she ve bent
To that purpose, he are her, and make us report.

Merry report. I count women lost if we love them not well
For ye se god loves them never a dele
Maystres ye can not speak with the god.

Gentylwoman. No, why.

Merry report. By my faith for his lordshyp is right besy
With a piece of work that needs must be done
Even now is he making of a new moon
He says your old moons be so far tasted
That all the goodness of them is wasted
Which of the great wete has been most matter
For old moons be like, they hold no water
But for this new moon I durst lay my gown
Except a few drops at her going down
Ye get no rain till her arysynge
Without it need and then no man's deuysynge
Could wyshe the fashyon of rain to be so good
Not gushinge out like gutters of Noyes fludde
But small drops sprynklynge sortely on the ground
Though they fell on a sponge they would give no sound
This new moon shall make a thing spring more in this while
The^ a old moae shall while a man may go a mile
By that time the god has all made an end
Ye shall se how the wether will amend
By saint Anne he goes to work even boldly
I think him wise enough for he looks holdely
Wherefore maystres be ye now of good chere
For though in his presence ye can not appear
Tell me your matter and let me alone
May hap I will think on you when you be go en

Gentylwoman. Forfoth the cause of my coming is this
I am a woman right tayre as ye se
In no creature more beauty then in me is
And syns I am fair, fair would I keep me
But the son in somer so sore does burn me
In winter the wind on every side me
No part of the year wot I where to turn me
But even in my house am I said to hyde me
And so do all other that beuty have
In whose name at this time this suit I make
Bescchynge Iupyter to grant that I crave
Which is this that it may please him for our sake
To send us wether close and temperate
No son shine no frost nor wind to blow
Then would we get the streets tryme as a parate
Ye should se how we would set our self to show.

Merry report. Yet where ye will I swear by saint Quintyne
Ye paste them all both in your own conceyt and mine

Gentylwoman. If we had wether to walk at our pleasure
Our lives would be merry out of measure
One part of the day for our apparelynge
Another part for eating and drinking
And all the test in streets to be walking
Orin the house to paste time with talk ynge.

Merry report. When serve ye god.

Gentylwoman. Who bosteth in virtue are but dawes.

Merry report. Ye do the better namely syns there is no cause
How spend ye this night

Gentylwoman. In daunsynge and singing
Till mydnyght and then fall to slepynge.

Merry report. Why sweet heart by your false faith can ye sing

Gentylwoman. Nay nay but I love it all thing.

Merry report Now by my troth for the love that I owe you
You shall here what pleasure I can show you
One song I have for you such as it is
And if it were better ye should have it by gys.

Gentylwoman. Mary sir I thank you even heartily.

Merry report. Come on syrs but now let us sing lustely.

Here they sing. Gentylwoman. Sir this is well done I heartily thank you
Ye have done me pleasure I make god a vow
Ones in a night I long for such a fyt
For long time have I ben brought up in it.

Merry report. Often time is seen both in court and town.
Long be women a bringing up and sone brought down
So fete it is, so nete it is, so nyse it is,
So trycke it is, so quycke it is, so wise it is
I fear me self except I may entreat her
I am so far in love I shall forget her.
Now good maystres I pray ye let me kys ye

Gentylwoman. Kys me quoth a why nay sir I wys ye.


Merry report. What yes hardly kys me ones and no more
I never desired to kys you defore.

Here the launder comes in. Launder. Why have ye always kyst her behind
In faith good enough if it be your mind
And if your appetyte serve you so to do
By lady I would you had kyst my ars to.

Merry report. To whom do thou speak foul hoar can thou tell.

Launder. Nay by my troth I sir not very well
But by coniectour this ges I have
That I do speak to an old baudy knave
I saw you dally with your symper de cocked
I read you beware she pycke not your pocket
Such ydell husyfes do now and than
Think all well won that they pycke from a man
Yet such of some men shall have more favor
Then we that for them daily tail and labor
But I trust the god will be so indifferent
That she shall fail some part of her intent

Merry report. No doubt he will deal so graciously
That all folk shall be served indifferently
How be it I tell the truth my office is such
That I must report each suit little or much
Wherefore with the god syns thou caust not speak
Trust me with thy suit I will not fail it to break.

Launder. Then lean not to much to gender gyglet
For here desire contrary to mine is set
I herd by her tale she would banyshe the sone
And then were we poor launders all undone
Except the son shine that our clothes may dry
We can do right naught in our laundry
Another manner loss if we should mys
Then of such nyreby ceters as she is.

Gentylwoman. I think it better that thou envy me
Then I should stand at reward of thy pytte
It is the guyse of such gross queynes as thou art
With such as I am evermore to thwart
By cause that no beauty ye can obtain
Therefore ye have us that be fair in disdain.

Launder. When I was as young as thou art now
I was within little as fair as thou
And so might have kept meyf I had would
And as derely my youth I might have sold
As the tryckest and fairest of you all
But I feared parels that after might fall
Wherefore some belines I did me provide
Lest vice might enter on every side
Which has tree enter where ydylnesse does reygne
It is not thy beauty that I disdain
But thine ydell life that thou have rehearsed
Which any good woman's heart would have perced
For I perceive in daunsynge and singing
In eating and drinking and thine apparelynge
Is all the joy wherein thy heart is set
But naught of all this does thine own labor get
For had thou nothing but of thine own travail
Thou myghtest go as naked as my nail
Me think thou should abhore such ydelnes
And pass the time in some honest besines
Better to lose some part of thy beauty
Then so often to ieoberde all thine honest
But I think rather then thou would so do
Thou had lever have us live ydylly to
And so no doubt we should if thou myghtest have
The clear son banysht as thou do crave
Then were we launders marde and unto the
Thine own request were small commodytie
For of these twain I think it far better
Thy face were son burned and thy clothes the swetter
Then that the son from shynynge should he smytter
To keep thy face fair and thy smock be shytter
Sir how lycke ye my reason in her case.

Merry reoorte. Such a raylynge hoar by the holy mas
I never hard in all my tyfe till now
Iu deed I love right well the tone of you
But or I keep you both by gods mother
The devil shall have the tone to fet the other.

Launder. Promise me to speak that the son may shine bright
And I will be gone quyikly for all night.

Merry report. Get you both hens I pray you hertely
Your suits I perceive and will report them truly
Un to Jupiter at the next leisure
And in the same desire to know his pleasure
Which knowledge had even as he does show it
Fere ye not time enough ye shall know it.

Gentylwoman. Sir if ye medyll remember me first

Launder. Then in this medlynge my part shall be the wurst.

Merry report. Now I beseech our lord the devil the burst
Who medleth with many I hold him accursed
Thou hoar can I meddle with you both at ones.

Here the gentylwoman goes forth. Launder. By the mass knave I would I had
both thy stones
In my purs if thou meddel not indifferently
That both our matters in issue may be lykely.

Merry report. Many words little matter and to no purpose
Such is the effect that thou disclose.
The more ye byb, the more ye babyll.
The more ye babyl, the more ye fabyl
The more ye fabyl, the more vnstabyl.
The more unstable, the more vnabyll
In any manner thing to do any good
No hurt though ye were hanged by the holy rood.

Launder. The less your scilence, the less your credence
The less your credence, the less your honesty
The less your honesty the less your assistence
The less your assistence the less abylyte
In you to do ought wherefore so god me save
No hurt in hangyng such a raylynge knave.

Merry report. What monster is this I never hard none such
For look how much more I have made her to much
And so far at last she has made me to little
Where be ye Launder I think in some spyttell
Ye shall wash me no gere for fere of fretynge
I love no launders that shrynke my gere in wettynge
I pray the go hens and let me be in rest
I will do thine errande as I think beft.

Launder. Now would I take my leave if I wyste how
The longer I live the more knave you,

Merry report. The longer thou lyuest the pity the gretter
The sooner thou be ryd the tidings the better
Is not this a sweet office that I have
When every drab shall call me knave
Every man knows not what gods service is
Nor I my self knew it not before this
I think gods servants may live holyly
But the devil servants live more merely
I know not what god gives in standing fees
But the devil servants hane casweltees
A hundredth times mo then gods servants have
For though ye be never so stark a knave
Yt ye lack money the devil will do wurse
But bring you straight to another man's purse
Then will the devil promote you here in this world
As unto such tyche it does most accord
First Pater noster quies in celis
And then ye shall sens the strife with your helys
The greatest friend ye have in field or town
Sandynge a typ to shall not reche your crown.

The boy comes in, the least that can play. This same is even he by allycklyhod
Sir I pray you be not you master god.

Merry report. No in good faith son but I may say to the
I am such a man that god may not mysse me
Wherefore with ye god if thou would have ought done
Tell me thy mind and I shall show it sone.

Boy. Forsothe sir my mind is this at few words
All my pleasure is in catsynge of vyrdes
And making of snow bailes and throwynge the same
For the which purpose to have set in frame
With my god father god I would feign have spoken
Desiring him to have sent me by some token
Where I might have had great frost for my pytfalles
And plente of suowe to make my snow balls
This ones had boys lives be such as no man leddes
O to se my snow balls light on my fellows hedes
And to here the birds how they slyckere there wings
In the pytfale I say it passes all things
Sir if ye be gods servant or his kynsman
I pray you help me in this yt ye can.

Merry report. Alas poor boy who sent the hither.

Boy. A hundred boys that stood together
Where they herd one say in a cry
That my god father god almighty
Was come from heaven by his own accord
This night to suppe here with my lord
And farther he said come whose wull
They shall sure have their bylles full
I fall wethers who list to crave
Each sort such wether as they list to have
And when my fellows thought this would be had
And saw me so pretty a pratelynge lad
Upon agreement with a great noys
Send little Dycke cried all the boys
By whose assent I am purueyd
To sewe for the wether a foresaid
Wherein I pray you to be good as thus
To help that god may give it us.

Merry report. Give boys wether quoth a nonny nonny.

Boy. If god of his wether will give nonny
I pray you will ye sell any
Or send us a bushel of snow or twain.
And point us a day to pay him again.

Merry report. I can not tell for by this light.
I chepte nor barowed none of him this night
But by such shyfte as I will make
Thou shall se soon what way he will take.

Boy. Sir I thank you then I may depart.

The boy goes out. Merry report. Ye farewell good son with all my heart
Now such an other sort as here has been
In all the days of my life I have not seen
No suitors now but women knaves and boys
And all their suits are in fansyes and toys
If that there come no wyser after this cry
I will to the god and make an end quickly
Oyes, if that any knave here
Be willing to appear
For whether foul or clear
Come in before this flock
And be he hole or syckly
Come show his mind quickly
And if his tail be not lyckly
Ye shall lycke my tail in the nocke
All his time I perceive is spente in wast
To wait for mo suitors I se none make have
Wherefore I will show the god all this process
And be delivered of my simple offes
Now lord according to your commandment
Attendynge suitors I have been diligent
And at beginning as your will was I should
I come now at end to show what each man would
The first suter before your self did appear
A gentylman desiring wether clear
Cloudy, nor mysty, nor no wind to blow
For hurt in his hunting and then as ye know
The Marchaunte sude for as of that kind
For wether clear and measurable wind
As they may best bear their sails to make speed
And straight after there came to me in deed
Another man who named him self a ranger
And said all of his craft be far brought in danger
For lack of living which chefely is wind fall
But he plainly says there blows no wind at all
Wherefore he desires for increase of their fleeses
Extreme rage of wind trees to tere in pieces
Then came a water myller and he cried out
For water and said the wind was so stout
The rain could not fall wherefore he made request
For plenty of rain to set the wind at rest
And then sir there came a wind myller in
Who said for the rain he could no wind win The water he wysht to be banyshe all
Besechynge yout grace of wind continual
Then came there another that would banyshe all this
A goodly dame an ydyll thing ywys
Wind, rain, nor frost, nor son shine would she have
But fair close wether her beauty to save
Then came there another that lives by laundry
Who must have wether hot and clear here clothes to dry
Then come there a boy for trost and snow continual
Snow to make snow balls and frost for his pytfall
For which god wot he sueth full gredely
Your first man would have cooles to blow meanly
The second the same save wether clear and not wyndy
The third desired storms and wind most extermely
The fourth all in water and would have no wind
The fyfte no water but all wind to grynde
The syxte would have none of all these nor no bright son
The seuent extremely the hot sone would have woone
The eight and the last for the frost and snow he prayed
By lady we shall take shame I am afraid
Who marketh in what manner this sort is led
May think it impossyble all to be speed
This number is small there lacks twain of ten
And yet by the mass among ten thousand men
No one thing could stand more wide from the other
Not one of their suitors agrees with an other
I promise you here is a shrewe piece of warke
This gere will try wether ye be a clarke
If ye trust to me it is a great folly
For it passes my brains by goods body.

Jupiter. Son thou have best diligent and done so well
That thy labor is right much thank worthy
But be thou sure we need no whyt thy counsel
For in our self we have forsene remedy
Which thou shall se but first depart hens quyckly
To the gentylman and al other suitors here
And command them all before us to appear

Merry report. That shall be no longer in doing
Then I am in coming and going

Merry report goes out. Jupiter. Such debate as from above he have hard
Such debate beneth among your selves ye se
As long as heddes from temperaunce be defarde
So long the bodies in distemperaunce be
This perceive ye all but none can help save we
But as we there have made peace concordantly
So will we here now give you remedy.

Merry report and all the suitors enters. Merry report. If I had caught them
Or ever I taught them
I would have taught them
To be nere me.
Full dear have I bought them
Lord so I sought them
Yet have I brought them
Such as they be.

Gentylman. Pleases it your majesty lord so it is
We as your subjects and humble suitors all
According as we here your pleasure is
Are presed as your presens being pryncypall
Head and governor of all in every place
Who ioyeth not in your sight no joy can have
Wherefore we all commyt us to your grace
As lord of lords us to peryshe or save.

Iupyter. As long as discrecion so well does you gyde
Obediently to use your duty
Dout ye not we shall your sauete provide
Your greuys we have hard wherefore we send for ye
To receive answer each man in his degree
And first to content most reason it is
The first man that sude wherefore mark ye this
Often shall ye have the wether elere and still
To hunte in for recompense of your pain
Also you merchants shall have much your will
For often times when no wind on land does remain
Yet on the sea pleasant cooles you shall obtain
And syns your hunting may rest in the night
Often shall the wind then rise and before day light.
It shall ratell down the wood in such case
That all ye rangers the better live may
And ye water myllers shall obtain this grace
Many times the rain to fall in the valey
When at the self times on hills we shall puruey
Fair wether for your windmilles with such cooles of wind
As in one instant both kinds of mylles may grynde.
And for ye fair women that close wether would have
We shall provide that ye may suffyciently
Have time to walk in and your beauty save
And yet shall ye have that lives by laundry
The hot son often enough your clothes to dry
Also ye pretty child shall have both frost and snow
Now mark this conclusyon we charge you arowe.
Much better have we now devised for ye all
Then ye all can perceive or could desire
Each of you sude to have contynuall
Such wether as his craft only does require
All wethers in all places if men all times might hyer
Who could live by other what is this negligence
Us to attempt in such inconvenience.
Now on the other side if we had granted
The full of the some one suit and no mo
And from all the rest the wether had forbid
Yet who so had obtained had won his own woe
There is no one craft can preserve man so
But by other crafts of necessity
He must have much part of his commodity.
All to serve at ones and one destroy an other
Or else to serve one and destroy all the rest
Another will we do the tone nor the other
But serve as many or as few as we think best
And where or what time to serve most or lest
The dyrectyon of that doubtless shall stand
Perpetually in the power of our hand.
Wherefore we will the hole world to attend
Each sort on such wether as for them does fall
Now one now other as lyketh us to send
Who that has it ply it and sure we shall
So gyde the wether in course to you all
That each with other ye shall hole remain.
In pleasure and plentyfull wealth certain.

Gentylwoman. Blessed was the time wherein me were borne
First for the blysfull chance of your godly presence
Next for our suit was there never man beforne
That ever hard so excellent a sentence
As your grace has given to us all arowe
Wherein your hyghnes has so bountyfully
Distrybuted my part that your grace shall know
Your self soole possessed.

Merchant Likewise merchants shall yield us holy
Only to laud the name of Iupyter
As god of all gods you to serve soolly
For of every thing I se you are norysher.

Ranger. No doubt it is so for so we now find
Wherein your grace us rangers so does bind
That we shall give you our hearts with one accord
For knowledge to know you only as our lord

Watermyller. Well I can no more but for our water
We shall give your lordshyp our ladies sauter

Wind myller. Much have ye bound us for as I be saved
We have all obtained better then we craved.

Gentylwoman. That is true, wherefore your grace shall truly
The hearts of such as I am have surely.

Launder. And such as I am who be as good as you
His hyghnes shall be sure on I make a vow.

Boy. Godfather god I will do somewhat for you again
By Christ ye may hap to have a bird or twain
And I promise you if any snow come*
When I make my snow balls you shall have some


