A MOST STRANGE and wonderful Herring, taken on the 26. day of November 1597.
near unto Drenton sometime the old and chief City of the kingdom of Norway.

Having on the one side the picture of two armed men fighting, and on the other
most strange Characters, as in the picture is here expressed.

First printed in Dutch at Roterdam by Ian van Doetecum. And now translated
into English.

Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. I W
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf. 1598.

A most strange and wonderful Herring taken on the 26. day of November 1597.
near unto Drenton, sometime the old and chief City of the kingdom of
Norway, having on the one side the picture of two armed men fighting, and on
the other most strange characters: as in the picture is expressed. Repent for
the kingdom of God is at hand.
THe Lord God of heaven, the most righteous and mighty judge of the world,
never intends to inflict plagues or punishments on any Country, City, or
nation, but first it pleases him of his unspeakable mercy, to forewarne the
same country, city, or nation thereof, by the mouths of his Prophets, and
other ministers of his word, or else by his wonderful signs and tokens
showed in the heavens, the earth, or other his creatures, that thereby the
people may be induced to forsake their former wickedness, and to learn
amendment and newness of life. Examples hereof we have in Genesis, how many
tokens of his wrath did the Lord show unto Pharao, before his destruction in
the red sea? Likewise before Sodom was consumde with fire from heaven, it is
written that Abraham had knowledge thereof, and entreated the Lord to spare it:
but such were the sins of that cursed City, that his prayers could not
prevail. Again, more then the space of an hundred years before the waters
drowned the world, had Noah warning to build ye Arc, and long it was ere he
finished that work, insomuch that the children of men made a scorn thereof,
and so far were they from grace, that no warning at all they took thereby.
The Ninevites having warning repented at the preaching of Jonas: but Jerusalem
was nothing moved though Christ Jesus himself foretold their destruction: for
which cause sorrow came upon them as upon a woman when she trauelleth. The
signs and tokens which the Lord sent over that City before their fall were
many and maruelleus, notwithstanding they persisted in their sins, and
flattering themselves in their own follies, made false interpretations of
those prodigious wonders. Seeing then that as the Apostle says, that
whatsoever is written, is written for our learning, let all Christians take
warning hereby, not iestingly to join themselves together (as they did in the
old world) to deride or falsely to interpret the dreadful tokens sent among
us, lest with them of Jerusalem destruction do suddenly come upon us. I have
here to show you a strange and wonderful token of Gods wrath figured forth in
a silly Herring, in which small fish he does demonstrate great and dreadful
matters as by the picture you may perceive: on the one side whereof you may
plainly behold the perfect shape of two armed men, the one having in his hand
a lance, the other a sword, close buckled in their corslets, with burgancts on
their heads, standing as it were in their defense, threatening and assayling
one another. I know that many will give as small credit hereunto, and as
slightly esteem thereof as Pharao did of the flies, and the Jews of Christ's
miracles: notwithstanding the Lord has chosen the foolish things of this
world to confound the wise, and the weak to overcome the mighty, as he
himself has expressed in his holy Gospel. Moreover there was toward the
tail of this Herring the right portraiture of two rods, the one far bigger
then the other, seeming to be bound together with two strong bands apeece,
which every man must confess to be the undoubted sign of dreadful
correction: according as the Psalmist speaks, saying: Thou shall bruise them
with a rod of Iron, and break them in pieces like a Potters vessel. In
scripture sword and pestilence is said to be the scourges of the Lord: and
therefore that cruel and bloody tyrant Tamberlaine did justly call himself the
scourge of God, by whom he corrected the proud, rebellious and wicked world:
bringing by bloody wars many kingdoms into his subjection. If we enter then
into due consideration hereof, and with the eyes of grace behold the same, we
cannot but confess, that the righteous Lord has sent these signs unto us, to
forewarne us of our wickedness, least by the sharp correcting rods of Gods
wrath we be most justly punished with sword and famine. But now behold on the
other side of this Herring, were five Characters most perfectly engraven, some
of them usual, and well known among us at this day, others strange and not
understood: but what the God of all power and might will give hereby to be
known is left to better judgment, notwithstanding let us remember, that as it
once pleased God by the finger of his power to write on the wall a heavy
sentence against Balthazar, so has it pleased him at this present to write on
this Herring undoubtedly a heavy sentence against the sins of this age,
thereby to call this drowsy world out of the damnable sleep of sin and
wickedness, wherein it has slugged so long a time. Then what is he that seeing
the same, and dreading the hot vengeance of the Lord, will not be enforced with
Balthazar to shake and tremble at the grievous judgments which is thereby
likely to be threatened: if Balthazar being a heathen King, shook so sore at
the handwriting on the wall, well may all Christians hearts shake to see, and
there withal to consider what fearful sentence may upon the Herring be
engraven. When our Savior Christ did write upon the ground, before those that
accused the woman of adultery, her accusers were thereby so confounded in
conscience, that for very shame they slipped away out of his sight: how much more
then may we be confounded at the sight and interpretation of these strange
characters, which the Lord has not written on the ground in the dust of the
earth, but in the very meat which we should eat, thereby (as it were) laying
his indgements in our dishes, at every meal to be remembered. For who is
ignorant that among the fishes of the sea, there is none so common at our table
as the Herring, no fish more used in any land, nor better known among all
sorts of people: whereby it is justly to be gathered, that the Lord has sent
it for a general warning unto his people: the Lord grant our hearts may be
moved thereby. Moreover, this Herring was full fourteen inches in length:
importing (as I conjecture) that this judgment threatened against the world for
sin is an extraordinary and no usual judgment, but such as the eyes of men
have seldom or never seen: besides, the marks were all of red and bloody
color. The Lord for Christ's sake be merciful unto us, and give us grace with
such repenting hearts to turn from our sins, that he may turn his just wrath
from us. This Herring among a number of others was taken on the 26. day of
Nouemb. 1597. near unto Drenton, sometime the ancient and chief City of the
kingdom of Norway. And after it was shown to diverse of the nobility, and
magistrates of that country. The portraiture thereof and admonition was first
printed in Roterdam, by John van Doetec^m in the Dutch tongue, and out of the
same language translated into English, for the profit and instruction of our
country people. The Lord God Almighty give us grace to watch and wait for the
coming of the heavenly brydegroome, that being decked and attired in the true
wedding garment of Christ's righteousness, we may enter with him to the heavenly
banquet, there to reign in his glorious kingdom for evermore, Amen.

FINIS.



