A dialogue conteinyng the number in effect of all the proverbs in the
english tongue, compacte in a matter concerning two manner of marriages, made
and set forth by John^ Heywood.

Londini. AN. M.D.XLVI.

The preface.
AMong other things profityng in our tongue
Those which much may profit both old and young
Such as on their fruit will feed or take hold
Are our common plain pithy proverbs old.
Some sense of some of which being bare and rude
Yet to fine and fruitful effect they allude.
And their sentences include so large a reach
That almost in all things good lessons they teach.
This write I not to teach, but to touch. for why,
Men know this as well or better than I.
But this and this rest, I write for this.
Remembryng and consyderyng what the pith is
That by remembrance of these proverbs may grow
In this tale, erst talked with a friend, I show
As many of them as we could fytly find,
Falling to purpose, that might fall in mind.
To thentent the reader redyly may
Find them and mind them, when he will always.
The first part.
The first chapter.
OF mine acquayntaunce a certain young man
(Being a resorter to me now and than)
Resorted lately, showyng him self to be
Desirous, to talk at length alone with me.
And as we for this a mete place had won,
With this old proverb, this young man begoon.
who so that knew, what would be dear,
Should need be merchant but one year.
Though it (quoth he) thing impossible be
The full sequel of present things to fore se:
Yet does this proverb provoke every man
Politikely (as man possibly can)
In things to come after, to cast iye before
To cast out or keep in, things for fore store.
As the provision may seem most profitable,
And the commoditee most commendable.
Into this consideracion I am wrought
By two things, which fortune to hands has brought.
Two women I know, of which twain the tone
Is a maid of flowryng age, a goodly one.
The Other a wydowe, who so many years bears,
That all her whiteness lythe in her white hears.
This maid has friends rich, but riches has she non
Nor none can her hands get to live upon.
This wydow is very rich, and her friends bare.
And both these, for love to wed with me fond are.
And both would I wed, the better and the wurs.
The tone for her person, the the other for her purs.
They woo not my substance, but my self they woo.
Goods have I none, and small good can I do.
On this poor maid her rich friends I clearly know
(So she wed where they will) great gifts will bestow.
But with them all I am so far from fauer,
That she shall sure have no grote, if I have her.
And I shall have as littell, all my friends swear,
Except I follow them, to wedde else where.
The poor friends of this rich widow bear no sway,
But wed her and wyn wealth, when I will I may.
Now which of these twain is like to be derest
In pain or pleasure to stycke to me nerest,
The depth of all doubts with you to consider,
The sense of the said proverb sendth me hither.
The best bargain of both quickly to have skande:
For one of them think I to make out of hand.
The second chapter.
Friend (quoth I) welcome, and with right good will,
I will as I can your will herein fulfill.
And two things I see in you, that show you wise.
First in weddyng or ye wed, to ask advise.
The second, your years being young it apperes,
Ye regard yet good proverbs of old fern years.
And as ye ground your tale upon one of them
Furnishe we this tale with euerychone of them.
Such as may fitly fall in mind to dispose,
Agreed (quoth he.) Then (quoth I) first this disclose.
Have you to this old wydowe, or this young maid,
Any words of assurance or this time said?
Nay in good faith said he. Well than (said I)
I will be plain with you, and may honestly.
And plainly to speak, I like you (as I said)
In two fore told things, but a third have I wayde,
Not so much to be lyked, as I can deem,
Which is in your weddyng your haste so extreme.
The best or wurst thing to man for this life
Is good or ill choosyng his good or ill wife.
I mean not only of body good or bad,
But of all things meet or unmeet to be had
Such as at any time by any mean may
Between man and wife, love increase or decaie.
Where this ground in any head, gravely grateth
All fyry haste to wed, it soon rebateth.
Some things that provoke young men to wed in haste
Show after weddyng that haste makes waste.
When time has turned white sugar to white salt,
Than such folk se, soft fire makes sweet malte.
And that deliberacion does men assyst
Before they wed, to beware of had I wist.
And than their tymely weddyng does clear appear,
That they were early up, and never the nere.
And ones their hasty heat a little controlde,
Than perceive they well, hot love sone cold.
And when hasty witless mirth is mated we will,
Good to be merry and wise, they think and feel.
Haste in weddyng some man thynkth his own avail
When haste proves a rod made for his own tail.
And when he is well beaten with his own rod,
Than sees he haste and wisdom, things far odd.
And that in all, or most things, wished at need,
Most times he sees, the more haste the less speed.
In les things the^ wedding, haste showth haste ma^s fo
So that the hasty man never wants woe.
These sage said sawes if ye take so profounde,
As ye take that, by which ye took your ground,
Than find ye grounded cause by these now here told*
In haste to weddyng your haste to withholde.
And though they seem wives for you never so fyt,
Yet let not harmfull haste so far out ren your wit,
But that ye hark to here all the holle some,
That may please or displease you in time to come.
Thus by these lessons ye may learn good cheap
In weddyng and all thing, to look or ye leap.
Ye have even now well ouerlookt me (quoth he)
And lepte very nigh me to. For I agree.
That these sage sayings do weightily way
Against haste in all thing: but I am at baye.
By other parables of like weighty weight,
Which haste me to weddyng as ye shall here straight.
The third chapter.
HE that will not when he may,
When he would, he shall have naie.
Beauty or riches the tone of the tweyne
Now may I chose, and which me list obtain.
And if we determyne me, this maid to take,
And than tract of time train her me to forsaek:
Than my beautyfull marriage lythe in the dyke,
And never for beauty, shall I wedde the like.
Now if we awarde me this wydowe to wedde,
And that I drive of time, till time she be dedde:
Than farewell riches, the fat is in the fire.
And never shall I to like riches aspire.
And a thousand fold would it grieve me more,
That she in my fault should dye one hour before,
Than one minute after. Than haste must provoke,
When the pygge is proferd to hold up the poke.
When the son shynth make hey. which is to say,
Take time when time co^mth, lest time stele away.
And one good lesson to this purpose I pyke
From the smiths forge, when thyron is hot stryke.
The sure sea man sees, the tide tarieth no man.
And long delays or absence somewhat to skan.
Sens that that one will not an other will,
Delays in wooers must needs their speed spyll.
And touching absence, the full account who somthe
Shall se, as fast as one gothe an another comthe.
Time is tyckell. and out of sight out of mind.
Than catch and hold while I may fast bind fast find.
Blame me not to haste, for fear mine eye be blerde.
And thereby the fat clean flyt fro my berde.
Where wooers hoppe in and out, long time may bring
Him that hoppeth best, at last to have the ryng.
I hoppyng without, for a ryng of a rushe.
And while I at length debate and beat the bushe,
There shall step in other men, and catch the burdes.
And by long time lost in many vain wurdes
Between these two wiuis, make sloth speed confou^d
While between two stoles, my tail go to ground.
By this, sens we se sloth must bread a skab,
Best stick to the tone out of hand, hab or nab.
Thus all your proverbs inuehyng against haste,
Be answered with proverbs plain and promptly plaste.
Whereby, to purpose all this no further fits,
But to show, so many hedds so many wits.
Which show as surely in all that they all tell,
That in my weddyng I may even as well
Tarry to long, and thereby come to late,
As come to soon by haste in any rate.
And prove this proverb, as the words thereof go,
Haste or sloth herein work noth^^ wealth nor woe.
Be it far or ny, weddyng is desteny,
And hangyng likewise, says that proverb, said I.
Than wed or hang (quoth he) what helpth in ye whole
To haste or hang a loofe, happy man, happy dole.
Ye deal this dole (quoth I) out at a wrong dur:
For desteny in this case does not so stur
Against man's endeavor, but man may direct
His will, fore provision to work or neglect.
But to show yt quick wedding may bring good speed
Somewhat to purpose, your proverbs prove in deed.
Howbeit, whether they counterpayse or out way
The proverbs, which I before them did lay,
The trial thereof we will lay a water,
Till we try more. For trying of which matter
Declare all commoditees ye can deuyse,
That by those two weddyngs to you can rise.
The fourth chapter.
I Will (quoth he) in both these cases straight show,
What things as (I think) to me by them will grow.
And where my love began there begin will I.
With this maid, the piece peerless in mine eye.
Whom I so favor, and she so fauourth me,
That half a death to us a sonder to be.
Affection each to other does us so move,
That well ny without food we could live by love.
For be I right sad, or right sick, from her sight,
Her presence absenteth all maladies quyght.
Which seen, and that the great ground in marriage
Standth upon lykyng the parties personage,
And than of old proverbs in openyng the pack,
One shewth me openly in love is no lack.
No lack of lykyng, but lack of living,
May lack in love (quoth I) and bread ill cheuyng.
Well as to that (said he) hark this o thing,
What time I lack not her, I lack nothing.
But though we have naught) nor naught we ca^ geat
God never sends mouth, but he sends meat.
And a hard beginning makes a good endyng.
In space comth grace, and this further amendyng.
Seldom comth the better, and like will to like.
God sendth cold after clothes. And this I pike.
She, by lack of substance semyng but a spark,
Steynth yet the stoutest. For a leg of a lark
Is better than is the body of a kyght.
And home is homely, though it be poor in sight.
These proverbs for this part show such a flourishe,
And then this party does delight so nourishe,
That much is my bow bent to shoot at these marks,
And kyl fear. when the sky falth we shall have larks.
All perils that fall may, who fears they fall shall,
Shall so fear all thing, that he shall let fall all,
And be more frayd tha^ hurt, if the things were done.
Fear may force a man to cast beyond the moon.
Who hops in gods help, his help can not sterte.
Nothing is impossible to a willing heart.
And will may wyn my heart, herein to consent,
To take all thing as it comthe, and be content.
And here is (quoth he) in mariyng of this maid,
For courage and commoditee all mine aid.
Well said (said I) but a while keep we in quench
All this case, as touching this poor young wenche.
And now declare your whole consideracion,
What manner things draw your imaginacion,
Toward your weddyng of this widow rich and old.
That shall ye (quoth he) out of hand have told.
The fyfte chapter.
THis wydowe being foul, and of favor ill,
In good behauour can veraie good skyll.
Pleasauntly spoken, and a veraie good wit,
And at her table, when we together sit,
I am well served, we fare of the best.
The meat good and wholesome, and holsomly dressed.
Sweet and soft lodgyng, and thereof great shyft.
This felt and seen, with all implementes of thrift,
Of plate and money such cupbordes and cofers,
And that without pain I may wyn these profers,
Than couetyse bearyng Venus bargayn back,
Praisyng this bargain, says, better leave than lack.
And gredynesse, to draw desire to this lore,
Says, that the wise man says, store is no sore.
Who has many pease may put the mo in the pot.
Of two yls, chose the least while choice lyth in lot.
Sens lack is an ill, as ill as man may have,
To provide for the worst, while the best it self save.
Resty wealth wylth me this wydow to win,
To let the world wag, and take mine ease in mine in.
He must needs swym, that is hold up by the chyn.
He laugth that wynth. And this threde finer to spyn,
Master promocion says, make this substance sure,
If riches bring ones portly countenance in ure,
Than shall thou rule the roast all round about.
And better to rule, than be ruled by the rout.
It is said: be it better be it wurs,
Do ye after him that bears the purs.
Thus be I by this, ones le senior de graunde,
Many that commanded me, I shall command.
And also I shall to revenge former hurts,
Hold their noses to grinstone, and sit on their skurts,
That erst sat on mine. And riches may make
Friends many ways. Thus better to give than take.
And to make carnal appetite content
Reason laboreth will to win wyls consent,
To take lack of beauty but as an eye sore.
The fair and the foul, by dark are like store.
As this proverb says, for quenchyng hot desire,
Foul water as soon as fair, will quench hot fire.
Where gyfts be given freely, est west north or south,
No man ought to look a given horse in the mouth.
And though her mouth be foul, she has a fair tail,
I constre this text, as is most mine avail.
In want of white teeth and yelow hears to behold,
She flourishes in white silver and yelow gold.
What though she be toothlesse and balde as a coote?
Her substance is shootanker, whereat I shoot.
Take a pain for a pleasure all wise men can.
What, hungry dogs will eat d^rty puddyngs man.
And here I conclude (quoth he) all that I know
By this old wydow, what good to me may grow.
The sixth chapter.
YE have (quoth I) in these conclusions found
Sundry things, that veraie sauerly sound.
And both these long cases, being well vewde
In one short question, we may well inclewde
Which is, whether best or wurst be to be led
With riches, without love or beauty, to wedde:
Or with beautee without richesse for love.
This question (quoth he) inquerth all that I move.
It does so (said I) and is nerely couched.
But thanswere will not so breuely be touched.
And your self, to length it, takes direct trade.
For to all reasons, that I have yet made,
Ye seem more to seek reasons how to contend,
Than to the counsel of mine to condiscende.
And to be plain, as I must with my freende,
I perfitly feel even at my fyngers eende.
So hard is your hand set on your halpeny:
That my reasonyng your reason sets naught by.
But reason for reason, ye so styffely ley
By proverb for proverb, that with you do wey,
That reason only shall herein naught move you
To here more than speak. wherefore I will prove you
With reason, assisted by experience.
Which my self saw, not long sens nor far hence.
In a matter so like this fashond in frame,
That none can be liker, it semthe even the same.
And in the same, as your self shall espy
Each sentence soothed with a proverb. welny,
And at end of the same, ye shall clearly see
How this short question shortly answered may be.
Ye mary (quoth he) now ye shoot ny the prick.
Practice in all, above all touches the quick.
Proof upon practice, must take hold more sure,
Than any reasonyng by guess can procure.
If ye bring practice in place, without fablyng,
I will banishe both haste and busy bablyng.
And yet that promise to perform is mickell.
For in this case my tongue must often tickell.
Ye know well it is, as telth us this old tale,
Meet, that a man be at his own bridale.
If he wyue well (quoth I) meet and good it were.
Or else as good for him an other were there.
But for this your bridale I mean not in it,
That silence shall suspend your speech every whit,
But in these marriages, which ye here meue,
Sens this tale conteinth the counsel I can give,
I would se your ears attend with your tongue,
For advise in both these weddyngs old and young.
In which heryng, time seen when and what to talk,
When your tongue tyckleth, at will let it walk.
And in these brydales, to the reasons of ours,
Mark mine experyence in this case of yours.
The.vii. chapter.
Within few years past, from London no far way,
Where I and my wife, with our poor household lay,
Two young men were abydyng, whom to discriue
were I, in portraying persons dead or alive,
As counnyng and as quick, to touch them at full,
As in that feate I am ignorant and dull,
Never could I paynte, their pictures to allow,
More lively, than to paynt the picture of you.
And as your three persons show one similitewd,
So show you three one, in all things to be vewd.
Like wise a widow and a maid there did dwell,
Alyke like the wydow and maid ye of tell.
The friends of them four in every degree,
Standing in state as the friends of you three.
Those two men, each other so hasted or tarried,
That those two women on one day they married.
Into two houses, which next my house did stand,
The one on the right, the other on the left hand.
Both brydegromes bad me, I could do none other,
But dyne with the tone, and sup with the the other.
He that wedded this widow rich and old,
And also she, favored me so, that they would
Make me dine or sup ones or twice in a weke.
This poor young man and his make being to seek
As often, where they might eat or drink, I them bad,
Were I at home, to such pittaunce as I had.
Which common conference such confidence wrought
In them to me, that deed, word, ne welny thought
Chanced among them, what ever it wear,
But one of the four brought it straight to mine care.
Whereby between these twain, and their two wives,
Both for welthe and woe, I knew al their four lives.
And sens the matter is much intricate,
Between side and side, I shall here separate
All matters on both sides, and than sequestrate,
The One side, while the other be full reherste, in rate,
As for your understanding may best stand.
And this young poor couple shall come first in hand.
Who, the day of weddyng and after, a while,
Could not look each on other, but they must smile.
As a whelpe for wantonness in and out whipps,
So played these tweyne, as merry as three chipps.
Ye there was god (quoth he) when all is done.
Abide (quoth I) it was yet but honey moon.
The black ox had not trod on his nor her foot.
But er this branche of blys could reach any root,
The flowers so faded, that in fiftene weeks,
A man might epsy the change in the cheeks,
Both of this pore wretch, and his wife this pore wenche.
Their faces told toies, ye Totnam was turned french
And all their light laughyng turned and translated
Into sad syghyng, all mirth was amated.
And one morning tymely he took in hand,
To make to my house, a fleeuelesse errande.
Haukyng upon me, his mind herein to break.
Which I would not see, till he began to speak.
Praying me to here him. And I said, I would.
Wherewith this that follows forthwith he told.
The.viii. chapter.
I Am now driven (quoth he) for ease of my heart,
To you, to utter part of mine inward smerte.
And the matter concerns my wife and me.
Whose fathers and mothers long sens dead be.
But uncles, with auntes and cosyns, have we
Diverse rich on both sides, so that we did see,
If we had wedded, each, where each kynred would,
Neither of us had lackt, either silver or gold.
But never could suite, on either side obtain
One penny, to the one weddyng of us twain.
And sens our one mariyng or marryng day,
Where any of them se us, they shrink away,
Solemnly swearyng, such as may give ought,
While they and we live, of them we get right naught.
Nor naught have we, nor no way ought can we get,
Saving by borowyng, till we be in det
So far, that no man any more will us lend.
Whereby, for lack we both be at our wits end.
Whereof no wonder, sens the end of our good,
And beginning of our charge, to gither stood.
But wit is never good till it be bought.
Howbeit when bought wits to best price be brought:
Yet is one good forewyt worth two after wits.
This payth me home lo, and full my folly hyts.
For had I looked before, with indifferent eye,
Though haste had made my thurst never so dry:
Yet to drown this drought, this must I needs thynk,
As I would needs brewe, so must I needs drynk.
The drink of my bride cup I should have forborne,
Till temperance had tempred the taste beforne.
I se now, and shall see while I am alive,
Who wedth or he be wise, shall dye er he thryue.
He that will selle lawne, er he can fold it,
He shall repent him er he have sold it.
I reckned my weddyng a sugar sweet spice,
But reckners without their host must reckon twice.
And all though it were sweet for a week or twain,
Sweet meat will have sour sauce, I se now plain.
Continual penury, which I must take,
Telth me, better eye out than alwaie ache.
Boldly and blyndly I ventred on this,
How be it, who so bold as blind bayard is?
And herein to blame any man, than should I rave.
For I did it my self: and self do, self have.
But a day after the fair, comth this remors,
For relefe: for though it be a good horse
That never stumbleth, what praise can that auouche
To iades, ye break their necks at first tryp or touch.
And before this my first foil or breakneck fall,
Subtly like a sheep thought I, I shall
Cut my cote after my cloth. When I have her.
But now I can smell, nothing has no sauer.
I am taught to know, in more haste tha^ good speed,
How iudicare came into the Creed.
My careful wife in one corner wepeth in care,
And I in an other, the purse is threde bare.
This corner of our care (quoth he) I you tell,
To crave therein your comfortable counsel.
The nynthe chapter.
I Am sorry (quoth I) of your pouertee,
And more sorry that I can not succourye.
If ye stur your need mine alms to stur,
Than of troth ye beg at a wrong man's dur.
There is nothing more vain, as your self tell can,
Than to beg a breeche of a bare arst man.
I come to beg nothing of you, quoth he,
Save your advise, which may my best way be.
How to win present salve, for this present sore.
I am like thyll surgeon (said I) without ^^ore
Of good plasters. Howbeit such as they are,
Ye shall have the best I have. But first declare,
Where your and your wives rich kynsfolke do dwell.
Enuyronned about us (quoth he) which shewth well,
The nere to the church, the ferther from god.
Most part of them dwell within a thousand rod.
And yet shall we catch a hare with a taber,
As soon as catch ought of them, and rather.
Ye play coleprophet (quoth I) who takth in hand,
To know his answer before he do his errande.
What should I to them (quoth he) flyng or flyt,
An unbidden geast knows not where to sit.
Shame drawth me back, being thus forsaken.
Tushe man (quoth I) shame is as it is taken.
And shame take him ye shame thinkth, ye think none.
Vnmynded, vnmoned, go make your moan.
Well (quoth he) if I shall need this viage make,
With as good will as a bear goth to the stake,
I will straight way anchor and hoise up sail.
And thitherward hie me in haste like a snaile.
And home again hitherward quick as a be.
Now for good luck, cast an old shoe after me.
And first to mine uncle, brother to my father.
By suite, I will assaie to win some fauer.
Who brought me up, and till my weddyng was don
Loved me, not as his nephew, but as his son.
And his heir had I been, had not this chanced,
Of lands and gooddes, which should me much auanced.
Trudge (quoth I) to him, and on your marybones,
Crouche to the ground, and not so often as ones,
Speak any one word him to contrary.
I can not tell that (quoth he) by saint Mary.
I know not how I shall be pryckt to speak.
Well (quoth I) better is to bow than break.
Sens ye can naught wyn, if ye can not please,
Best is to suffer. For of suffrance comth ease.
Cause causes (quoth he) and as cause causes me,
So will I do. And with this away went he.
Yet whether his wife should go with him or no,
He sent her to me to know er he would go.
Whereto I said, I thought best he went alone.
And you (quoth I) to go straight as he is gone,
Among your kynsfolke likewise, if they dwell ny.
Yes (quoth she) all round about even here by.
Namely an aunte, my mothers sister, who well
(Sens my mother died) brought me up from the shell.
And much would have given me, had mi weddi^g grown
Upon her fansy, as it grew upon mine own.
And in likewise mine uncle her husband, was
A father to me. Well (quoth I) let pas.
And if your husband will his assent grant,
Go, he to his uncle, and you to your aunte.
Yes this assent he grants before (quoth she)
For he or this thought this the best way to be.
But of these two things he would determyne none
Without aid. For two hedds are better than one.
With this we departed, she to her husband,
And I to dinner to them on the other hand.
The tenth chapter.
When dinner was done, I came home again,
To attend on the return of these twain.
And er three hours to end were fully tryde,
Home came she first, welcome (quoth I) and well hyde.
Ye a short horse is soon corryd (quoth she)
But the weaker has the worse we all day see.
After our last partyng, my husband and I
Departed, each to place agreed formerly.
Mine uncle and aunte on me did loure and glome.
Both bad me god speed, but none bad me welcome.
Their folks glomd on me to, by which it appears,
The young cock croweth, as he the old hereth.
At dinner they were, and made (for manners sake)
A kynswoman of ours, me to table take.
A false flattryng fylth, and if that be good,
None better to bear two faces in a hood.
She speaks as she would crepe into your bosom.
And when the meal mouth has won the bottom
Of your stomach, than will the pikthanke it tell
To your most enmies, you to bie and sell.
There is no mo such tytifils in Englands ground,
To hold with the hare, and run with the hounde.
Fire in the tone hand, and water in the the other,
The makebate bears between brother and brother.
She can wynk on the yew, and weary the lam,
She makes ernest matters of every flymflam.
She must have an ore in every man's barge.
And no man chat ought in ought of her charge.
Colle under canstyk she can play on both hands,
Dissimulacion well she understands.
She is lost with an appull, and won with a nut.
Her tongue is no edge tool, but yet it will cut.
Her chekes are purple ruddy like a horse plumme.
And the bygge part of her body is her bumme.
But littell tit all tail, I have herd er this,
As high as two horseloues her person is.
For privy nyps or casts overthwart the shyns,
He shall lose the maystry that with her begyns,
She is, to turn love to hate, or joy to grefe
A pattern, as mete as a rope for a thief.
Her promise of frendshyp, for any avail,
Is as sure to hold, as an eele by the tail.
She is another fish nor flesh nor good red hearing.
She may do much there, and I thereby fearyng
She would spit her venym, thought it not evil
To set up a candell before the devil.
I clawd her by the back in way of a charm,
To do me, not the more good, but the less harm.
All that dinner time we syttyng to gether,
Above all, with her I made fair wether.
Praying her in her ear, on my side to hold,
She thereto swearyng by her false faith, she would.
Straight after dinner mine aunte had no choice,
But other burst, or burst out in pylats voice.
Ye huswife, what wind blowth ye hither thus right?
Ye might have knokt or ye came in, leave is light.
Better unborn then untaught, I have herd say,
But ye be better fed than taught far away.
Not veraie fat fed, said this flebergebet,
But need has no law, need makes her hither iet.
She comth nece Ales (quoth she) for that is her name
More for need, then for kyndnes, pain of shame.
Howbeit she can not lack, for he fyndth that seeks,
Lovers live by love, ye as larks live by leekes.
Said this Ales, much more than half in mockage.
Tushe (quoth mine aunte) these lovers in dotage
Think the ground bears them not, but wed of courage
They must in all haste, though a leaf of borage
Might bye all the substance that they can sell.
Well aunt (quoth Ales) all is well that ends well.
Ye Ales, of a good beginning comth a good end.
Not so good to borow, as be able to lend.
Nay in deed aunt (quoth she) it is sure so,
She must needs grant, she has wrought her own woe.
She thought Ales, she had seen far in a mylstone,
When she gat a husband, and namely such one,
As they by weddyng could not only naught wyn,
But lose both living and love of all their kyn.
Good aunt (quoth I) humbly I beseech ye,
My trespase done to you forgive it me.
I know and knowlage, I have wrought mine own pein
But things past my hands, I can not call agein.
True (quoth Ales) things done, can not be undone,
Be they done in due time, to late, or to soon.
But better late then never to repent this.
To late (quoth mine aunt) this repentance showed is.
When the stead is stolen, shut the stable durre.
I took her for a rose, but she bredeth a burre.
She comth to stycke to me now in her lack,
Rather to rent of my clothes fro my back,
Then to do me one ferthyng wurth of good.
I see day at this little hole. For this bood
Shewth what fruit will follow. In good faith I said
In way of peticion I sue for your aid.
A well (quoth she) now I well understand
The walking staff has caught warmth in your hand
A clean fyngerd huswyfe and an ydel, folk say,
And will be lyme fyngerd I fear by my faie.
It is as tender as a persons lemman.
Naught can she do, and what can she have than?
She may not bear a fether, but she must brethe,
She makes so much of her painted shethe.
She thynkth her ferthyng good silver I tell you.
But for a ferthyng who ever did sell you
Might bost you to be better sold than bought.
And yet though she be worth naught, nor have naught
Her gown is gaier and better than mine.
At her gaie gown (quoth Ales) ye may repyne.
How be it as we may we love to go gaie all.
Well well (quoth mine aunte) pride will have a fall.
For pride goes before, and shame comes after.
Sure (said Ales) in manner of mockyng laughter,
There is nothing in this world that agrees wurs,
Than does a ladies heart, and a beggars purs.
But pride she shewth none, her look reason alowth
She lookth as butter would not melt in her mouth.
Well the still sow eats up all the draffe Ales.
All is not gold that glistreth by old told tales.
In youth she was toward and without evil,
But soon ripe sone rotten, young saint old devil.
How be it lo god sendth the shrewd cow short horns.
While she was in this house she sat upon thorns.
Each one day was three, till libertee was borow
For one months joy to bring her holle lives sorrow.
It were pitee (quoth Ales) she should myscary.
For she is grown a goodly damsel mary.
Ill weed growth fast Ales. whereby the corn is lorne.
For surely the weed ouergroweth the corn.
If I may (as they say) tell troth without syn,
Of truth she is a wolf in a lambs skyn.
Her heart is full hye, when her eye is full low.
A geast as good lost as found, for all this show.
But many a good cow has an evil calfe.
I speak this daughter in thy mothers behalf.
My sister (god rest her soul) whom though I bost,
Was called the flower of honestee in this cost.
Aunt (quoth I) I take for father and mother
Mine uncle and you above all other.
When we would, ye would not be our child (quoth she.)
Wherefore now when ye would, now will not we.
Sens thou woldst needs cast a way thy self thus,
Thou shalt sure synke in thine own syn for us.
Thou art in deed borne veraie ny of my stock,
And ny is my kyrtell, but nere is my smock.
I have one of mine own, whom I must look to.
Ye aunte (quoth Ales) that thing must ye needs do.
Nature compellth you to set your own first up.
For I have heard say, it is a dear colup,
That is cut out of thowne flesh. But yet aunte,
So small may her request be, that ye may grant
To satisfy the same, which may do her good,
And you no harm in thauancyng your own blood.
And cosyn (quoth she to me) what ye would crave,
Declare, that our au^t may know what ye would have.
Nay (quoth I) be they wynners or loosers,
Folk say alwaie, beggars should be no choosers.
With thanks I shall take what ever mine aunt please,
Where nothing is, a little thing does ease.
And by this proverb appears this o thing,
That alwaie somewhat is better than nothing.
Hold fast when ye have it (quoth she) by my life.
The boy thy husband, and thou the gyrle his wife,
Shall not consume that I have labored fore.
Thou art young enough, and I can work no more.
Kyt calot my cosyn saw this thus far on
And in mine aunts ear she whispreth anon
Roundly these words, to make this matter whole.
Aunt, leat them that be a cold blow at the cole.
They shall for me Ales (quoth she) by gods blyst.
She and I have shaken hands. farewell vnkyst.
And thus with a beck as good as a dieu guard,
She flang fro me, and I from her hitherward.
Beggyng of her booteth not the worth of a bean,
Little knows the fat sow, what the lean does mean.
Forsooth (quoth I) ye have bestyrd ye well.
But where was your uncle while all this fray fell?
A sleep by (quoth she) routyng like a hog.
And it is evil wakyng of a slepyng dog.
The bitche and her whelp might have been a sleep to.
For ought they in wakyng to me would do.
Fare ye well (quoth she) I will now home streyte.
And at my husbands hands for better news weyte.
The leuenth chapter.
HE came home to me the next day before noone.
What tidi^gs now (quoth I) how have ye done?
Upon our departing (quoth he) yesterdaie
Toward mine uncles, somewhat more than mydway,
I ouertoke a man, a servant of his,
And a friend of mine. who gessed straight with this,
What mine errand was, offering in the same,
To do his best for me, and so in gods name.
Thither we went, no body being within,
But mine uncle, mine aunte, and one of our kyn.
A mad knave, as it were a raylyng gester,
Not a more gagglyng gander hense to Chester.
At sight of me he asked, who have we there?
I have seen this gentylman, if I wist where.
How be it lo, seldom seen, soon forgotten.
He was (as he will be) somewhat cupshotten.
Six days in a week, beside the market day,
Malt is above wheat with him, market men say.
But for as much as I saw, the same taunt
Contented well mine uncle and mine aunt,
And that I came to fall in, and not fall out,
I forbear. or else his dronken red snout
I would have made as often change from hew to hew,
As does the cocks of Inde. For this is true.
It is a small hop on my thomb. And Christ wot,
It is wood at a word. little pot soon whot.
Now merry as a cricket, and by and by,
Angry as a waspe, though in both no cause why.
But he was at home there, he might speak his will.
Every cock is proud on his own dunghill.
I shall be even with him herein when I can.
But he having done, thus mine uncle began.
Ye merchant, what attempth you, to attempt us,
To come on us before the messanger thus.
Romyng in and out, I here tell how ye toss.
But son, the rollyng stone never gatherth moss.
Like a pickpurs pilgrym, ye pry and ye proule
At rouers, to rob Peter and pay Poule.
I wys I know, er any more be told,
That draff is your errand, but drink ye would.
Uncle (quoth I) of the cause, for which I com,
I pray you patiently here the hole some.
In feyth (quoth he) without any more su^myng
I know to beg of me is thy cu^myng.
For sooth (quoth his man) it is so in deed.
And I dare boldly bost, if ye knew his need,
ye would of pytee yet set him in some stey.
Son, better be envied then pitied, folk sey.
And for his cause of pitee (had he had grace)
He might this day have been clear out of the case.
But now he has well fisht and caught a frog.
Where naught is to wed with, wise men flee the clog.
Where I (quoth I) did not as ye wyld or bad,
That repent I often, and as often wyshe I had.
Son (quoth he) as I have herd of mine olders,
Wishers and wolders be no good householders.
This proverb for a lesson, with such other,
Not like (as who seyth) the son of my brother,
But like mine own son, I often before showed the,
To cast her quyte of, but it would not be.
When I wyld the any other where to go,
Tushe, there were no mo maidens but malkyn tho.
Ye had been lost to lack your lust, when ye list,
By two miles trudgyng twice a weke to be kyst.
I would ye had kyst, well I will no more stir,
It is good to have a hatche before the durre.
But how is my saying come to pass now?
How often did I prophecy this between you,
And your gynyfinee nycebycetur,
When sweet sugar should turn to sour salt petur?
Whereby ye should in seeing, that ye never saw.
Think that you never thought. your self a dawe.
But that time ye thought me a dawe. so that I
Did no good in all my words than, save only
Approved this proverb plain and true matter,
A man may well bring a horse to the water.
But he can not make him drink without he will.
Colts (quoth his man) may prove well, with tatchis ill
For of a ragged colt there comthe a good horse.
If he be good now, of his ill past no forse.
Well he that hangth him self a sondaie (said he)
Shall hang still uncut down a mondaie for me.
I have hanged up my hatchet, god speed him well.
A wonder thing what things these old things tell.
Cat after kind good mouse hunt. And also
Men sey, kind will crepe where it can not go.
These sentences to the I may assyne
By thy father, the said brother of mine.
Thou folowist his stepps as right as a line.
For when prouander pryckt him a little tyne,
He did as thou did. One, on whom he did dote,
He wedded in haste, with whom he had no grote.
And she as little with him. whereby at last
They both went a beggyng. And even the like cast
Haste thou. thou will beg or steal, or thou die,
Take heed friend, I have seen as far come as me.
If ye seek to find things er they be lost,
Ye shall find one day you come to your cost.
This do I but repete, for this I told the,
And more I say. but I could not than hold the.
Nor will not hold the now: nor such folly feel,
To set at my heart, that thou set at thy heel.
And as of my good, er I one grote give,
I will se how my wife, and my self shall live.
Shall I make the laugh now, and my self weep then?
Nay good child, better childern weep than old men.
It is hard to wiue and thrive both in a year.
But by thy wyuyng, thryuyng does so appear,
That thou art past thryft, before thrifte begin.
But lo, will will have will, though will woe wyn.
Will is a good son, and will is a shrewde boy.
And wilful shrewde will has wrought the this toy.
A gentill white spur, and at need a sure spear.
He standth now as he had a flea in his ear.
How be it for any great courtesy he does make,
It semth the gentle man has eaten a stake.
He bears a dagger in his sleue, trust me,
To kill all that he meteth, prouder than he.
Sir (quoth his man) he will no fault defend,
But hard is for any man all fautes to mende.
He is lyueles, that is fautles, old folks thought,
He has (quoth he) but one fault, he is naught.
Help him sir (quoth his man) sens ye easily may.
Two falls knaves need no broker (quoth he) me^ say,
The one knave now crouchith, while the other crauith
But to show what shall be his releuauith,
Either after my death, if my will be kept,
Or during my life, had I this halle hept
With gold, he may his part on good friday eat,
And fast never the wurs, for ought he shall geate.
Now here is the door, and there is the wey.
And so (quoth he) farewell gentill Geffrey.
Thus parted I from him, being much dismayed,
Which his man saw, and (to comfort me) said.
What man, pluck up your heart, be of good chere.
After clouds black, we shall have wether clear.
What should your face thus again the woll be shorn
For one fall? What man all this wynd shakes no corn.
Let this wind ouerblow. a time I will spy,
To take wind and tide with me, and speed thereby.
I thank you (quoth I) but great boste and small roste,
Makes unsavory mouths, where ever men oste.
And this boste veraie vnsauourly serves.
For while the grass grows, the horse sterueth.
Better one bird in hand than ten in the wood.
Rome was not bylt on a day (quoth he) and yet stood
Till it was fynysht, as some say, full fair.
Your heart is in your hose all in despair.
But as every man says, a dog has a day.
Should you a man, despair than any day? nay.
Ye have many stryngs to the bow. for ye know,
Though I, having the bent of your uncles bow,
Can no way bring your bolt in the butte to stand,
Yet have ye other marks to roue at, at hand.
The kays hang not all by one man's girdill man.
Though naught will be won here, I sey, yet ye can
Taste other kynsmen, of whom ye may geat,
Here some and there some, many small make a great.
For come light wynnyngs with blessyngs or curses,
Evermore light gaynes make heavy purses.
Children learn to crepe er they can learn to go.
And little and little, ye must learn even so.
Throw no gift again at the giuers head,
For better is half a lofe then no bread.
I may beg my bread (quoth I) for my kyn all,
That dwelth ny, Well, yet (quoth he) and the worst fall,
Ye may to your kynsman, hens nine or ten mile,
Rich without charge, whom ye saw not of long while
That bench whistler (quoth I) is a pinchepeny.
As fre of gift, as a poor man of his eye.
I shall get a fart of a dead man as soon,
As a farthyng of him, his dole is soon done.
He is so hye in thynstep, and so straight last,
That pride and couetise withdrawth al repaste.
Ye know what he has been (quoth he) but ywis,
Absence says plainly, ye know not what he is.
Men know (quoth I) I have herd now and then,
How the market gothe by the market men.
Further it is said, who that saying weyth,
It must needs be true, that every man seyth.
Men say also, childerne and fools can not ly.
And both man and child says, he is a heynsby.
And my self knowth him, I dare boldly brag,
Even as well as the beggar knowth his bag.
And I knew him, not worth a good gray grote.
He was at an ebb. though he be now a flote,
Poor as the poorest. And now naught he sets
By poor folk. For the paryshe priest forgets,
That ever he has been holy water clerk.
By ought I can now here, or ever could mark,
Of no man has he pitee, or compassion.
Well (quoth he) every man after his fassion.
He may yet pitee you, for ought does appear.
It hapth in one hour, that hapth not in. vii. year.
Forspeake not your fortune, nor hyde not your need.
Noght ve^ter noght have spare to speak spare to speed
Unknown vnkyst. it is lost that is unsought.
As good seek naught (quoth I) as seek and find naught
It is (quoth he) ill fyshyng before the net.
But though we get little, dear bought and far fet
Are deinties for ladies. Go we both too.
I have for my master thereby to do.
I may break a dishe there, and sure I shall
Set all at six and seven, to win some wyndfall.
And I will hang the bell about the cats neck.
For I will first break, and ieobard the first check.
And for to win this pray, though the cost be mine,
Leat us present him with a bottell of wine.
That were (quoth I) as much alms or need,
As cast water in Thems. or as good a deed,
As it is to help a dog over a style.
Than go we (quoth he) we lose time all this while.
To follow his fansy, we went together.
And toward night yesternight when we came thither,
She was within, but he was yet abroad.
And straight as she saw me, she swelde like a tode.
Pattryng the devils pater noster to her self.
God never made a more crooked crabbed elfe.
She bad him welcome, but the wors for me.
This knave comth a beggyng, by me thought she.
I smelde her out, and had her straight in the wind.
She may abide no beggars of any kind.
They be both gredy gutts. all given to get,
They care not how. all is fyshe that comth to net.
They know no end of their good, nor beginning
Of any goodness. such is wretched wynnyng.
Hunger droppeth even out of both their noses.
She gothe with broken shone and torn hoses.
But who is wurs shod, than the shoemakers wife,
With shops full of new shapen shoes all her life.
Or who will do less, than they that may do most.
And namely of her I can no way make boste.
She is one of them, to whom god bad who.
She will all have, and will right naught forgo.
She will not part with the paryng of her nails.
She toyleth continually for auayles.
Which life she has so long now kept in ure,
That for no life she would make change, be sure.
But this lesson lernde I, er I was years seven,
They that be in hell, wene there is none other heaven.
She is nothing fair, but she is ill favored.
And no more vnklenly, than vnswete sauourd.
But hakney men say, at mangy hakneys hyer
A scalde horse is good enough for a scabde squier.
He is a knuckylbonyard veraie meet
To match a mynion another fair nor sweet.
But a vengeable wit, and all his delight,
To give tauntes and checkes of most spiteful spite.
In that house commonly such is the cast,
A man shall as soon break his neck as his fast.
And yet now such a gyd did her head take,
That more for my mates than for manner sake,
We had bread and drink, and a chese very great.
But the greattest crabs be not all the best meat,
For her crabbed chese, with all the gretnesse,
Might well abide the fynenesse or swetnesse.
Anon he came in. and when he us saw,
To my companyon kyndly he did draw.
And a welfauourd welcome to him he yields,
Byddyng me welcome straungely over the feelds.
With these words. ah young man I know your matter,
By my faith you come to look in my water.
And for my comfort to your consolacion,
Ye would, by my purs, give me a purgacion.
But I am laxatiue enough there otherwise.
This case (quoth this young man) contrary does rise.
For he is purs sick. and lackth a physician.
And hops upon you in some condition.
Not by purgacion, but by restoratiue.
To strength his weakness to keep him alive.
I can not (quoth he) for though it be my lot
To have speculacion, yet I practice not.
I see much, but I say littell, and do less.
In this kind of phisike. and what would ye guess.
Shall I consume my self, to restore him now?
Nay, backare (quoth Mortymer to his sow)
He can before this time, no time assyne,
In which he has laid down one penny by mine.
That ever might either make me bite or sup.
And byr lady fre^d. naught ley down naught take up.
To put me to cost, thou can half a score miles.
Out of thine own nest, seek me in these out yles.
Where thou will not step over a straw, I think,
To win me the worth of one draught of drink.
No more than I have won of all thy holle stock.
I have been common Jack to all that hole flock.
When ought was to do, I was common hackney.
Folk call on the horse that will carry alwey.
But evermore the common horse is worste shod.
Desert and reward be often times things far od.
At end I might put wy wynnyng in mine iye,
And see never the wors. for ought I wan them by.
And now without them, I live here at staves end.
Where I need not borow, nor I will not lend.
I pray you (quoth he) pitee me a poor man
With somewhat, till I may work as I can.
Toward your work (quoth he) ye make such tastings
As approve you to be none of the hastyngs,
Ye ren to work in haste as nine men held ye.
But when so ever ye to work must yield ye.
If your meet mate and you meet together.
Than shall we see two men bear a fether.
Recompensyng former loytryng life loose,
As did the pure penitent that stale a goose,
And stak down a fether. And where old folk tell.
That evil gotten good never proves well,
Ye will truly get. and true gettyng well keep,
Till time ye be as rich as a new shorn sheep.
How be it when thrift and you fell first at a fray,
You played the man, for ye made thrift ren away.
So help me god, in my poor opynion,
A man might make a play of this minyon.
And fayn no ground, but take tales of his own friends,
I suck not this out of mine own fyngers ends.
And sens ye were wed, although I naught gave you,
Yet pray I for you, god and saint Luke save you.
And here is all. For what should I further wade?
I was another of court nor of counsel made.
And it is as I have learned in lystnyng,
A poor dog. that is not worth the whistlyng.
A day er I was wedde, I badde you (quoth I)
Scarbrough warnyng I had (quoth he) whereby,
I kept me thens, to serve the according.
And now, if this nyghtes lodgyng and bordyng
May ease the, and ryd me from any more charge,
Than welcome. or else get the straight at large.
For of further reward, mark how I bost me.
In case as ye shall yield me as ye cost me,
So shall ye cost me as ye yield me likewise.
Which is, a thing of naught rightly to surmyse.
Here withal his wife to make up my mouth,
Not only her husbands tauntyng tale auouthe,
But thereto deuiseth to cast in my teeth,
Checks and chokyng oysters. And when she sees
Her time to take up, to show my fare at best,
Ye se your fare (said she) set your heart at rest.
Fare ye well (quoth I) how ever I fare now.
And well mote ye fare both when I dyne with you.
Come, go we hens friend (quoth I to my mate)
And now will I make a cross on this gate.
For coming here again. Have we not well wrought?
Me^ say, as good plai for naught as work for naught
Well well (quoth he) we be but where we were.
Come what come would, I thought er we came there.
That if the worst fell. we could have but a naie,
There is no harm done man in all this fray.
Neither pot broken, nor yet water spylt.
Farewell he (quoth I) I will as sone be hylt,
As wait again for the moneshyne in the water.
But is not this a praty pyked matter?
To disdeigne me, who muck of the world hordth not.
As he does, it may ryme but it accordth not.
She fometh like a bore, the beast should seem bold.
For she is as fires, as a lion of cotsolde.
She fryeth in her own grease, but as for my part,
If she be angry, beshrew her angry heart.
Let pass (quoth he) and let us be trudgyng.
Where some noppy ale is, and soft sweet ludgyng.
Be it (quoth I) but I would very feign eat.
At breakefast and dinner I eete little meat.
And two hungry meals make the third a glutton.
We went where we had boylde beef and bake mutton.
Whereof I fed me as full as a tun.
And a bed were we er the clock had nine run.
Early we rose, in haste to get away.
And to the hostler this morning by day
This fellow calde, what how fellow, thou knave,
I pray the leat me and my fellow have
A hear of the dog that bote us last night.
And bytten were we both to the brain aryght,
We saw each other drunk in the good ale glass,
And so did each one each other, that there was.
Save one, but old men say that are skyld,
A hard foughten feeld, where no man scapeth vnkyld.
The recknyng reckned, he needs would pay the shot,
And needs he must for me, for I had it not.
This done we shoke hands. and parted in fine,
He into his way, and I into mine.
But this journey was quite out of my way.
Many kynsfolke and few friends, some folk say.
But I find many kynsfolke, and friend not one.
Folk say, it has been said many years sens gone.
Prove thy friend er thou have need. but in deed,
A freende is never known till a man have need.
Before I had need, my most present foes
Seemed my most friends. but thus the world goes,
Every man basteth the fat hog we see,
But the lean shall burn er he basted be.
As seyth this sentence, often and long said before.
He that has plenty of goods shall have more.
He that has but a little, he shall have less.
He yt has right naught, right naught shall possess.
Thus having right naught. and would somewhat obtayn,
With right naught (quoth he) I am retornd again.
The.xii. Chapter.
Well (quoth I) comfort your self with this old text.
That telth us, when bale is hekst, boot is next.
Though every man may not sit in the chair.
Yet always the grace of god is worth a fair.
Take no thought in no case, god is where he was.
But put case in pouertee all your life pas.
Yet pouertee and poor degree, taken well,
Feedth on this. he that never clymbde, never fell.
And some case at some time shewth preefe somwheare,
That riches bryngth often harm. and ever fear,
Where pouertee passes without grudge of grief,
What, man the beggar may sing before the thief.
And who can sing so merry a note,
As may he, that can not change a grote.
Ye (quoth he) beggars may sing before thieves,
And weep before true men, lamentyng their greeues.
Some say, and I feel hungre perseth stone wall.
Meat nor yet money, to bye meat withal,
Have I not so much as may hungar defend
Fro my wife and me. Well (quoth I) god will send
Time to provide for time, right well ye shall se
God send that provision in time, said he.
And thus semyng welny weary of his life,
The pore wretch went to his like pore wretchid wife.
And after this a monthe, or somewhat less,
Their landlorde came to their house to take a stresse
For rent. to have kept bayard in the stable.
But that to win any power was unable.
For though it be ill playing with short daggers,
Which means, that every wise man staggers,
In earnest or boorde to be busy or bold
With his biggers or betters, yet this is told.
Where as nothing is, the king must lose his right.
And thus, king or keyser must have set them quyght.
But warnyng to depart thens they nedyd none.
For er the next day the byrds were flowne each one,
To seek service. of which where the man was sped,
The wife could not speed, but maugre her head,
She must seek else where. for either there, or ny
Service for any suite she none could espy.
All folk thought them not only to lyther,
To linger both in one house to gyther,
But also dwelling ny under their wyngs,
Under their noses, they might convey things.
Such as were another to heavy nor to whot,
More in a month then they their master got
In a whole year. Whereto folk further weying,
Receite each of other in their conueying,
Might be worst of all. For this proverb preeues,
Where be no receyuers, there be no thieves.
Such hap here hapt, that common dread of such gyles,
Drove them and keeps them asonder many miles.
Thus though love decree, departure death to be,
Yet pouertee parts fellowship we see.
And does those two true lovers so disseuer,
That meet shall they seldwhan, or happily never.
And thus by love, without regard of living,
These twayn have wrought each others ill cheuyng.
And love has so lost them the love of their friends,
That I think them lost, and thus this tale eends.
The.xiii. chapter.
AH sir (said my fre^d) when men will needs mary,
I see now, how wisdom and haste may vary.
Namely where they wed for love all together,
I would for no good, but I had come hither.
Sweet beautee with sour beggary, nay I am gone,
To the welthy wythred wydow, by saint John.
What yet in all haste (quoth I) ye (quoth he)
For she has substance enough. and ye se,
That lack is the loss of these two young fools.
Know ye not (quoth I) that after wise men's schools,
A man should here all parts, er he judge any,
Why axe ye that (quoth he) for this (quoth I.)
I told you, when I this began, that I would,
Tell you of two couples. and I having told
But of the tone, ye be straight startyng awey,
As I of the the other had right naught to sey.
Or as your self of them right naught would here,
Nay not all so (quoth he) but syns I thynk clear,
There can no way appear so paynfull a life,
Between your young neybour and his old rich wife,
As this tale in this young poor couple does show,
And that the most good or lest ill ye know.
To take at end, I was at beginning bent,
With thanks for this, and your more pain to prevent,
Without any more matter now reuolued,
I take this matter here clearly resolved.
And that ye herein awarde me to forsake,
Beggarly beautee, and riuyld riches take.
That's just. if the half shall judge the whole (quoth I)
But yet here the whole, the whole wholly to try.
To it (quoth he) than I pray you by and by.
We will dine first (quoth I) for it is noone hy.
We may as well (quoth he) dine when this is done.
The longer forenoone the shorter after noone.
All comth to one, and thereby men have gest,
Alwaie the longer east the shorter west.
We have had (quoth I) before ye came, and syn,
Weather, meet to set paddocks abroode in.
Rayn, more tha^ enough. and wha^ al shrews have dynd,
Change from foul wether to fair is often inclind.
And all the shrews in this part, saving one wife,
That must dine with us, have dind peyn of my life.
Now if good change of ill wether be dependyng,
Upon her diet, what were mine offendyng,
To keep the woman any longer fasting.
If ye (quoth he) set all this far castyng.
For common wealth* as it appears a clear case,
Reason would your will should, and shall take place.
Thus ends the first part.
The second part.
The first chapter.
DIners can not be long, where deyntees want,
Where coin is not common, commons must be scant.
In post pace we past from potage to cheese,
And yet this man cryde, alas what time we leese.
He would not leat us pause after our repaste,
But aparte he plucked me straight, and in all haste,
As I of this poor young man, and poor young maid,
Or more poor young wife, the forsaid words had said,
So prays he me now the process may be told,
Between the other young man, and rich widow old.
If ye lack that (quoth I) away ye must wind,
With your holle errand, and half thanswer behind.
Which thing to do, sens haste thereto shewth you loath,
And to haste your going, the day away goth,
And that time lost, again we can not wyn,
Without more loss of time this tale I begin.
In this late old wydow, and than old new wife,
Age and appetite fell at a strong strife.
Her lust was as young, as her lyms were old.
The day of her weddyng, like one to be sold.
She set out her self in fine aparell.
She was made like a beer pot, or a barell.
A crooked hoked nose, beetyll browde, bleare eyde.
Many men wishte, for beautifying that bryde,
Her waste to be gyrd in, and for a boon grace,
Some well favored visor, on her ill favored face.
But with visorlike visage, such as it was,
She smyrkd, and she smylde, but so lisped this las,
That folk might have thought it done only alone,
Of wantonness. had not her teeth been gone.
Vpryght as a candell stands in a soket,
Stood she that day, so sympre de coket,
Of ancient fathers she took no cure nor care.
She was to them, as koy as a crokers mare.
She took thentertaynment of the young men
All in dalyance, as nyce as a nuns hen.
I suppose that day her ears might well glow.
For all the town talked of her, hye and low.
One said, a well favored old woman she is.
The devil she is, said an other, and to this,
In came the third, with his. v. eggs, and said,
Fyfty year ago I knew her a trym maid.
What ever she were than (said one) she is now,
To become a bryde, as meet as a sow
To bear a saddle. She is in this marriage
As comely as is a cow in a cage.
Gup with a galde back gill, come up to souper.
What mine old mare would have a new crouper.
And now mine old hat must have a new band.
Well (quoth one) glad is he that has her in hand.
A goodly marriage she is, I here say.
She is so (quoth one) were the woman away.
Well (quoth an other) fortune this moves.
And in this case every man as he loves.
Quoth the good man, when that he kyst his cow.
That kys (quoth one) does well here, by god a vow.
But how can she give a kiss sour or sweet?
Her chyn and her nose, within half an ynche meet.
God is no botcher sir, said an other.
He shapeth all parts, as each part may fit other.
Well (quoth one) wisely, let us leave this skannyng.
God speed them. be as be may is no bannyng.
That shall be, shall be. and with gods grace they shall
Do well. And that they so may, wyshe we all.
This wonder (as wonders last) lasted nine days.
Which done, and all gests of this feast gone their ways,
Ordinary householde this man began
Very sumptuousely, which he might well do than,
What he would have, he might have. his wife was set,
In such dotage of him, that fair words did fet,
Gromelsede plentee. and pleasure to prefer,
She made much of him, and he mocked much of her.
I was as (I said) much there, and most of all
The first month. in which time such kindness did fall,
Between these.ii. counterfaite turtle burds.
To see his sweet looks, and here her sweet wurds,
And to think wherefore they both, put both in ure,
It would have made a horse break his halter sure.
All the first fortnight their ticki^g might have tought,
Any young couple, their love ticks to have wrought.
Some laughed. and said, al thing is gay that is green.
Some thereto said, the grene new brom swepith cleene
But sens al thing is the wors for the wearyng,
Decay of clean sweepyng folk had in fearyng.
And in deed, er.ii. months away were crept,
And her byggest baggs into his bosom swept,
Where love had appeerd in him to her alwaie
Hot as a toste, it grew cold as a kaie.
He, at meat caruyng her, and none else before,
Now carved he to all but her, and her no more.
Where her words seemd honey, by his smylyng chere,
Now are they mustard. he frowneth them to here.
And when she saw sweet sauce begin to wax sour,
She waxt as sour as he, and as well could lowre.
So turned they their tippets by way of exchange,
From laughyng to louryng, and taunts did so raunge,
That in plain terms, plain truth to you to utter,
They two agreed, like two catts in a gutter.
Mary sir (quoth he) by scratchyng and bytyng
Catts and dogs come together. by folks recityng,
Together by the ears they come (quoth I) cherely.
How be it those words are not void here clearly,
For in one state they twain could not yet settyll.
But waueryng as the wind. in docke out nettyll.
Now in now out, now here now there, now sad,
Now merry, now hye now low, now good now bad.
In which vnstedy sturdy storms streynable.
To know how they both were irrefreynable,
Mark how they fell out, and how they fell in.
At the end of a supper she did thus begin.
The second chapter.
Husband (quoth she) I would we were in our nest.
When the belly is full, the bones would be at rest.
So soon upon supper (said he) no question,
Sleep makes ill and unwholesome digestion.
By that diete a great disease ons I gat.
And burnt child fire dredth. I will beware of that.
What a post of physyk (said she) ye a post.
And from post to pillar wife, I have been tossed
By that surfeit. And I feel a little fit,
Even now. by former attemptyng of it.
Whereby, except I shall seem to leave my wit,
Before it leave me, I must now leave it.
I thank god (quoth she) I never yet felt pain,
To go to bed tymely. but rysyng again
To soon in the morning, has me displeased.
And I (quoth he) have been more diseased,
By early lying down, than by early rysyng.
But thus differ folk lo, in exercysyng.
That that one may not, an other may.
Use makes mastry. and men many times say,
That one loves not, an other does, which has sped,
All meats to be eaten, and all maids to be wed.
Haste ye to bed now, and rise ye as ye rate.
While I rise early, and come to bed late.
Long lying warm in bed is wholesome (quoth she)
While the leg warmeth, the boot harmeth (quoth he)
Well (quoth she) he that does as most men do,
Shall Be lest wondered on. and take any two,
That be man and wife in all this holle town,
And most part together, they rise and lie down.
When byrds shall roust (quoth he) at.viii.ix. or ten,
Who shall appoint their hour. the cock, or the hen.
The hen (quoth she) the cock quoth he) just (quoth she)
As Iermans lips. It shall prove, more just (quoth he)
Than prove I (quoth she) the more fool far away.
But there is no fool to the old fool, folk say.
Ye are wise enough (quoth he) if ye keep ye warm,
To be kept warm, and for none other harm.
Nor for much more good, I took you to wedde.
I took not you (quoth he) night and day to bed.
Her carreyne carkas (said he) is so cold,
Because she is aged, and somewhat to old,
That she kylth me. I do but roast a stone.
In warmyng her. And shall not I save one,
As she would save an other? yes by saint Iohne.
A sir (quoth she) mary this gear is alone.
Who that worst may shall hold the candyll, I se.
I must warm bed for him should warm it for me.
This medicine, thus ministered is sharp and cold.
But al thing that is sharp is short. folk have told,
This trade is now begun, but if it hold on,
Then farewell my good days. they will be sone gone.
Gospel in thy mouth (quoth he) this strife to break.
How be it, all is not gospel that thou dooest speak,
But what need we lump out love at ones lashyng,
As we should now shake hands. what soft for dashyng.
The fair lasts all the year. we be new kneet.
And so late met, that I fear, we part not yeet,
Quoth the baker to the pillory. Which thing
From distemperate fonding temperance may bring.
And this reason to aid, and make it more strong,
Old wise folk say, love me little love me long.
I say little (said she) but I think more.
Thought is fre. Ye lean (quoth he) to the wrong shore.
Braulyng booted not, he was not that night bent.
To play the bridegroom, Alone to bed she went.
This was their beginning of iar. How be it,
For a beginning, this was a feate fyt,
And but a fleabytyng to that did ensew.
The worst is behind. we com not where it grew.
How say you (said he to me) by my wife.
The devil has cast a bone (said I) to set strife
Between you, but it were a folly for me,
To put my hand between the bark and the tree.
Or to put my finger to far in the fire.
Between you, and lay my credence in the mire.
To medyll little for me it is best.
For of little medlyng there comth great rest.
Yes ye may medyll (quoth he) to make her wise,
Without taking harm, in gyuyng your advise.
She knowth me not yet, but if she wax to wild,
I shall make her know, an old knave is no child.
Sluggyng in bed with her is wors then watchyng,
I promise you, an old sack asks much paschyng.
Well (quoth I) to morrow I will to my beads,
To pray, that as ye both will, so ache your heads.
And in mean time my akyng head to ease,
I will couch a hogs head. Quoth he when ye please.
We parted, and this within a day or twain,
Was raakt up in thashes, and couerd again.
The third chapter.
THese.ii. days past, he said to me, when ye will
Com chat at home. al is well. Iak shall have gill.
Who had the wors end of the staff (quoth I now?)
Shall the master wear a breeche, or none. sey you.
I trust the sow will no more so deep wroote.
But if she do (quoth he) you must set in foot.
And whom ye see out of the way, or shoot wide,
Ouershoote not your self any side to hyde.
But shoot out some words, if she be to whot.
She may say (quoth I) a fools bolte is soon shot.
Ye will me to a thanklesse office here.
And a busy officer I may appear.
And Iak out of office she may bid me walk.
And think me as wise as Waltams calfe, to talk,
Or chat of her charge, having therein naught to do.
How be it, if I se need, as my part comth to,
Gladly between you I will do my best.
I bid you to dinner (quoth he) as no geste,
And bring your pore neighbors on your other side.
I did so. And straight as tholde wife us espide,
She bad us welcome. and merrily toward me,
Grene rushes for this stranger, strewe here (quoth she)
With this a part she pulde me by the sleue.
Saying in few words, my mind to you to meue,
So it is, that all our great fraie the last night,
Is forgeuen and forgotten between us quight.
And all fraies by this I trust have taken end.
For I fully hope my husband will amend.
Well amended (thought I) when ye both relent,
Not to your own, but each to others mendment.
Now if hope fail (quoth she) and chance bring about
Any such breach, whereby we fall again out,
I pray you tell him his pars verse now and than.
And wynke on me also hardly, if ye can
Take me in any tryp. Quoth I, I am loathe,
To meddle commonly. For as this tale gothe,
Who medleth in all thing, may shoe the goslyng.
Well (quoth she) your medlyng herein may bring
The wynd calm between us, wha^ it else might rage.
I will with good will (quoth I) ill wynds to swage,
Spend some wi^d at need, though I wast wind in vayn.
To table we sat, where fine fare did remayn.
Merry we were as cup and can could hold,
Each one with each other homely and bold.
And she for her part, made us chere heaven hye.
The first part of diner merry as a pie.
But a scalde head is soon broken. and so they,
As ye shall straight here, fell at a new fraie.
The fourth chapter.
Husband (quoth she) ye study. be merry now.
And even as ye think now, so come to you.
Nay not so (quoth he) for my thought to tell right,
I think how ye lay gronyng wife, all last night.
Husband, a gronyng horse, and a gronyng wife,
Never fail their master (quoth she) for my life.
No wife. a woman has nine lives like a cat.
Well my lamb (quoth she) ye may pick out of that,
As soon gothe the young lambskyn to the market,
As tholde yews. God forbid wife, ye shall first iet.
I will not iet yet (quoth she) put no doubtyng.
It is a bad sack that will abide no cloutyng.
And as we often see, the loathe stake stands long,
So is it an ill stake (I have herd among)
That can not stand one year in a hedge.
I drink (quoth she) Quoth he, I will not pledge.
What need all this. a man may love his house well,
Though he ride not on the ridge, I have herd tell.
What, I wene (quoth she) proferd service stynkth.
But somewhat it is, I se, when the cat wynkth,
And both her eyes out, but further strife to shonne,
Let the cat wynke, and leat the mous run.
This past, and he chered us all. but most chere,
On his part, to this fair young wife did appear.
And as he to her cast often a loving iye,
So cast her husband like iye, to his plate by.
Wherewith in a great musyng he was brought.
Friend (quoth the good man) a penny for your thought.
For my thought (quoth he) that is a goodly dishe.
But of troth I thought, better to have than wish.
What. a goodly young wife, as you have (quoth he)
Nay (quoth he) goodly gylt gobblets, as here be.
Byr lady friends (quoth I) this makes a show,
To show you more unnatural than the crow.
The crow thynkth her own byrds fairest in the wood.
But by your words (except I wrong understood)
Each others byrds or jewels, ye do weie
Above your own. True (quoth the old wife) ye sey.
But my neighbors desire rightly to measure,
Comth of need. and not of corrupt pleasure,
And my husbands more of pleasure, than of need.
Old fish and young flesh (quoth he) does men best feed.
And some sey, change of pasture makth fat calves.
As for that reason (quoth she) ronth to halues.
As well for the cow calfe as for the bull.
And though your pasture look bareynly and dull,
Yet look not on the meat, but look on the man.
And who so looks on you, shall shortly skan,
Ye may write to your friends, that ye are in health.
But all thing may be suffered saving welthe.
An old said saw, itche and ease, can no man please.
Plenty is no deyntie. ye see not your own ease.
I see, ye can not see the wood for trees.
Your lyps hang in your light. but this poor man sees
Both how blyndly ye stand in your own light,
And that you rose on your right side here right.
And might have gone further, and have faren wurs.
I wot well I might (quoth he) for the purs,
But ye be a baby of Belsabubs bower.
Content ye (quoth she) take the sweet with the sour.
Fancy may boult bran, and make ye take it flower.
It will not be (quoth he) should I die this hour,
While this fair flower flourishes thus in mine iye.
Yes, it might (quoth she, and here this reason why.
Snow is white and every man lets it lie.
And lies in the dike and every man lets it lie.
Pepper is black And every man does it bye.
And has a good smacke And every man does it bye.
Milk (quoth he) is white but all men know it good meat.
And lies not in the dyke but all men know it good meat.
Ink is all black No man will it drink nor eat.
And has an ill smacke No man will it drink nor eat.
Thy ryme (quoth he) is much elder than mine,
But mine being newer, is trewer than thine.
Thou likenest now, for a vain advantage,
White snow to fair youth, black pepper to foul age
Which are placed out of place here by rood.
Black ynke is as ill meat, as black pepper is good.
And white milk as good meat, as white snow is ill.
But a milk snow whit smoth yo^g skin, who change will
For a pepper ynke black rough old riueld face?
Though change be no robbry for the changed case,
Yet shall that change rob the changer of his wit,
For who this case sercheth, shall soon see in yt,
That as well agrees thy comparison in these,
As a like to compare in taste, chalk and chese.
Or a like in color to deem ynke and chalk.
Walk drab walk. Nay (quoth she) walk knave walk
Says that term, How be it sir, I, say not so.
And best we lay a straw here, and even there who.
Orels this gear will bread a pad in the straw.
If ye hale this way, I will an other way draw.
Here is god in thambry (quoth I) Quoth he, naie,
Here is the devil in thorologe, ye may say.
Sens this (quoth I) rather bri^geth bale than boot,
Wrap it in the clothe, and tread it under foot.
Ye harp on the stryng, that gives no melody.
Your tongs ron before your wits, by saint Antony.
Mark ye, how she hitteth me on the thu^bs (quoth he)
And ye taunt me tyt over thumb (quoth she)
Sens tyt for tat (quoth I) on even hand is set,
Set the hares head against the goose ieblet.
She is (quoth he) bent to fors you perfors
To know, that the gray mare is the better horse.
She chopth logyk. to put me to my clargy.
She has one point of a good hawk, she is hardy.
But wife, the first point of hawkyng is hold fast.
And hold ye fast, I red you, lest ye be cast,
In your own turn. Nay she will turn the leaf.
And rather (quoth I) take as falth in the sheafe,
At your hands. and let fall her hold. than be to bold,
Nay, I will spit in my hands, and take better hold.
He (quoth she) that will be angry without cause,
Must be at one, without amends. by sage sawes.
Tread a worm on the tail, and it must turn again.
He takes pepper in the nose, that I complain
Upon his fautes, my self being fautlesse.
But that shall not stop my mouth, ye may well guess.
Well (quoth I) to much of one thing is not good.
Leave of this. Be it (quoth he) fall we to our food.
But suffrance is no quittance in this dayment.
No (quoth she) nor mysrecknyng is no paiement.
But even recknyng makes long friends. my friend.
For alwaie own is own, at the recknyngs eend.
This recknyng thus reckned. and dinner ons done,
We three from them twayn, departed very soon.
The fyfte chapter.
THis old woman, the next day after this night,
Stale home to me secretly as she might.
To talk with me, in secret counsel (she said)
Of things, which in no wise might be bewrayed.
We twain are one to many (quoth I) for men say,
Three may keep a counsel, if two be away.
But all that ye speak, unmeet again to tell,
I will say naught but mum, and mum is counsel.
Well than (quoth she) herein auoydyng all fears,
Avoid your children. small pitchers have wide ears.
Which done (she said) I have a husband, ye know,
Whom I made of naught, as the thing self does show
And for these two causes only him I took.
First, that he for my love, should louyngly look,
In all kinds of cause, that love engender might,
To love and cheryshe me by day and by night.
Secondly, the substance, which I to him brought,
He rather should augment than bring to naught.
But now my good shall both be spent, ye shall see,
And it in spendyng soole instrument shall be
Of my destruction. by spendyng it on such
As shall make him distroie me. I fear this much.
He makes hauok. and sets cock on the hoope.
He is so laueis, the stock begins to droope.
And as for gain is dead, and laid in tumbe.
When he should get ought, each finger is a thumb.
Each of his joints against other iustles,
As handsomely as a bear picketh muscles.
He makes his martes with marchantes lykely,
To bring a shillyng to nine pence quickly.
Flattryng knaves and queans a sort, beyond the mark.
Hang on his sleue, and many hands make light wark.
If he hold on a while, as he begyns,
We shall se him prove a merchant of eele skyns.
A merchant, without either money or ware.
But all be bugs words, that I speak to spare.
Better spare at brym than at bottom, say I,
Ever spare and ever bare, says he, by and by.
Spend, and god shall send (says he) says thold balet.
What sendth he (say I) a staff and a wallet.
Than up goth his staff, to send me a loufe.
He is at three words up in the house roufe.
He has a nest of chekyns, which he does brood,
That will sure make his hear grow through his hood.
And herein to grow (quoth she) to conclusyon,
I pray your aid, to avoid this confusion.
And for counsel herein, I thought to have gone,
To that cunnyng man, our curate sir John^.
But this kept me back. I have herd now and then,
The greattest clerks be not all the wisest men.
I thynk (quoth I) who ever that term began,
Was neither great clerk, nor the greatest wise man.
In your rennyng from him to me, ye roon
Out of gods blissyng, in to the warm soon.
Where the blind ledth the blind, both fall in the dike.
And blind be we both, if we think us his like.
Folk show much folly, when things should be sped.
To ren to the foot, that may go to the head,
Syns he best can, and most ought to do it,
I fear not, but he will, if ye will woo it.
There is one let (quoth she) mo then I spoke on,
My husband and he be so great, that the ton
Can not piss, but the the other must let a fart.
Choose we him a party, then farewell my part.
We shall so part stake, that I shall lose the hole.
Folk say of old, the shoe will hold with the sole.
Shall I trust him then? nay in trust is treason.
But I trust you, and come to you this season,
To here me, and tell me, what way ye thynk best,
To hem in my husband, and set me in rest.
If ye mind (quoth I) a conquest to make
Over your husband, no man may undertake
To bring you to ease, nor the matter amend.
Except ye bring him to wear a cocks comb at end.
For take that your husband were, as ye take him.
As I take him not, as your tale would make him,
Yet were contencion like to do naught in this,
But keep him naught, and make him wors than he is.
But in this complaynt, for counsel quick and clear,
A few proverbs for principuls, leat us here.
Who that may not as they would, will as they may.
And this to this, they that are bound must obaie.
Folly it is to spurn against a prick,
To strive against the streme, to winche or kick
Against the hard wall. By this ye may see,
Being bound to obedience, as ye be,
And also ouermatcht, suffraunce is your dance.
He may ouermatche me (quoth she) perchance
In strength of body, but my tung is a lym,
To match and to vex every vein of him.
Tongue breaks bone, it self having none (quoth I)
If the wind stand in that door, it standth a wry,
The peril of pratyng out of tune by note,
Telth us, that a good be still is worth a grote.
In being your own foe, you spyn a fair threede.
Advise ye well, for here does all lie and bleed.
Flee thattemptyng of extremitees all.
Folk say, better sit still, than rise and fall.
And where the small with the great, can not agree,
The weaker goth to the pot, we all day see.
So that alwaie the bygger eats the bean.
Ye can naught wyn, by any wayward mean.
Where the hedge is lowest, men may soonest over.
Be silent. Leat not your tongue ron at rouer.
Sens by strife, ye may lose, and can not wyn,
Suffer. It is good slepyng in a whole skyn.
If he chide, keep you bill under wyng muet.
Chattyng to chydyng is not worth a chuet.
We se many times might ouercomth right.
Were not you as good tha^ to say, the crow is whight.
And so rather let fair words make fools fayn.
Tha^ be plain without plites, and plant your own pain,
For were ye as plain as Dunstable hye way.
Yet should ye that way rather break a love day,
Than make one. thus though ye perfitly knew,
All that ye conjecture to be proved true.
Yet better dissemble it, and shake it of.
Than to broyd him with it in earnest or scof.
If he play falsehed in fellowship, play ye,
Se me, and se me not. the worst part to fle.
Why think ye me so white lyuerd (quoth she?)
That I will be tongue tied? Nay I warrant ye.
They that will be afraid of every farte,
Must go far to piss. Well quoth I, your part
Is to suffer (I say.) For ye shall preeue,
Taunts appease not things, they rather agreeue.
But for ill company, or expense extreme,
I here no man doubt, so far as ye deem.
And there is no fire without some smoke, we see.
Well well, make no fire, reyse no smoke (said she)
What cloak for the rain so ever ye bring me,
My self can tell best, where my shoe does wring me,
But as ye say, where fire is, smoke will appear.
And so has it done. For I did lately here,
How flek and his make, use their secret hauntyng,
By one byrd, that in mine ear was late chauntyng.
One swalow makes not summer (said I) men say,
I have (quoth she) mo blocks in his way to lay.
For further increase of suspicion of yls,
Beside his iettyng in to the town, to his gils.
With caletts he consumes him self and my goods,
Sometime in the feelds, sometime in the woods.
Some here and se him, whom he hereth nor sees not.
But feelds have eyes, and woods have ears. ye wot.
And also on my maids he is ever tootyng.
Can ye judge a man (quoth I) by his lookyng?
What, a cat may look on a king. ye know,
My cats leeryng look (quoth she) at first show,
Shewth me, that my cat gothe a catterwawyng.
And specially by his manner of drawyng,
To Madge my fair maid. for may he come ny her,
He must needs basse her, as he comth by her.
He loves well sheeps flesh, that wets his bred in wul.
If he leave it not, we have a crow to pull.
He loves her better at the sole of the foot,
Than ever he loved me at the heart root.
It is a foul byrd, that fyleth his own nest.
I would have him live as gods law has expressed.
And leave leude tyckyng. he that will none ill do,
Must do nothing, that belongs thereto.
To ticke and laugh with me, he has laufull leeue.
To that I said naught, but laughed in my sleeue.
But when she seemed to me fixed in mind,
Rather to seek for that she was loathe to find,
Then leave that sekyng, by which she might find ease.
I fainde this fancy to feel how it would please.
Will ye do well (quoth I) take pain to watch him.
And if ye chance in aduoutry to catch him,
Then have ye him on the hyp, or on the hyrdell.
Then have ye his head fast under your gyrdell.
Where your words now do but rub him on the gall.
That deed without words shall drive him to the wall.
And further than the wall, he can not go.
But must submyt him self. and if it hap so,
That at end of your watch, he gyltles appear,
Tha^ al grudge, grown by ielousy, takes end clear.
Of all folks I may worst watch him (says she)
For of all folks him self most watches me.
I shall as soon try him or take him this way,
As drive a top over a tyeld house, no naie.
I may keep corners or holow trees with thowle,
This seven years, day and night to watch a bowl,
Before I shall catch him with undoubted evil.
He must have a long spoone, shall eat with the devil.
And the devil is no falser then is he.
I have often herd tell, it had need to be
A wyly mouse, that should breed in the cats ear.
Shall I get within him than? naie ware that gear.
It is hard haltyng before a cripple, ye wot.
A falser water drynker there lives not.
When he hunteth a do, that he can not auow,
All dogs bark not at him, I warrant you.
Namely not I, I say, though, as I said,
He sometime, though seldom, by some be bewrayed.
Close huntyng (quoth I) the good hunter alowth.
But be your husband never so still of mowth,
If ye can hunte, and will stand at receyte,
Your maid examinde, makes him open streyte.
That were (quoth she) as of my truth to make preefe,
To axe my fellow, whether I be a thief.
They cleave together like burs. that way I shall
Pike out no more, than out of the stone wall.
Then like ye not to watch him for wife nor maid.
No (quoth she.) Nor I (quoth I) what ever I said.
And I myslyke not only your watch in vain,
But also if ye took him. what could ye gain?
From suspicion to knowledge of ill. for sothe
Could make ye do, but as the flounder does,
Leap out of the frying pan into the fire.
And change from ill pein to wurs is worth small hyre.
Let time try. time tries troth in every dout.
And deem the best, til time has tried the troth out.
And reason says, make not two sorows of one.
But ye make ten sorows, where reason makes none.
For where reason (as I said) wylth you to wynke,
(Although all were proved, as ill as ye think)
Contrary to reason ye stamp and ye stare.
Ye frete and ye fume, as mad as a march hare.
Without proof to his reprofe present or paste.
But by such report, as most prove lies at last.
And here goth the hare away, for ye judge all,
And judge the worst in all, or proof in ought fall.
But blind men should judge no colors. by old sawes,
And folk ofttimes are most blind in their own cause.
The blind eat many flies. how be it the fansy,
Of your blyndnesse comth not of ignorancy,
Ye could tell a another herein, the best way.
But it is as folk do. and not as folk say,
As ye can seem wise in words, be wise in deed.
That is (quoth she) sooner said than done, I dread*
But me thynkth your council weyth in the whole,
To make me put my finger in a hole.
And so by sufferaunce to be so lyther,
In my house, to ley fire and tow together.
But if they fire me, some of them shall wyn
More tow on their distaues, then they can well spyn.
And the best of them shall have both their hands full,
Bolster or pyllow for me, be whose wull.
I will not bear the deuyls sack, by saint Audry.
For concelyng suspycyon of their bawdry.
I fear false measures, or else I were a child.
For they that thynk none ill, ar sonest begylde.
And thus though much water go by the myll,
That the myller knows not of, yet I will
Cast what may escape. and as though I did find it,
With the clak of my myll, to fine meal grynd it.
And sure or I take any rest in effect,
I must banysh my maids, such as I suspect.
Better it be done than wysh it had been done.
As good undone (quoth I) as do it to soon.
Well (quoth she) till sone, fare ye well, and this
Keep now as secret, as ye thynk meet is.
Out at doors went she herewith. and hereupon
In at dors came he forthwith as she was gone.
And, without any temprate protestacyon,
Thus he began, in way of exclamacion.
The.vi. chapter.
OH what choice may compare, to the deuyls life,
Like his, that has chosen a devil to his wife.
Namely such an old wytche, such a mackabroyne,
As evermore like a hog hangs the groyne,
On her husband. except he be her slave,
And follow all fancyes, that she would have.
This proverb proves, there is no good accord,
Where every man would be a lord.
Wherefore my wife will be no lord, but lady.
To make me, that should be her lord, a baby.
Before I was wedded, and sens. I made recknyng*
To make my wife boow at every becknyng.
Bachelors bost, how they will teache their wives good,
But many a man speaks of Robyn hood,
That never shot in his bow. When all is sought,
Bachelors wives, and maids children be well tought.
And this with this, I also begin to gather,
Every man can rule a shrewe save he that has her.
At my will I wend she would have wrought, like wax.
But I find and feel, she has found such knakx.
In her bouget, and such toies in her head,
That to dance after her pipe I am ny led.
It is said of old, an old dog byteth sore.
But by god, tholde bitche byteth sorer and more.
And not with teeth (she has none) but with her tongue.
If all tales be true (quoth I) though she be stong,
And thereby styng you, she is not much to blame.
For what ever you say, thus goes the fame,
When folk first saw your substance laid in your lap,
Without your pein, with your wife brought by good hap
Often in remembrance of haps happy devise,
They would say, better to be happy than wise.
Not myndyng thereby than, to deprave your wit,
For they had good hope, to see good proof of yt.
But sens their good opinion therein so cooles,
That they say as often, god sends fortune to fools.
In that as fortune without your wit gave it,
So can your wit not keep it when ye have it.
Says one, this gear was gotten on a holy day.
Says an other, who may hold that will away.
This game from beginning, shewth what end is meant.
Soon gotten soon spent, ill gotten ill spent.
Ye are calde not only to great a spender,
To frank a gyuer, and as free a lender,
But also ye spend give and lend, among such,
Whose lightness minisheth your honestee as much,
As your money, and much they disalow,
That ye bribe all from her, that brought all to you.
And spend it out at doors, in spite of her,
Because ye would kill her, to be quite of her.
For all kyndnesse of her part, that may rise,
Ye show all thunkyndnesse ye can deuyse.
And where reason and custom (they say) afoords
Alwaie to let the loosers have their words,
You make her a cookqueyn, and consume her good.
And she must sit like a bean in a monks hood.
Bearyng no more rule, than a goose turd in tems.
But at her own maidens becks, wynks, or hems.
She must obeie those lambs, or else a lambs skyn,
Ye will provide for her, to lap her in.
This byteth the mare by the thumb, as they sey.
For were ye, touching condition (say they)
The castle of honestee in all things else.
Yet should this one thing as their holle tale tells,
Defoyle and deface that castle to a cotage.
One crop of a tourde marrth a pot of potage.
And some to this, cry, let him pas, for we think,
The more we stur a tourde, the wours it will stynke.
With many conditions good, one that is ill,
Defaceth the flower of all, and does all spyll.
Now (quoth I) if you think they truly clatter,
Let your amendment amend the matter.
Half warnd half armd. this warni^g for this I show,
He that has an ill name, is half hanged. ye know.
The.vii chapter.
Well said (said he) mary sir here is a tale,
For honestee, meet to set the dyuell on sale.
But now am I forced, a bead roll to unfold,
To tell somewhat more to the tale I erst told.
Grow this, as most part does, I durst hold my life,
Of the ielousy of dame Iulok my wife,
Than shall ye wonder, when truth does define,
How she can, and does here, both bite and whine.
Fransy, heresy, and ielousy are three,
That men say hardly or never cured be.
And all though ielousy need not or boot not,
What helps that counsel, if reason root not.
And in mad ielousy she is so far gone,
She thynkth I roon over all, that I look on.
Take good head of that (quoth I) for at a word,
The proverb says, he that strikes with the sword,
Shall Be stricken with the scaberde. Tushe (quoth he)
The devil with my scaberde will not strike me,
But my dame taking suspicion for full preefe,
Reports it for troth, to the most mischief.
In words gold and hole, as men by wit could wish.
She will lie as fast as a dog will lycke a dishe.
She is of troth as falls, as god is true.
And if she chance to see me at a view
Kiss any of my maids alone, but in sport,
That takes she in ernest* after Bedleem sort.
The cow is wood. Her tongue ronth on patens.
If it be morn, we have a pair of matens.
If it be even, euensong. not latin nor greek,
But english, and like thutas in easter week.
She begins, first with a cry a leysone.
To which she ringth a peale, a larom. such one,
As folk ring bees with baso^s. ye world ronth on wheles.
But except her maid show a fair pair of heles,
She haleth her by the booy rope, till her brayns ache.
And bring I home a good dishe, good chere to make,
What is this (says she) Good meat (say I) for you.
God a mercy horse, a pyg of mine own sow.
Thus when I se, by kyndnesse ease renewth not,
And than, that the eye sees not, the heart rewth not,
And that he must needs go, who^ the devil does drive,
Her fors forsyng me, for mine ease to contriue,
To leat her fast and freate alone for me,
I go where merry chat, and good chere may be.
Much spend I abroad, which at home should be spent,
If she would leave controllyng, and be content.
There lepte a whityng (quoth she) and lept in streite.
Ye shall straight here (quoth she) a pretty conceit.
He makes you believe, by lies leyde on by lode,
My braulyng at home, makes him banquet abroad.
Where his bankets abroad, make me braule at home,
For as in a frost, a mud wall made of lome
Cracketh and crummeth in pieces a sonder,
So melts his money, to the worlds wonder.
Thus may ye se, to turn the cat in the pan,
Or set the cart before the horse, well he can.
He is but little at home, the truth is so.
And forth with him he will not let me go.
And if I come to be merry where he is,
Than is he mad. as ye shall here by this.
Where he with gosseps at a banquet late was,
At which as use is, he paid all. but let pas.
I came to be merry. wherewith meryly,
Proface. Have among you blind harpers (said I.)
The mo the merier, we all day here and se.
Ye but the fewer the better fare (said he)
Then here were, er I came (quoth I) to many.
Here is littell meat left, if there be any.
And it is ill coming, I have hard say,
To thend of a shot, and beginning of a fray.
Put up thy purs (quoth he) thou shall none pay.
And fray here should be none, were thou gone thy way.
Here is, syns thou camst, to many feet a bed.
Welcome when thou go. thus is thine errand sped.
I come (quoth I) to be one here, if I shall,
It is merry in halle, when berds wag all.
What bid me welcome pyg. I pray the kys me.
Nay farewell sow (quoth he) our lord blys me
From bassyng of beasts of bear bynder lane,
I have (quoth I) for fine sugar, fair rats bane.
Many years sens, my mother said to me,
Her elders would say, it is better to be
An old man's derlyng, then a young man's werlyng.
And god knowth, I knew none of this snerlyng.
In my old husbands days. for as tenderly,
He loved me, as ye love me slenderly.
We drew both by one line. Quoth he, would to our lord
Ye had in that drawyng, hanged both in one cord.
For I never meet the at flesh nor at fyshe,
But I have sure a dead man's head in my dyshe.
Whose best and my worst day, that wished might be,
Was when thou dydst bury him, and mary me.
If you (quoth I) long for change in those cases,
Would to god he and you had changed places.
But best I change place. for here I may be sparde.
And for my kind coming, this is my reward.
Claw a chorle by thars, and he shiteth in my hand.
Knak me that nut. much good doyt you all this band.
Must she not (quoth he) be welcome to us all,
Among us all, lettyng such a farewell fall?
But such carpe^ters, such chips. Quoth she folk tell,
Such lips, such letise. such welcome, such farewell.
Thine own words (quoth he) thyn own welcome mard
Well (said she) when so ever we twayn have iard,
My words be pryed at narowly, I espy.
Ye can see a mote in an other man's iye,
But ye can not see a balke in your own.
Ye mark my words, but not that they be grown.
By reuellous rydyng on every royle.
Well ny every day a new mare or a moyle.
As much dishonest. as unprofitable,
Which shall bring us shortly to be unable,
To give a dog a lofe. as I have often said.
How be it your pleasure may no time be denayde.
But still you must have, both the fynest meat,
Apparel, and all thing that money may geate,
Like one of fond fancy so fine and so neat,
That would have better bread tha^ is made of wheat.
The best is best cheap (quoth he) men say clear.
Well (quoth she) a man may bie gold to dear,
Ye another care, nor welny cast what ye pay,
To bye the derest for the best alwaie.
But wise men can say, against hewyng to hye,
Hew not to hye, lest the chyps fall in thine iye.
Measure is a merry mean, as this does show.
Not to hy for the pie, nor to low for the crow.
The difference between staryng, and stark blind,
The wise man at all times to follow can find.
And ywis an auditour of a mean wit,
May soon account, though hereafter come not yet.
Yet is he sure be the day never so long,
Evermore at last they ryng to euensonge.
And where ye spend much, though ye spent but lickell,
Yet littell and littell the cat eats the flickell.
Littell loss by length may grow importable.
A mouse in time, may bite a two, a gable.
Thus to end of all things, be we leefe or loathe,
Yet lo the pot so long to the water gothe,
Till at the last it comth home broken.
Few words to the wise suffice to be spoken.
If ye were wise, here were enough (quoth she)
Here is enough, and to much, dame (quoth he)
For though this appear a propre pulpet peese,
Yet when the fox preaches, than beware our geese.
Thou would have me hynch and pynch, like a snudge,
Every day to be thy driuell, or thy drudge.
Not so (quoth she) but I would have ye stur
Honestly, to keep the wulfe from the dur.
Often said the wise man, whom I erst did very,
Better are meals many, than one to merry.
Well (quoth he) that is answered with this. wife.
Better is one months chere, than a churles hole life.
I think it learning of a wyser lectour,
To learn to make my self mine own exectour.
Than spare for an other, that might wed the,
As the fool, thy first husband. spared for me,
And as for ill places, thou sekest me in mo,
And in wors to. than I into any go.
Whereby this proverb shewth the in by the week.
No man will an other in the oven seek,
Except that him self have been there before,
God give grace thou have been good. I say no more.
And would have the sai less. except thou could prove
Such process, as thou slanderously do move.
For sclaunder perchance (quoth she) I not deny.
It may be a sclaunder, but it is no lie.
It is a lie (quoth he) and thou a liar.
Will ye (quoth she) drive me to touch ye nyer?
I rub the gald horse back till he winche, and yet.
He would make it seem, that I touch him no whit.
But I wot what I wot, though I few words make,
Many kiss the child for the nurces sake.
Ye have many godchyldren to look vpone,
And ye bless them all, but ye basse but one.
This half shewth, what the holle meanth, yt I meeue.
Ye fet circumquaques to make me believe
Or think, that the moon is made of a grene chese.
And when ye have made me a loute in all these,
It seems ye would make me go to bed at noone.
Naie (quoth he) the day of dome shall be done
Er thou go to bed at noone, or night, for me,
Thou art, to be plain and not to flatter the,
As wholesome a morsel for my comely cors,
As a shoulder of mutton for a sick horse.
Thou make me claw where it itcheth not. I would
Thy tongue were coolde to make thy tales more cold.
That aspine leaf, such spiteful clappyng has bred,
That my cap is better at ease than my head.
God send that head (said she) a better nurs.
For when the head aketh, all the body is the wurs.
God grant (quoth I) the head and body both too,
To nurs each other, better than they do,
Or ever have done for the most times paste,
I brought to nurs both (quoth she) had not be^ waste,
Margery good cow (quoth he) gave a good meele,
But than she cast it down again with her heel.
How can her purs for profit be delitefull?
Whose person and propretees be so spiteful
As are thine. Sure a man were better beg,
Or sit with a roasted appull, or an egg,
Where his appetite serves him to be,
Than every day to fare like a duke with the.
Like a duke, like a duck (quoth she) thou shall fare,
Except thou will spare, more tha^ thou do yet spare.
Thou farest to well (quoth he) but thou art so wood,
Thou know not who does ye harm, who does ye good
Yes yes (quoth she) for all those wise words vttred,
I know on which side my bread is buttred,
But there will no butter cleave on my bread.
And on my bread any butter to be spread,
Every promise that thou therein do utter,
Is as sure, as it were sealed with butter.
Or a mouse tied with a threede. Every good thing,
Thou let even slyp, like a wag halter slypstryng.
But take up in time, or else I protest,
All be not abedde, that shall have ill rest.
Now go to thy derlyngs, and declare thy grief.
Where all thy pleasure is. hop hoore, pype thief?
The eight chapter.
With this the^s hopt she, wherewith o lord he cride
What wretch but I, this wretchedness coud bide
How be it in all this woe, I have no wrong,
For it only is all on my self alonge.
Where I should have bridled her first with rough byt,
To have made her chowe on the brydell one fyt,
For likorous lucre of a little winnyng,
I gave her the bridell at beginning.
And now she takes the bridle in the teeth,
And runth away with it, whereby each man sees,
It is (as old men right well understand)
Ill puttyng a naakt sword in a mad man's hand.
She takes such heart of gras, yt though I maym her,
Or kill her, yet shall I never reclaym her,
She has (they say) been styffe necked evermore.
And it is ill healyng of an old sore.
This proverb prophesied many years agone,
It will not out of the flesh, that's bred in the bone.
What chance have I, to have a wife of such sort,
That will no fault amend, in earnest nor sport,
A small thing amysse late I did espy.
Which to make her mende, by a ieste meryly,
I said but this, taunt tyuet wife, your nose drops.
So it may fall, I will eat no browesse sops
This day. But two days after this came in ure,
I had sorrow to my sops enough be sure.
Well (quoth I) it is ill iestyng on the soothe.
Soth bourd is no bourd, in ought that mirth does.
Such jests could not iuggle her, were ought amys.
Nor turn melancoly to mirth. for it is
No playing with a straw before an old cat,
Every tryflyng toie age can not laugh at.
Ye may walk this way, but sure ye shall find,
The further ye go, the further behind.
Ye should consider, the woman is old.
And what for a whot word. Sone whot, sone cold.
Bear with them, that bear with you. and she is scand,
Not only the fairest flower of your garlande,
But also she is all the fair flowers thereof.
Will ye requite her than with a tauntyng scof?
Or with any other kind of unkindness?
Take heed is a fair thing. Beware this blyndnesse.
Why will ye (quoth he) I shall follow her will?
To make me John^ drawlache, or such a snekebill.
To bring her solas, that bryngth me sorrow,
Byr lady, than we shall catch byrds to morrow.
A good wife makth a good husband (they say)
That (quoth I) ye may turn an other way.
To make a good husband, make a good wife.
I can no more herein, but god stynt all strife.
Amen (quoth he) and god a mercy brother,
I will now mende this house, and pair an other.
And that he meant of lykelyhod by his own.
For so apairde he that, er three years were grown,
That little and little he decade so long,
Till he at length came to buckle and bare thong.
To discharge charge, that necessarily grew,
There was no more water than the ship drew.
Such dryfts drove he, from ill to wars and wars,
Till he was as bare as a byrds ars.
Money, and money worth, did so mysse him,
That he had not now, one penny to bliss him.
Which foreseen in this woman wisely waying,
That meet was to stay somewhat for her staying,
To keep yet one mess for Alyson in store.
She kept one bag, that he had not seen before.
A poor cook that may not lick his own fyngers.
But about her at home now still he lyngers.
Not checker a board, all was not clear in the cost,
He looked like one, that had beshyt the roste.
But whether any secret tales were sprynklyng,
Or that he by guess had got an ynklyng
Of her hoord. or that he thought to amend,
And turn his ill beginning to a good end.
In showing him self a new man, as was feet,
That appeared shortly after, but not yeet.
The nynthe chapter.
ONe day in their arbor, which stood so to mine,
That I might, and did closely mine ear inclyne,
And likewise cast mine eye to here and see,
What they said and did, where they could not se me.
He unto her a goodly tale began,
More like a wooer, than a weddyd man,
As far as matter thereof therein served,
But the first part from words of wooyng swerued.
And stood upon repentance, with submission,
Of his former crooked unkind condition.
Pray^^g her, to forgive and forget all free,
And he forgave her, as he forgeuen would be.
Loving her now, as he full depely swore,
As whotly, as ever he loved her before.
Well well (quoth she) what ever ye now say,
It is to late to call again yesterdaie.
Wife (quoth he) such may my diligence seem.
That thoffence of yesterdaie I may redeem.
God takes me as I am, and not as I was.
Take you me so to, and let all things past pas.
I pray the good wife, thynk I speak and thynk plain.
What, he ronth far, that never turnth again.
Ye be young enough to mende, I agree it.
But I am (quoth she) to old to see it.
And mende ye or not, I am to old a year.
What is life? where living is extincte clear.
Namely at old years of least help and most need.
But no tale could tune you, in time to take heed.
If I tune my self now (quoth he) it is fair.
And hope of true tune, shall tune me from despair.
Believe well and have well. men say. Ye. said she,
Do well and have well. men say also, we see.
But what man can believe, that man can do well.
Who of no man will counsel take or here tell.
Which to you, when any man any way tryde,
Than were ye deaf. ye could not here on that side.
Who ever with you any time therein wears,
He must both tell you a tale and find you ears.
You had on your harvest ears, thycke of heryng.
But this is a question of old enqueryng,
Who is so deaf, or so blind, as is he,
That wilfully will another here nor see.
When ye saw your manner, my heart for woe, molte,
Than would ye mende, as the fletcher mends his bolt.
Or as sour ale mendthe in summer, I know,
And knew, which way the wind blew, and will blow.
Though not to my profit, a prophet was I.
I prophesied this, to true a prophecy.
When I was right ill believed, and worse hard.
By flynging from your folks at home, which al mard*
When I said in semblaunce either cold or warm,
A man far from his good, is nigh his harm.
Or wild ye to look, that ye lost no more,
On such as show, that hungry flies byte sore,
Than would ye look over me, with stomach swollen,
Like as the devil looked over Lyncolne.
The devil is dead wife (quoth he) for ye see.
I look like a lamb, in all your words to me.
Look as ye list now (quoth she) thus looked ye than,
And for those looks I show this, to show each man,
Such proof of this proverb, as none is gretter,
Which says, that some man may steal a horse better,
Than some other may stand and look vpone.
Leude huswiues might have words. but I not one
That might be alowde. But now if ye look,
In mystakyng me, ye may see, ye took
The wrong way to wood, and the wrong sow by theare
And thereby in the wrong box to thrive ye wear.
I have herd some, to some tell this tale not feelde,
When thr^ft is in the town, ye be in the feelde.
But contrary, you made that sense to sown,
When thryfte was in the feelde, ye were in the town.
Feelde ware might synke or swym, while ye had any,
Town ware was your ware, to turn the penny.
But town or feelde, where most thryfte did appear.
What ye wan in thundered, ye lost in the shere.
In all your good husbandry, thus ryd the rock,
Ye stumbled at a straw, and lept over a block.
So many kynds of increase you had in choice,
And naught increase nor keep, how can I rejoice?
For as folk have a saying, both old and true,
In that they say, black will take none other hew,
So may I say here, to my deep dolor,
It is a bad cloth, that will take no color.
This case is yours. For ye were never so wise,
To take specke of color, of good advise.
Thaduise of all friends I say, one and other
Went in at the tone ear, and out at the the other.
And as those words went out, this proverb in came.
He that will not be ruled by his own dame,
Shall be ruled by his stepdame, and so you,
Having lost our own good, and own friends now,
May seek your foreyn friends. if you have any,
And sure one of my great greefes, among many,
Is, that ye have been so veraie a hog,
To my friends. What man, love me, love my dog.
But you, to cast precious stones before hogs,
Cast my good before a sort of curre dogs.
And sawte bitches. Which by whom now devoured,
And your honestee among them defloured,
And that ye may no more expense afoorde,
Now can they not afoorde you one good word.
And you them as few. And old folk understood,
When thieves fall out, true men come to their good.
Which is not alwaie true. For in all that bretche,
I can no ferthyng of my good the more fetch.
Nor I trow them selfs neither. if they were sworn.
Light come light go. And sure sens we were borne,
Ruin of one rauyn, was there none gretter.
For by your gyfts, they be as little the better,
As you be much the worse. and I cast away.
An ill wind, that blowth no man to good, men say.
Well (quoth he) every wind blowth not down the corn
I hope (I say) good hap be not all out worn.
I will now begin thryft, when thrifte seems gone.
What wife, there be mo ways to the wood than one.
And I will assaie all the ways to the wood,
Till I find one way, to get again this good.
Ye will get it again (quoth she) I fear,
As shortly as a horse will lycke his ear.
The douche man says, that seggyng is good cope.
Good words bring not ever of good deeds good hope
And these words show your words spoken in scorn.
It pricketh betymes that will be a good thorn.
Tymely crookth the tree, that will a good camok be.
And such beginning such end. we all day see.
Now you by me at beginning being thriuen,
And than to keep thrift could not be pricked nor driven
How can ye now get thrifte, the stock being gone?
Which is thonely thing to reyse thryft upon.
Men say, he may ill run, that can not go,
And your gayn, without your stock, renueth even so.
For what is a workman, without his tools.
Tales of Robyn hoode are good among fools.
He can ill pype, that lackth his over lyp.
Who lackth a stock, his gain is not worth a chyp.
A tale of a tub, your tale no truth auowth,
Ye speak now, as ye would creep into my mowth.
In pure peynted process, as false as fair,
How ye will amend, when ye can not appayre.
But against gaie glosers this rude text recites,
It is not all butter, that the cow shites.
Your tale has like taste, where temprance is taster,
To break my head, and than give me a plaster.
Now thrifte is gone, now would ye thryue in all haste.
And when ye had thryfte, ye had like haste to waste.
Ye lyked than better an ynche of your will,
Than an ell of your thrifte. Wife (quoth he) be still.
May I be help forth one ynche at this pynche,
I will yet thrive (I say) As good is an ynche
As an ell. Ye can (quoth she) make it so, well.
For when I gave you an ynche, ye took an ell.
Till both ell and ynche be gone, and we in det.
Nay (quoth he) with a wet finger ye can fet,
As much as may easily all this matter ease,
And this debate also pleasauntly appease.
I could do as much with an hundred pound now,
As with a thousand before, I assure you.
Ye (quoth she) who had that he has not, would
Do that he does not, as old men have told.
Had I, as ye have, I would do more (quoth he)
Than the priest spoke of on sondaie, ye should see.
Ye do, as I have (quoth she) for naught I have,
And naught ye do. What man, I trow ye rave.
Would ye both eat your cake, and have your cake?
Ye have had of me all that I might make.
And be a man never so greedy to win,
He can have no more of the fox but the skyn.
Well (quoth he) if ye list to bring it out,
Ye can give me your blessyng in a clout.
That were for my child, (quoth she) had I any,
But husband, I have neither child, nor money.
Ye cast and conjecture this much like in show,
As the blind man casts his staff, or shootes the crow.
Howbeit had I money right much, and ye none,
Yet to be plain, ye should have none, for Ione.
Naie, he that first flattreth me, as ye have done.
And does as ye did to me after, so soon,
He may be in my Pater noster in deed.
But be sure, he shall never come in my Creed.
Aue Maria (quoth he) how much mocion
Here is to prayers, with how little devotion.
But some men say, no penny no Pater noster.
I say to such (said she) no longer foster
No longer lemman. But fair and well than,
Pray and shifte each one for him self, as he can.
Every man for him self, and god for us all.
To those words he said naught, but forthwt did fall,
From harpi^g on that stryng, to fair flattring spech.
And as I erst said, he did her so beseech,
That things erst so far of, were now so far on,
That as she may walow, away she is gone,
Where all that was left lay with a trusty friend,
Dwelling a good walk from her at the towns end.
And back again straight a haltyng pace she hobles.
Bryngyng a bag of royals and nobles.
All that she had, without restraynt of one jot.
She brought bullocks noble. for noble or grote,
Had she not one mo. Which I after well knew.
And anon smylyng, toward him as she drew,
A sir, light burdeyn far heavy (quoth she)
This light burdeyn in long walk welny tierth me.
God give grace, I play not the fool this day.
For here I send thaxe after the helue away.
But if ye will stynt, and avoid all strife,
Love and cheryshe this as ye would my life.
I will (quoth he) wife, by god almighty.
This gear comth even in puddyng time ryghtly.
He snatched at the bag. No have but good (quoth she)
Short shootyng leeseth your game, ye may see.
Ye mist the cushyn, for all your haste to it.
And I may set you beside the cushyn yet,
And make ye wype your nose upon your sleeue,
For ought ye shall wyn without ye axe me leeue.
Have ye not herd tell, all covet all leese?
Ah sir, I se, ye may see no green chese,
But your teeth must water. A good coknay coke.
Though ye love not to bye the pyg in the poke,
Yet snatche ye at the poke, that the pyg is in,
Not for the poke, but the pyg good chepe to win.
Like one half lost, till gredy graspyng gat it,
Ye would be over the style, or ye come at it.
But abide friend, your mother bid till ye were borne.
Snatchyng wynth it not. if ye snatche till to morn.
Men say (said he) long standing and small offryng
Makes poor parsons. and in such signs and proffryng
Many praty tales, and merry toys had they,
Before this bag came fully from her awey.
Howbeit, at last she took it him, and said,
He should bear it, for that it now heavy wayde.
With good will wife. for it is (said he to her)
A proud horse that will not bear his own proua^der.
And often before seemed she never so wise,
Yet was she now, suddenly waxen as nyse
As it had been a halporth of silver spoones.
Thus cloudy mornyngs turn to clear after noones.
But so nigh noone it was, that by and by,
They rose, and went to dinner louyngly.
The tenthe chapter.
THis diner thought he long. and straight after that,
To his accustomed customers he gat.
With whom in what time he spent one grote before,
In less time he spendth now, ten grotes or more.
And in small time he brought the world so about,
That he brought the bottom of the bag clean out.
His gaddyng thus again made her ill content,
But she not so much as dreamd that all was spent.
How be it suddenly she minded on a day,
To pick the chest lock, wherein this bag lay.
Determynyng this. if it lay whole still,
So shall it lie, no myte she minyshe will.
And if the bag began to shrynke, she thought best,
To take for her part, some part of the rest.
But straight as she had forthwith opened the lock,
And looked in the bag, what it was a clock,
Than was it proved true, as this proverb gothe,
He that comes last to the pot, is soonest wroth.
By her coming last, and to late to the pot.
Whereby she was potted, thus like a sot,
To see the pot both skymd for rennyng over,
And also all the lykour run at rouer.
At her good husbands and her next meetyng,
The devils good grace might have given a greetyng.
Either for honor or honestee as good
As she gave him: She was (as they sai) horn wood.
In no place could she sit, her self to settyll.
It seemd to him, she had pyst on a nettyll.
She nettlyd him, and he rattled her so,
That at end of that fraie, a sunder they go.
And never after came together again.
He turnde her out at durs, to grase on the plain.
And him self went after. For within fortnyght,
All that was left, was launched out quight.
And thus had he brought haddock to paddock,
Till they both were not now worth a haddock.
It has been said, need makes the old wife trot.
Other folk said it, but she did it. god wot.
First from friend to friend, and than from dur to dur,
A beggyng to some that had begged of hur.
But as men say, misery may be mother,
Where one beggar is driven to beg of an other.
And thus ware, and wasted this most woeful wretch.
Till death from this life, did her wretchedly fetch.
Her late husband, and now wydower, here and there
Wandryng about few know, and fewer care where.
Cast out as an abject, he leads his life,
Till famyne by like, fet him after his wife.
Now let us note here. First of the first twain,
Where they both wedded together, to remain,
Hopyng joyful presence should wear out all woe.
Yet pouertee brought that joy to ieofayle, lo.
But notably note these last twain where as he
Took her only, for that he rich would be.
And she him only in hope of good hap,
In her dotyng days to be daunst on the lap,
In condition they differd so many ways,
That lightly he laid her up for holy days.
Her good he laid up so, lest thieves might spy it,
That another she could, nor he can come by it.
Thus failed all four of all things less and more,
Which they all, or any of all, married fore.
The leuenthe chapter.
FOrsothe (said my friend) this matter makes bost,
Of dimmucion. For here is a myll post
Thwitten to a puddyng prick so nearly,
That I confess me discouraged clearly,
In both my weddyngs, in all things except one.
This spark of hope have I, to proceed vpone.
Though these, and some other sped ill as ye tell,
Yet other have lived and loved full well.
If I should deny that (quoth I) I should rave.
For of both these sorts, I grant, that my self have
Seen of the tone sort, and herd of the the other.
That lyked and lived right well, each with other.
But whether fortune will you, that man declare.
That shall choose in this choice, your comfort or care
Sens, before ye have chosen, we can not know,
I thought to lay the worst, as ye the best show.
That ye might, being yet at libertee,
With all your joy, join all your ieoperdee.
And now this herd, in these cases on each part,
I say no more, but lay your hand on your heart.
I hertily thank you (quoth he) I am sped
Of mine errande. This hitteth the nail on the head.
Who that leaves suretee, and leans to chance,
When fools pipe, by auctoritee he may dance.
And sure am I, of those twain, if I none choose,
Although I naught wyn, yet shall I naught loose.
And to win a woman here, and lose a man,
In all this great wynnyng, what gayn wyn I than?
But mark how folly has me away carried.
How like a wethercock have I here varied.
First these two women to loose I was so loathe,
That if I might, I would have wedded them both.
Than thought I sens, to have wedded one of them.
And now know I clear, I will wed none of them.
They both shall have this one answer by letter,
As good never a whit as never the better.
Now let me axe (quoth I) and your self answer
The short question, that I asked while ere.
Afoule old rich widow, whether wed would ye,
Or a young fair maid, being poor as ye be.
In neither barrel better hearryng (quoth he)
I like thus, riches as ill as pouertee.
Who that has either of these pygs in ure,
He has a pygge of the worse panier sure.
I was wedded unto my will. how be it,
I will be deuorst, and be wedde to my wit.
Whereby with these examples paste, I may see,
Fond weddyng, for love, or good only, to flee.
Only for love, or only for good,
Or only for both. I wedde not, by my hood.
Thus no one thing only, though one thing chiefly
Shall woo me to wed now, for now I espy,
Although the chief one thing in weddyng be love,
Yet must mo things join, as all in one may move
Such kind of living, for such kind of life,
As, lackyng the same, no lack to lack a wife.
Here is enough, I am satisfied (said he.)
Sens enough is enough (said I) here may we,
With that one word take end good, as may be geast.
For folk say, enough is as good as a feast.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED at London in Fletestrete by Thomas Berthelet prynter to the kings
highness.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. ANNO. M.D.XLVI.


