A manifest and apparent confutation of an Astrological discourse, lately
published to the discomfort (without cause) of the weak and simple sort, as
will by the sequel of that which follows, evidently appear.

With a brief Prognostication, or Astrologicall prediction, of the conjunction
of the two Superior planets, Saturn and Jupiter: which shall be in the year of
our Lord God 1583 the 29. of April, at three of the clock in the morning.

Written the 25. of March by THOMAS HETH, Master of Art.

GOD IS MY DEFENDER.


Printed by Robert Walde-graue, dwelling in Foster Lane, over against
Goldsmiths Hal, at the sign of the George.

By the assent of RICHARD WATKINS.

The Epistle to the Reader.
GENTLE READER, IT may seem a thing somewhat more then needful to write of
that, whereof another has written so lately, yea and as the most think, so
largely and learnedly, as is possible in that behalf, and nothing omitted
therein that might any way tend to the declaration thereof. The consideration
whereof caused me at the first to pause at the matter, and in so doing, found
them that had hitherto written thereof, to have mistaken the ground of all
their judgment, presupposing a vvrong and untrue time of the conjunction of
the said Planets, whereupon they seem to ground the principles of al their
judgments, and therefore I could not but certify you thereof, and with the
best of my endeavor, seeking to satisfy you with the truth, have enterprised
to write this treatise following, in humble wise praying you well to accept the
plainness and simpleness of the style, as of one, not so well exercised in the
eloquent pe^ning or the rethorical flourishing of any piece of work (though the
same be a thing very commendable and requisite) as in the contemplacion and
practice of the art, cheifest to be expected herein, hoping that no indifferent
person will think the worse of so excellent a science, for that the students
in the same profession, seem to write the one directly contrary to the other:
the first, threatening great harm to the whole world, the second, promising
good hap to the same, the rather, because that contrariety in writing, is a
thing not only incident to this profession, but also unto sundry other studies
vvherin the learned in each faculty are to consider and judge; who in his
profession vvriteth most learnedly and substantially, unto whose censure I
submit my self, and this my travel, vvishing that as well the unskillful
Astronomer, which takes upon him the Art without knowledge thereof, making
mountains of Molhills, and miracles of mere trifles, might be better advised
ere he publish his doings to the view of the world, discrediting himself
and the Art thereby, as also that the unlearned and ignorant sort, which
injuriously vpbraid and defame the same, thorough their dispightfull and
malicious speeches (for that the predictions which the unskillful in this
science prognosticat, answer not their expectation to the full, either to
suspend their judgments (for that the blind are not able to judge or discern
colors) either else to impute the fault, where of right it ought, unto the
artist and not unto the Art Which doing, their credit vvoulde be the more,
and the commendation of the Art no less then in truth it does deserve; and
otherwise their rash and indiscreet judgment, will no less appear herein,
then in the condemnation of the common laws without cause, when as their
humor is not pleased, and their cause justly condemned. But the Godly and
learned through their example admonished, whose judgment is more, and meaning
better, will I hope well conceive of my simple and plain meaning herein, to
whose good consideration I refer the declaration of that which follows.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL Sir George Carey, Knight, and Knight MARSHALL OF HER
Majesty's most Honorable household: THOMAS HETH wishes long life with much
felicity.
RIght worshipful, according to my duty unto your worship, and my native
Country, (though somewhat prevented by the hasty and rash atemptes of other
some). I have at this present published that, whereof I hope your worship will
accept, which is my censure and opinion (according to the grounds of Art) of
the conjunction of the two superior Planettes, happening in this year of our
Lord, a thousand five hundred eighty three, the twenty eight day of April,
about the fifteenth hour of the Astronomicall day. The which reduced to our
vulgar accountp, is the twenty ninth day, at three of the clock in the
morning, or near about the same, as I am able to prove by plain
Demonstration, though Leouitius and an imitatour of him, Frauncis Liberati, an
Italian Doctor, Vir equidem ab omni liberatus iudicio, affirm the same to be
the second day of May, at three of the clock, fifteen Minutes in the morning,
under such a Celestial Scheme as follows, erected for the Meridian of
Paris. But how far he erreth from the truth, the thing it self will
sufficiently show.



Likewise Stadius somewhat nearer to the truth, though far different, puts
it the twenty eight day of April, just at noone to them of Antwerpe, under
such a figure as follows.



The same by some reduced to London very slightly. Wherefore before I can come
to say any thing thereof. I am driven to disprooue many of their mistaken
Axioms. Wherewith they seem to bring the world into such admiration, that they
of the better sort, know not what to think thereof, and the rest more simple,
brought into no small fear and discomfort thereby. As touching the first, who
yields no reason of his predictions, I boldly say, they are mere immaginary
and altogether frivolous. For if he judge by the conjunction, he seems to
leap over the style before he come at it. For that a great Conjunction,
Eclipse, Comet, or Revolution can not work any matter that should come to
effect before the same first appear unto the world, and therefore were it, so
that his estimate of the Conjunction were any thing near unto the truth, yet
he could not prognosticate thereby anything to fall out before the time of the
said Conjunction (the same being the efficient occasion thereof) as he does in
the beginning of this year 1583. the 26. day of February two months before
the conjunction, among a great many of other strange matters. His words
be these preparation de guerre en Angliterre etc. non obstant les iours
quaresme. Likewise the thirteenth day of March Division in Angliteire courriers
en Flanders and en Almaygne. etc Which saying because it touched our native
Country. I thought good to recite as also for yt (God be praised therefore) it
came nothing so to pass. Nor nothing near the truth, for as all men know
there was no cause of preparation to war or likelihood thereof: much less
any preparation at all. But it is an ancient saying, and not so old as true,
written by Ptholomi in his Cen^iloquio propositione 12. Amor odiumque ne vera
eueniant iudicia probibent, s^quidem minuunt maxima, augent minima: and
therefore my trust and confidence is, that the rest of his predictions,
wherewith he threatens us shall hurt us no more then the former has
hitherto done. Si deus enim nobiscum quis contra nos, if God be on cure side,
who can be against us. Again, if he had judged by the revolution (as it should
rather seem he did) where he puts the ingresse of the sun into the first
minute of Aries, to be the tenth day of March at 8. a clock thirty two
minutes at night, The twenty eight degree of Libra ascending, and Mars in
Cancer in the ninth house, if that position had been true, as it is nothing so,
yet Mars can not be Lord of the year by any reason Astrologicall, being
neither strong in himself, nor well placed in the figure, for he is both in his
fall, and in a cadent house, far unfit for that function, after the mind of
any learned writer in this science. And yet this is his opinion. Mars plus
puissant en la figure and lieu de ciel, de tous les autres Planets sera
seigneur and le dispositeur de le an 1583. And therefore with very good reason
I conclude against him with the saying of Schoner, uomodo e^iahit Astrologus
errorem, si capue anni (radicem predictionis suae) prors^s ignorauerit. That is
to say how shall the Astrologer avoid an error in judgment, if he be utterly
ignorant of the true beginning of the year the very ground of his prediction.

And now to return to the other, who seems to write more learnedly and more
amply of the same matter, though not upon the same ground. Wherein verily he
shows him self a toward scholar, though not so perfect an Astrologer, in
that he leans somewhat too much, (without cause) to the works of other
writers, as shall be declared hereafter, not examining whether there has been
any error or oversight committed, either by the author or printer of the same.
For in one of them there must of necessity some negligence appear As for
example ^eouitius, who was excellently well learned, and daily exercised in
the Mathematicals, puts the conjunction to be the second day of May, at
three of ye clock in the morning? Who as it is well known, followed the
Alphonsine account, which at this day and long since is found (by the best
learned) to halt, and proved insufficient, exactly to account any apparent
motion by. Wherefore no doubt (if he were living at this present) he would not
let, (after proof made) to say with othersom, Errare po^um bereticus essenolo.
And Stadius of like credit, and no less experience then the former, affirms
it to be the twenty eight day of April exactly at noone, under the constitution
that goes before, which is more then four days different, and therefore must
needs breed great alteration in judgment.

Lastly, Moestlin who endeuoresh himself to win no less acceptatton and
credit then the rest, whereof there is no doubt but he will if he persevere, (as
he has already begun) puts it to be the same day, but sixteen hours from
noone, or at four of the clock the next day in the morning, and nearest to
the truth for certain. And though these writers do write for sundry meridians,
as Augusta, Antwerpe, and Tubing, yet can not any reduction bring them all to
be united or agreeable to any one of the said three Cities, or any other
meridian else, that one may safely say, this is the true hour and minute of the
conjunction. For neither Stadius (if he had been willed) or Moestlin (if he
should be required) to put it down to the view of the world, would trust to
his own Ephemerides, much less to any others, but rather would vouchsafe the
supputation of the same out of the grounds thereof. For although et be thought
sufficient, in the supputation of an Ephemerides to come, within a minute, two,
or three of the true place of the Plar et at noone, yet is it to be otherwise
required in this behalf. For not only to know the degree and minute is
requysite herein, but also the second, wherein the said conjunction shall at
any time happen. For as much as they may be both conjoined together in one
degree, and same minute, the space of five hours at least, before the true
conjunction, or no less time after the same, through the slownesse of their
motions. All which considered, I have here set down according to my simple
skill, the figure thereof, so near the truth as I possibly could. Which
though I dare not warrant the exact minute of time, yet of the hour, I am well
assured that no way I am deceived, for as much as it has bin supputated out of
the grounds, esteeming the same to be with us at London, the twenty ninth day
of April, at three a clock in the morning, under such a position as follows.



THis conjunction happens in the fifth minute of the 22. degree of Pisces, the
last sign of the zodiac, and in the latter part of the twelfe house, which
is termed of ye Astronomers. Domus tristitiae, laboris, aerumnae, maeroris,
inimicitiarum, inuidiae, susurrationis, carceris, seruorum, deceptorum,
animalium magnorum. etc. And whether it ought to seem so fearful and
terrible unto us, as it is thought by some, we are to examine. And for as much
as it is a conjunction of the very best and worst of all the Planets: we ought
well to consider, whether Saturn in his malice and mischief, be able and of
sufficient power to subdue the influence of Jupiter, and those good haps by him
signified. And in as much as they twain, are not all in all, having to do
wholly in all causes, it is therefore requisite and needful, jointly io
consider with them, the Dominion and authority of the rest in order, as
follows.

est FORTITVDINES.

Liber directus, velox, orientalis, auctus lumine and numero, receptus a jove
in domum, coniunctus loui, in domo gaudij, in quarta conformi, in gra du
lucido.

DEBILITATES.

Peregrinus, in 12, desc. in eccent, epicicio, and in meridiem, in gradu vacuo
and in contrarietate haiz.

est Directus, velox, auctus lumine and numero in domo propria, in conformi
quarta, gradu lucido, coniunctus cum stella fixa de natura fortunae,
orientalis, liber.

Desc. in epiciclo, eccentrico, and in meridiem, coniunctus saturno, in 12. in
gradu vacuo, in contrarietate haiz.

est Directus, asc. in epici, and ecce^^, in co^formitate sexus and quartae, in
gradu auge^te fortunam, liber a co^bustione. Tardus, minutus lumine and numero
peregrinus, in sexta, in contrarietate haiz occidentalis. est Asc. in eccent
auctus numero, in suo haiz, in conformi quarta, in lextili iouis, in horoscopo.

Tardus, peregimus.

est Directa, velox, asc. in eccent, aucta lumine and numero, occidentalis, in
2. domo, in conformi quarta, gradu lucido, lib. a combustione.

Desc. in epici, in contrarietate haiz, peregrina.

est Liber, directus, velox, asc. in epici, in horoscopo.

Desc in eccent, and in metid, perigrinus, in gradu vacuo.

est Lib^ra a combus. in facie propria, recepta, in suo haiz, in conformi
quarta, gradu lucido and augente fortunam.

Tarda, desc. in epici, and eccent, minuta lumine and numero, in 8. domo, in
quadrato saturni.


And now to come to the purpose, these former considerations wayd, if we
compare the fortituds of Saturn with his debilities, we shall then find that
he is strong (proportione sesquialtera) his strengths being above thirty, his
debilities, only 20. wherefore I may safely say, he is well affected, well
situat, and very well configurate: no less may he thought of Jupiter, though
not having the same fortitudes and debilities in all points, yet the like in
number, and same proportion, and are both as witnesses Cardan. In primo and
optimo statu, robustissimi, quia orientales, veloces and aparentes. Wherefore
it were very gross to conclude yt Saturn should be so hateful so hurtful, so
dispitefull, or so malicious by his force and authority, to overcome and subdue
the good nature, the sweet influence, and prosperous irradiation of the
beneuolent and friendly Planet Jupiter. Upon his trial, who is found in all
respects to be as strong, as able, as manlike, and as mighty as himself, and
having him at home in his own house, he may either entreat him as a friend,
or else (de iure) command him as a guest to be ruled, and be of good
behavior, yielding the superiority unto his Host, without causing great
abundance of waters, cold weather, unwonted mischiefs, sorrow, envy, debate,
quarrelling, hate, strife, lawing for the goods of the dead, reconinges,
accountes, or such like, the rather because he is neither in the eight,
neither has any dominion therein, nor beholds Mars the Lord of the cuspe of
the same: for Leo and Pisces no way behold the one the other. And whereas he
threatens through the influence of Saturn, vprores, tumultes, manyfolde
troubles, violence and oppression, he greatly mistaketh the matter, for that
they are rather the effects of the outrageous, fell, and furious Planet Mars,
who in the conjunction has little or nothing to do. But if thereupon he had
threatened hunger, want, penury, and poverty unto the poor and indigent, his
prediction had not been unlike to have taken effect, for that their estate is
never better, and why he should discomfort the Clergy or Ecclesiastical
estate, I see no cause considering that Jupiter their general significator (as
also Dominus 9. of the figure) is so strong and well affected, both in himself
and his essential dignities, elevated above the rest, and also small reason he
has, to move him to pronounce the ruin and overthrow of Noble men, great
personages and gentlemen, though some and sundry from time to time fall into
like extremities, and be overthrown with the loss of estimation, goods and
life, by the secret working of their own pryuate natiuities, without any
general constitution. But were it so, that Saturn (as he says he is) were
disposed to work strange feats, or to bring great matters about: yea, and
that his might were so much, and his malice so great, as to show the full force
of his mischievous and malicious nature, seeking to bring upon the world,
Plague, pestilence, famine, and other calamities whatsoever, which have at any
time since the creation thereof, happened for the punishment of sin: yet could
he not at this present play these pagea^ts, being otherwise brydled and
restrained of his will, for that he is neither Lord of the conjunction,
neither has dominion in the revolution of the year, nor ought to do in the
government of the great Orb, or any commertion with those who have
authority therein. Therefore if any alteration extraordinary happen in the
years following, different from the others past, it must of necessity rise
and proceed of some more farther cause, then any alleged in all the whole
Astrologicall discourse: for as much as there is not any one Maxim therein
alleged, that may not seem. Puerile quiddam, not worth the hazarding of any
small credit in Astrology, that has been already purchased (else how can one
loose that he never had). And for the better proof of these my speeches,
consider what is by him alleged. Jupiter on whom some part of the charge is
laid, shall begin to shrincke the tenth of July, and go backward, whereby his
influence should be hindered, which is nothing material. For why the combat
(the conjunction I mean) being fought and past long before, it is requisite
that the combattants do retire and repose them selves in array, returning back
from whence they came, which well they may do without any kind of impeachment
or discredit in this respect. Besides it is a passion which happens unto them
every year once, which they can not possibly avoid. Then to think, or be
persuaded that Saturn, Jupiter, or any other of the Errones can be or shall
be, these five or six years next ensuing, either oftener retrograde then
heretofore they have been, or than commonly they use to be, is most absurd
and chieldish, and argues that whosoever is of that opinion can be but a
simple Astrologian, not seen at all in the Theory of the Planettes, nor well
acquainted with Copernicus his Hypotheses, Rein^olts observations, or
Pe^rbachius. Forasmuch as it is a position or rule infallible that a Planet
cannot pass by his first station above once, while he makes his revolution
in his epicicle, and by it he must of necessity once pass, and the tempus
periodicum of his revolution is certain, constant, and without alteration.
Wherefore, if he ever see Saturn oftener retrograde, then once in twelve
months and eighteen days (menses solares I mean) or Jupiter in 13. months
and 9. days, Mars, in 3. years and 2. months, Venus in one year 7. months
and 14. days, Mercury in 3. months and 26. days, or if he can find that they
escape retrogradation in any of those prescribed times, then let me loose the
credit of mine Astrology, unless it please the almighty to work miracles more
in these 6. years following, the^ in 1600. years heretofore: and were his
meaning no less, yet were it doubtful, whether the author of the
Astrological discourse. were a consilijs illius, and privy to his intent. But
admit it were as he says, that they were oftener retro grade then in times
past, and that which is more then so, that the sun stood still, or went
backward, contrary to his natural motion: yet were it no argument thereupon to
infer the dissolution of the world, or end of the same: considering that in
the time of Joshua, the Sun stood still: and in the time of Ezechias, the
Sun went back: and the world notwithstanding continuing after the space of
sixteen hundred years, and not so little. And whereas he also says, that the
26. day of October they are almost in conjunction again. I answer that almost
never won the game, nor almost did never hit ye nail on the head, and although
they be in application, yet is the same but aplicatio auersa, and is prevented
by refranation, before they come to the full conjunction and as for their
situation in the 10. house, at the Sunn his entrance into Libra, in the third
part of the Astronomicall year: it cannot any way increase the hurt, since they
have no dominion in the said year, for how can he govern a part, that is
excluded from the whole. And to return to the constitution of the other
Planets, which are supposed to help forward this cause, and play their parts in
this tragedy. Mars is the man most suspected herein: who though he be
peregrine, yet by his dignities coequall with his debilities, and therefore
become indifferent and of a mean disposition, who although he be in Leo, yet
is he not in Cacodemon, neither is he any way so greatly disgraced or evil
affected, whereby it should be thought to pretend any such wonderful
contention, sedition, treason, rebellion, wars, tumultes, mutines or vprores,
with horrible slaughter and bloodshed, but rather warranteth thereby, this his
terrible prediction and fearful prognostication to pass like a shaddowe, or
vanishe like a smoke, not unlike quicksiluer molten at ye fire, or as ye crack
of a Cannon charged without a bullet, only making a fearful noise, and causing
no further harm. He says also thereupon, that great multitudes shall be spoiled,
subdued, destroyed and murdered, by the enemy yt should oppress them with the
sword and fire, and other tragical mischeifs and notorious calamities, to be
presaged to some mighty ruler or governor, appointed in high dignity or
supreme authority. Mars being neither in the 10. nor having dominion therein.
Furthermore, he supposing Mars to be Lord of the 9. house, infers thereupon
evil success to the clergy, whereas in truth Mars has nothing to do in the
same, neither is Mercury there unluckily appointed, or lately of him
discomforted or discouraged with a hateful square aspect," but rather received
with a trine into his house, which can by no means" forshewe any persecution
of the Clergy, or any disquiet thereby, what soever is signified otherwise.
Likewise Mars in Leo, not in ye 12. house from the ascendent (as he would have
him) can not threaten loss or destruction in those kinds of beasts that have
houes, horns, and fleeces, nor hinder the increase of Waspes, Pismires,
Caterpillars, Cormorantes, and vermin: but that they should abou^d to much (if
it pleased not God otherwise to hinder the same) who because he is not seated
in the eight house from the Moon, Ipse non significat interfectiones and
infirmitates magnai in hominibus. Moreover, the Sun being not Lord of the
Ascendent, nor resident in the 10. house but Lord of the sixth, and situate in
the ascendent, shows that he should imploye his influence far otherwise
then to busy himself, with causing much trouble, vexation or sorrow, to
Noble men, or Honorable personages: much less to thrust any Magistrates out
of Office, deprive them of their dignities, or place other in their rooms:
though some may feel these inconveniences threatened unto them, but by some
particular and private cause, as is before mentioned. Likewise, Venus no Lady
of the 10. house, though peregrine, not co^bust, and in the 2. house, means
to be no partaker with the Sun herein, though he be in her house: yet is she
from home, minding to visit her old friend Mars with a sextile aspecte,
intending to make some banquett or good cheer, whereby to help away with the
substance that else would rust, rather then to forshewe the bad estate not
only to Princes, but of their subjects likewise: which bad estate says he,
shall be found in the Countries that be situate between the East and the
West, a sentence worthy the notyng: for it contains much matter, and is most
like to be truest of al his predictions: for if any such thing happen in any
place of the whole world, he thereby hits it. For what place is there under
the Sun, which is not between the East and ye West, and if he had likewise
said between the North and the South, or between the Earth and the Sky, he
should have left no place of the world unconsidered: for within the two
extremes, of either these three even distances, not only the universal earth,
but the whole is comprised, and by including the whole he can not lightly miss
a part. And Venus, if she were in the 11. house, as she is in the 2. is not
there weakened, or vnluckely affected, for that she has 23. strengthes to
help her self withal, only 9. debilities to be deducted: and if it may
help, rather she is in optimo statu, quia appare^s in ortu vespertino, and
velox cursu, far enough from the Moon Catabibazon: and therefore can not
signify that subtle dissemblyng and false packyng amongst men, or want of
faithful and sound freendship, or much counterfeite and feigned amity,
discourteous dealyng, falsehood, breach of friendship, hate, discord, strife,
division or factions, etc. Nor after Haly, Destructionem futuram in mulieribus,
neque presagit leguminum caritatem: because she not unfortunate in the 11.
house. And as for Mercury, as he is not nere his 2. station by 25. degrees, so
is he not in the house of Religion, or long iourneyes, though peregrine in
Aries, his place is in the Ascendent, and has not to signify much iourneying
or remouyng: for although he be Conuertibilis and mobilis, yet he is slow of
course, and therefore by that Arologicall reason, can not signify trauellyng or
iourneying. Also Mercury having nothing to do in the 7. house, nor aspecting
the cuspe of the same, cannot infer sundry greeuances, violent Robberies,
Spoils, wilful Murders, and cruel man slaughters. For Mercury his influence,
when he has to do therein, is rather to incline the evil disposed to secret
filching, privy picking, purloining, pilferie, and pety lasseny, then unto
forcible breaches, riots, or violent Robberies. And that the same
configuration, should" cause irreligious, impious, obstinate" wicked,
stubborn, and disorderly persons to abound: the marvel were not great,
considering the world lacks them not at this present, nor has not wanted
them in former ages: how beit Mercury (who is Conuertibilis naturae) chau^gyng
himself into the nature and disposition of him whom he most pertily aspecteth,
who is the Moon, in this behalf, can produce no such effect, no more then any
other kind of infortune unto the estate of Embassadoures, Secretaries,
Notaries, Registers, Clerks, Scriueners, Mercers, and those especially of the
learneder sort, which is no way to be feared, considering that Mercury their
Significator, is both strong in himself, and in the position of the Figure: and
as for busy "minded fellows, and factious heads "wedded to their own
conceits, I have no doubt, but that they are likewise wedded to their own
sorrows and harms, for that the busy man never wants woe. But to come now
to the Moon, who being neither peregrine, for that she is in suo Decano,
neither in opposition with Venus, but seperating from the trine of Mars:
neither she being Lady of the tenth house, but of the second: it were
against reason to think, that she should in that constellation show any heavy
calamities, imprisonmentes, disturbances, tribulations, thought, anguishe, and
sorrow unto the common people: so that in very truth, there is not one
Aphorism in the whole tract, that agrees with ye figure of the true
Conjunction: then how is it possible to pronounce ex faelsis verum. Neither is
it hereby to be thought, that the Commons shall carry either disloyal,
bisobedient, or rebellious hearts toward their governors. And though the
world be wickedly given, yet it is not like that any should be so unfaithful
to their Prince, or unnatural to their Country, as to disquiet the common
wealth thereof, unless it be some such, whose significatours of their
Natiuities be infortunately situate, in signis odiose obedientibus, which from
the beginning, as they have unhappily begun their Insurrections and
Rebellions, so have they unfortunately proceeded, and miserably ended the
same. I pray GOD with my whole heart, that all so minded and disposed, may
come to the like success in the end, as no doubt they shall through GOD his
Justice, had this Conjunction never been. And for as much as the Sun, being
Anima Mundi, is not become Maleficus, neither the Fiery triplicitie
unfortunate, neither the Sign of the eleventh and fifth house, wherein the
Moon can no way be placed, neither Saturn in the eight, nor Lord of the
sixth and seventh house, his judgment dependyng therevppon, together with
other incidentes of that Figure by him erected, are willingly (as vnneedefull)
for brevity sake omitted, and had been here unto "small purpose recited, but
as he is verily persuaded that there is no Country, or Nation, shall behold
the same Conjunction unpunished: so am I certainly assured, that he is greatly
deceived: and were it so, that it extended the force and signification thereof,
unto the first and second Climate (which is Per Meroen Aethopiae, and per
Syene^ Aegipti sub Tropico Cancri) it is no doubt far different from the 8.
Climate, and 18.19. and 20. Parallel, wherein this our Country lies, neither
are Pisces, Gemini, Virgo, or Sagittary, signs that ascendent, or
Horoscopicall unto all the Countries and Cities of the whole world: neither
Saturn or Jupiter, Dij topici omnibus gentibus: and therefore the influence of
this Conjunction not to stretche over all the world, nor upon al sorts of
people in the same: For the omnipotent and almighty Jehovah, who sits above
both Planettes and Starrie Firmament, and rules them at his will and pleasure,
has ordained them as well to be signs and tokens of his mercy and love
toward us his chosen and elected, as of his wrath and justice toward the
wicked and reprobate, upon whom he never brought any just scourge or punishment
for their sins and wickedness, but he first called them to repentance, by
some such fearful signs and tokens: if the same might have pierced their
obstinate and stony hearts. But to come to the Author his particular
Judgments, as touching weathers, and such like accidents. Nothing there is
therein contained more praise worthy, then the rest before mentioned. And
whereas upon the convent and assembly of the Planettes, happenyng in the
Month of April, in the year of our Lord 1584. in the Sign of Aries, at
what time Saturn and Jupiter shall forsake the Sign Pisces, is promised a
Comet immediately to ensue. I plainly say, it is a very weak argument
whereupon to infer such a great matter and accident by, as by the induction
of Histories will be proved. In the year of our Lord GOD 1505. in the latter
end of July, there was assembled the Son, the Moon, Saturn, Jupiter,
Venus, and Mercury, in Leo, a fiery sign: after which there followed no
Comet. Again, in the year of our Lord God 1544. in the midst of November:
there was Saturn, Jupiter, Sol, Venus, Mercury, Luna, all conuented in
Sagittarie, a fiery sign as the former, after which there followed no Comet
at all. Likewise in the year of our Lord God 1564. in the end of June there
was Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, assembled in Leo a fiery
sign, and the first before mentioned: After the which there followed no
Comette, Drought, or Heat, but rather great floodes and inundatio^s,
increasyng the River of Thames in such sort, that it ouerflowed the marshes,
and drouned much cattle: and also the same year there insued a very cold and
hard Winter in so much that the river of Thames was frosen over, the like
whereof has not been seen at any time since nor in many years before. As also
Owse bridge at York, carried away with the force of the Ise at the same time:
Howbeit, Leouitius promised a Comet, and the contrary weather, who was therein
deceived, and so may" other presumyng no less. And as" for the Comette,
which appeared "in the year of our Lord 1556. in the beginning of March, it
could not any way be signified or forshewed by that assembly, that the^ was in
Aries: for that the said Comett appeared before there was any more entered
into Aries then three, who were Saturn, Mars, and Venus: and therefore I may
safely conclude, that the said blazyng Starr or Comet, was no more caused
thereby, then that which happened after ye meeting in Leo, in ye year 1434. or
ye which happened before ye death of Charlemaine Anno domini, 814. after their
concourse in Sagittary. Wherefore, when a Comet is to be presaged, debet
aliunde peti, and therefore dare I not give any consent, to think that we
shall have a Comet 1584. upon that Astrologicall conclusion, and slender reason
before mentioned. For why, I am certainly persuaded, that they are engendered
upon some other farther cause: for that in the year of our Lord God 1572. when
there was no concourse of Planettes in fiery signs, there appeared a strange
Comet in the Asterisme of Cassiopeia, toward the North part of the world, in
the Month of October, which was of long continuance. And again, in the year
1580. in the month of November, there appeared an other toward the Southwest,
which lasted ye space of a fortnight, and appeared very great when as there was
no meetyng of the Planettes in any of the fiery signs, at, or immediately
before the same. Furthermore, it is said by him, that in the Month of April,
1584. there should be excessive cold, and extreme heat, caused by the
Conjunction of Saturn and Mars in Pisces, and Jupiter and Mars in Aries,
which is a thing very absurd: for all me^ know, that two extremes do make a
mean, and two contrary causes the one co^sumes the other, and they both bring
forth a third: as scaldyng hot water, and extreme cold, do make luke warm.
As concerning the judgment "of the year 1585. it is not to be thought, that
the assembly in Aries, should pull on the effect of a Conjunction that was
before in Pisces, a watrie sign, and of a contrary Eleme^t, and fire and water
so hardly agreeing, as also, for that Transitus (as the Astronomers term it)
is the least of all the influences. Again, where as it is said, that they
which have in their Natiuities the Ascendent, the Sun, the two superious
Planets, or the Lord of the Ascendent or Nativity in Aries, Inprimis, ad
choreas caelestes inuitabuntur, aliquidque noui molientur: and that Germany and
Italy, with other Countries subject to Aries, should beware of grievous
calamities, chances and chaunges: it is far against reason to think that
any Constellation should foreshewe general calamities to whole Countries, and
particular prefermentes to private persons, both being under the government
of one and the same sign. As touching the continuance of the former effects,
even as the conjectures of them are very slender, so is the text of Cardane
very weak to this purpose: Effectus durant vsque ad reditu^, vt pote
coniu^ctio Saturni and Iouis, vsque ad alia^ coniunctione^: whereby his meaning
is, that it should last the term and space of 20. years following, whereas it
is recorded among them of no small credit in this science, that the
significations upon the change of a Trigon, has been sometimes deferred
until the 3. or 4. Conjunction followyng, which is a 60. or 80. years from
the same, or it take effect, and has not lasted above 7. or 8. years in
effect. But to come to the comparison of this Conjunction with others
heretofore. The Conjunction which was in Cancer in November, that showed the
general Deluge, called Nohae flood, had other accidents co^curring with the
same, which did aggrauate the force thereof, as these. The Conjunction was in
Cancer, which then likewise was the sign of the great Orb, and Saturn was
then lord of ye great Orb, and was there far worse disposed then at at this
present, forasmuch as the^ he was Tardus motu, prope statione^, in detrime^to,
as well as Peregrine, etc. and being so many ways lord and governor of the
whole, and so diversely feebled and weakened, no marvel though so great
effect did then follow, such as the world shall never see again: neither ye
like co^stellation in all respects. As for the Roman Monarchy, and his
beginning, which happened after a conjunction in Scorpie, (but forty year
before the beginning of the fiery Trigon at the least) which Conjunction of
it self could as then have done naught, had there not been a little before, a
concourse of Orbs, yt head of Aries, octaui orbis, being in longitude with Aries
noni orbis, and beginning as then to make a new reuolutio^, which is Res
magnai^caelo, as witnesses Cardane. Furthermore, ye sign of ye great Orb at
ye same time was Aquarie which Orb was as then newly begun, and Saturn Lord
of the said Orb, who did by a square aspect, behold the sign of the great
Orb ex siguis se odiose intuentibus. All which considered, there is more cause
to think that then there should follow some notable subversion, rather then
now, when as none of the like accidents do any way concur, again it is no
reason to think that the watery Trygon, which began the fourth Monarchy,
should likewise finish the same: Quia idem non potest esse causa generationis
and corruptionis. And as touching the conjunction, which was six years before
the blessed and happy birth of our savior Christ, the which Leouitius puts
in Pisces, Cardane affirms the same to be in the third degree of Aries, and
the fiery Trygon already begun, which controuersye of theyrs (being men
excellentlye read and learned) I refer to my betters to decide. Lastly in the
time of Carolus magnus, the Trygon changing into Aries, came as then into the
sign of the great Orb and Dominion of Mars. And since that by process of
time, we are now come again to the end of the watery Trigon, and beginning of
the fierye, it is requisite before we shall presume by Astrologicall conjecture,
to affirm yt the end and consumation of the world, should be in the year of
our Lord 1588. We should first consider whether there happen any change of
the great Orb, or concourse of the eight and ninth Orb, either else the
change of any Absit out of one sign into an other. All which, as Cardane
witnesses. Sunt res magnae in Coelo. If so be that there be any such cause
concurrent, then is somewhat to be spoken thereof, otherwise little to be
expected. The prophesies of the sacred Scriptures first most reverenced and
best considered about the same, and then the Astrogliocall conjectures
compared therewithal, and carefully foreseeing that we allege not, Non
causam pro causa, some reasonable estimate may be made thereof. But the day
and hour is unknown to the angels of heaven, And so to return to the last
notable matter by him specified, which is, that there shall not appear unto us
in our Horizon, any Eclipse, of the Sun, or moon this year. But how great or
how notable a thing, yt is to be co^sidred, I leave to those yt are meanly
exercised in Astronomy. But as touching the influence of the Eclipse of the
Sun, that was in Cancer, the last year 1582, whereof there is wonders
promised, we are to examine. And first the cause of an Eclipse well known, we
are to consider the quantity of the Eclipse, and the continuance of the same.
Leouitius at Augusta, puts it to be the twenteth of June, at four of ye
clock, fifty three minutes in the morning, and three points seven minutes
darkened, and continued an hour and twenty two minutes. Maestlin for Tubing,
affirms it to be at four of ye clock fifty minutes, and but two points
four minutes darkened, and lasted an hour and fourteen minutes. And Stadius for
Antwerp has it at four of the clock forty two minutes: But not so much as
one sixth part of one point darkened, nor of any continuance at all, but only a
touch as it were.

Wherefore if they which dwell in longitude, thirty degrees, and have the pole
elevated fortye eight degrees, had it three points darkened, and they in
longitude thirty one degrees, under the elevation of forty nine degrees, had
but two points darkened. Likewise they that dwell in longitude twenty six
degrees under the elevation of fifty one degrees, saw nothing at all. How is
it possible that they which are in longitude ninteene degrees, under the
elevation of fifty two degrees, should see any thing. And for because the
surreption of light is the ground whereby to judge of the events: I thought
good to take the pains, to prove by the principles of the Art, whether there
were any surreption in our Horizon or no, with the rest of the circumstances
thereunto apertayning. Whereby it may appear to any that is studious or desirous
to come to the truth thereof, in manner as follows.

die. Ho. mi. ^. Visibilis coniunctio solis and Lunae. 19. 16. 30. 11.
Distantia verae coniunctionis a visa. 0. 0. 59. 8. Con iunctio vera. 19. 17.
30. 0. Anomalia solis annua. sex. 5. 58. 39. 39. Anomalia lunae Coaequata. 4.
5. 8. 19. Motus verus latitudinis. 1. 27. 13. 20. Distantia solis ac lunae a
vertice. gra. 86. 26. 0. Paralaxis Lunae ad solemn. 0. 0. 55. 23 Paralaxis
Longitudinis lunae ad solemn. 0. 0. 33. 54 Paralaxis Latitudinis lunae ad solemn.
0. 0. 46 47. mi 6 Latitudo lunae vera. bor. 0. 14. 13. Latitudo lunae visa.
Aust. 0. 32. 16. Semidia meter solis visualis. 0. 0. 15. 49. Semidia meter
lunae visualis. 0. 0. 16. 53. Congeries semidia metrorum. 0. 0. 32. 42. Digiti
ecliptici. digit. 0. 9. 32. Tempus insidentiae. ho. 0. 5. 0.

WHereby it may evidently appear that there was scant the sixth part of one
point of the Suns body eclypsed, what soever was seen at Cambridge, before
whom so ever, unless they had their Ossa iugalia nimium extensa. As Cornelius
Gemma had, when he considred the Comet that was in Cassiopeia, which made them
see the thing which was not, else had they not Neruum opticum been dispositum,
which made that small darkness to appear sixteen times bigger then it was,
and the obscuration being but the sixte part of one point, is a thing of none
account at all, as the sequel showed. For that small influence that it had,
began the sixth day of July, lasted two months, and ended the seventh of
September following in the same year. Wherefore the effects thereof can not
by any Astrologicall reason be deferred till May 1583, and so continue a year.
Thus is there neither good nor bad can be aspected from this Eclipse. As for
the comparing with other Eclipses is needless. But one example must not be
omitted. If this Eclipse had been darkened three points as it was not (though
he so say thereof) In the year says he, 1536. the 13. day of June, at one of
the clock after noone was an eclipse of the Sun in the seventh degree of
Cancer, the sun was darkened eight points almost, with them at Tubing, but
much less with us at London, and from the beginning to the end, lasted two
hours and six minutes. The effects whereof began in January following, the
tenth day, and lasted two years, which declares that this Eclips could not
foreshew the two great commotions, that were in Lyncolneshire and Yorkshire,
which were both of them begun and ended in October before the influence of
this eclipse took place, at least the space of 2. months. But for
confirmation of Art, let us see what happened from January 1537 till January
1539. when as the influence of this Eclipse raged. In February there was
stirred a rebellion, wherein Carlisle was besieged. In April after there was a
co^motion in Sommersetshire, about taking up of Corn, and there was from the
beginning to the end, above sixtye persons executed and put to death for
treason, rebellion, and denying the Kings Supremacy: of which number there was
a Marquess, three Lords, six Knights, three Abbotes and a Lady, that was
brent in Smithfield (Quiae Eclipsis fuit in decima domo regis, and prope locum
solis aphetae suae genesis) If we may give credit to Cardane, al so in ye time
there were sundry abbeys suppressed, ye black Friars, the white Friars and the
Monckes of Charterhouse, soon after all the rest, (Quia in nona domo quae est
domus religionis) As for any dearth or scarsity, sickness or mortalitye, I
read of none yt followed, neither of inundatio^s or floods but great hurt by
fire was done in London amongst ye basketmakers in Roode Lane, where twelve
houses and nine persons were burnt in the space of three hours, besides friar
Forest and other that were brent in Smithfield, and a great many of Images (for
auoidi^g of Idolatry) were burnt at Chelsey (Mars feriebat gradu^ Eclipticu
quadrato breuium) Likewise on a su^day at ye sermon time, appeared at Paul's
Cross the Rood of grace, and there moved the mouth and lips, very straunglie.
But it was brought thither out of Kent, and with sundry devises made so to do.
Afterward by the same Preacher the Bishop of Rochester was showed the blood of
Hales, and proved to be no blood, but clarified honey mixte with Saffron. And
lastly, to conclude and to show, that some good as well as ill, may be
foreshewed by an Eclipse, as well privately, as publicly, particularly, as
generally. There were (during ye influence of that Eclipse) 18. States created
and advanced. Also the virtuous and Godly Prince Edward, afterward king
Edward the sixth was borne, a great joy to the whole Land. Also the Bible in
english was set in every Church of the Realm for all men to read: And thus
much for the confutation of the Astrologicall discourse and positions therein
contained. And for as much as it is not thuoght sufficient for any one to
reprehend or reprove the doings and procedinges of other writers unless
after confutation of their error made, he seems further to add of his
own, somewhat either more Substantial in doctrine, reasonabler in hearing, or
with the truth of the matter better agreeing. I have there upon thought it not
amiss, to follow an order and platfourme of judgment in the declaration
hereof used by Ptholomy, and other learned writers of later time. Wherein it is
first requisite to understand, who at this present is Lord of the great Orb,
what the sign of the same is, as also the degree profectionall, and the
divisor thereof. Likewise the Ascendent of the conjunction, and revolution, and
lastly, who has the Dominion in the conjunction, or prevention next and
imediately going before the same. Al which, for the better understanding of
that which follows, I will briefly in order set down, thereby yt it may
appear, who of these twain thus conioined has most force and dominion in all
or most, of the former considerations, for that the conjunction simply of it
self, unless it has a further consent of the premises, can not pretend or
forshew any great matter worthy the penning. Much less the alteration of
Kingdoms, the coming of Christ in judgment, or consumation of the world.
For as much as it is a matter usually happening once in each twenty year, four
times in every sign, and twelve times in every Trygon before they shyft, or
change the same. So that within the space of two hundred forty years, they
are twelve times conjoined together, and not abooue.

And what horrible matters about twenty years last past, in respect of the
former resited have happened, there are none of sufficient years, who are not
able to testify. And therefore most strange it is, that the audacitie of
every slender student in this science, should be such as upon so small causes
so certainly and peremptorily, to pronounce such great and wonderful effects,
assuring the same upon his credit. But how so ever his credit be, certain I
am, that through the like rash, and unlearned attempts the art it self, has
been greatly discredited. In so much as it is in a manner contemned of the
common people: the which was in times past esteemed both of Prince and
Potentate in such sort as they became earnest Stude^ts thereof. Wherefore, it
were to be wished, that some of the chiefest Mathematicians of this Age, and of
this our Country well learned, and long experienced, would undertake the writing
of these, and the like cases, whereby other yunger Scholars might be the more
benefited, and the common wealth the better profited. And were there any cause
of fear by this Conjunction portended, it were more reasonable and convenient,
that Liberati the Italian, should rather admonish the kingdom of France, and
Italy his country, then threaten the realm of England thereby. For that in the
year of our Lord 1524. after the like Conjunction in Pisces, the French king
was taken prisoner, at the siege of Paui, by the Duke of Bourbon: which in
dispight of the Cardinal Wolsey, went to Rome, besieged the City, his
Soldiers fact and spoiled it, the Pope driven to fly to ye castle of S.
Angelo, where he continued long in calamitye. The second year after, was a
peace concluded between England and France, the fifth year following was the
new Testament translated into English by William Tindall, and printed: the
sixth year following, the Pope was banished, and suite to the court of Rome
forbidden, and the same year died Cardinal Wolsey, all which I am persuaded,
was no loss to England, likewise the clergy was condemned in the praemunire.
No other great matter happned in this land, by the space of 10. years after
that Conjunction, except it were the loss of the holy maid of Kent: who with
her accomplices, Monks, and Friars, were worthily executed and put to death, and
certain houses of obseruaunt Friars put down. But to return from whence I
first digressed, the sign of the great Orb at this present, is Gemini. The
Lady and gouernesse of the Orb, Venus. The degree of the profection the twenty
eight of Libra, the divisor Mars, the ascendent of the conjunction, the twenty
nine degree, and 51. minutes of Pisces. The Lady of the hour of the said
conjunction Venus. The Lord and governor of the prevention, preceding Venus.
Al which considered, it evidently appears that Saturn has no Dominion in any
of the premises, much less in all, or the most of them. And therefore were he
Potentior Joue in loco coniunctionis, as some in considerately have supposed
him, yet cold-he not at this present, work those effects by him signified, by
reason of his dissent and disagreement otherwise. But according as Iels where
promised. I will first begin with ye doctrine of Ptolemy, in the sixty three
proposition of his Centiloquium, whose words are these. Cum Saturnus Iupiterque
co^iu^gunter vtrum eorum sublimior sit vide, and iuxta illius natural
pronuntiato. The which proposition contains much matter, and very difficult
in few words. For by the word conjunction, as some of the learned have
interpreted, he means in ye same place, Coniunctionem tam secundum
latitudinem, qua^ longitudine^. Both which at this present by great good hap,
in a manner concur, though the same by the Aucthor be neglected and omitted.
A farther consideration the^ the which notwithstanding of other some there is
required herein, the uniting and contactio^ of their bodies, the which (for
that the difference of their Latitudes is more the^ the Semidiameters of their
bodies) can not be: for as much as the Semidiameter of the body of Saturn is
but 4. minutes, and the Semidiameter of the body of Jupiter is 6. minutes,
both which added together makes 10. minutes, and the difference of their
Latitudes is 26. minutes: Ergo, it appears as is said: and how requisite
this third consideration is in the judgment of corporal Conjunctions: say
they, the Eclipse of the Sun and the Moon does evidently declare. For that
when as the Latitude of the Moon exceeds the Semidiameter of both their
bodies, there happens no Eclipse, be the Conjunction otherwise never so
partile, the which opinion although it be very reasonable and probatle, yet
will I not much stand therevppon, for that it seldom happens to concur
with the two former considerations, and yet the Conjunction pretending matter
to ensue: how be it it must of necessity be granted when it so happens, to
be the more significatiue, and of greater effect Ceteris paribus. The second
point contained in the former proposition, is to consider in this Conjunction
Quis eleuatur super alterum, the which word eleuatio, for that it is somewhat
ambiguous, is therefore diversely understood of sondrie Writers, some taking it
in one sense and some in other, as Trapezuntius commentyng upon the same
proposition understands Per eleuationem altitudine^ planetae in epiciclo,
affirming that when soever two Planets are co^ioyned together, he that is
nearest of ye twain unto the Apogeon of his Epicicle, dicitur eleuatus super
alterum, and when they are of like distaunce from the former Apogeon: Quod
nullus eleuatur supra alteru^: And some there are, as Guido, and such like, who
refer the same unto the latitudes of ye planets so conjoined thus saying
thereof, that if it happen their Latitudes to be both one way and into the
North, he whose Latitude is greater to be elevated above the other, but if
both their Latitudes be into the South, the^ he to be elevated whose latitude
is least of the twain: If the latitude of the one be into the North, and the
Latitude of the other into ye South, then he whose Latitude is into the North,
is elevated above the other in to ye South: but if their Latitudes be both one
way and like much, then he who is ascendent to be elevated above the other
descende^t in the same, and when as neither of them have any Latitude from the
Ecliptike, the^ none to be elevated above the other, and a third sort there
are who consider Per eleuationem, declinationem ab Equatore: saying, that in
this and the like Conjunctions, it is to be considered, Quis planetarum habet
maiorem declinationem, which if they happen to be both into the North, then
he who has the greatest declination of the twain is thought to be elevated
above the other: but if their declination be into the Southe, he whose
declinatio^ is less of ye twain: but if so be that the declination of the one
be into the North, and the declination of the other into the Southe, then he
who has his declination in to the North: but if their declinatio^s be both
one way, and equidistaunt from the Equator, then none to be elevated above
other, and they seem to yield this reason of their opinion, that he who has
the greater declination of the twain both being into the North, has
likewise the greater altitude Meridian, and therefore comes of the twain
nearest unto our Zenith or Vertical, the highest and nearest point of our
Country, but when as their declinations are both into the South, the reason
is contrary, for that he whose declination is then most, has the least
altitude Meridian of the twain, and when their declinations are both one way
and like much, then is the altitude Meridian one and the same, and none
comes nearer to our Vertical then the other. A fourth sort likewise there
are, and they no small number, who understand Per eleuationem, the distaunce
of a Planett from the Apogeon of his Eccentriciti, so that he who comes
nearest unto the same, is by them elevated above the other, and if they be
both equidistaunt from the same, then he who is ascendent in his Eccentriciti
above the other descendyng: but if both ascendyng or both descendyng and
equidistaunt from the same, then none elevated above other, who think
themselves to have great reason of their opinion, because it is daily seen by
ye Son and other Planettes, the nearer they come unto the same, the more they
are elevated above the earth, and higher and further from us. A fifth sort
there are, who understand eleuatione^ after a far other manner, referryng the
same unto the essential dignities of the Planettes, pronounsing that Planet in
any Coniunctio^ to be elevated above the other, who has Plures dignitates in
loco coniunctionis: saying, that he in reason ought to have the superiority in
any such case, who has most to do therein: alledgyng Pthol. in his third
book in the tracte de animae facultatibus for their warrant in this behalf,
whose words are these: Magna autem est vis planetarum potentiorum, and
eleuatorum super mercurium and lunam, where it is evident by that which goes
before the same, as thus: Quum autem sunt in proprijs, and familiaribus locis,
and dignitatibus planetae gubernantes animi inclinationes etc. And Cardane
commenting upon the said tracte, affirms no less. A sixth and last sort
understand Per eleuationem altitudinem planetae super Horizontem, accompting
that Planett to be elevated above the other, who is nearest to the Meridian of
the twain: As the Planet in the 12. house above an other in the ascendent, and
one in the 11. above the same in the 12. and one in the 10. above the same in
the 11. For as much say they as it is daiely seen, that as the Su^ne passes
these positions and houses, he asce^deth higher and higher until he come unto
the highest point thereof, and his heat and force in each of the said
points more and more increasing, until he come at the full Meridian and
highest point from the Horizon. And of this opinion is the learned Leonitius in
his judgment de natiuitatibus in the chapter de coniugio, his words being
these: Saturnus proxime supra vtrumque significatricem coniugij, stellam (lunam
ac venerem) eleuatus, ita vt nullus, prorsus, planeta interueniat, and ex loco
maxim sublimisz. medij coeli apice vtrunque velu^ deprimens, co^iugium huic
nato denegat: and other late Writers for the better maintainyng of this
opinion, allege the authority of Pthol. in the third Book in the tracte de
lesionibus, and morbis corporis. Whose words are these: Rursus quando venus
est in cardinibus dictis maxim in occid. iuncta Saturno, aut eum aspiciens,
aut domicilia mutarunt, Mars super cum eleuatur etc. And in the fourth Book in
the Chapter de facultatibus, alledgyng these words following: Considerentur
alij fausti planetarum aspectus ad hos and illi qui eleuantur super hos ex
eadem vel contraria qualitate. And again in the same Book in the tracte de
magisterio as follows: and cum beneficae stella su^t eleuati super
dominantes, faciunt magnos gloriosos etc. Econtra cum malefici eleuantur super
dominatores, faciunt submissos ignobiles, nihil lucrantes etc. In all which
places alleged it is evident say they that the authors understand, Per
eleuationem, altitudinem planetae quoad mundum vel Horizontem, by reason of
which diversity and co^trarietie of opinions, it is not a little difficult to
determine the elevation or superiority of these twain thus conjoined: but for
as much as the proposition before resited is taken out of Pthol I think it
most reasonable to confirm his meaning herein by himself, and the like words
used of him else where, taking eleuationem in this place in both the senses by
him alleged, according unto both which it will appear that Jupiter is
Sublimior of the twain. First, for that he is in domo propria and dominus
coniunctionis, and Saturn having no one dignity therein, nor ought to do in
the same. Secondly, because he is Saturno eleuatior quo ad mundum vel
Horizontem, whereof there may be some doubt, considering that they are both
in one degree and minute very partilly conjoined, which not withstandyng
because Jupiter his latitude is least of the twain, his distaunce therefore a
Meridie must be least of them both, and therefore his altitude above the
Horizon most, Et ergo sublimior Saturno: What then follows in the former
proposition, Iuxta illius naturam pronunciaeto, where by it is manifest that
this said Conjunction of the two superior follows the influence, operation,
and property of the most happy, prosperous and beneuolent Planette Jupiter,
whose influence and irradiation is not at any time to work hurt to any, much
less when as he is strong in himself, well affected, and disposed, and having
the prorogatiue and pre-eminence above the rest, for when at any time he has
the Dominion and government of an Eclipse, a matter far more significatiue
then this seely and simple Conjunction, considering that the said Jupiter the
governor and disposer thereof is neither dominus ascende^tis co^iunctionis,
because the ascendent is the last degree and almost last minute of ye sign
Pisces: neither dominus ascendentis reuolutionis: neither dominus orbis magni,
nor preuentionis prox. precedentis. For Pthol. writing and declaryng the
natural causes of general calamities, ascribes more unto the Eclipses then
unto any other: thus saying of the^, Prima and efficacissima taliu^ euentuu^
causa, est copulatio solis and lunae in defectibus: And next after Eclipses, he
affirms Cometts and blasing Stars to have a great affect and
signification, whereof he thus testifies in the 28. proposition of his
Centiloquium. Tratectiones atque crinitae secunda parts in Iudicijs ferunt,
and yet whenever this Planette Jupiter or Venus have the whole dominion in
either of the said places, as they have in this Conjunction, they turn the
significations thereof, unto much good prosperous hap and effect, as
appears by the said Pthol. Thus writing of ye said Jupiter in the second
Book in his tracte de eclipsibus there inquiryng, Quales futuri sunt euentus
boni vel mali. Thus much affirmyng of the said Planette Jupiter cum solus
dominatur, increme^ta efficit, cumque euentus ad homines pertine^t, gloriam,
fertilitatem, tranquillitatem, and pacem significat etc. And no less
signification has the said Jupiter and Venus, and either of them in the
dominion of Comettes and Meteors, as witnesses Mizaldus and others, who have
written de Cometographiae and were this not so, Commets and Eclipses could not
at any time signify and pretend good happ and effect to follow and ensue:
the contrary whereof experience does testify: for as much as after the
appearance of the Comette in Libra the Diurnall house of Venus, and under the
beams and irradiation of the most prosperous and beneuolent Planett Jupiter,
in the Nativity of our Savior, there followed great joy, peace and comfort
unto the whole world, and what good effects have insued of Eclipses in
particular Countries, each mean Chronographer is able to testify. If then in
such great matters as Eclipses and Comettes, the force of these Planettes be
such, upon their dominion there, I see no cause but to hope and expect the
like hereafter, the power and authority of Jupiter and Venus being no less in
this Conjunction, the one quia dominus, the other quia Almute^, and the same so
much the rather for that the said Jupiter has none elevated above him
thereby to let and inhibite his influence, but is both the highest and the
strongest in the figure, and therefore the good effects promised thereby so
much the more, as witnesses Pthol. in his second Book de predictionibus
Astronomicis: His words being these: Etenim beneficae stell^ and locis euentui
obnoxijs cognatione aliqua iunctae, si non superentur ab alijs contrariae
sectae stellis, efficatius quod policentur naturae suae bonitate absoluunt:
Wherefore it is requisite to show and declare to whom and what Countries this
said good by this Conjunction promised is especially portended: for as much
as it were absurd in reason to think this same to be prefigured unto the
whole, or unto these to who^ the same in the Exact time of the Conjunction
does not appear: For as a Comett signifies not but unto those to whom the
same does first show and appear: or an Eclipse, but unto such as se and
behold the same, their reuolutions notwithstanding about the whole within the
space of four and twenty hours: the like consideration therefore of this
Conjunction not without cause at this present in this behalf, according to the
which time and position it seems most reasonable to think the good
effects by this Conjunction promised and presaged, especially to touch such
Regions and Countries, as lie under the influence thereof, and as have the said
Jupiter their patron and significator, as also unto those Countries that are
subject unto the sign of the Conjunction, or sign ascendent of the same, or
sign wherein the Almuten of the Conjunction is as then seated and placed: And
for as much as the sign wherein the Conjunction will happen is known to be of
the fourth and last triplicitie, it has his signification in the Countries,
liyng in respect of the whole Southwest, and those especially of the same
situate on the Sea cost, and certain Islands liyng in the said point, as
also other Countries in the like position environed with many Rivers or great
waters, and to discende more particularly, unto Normandy, Portingall, and
Compestella in Spaigne, and no less good hap promised likewise unto the
Countries lying and situate in respect of us Southeast, adjoining and bounding
upon the North Seas, Quia Jupiter huius boni author and significator
orientalis a sole, and in latitudine australi, ac in piscibus, signo aqueo ac
septentrionali. And the sign Gemini wherein the Almuten of the said
Conjunction moves, somewhat confirms the same: Habet enim signum geminoru^,
ex regionibus Flandriam, Brabantiae^ etc. Et quia Jupiter huius rei dominator
fortis est per se, and erga solemn, and in domo pauoris, tristiciae, meroris,
captiuorum, ac incarceratorum sit us, ac supra saturnum eiusdem domus dominum
exaltatus, eumque de primens, exilij, inopiae, angustiarum, luctus, pauoris,
interitus, vastitatis, caritatis ac penuriae dominu^, ac significatorem maxim
necessarioru^ ad victum. What is hereby to be thought? but that the imprisoned
in the said places to be released, and the captives set at liberty, their
dearth and penury turned into more abundance and plenty, their fear to joy,
their thraldom to liberty, their sorrow to comfort, and their long war to
sudden and short peace, and the same so much the rather, if other more
forcible and effectual causes co^cur with ye same as ye two eclipses hereafter
following, the one lighting near unto the degree of the said conjunction, and
the other not far from the degree oposite to the same, but the good before
promised is not like presently to take effect, but after certain small tresons,
trecheries, secret conspirasies, and a few like troubles before going: for
although Jupiter have heerin ye victory and superiority, disposing for the
most part the coniu^ction after his own inclination and disposition: yet can it
not be denied, but ye Saturn works therein some little and small effect,
though nothing in respect of ye former good, and far less then otherwise he
would, had he had the superiority and supremacy therein. And it may seem
somewhat strange thus to think, considering that ye said Saturn is in this
conjunction peregrine, weak, and without dignity, as also in domo cadente, a
weak place of ye figure, where unto I answer, wc Haly, Abenragell, and other,
that although he be without dignity, yet is he not void of influe^ce, as also
yt the malefici being peregrine, are then readier and apter to mischief then
otherwise: howbeit their force and ability, as then not answerable to their
will, as appears in the direction of an Aphaeta, unto a weak and peregrine
Anaraeta, and although Saturn be in Cadente, yet must it be considered with all, yt he is in domo in qua gaudet. And therefore it is not any way to be
intended, yt the dominion and superiority of the one, can quite and wholly
extinguish the influence and operation of the other, but rather causes it to
appear mild, weak, feeble, and very remiss, Vt reru^ vmbrae potius, quam res
ipsae videantur, yt otherwise would appear, In intenciori ac summo gradu. And
for as much as Cardane in his first comment upon the second book of Pthol. his
quadrupartite, there speaking somewhat of the conjunction of the second
superior planets, Saturn and Jupiter, thus says of them. Hi tamen effectus
vt dictum est, ab eclipsibus augentur vel minuantur, vel etia^ ad effectum
ducuntur. And therefore I will here after (when as I have occasion to write of
those two eclipses before mentioned) diligently consider what consent, or
descent they have with the same, and accordingly to yield my censure and
opinion thereof, knowing not what should move the author of the late
Astrologicall discourse, without the consent of any of the former
considerations, so much to ascribe unto the said conjunction, unless the
remembrance of the fifty proposition Centiloquij Ptho. ye words being these.
Ne prete^mittas centum and december noue^ coniunctiones, in his enim posita est
vis eorum quae fiunt in mu^do, and generationis and corruptionis. The which
words, if he simply understand, without any further respect (as I am certainly
persuaded of no less), the^ see I no cause but that he may upon ye same ground
take no less occasion to pronounce ye like meruailes and miracles, upon the
coniu^ction of the two luminaries, the Sun and the Moon, a matter happening
once every month, ye same being one of the Centum and december nouem coniunctiones
there specified. But for yt I purposed not to be over tedious and troublesome
unto your worship in this behalf, I will at this present cease the further
examination and declaration hereof, hoping that your worship will accept in
good part, my simple and true meaning heerin, until such time as it may please
ye Almighty, to indue me with a farther knowledge in this science, worthy the
better liking and contentation of your worship.

Your worships to command, Thomas Heth.


