POPISH PIETY, OR The first part of the History of that horrible and
barbarous conspiracy, commonly called the Powder Treason:

Nefariously plotted against James King of great Britain, Prince Henry, and
the whole state of that Realm assembled in Parliament; and happily disc^^ered,
disappointed, and frustrated, by the powerful and sole arm of the Almighty,
the fifth of November, Anno 1605.

Written first in Latin verse by F.H. (...) in Physic: and translated into
^^glish by ^. P.

LONDON, Printed for William Ione 1610.

TO THE ILLUSTRIOUS AND MOST VIRTUOUS PRINCESS, THE LADY Elizabeth, only
daughter of the Kings most excellent Majesty.
I Have presumed to offer unto your Grace (most gracious Princess) an old
History clad in a new English coat. But why do I call that old, which ought
to be always new, and fresh in every true English heart, while the world
lasts? We have a vulgar saying, that fish and guests are stale in a few
days. And who sees not, that the greatest and strangest works of God wrought
amongst us, are but wonders of nine days? Our English nation is justly taxed,
as too Athenian-like, ever eagerly and curiously listening after novelties, and
over slightly and lightly passing by the most remarkable and memorable
accidents and occurrents. This is a general, and (as I may term it) a
national fault, which ought to be acknowledged and amended. Now howsoever many
passages may without any great dishonor unto God or detriment to the State, be
buried in the dark pit of oblivion, yet the Powder Treason, that monstrous
birth of the Romish harlot, cannot be forgotten without great impiety, and
injury to our selves. The Israelites were commanded to celebrate yearly the
memorial of their deliverance from Egypt, and often to inculcate unto their
children t^ (...) works which the Lord wrought f^ (...) in drying the red sea,
in dividing t^ (...) of Jordan, in subduing the Canaan (...) expelling them
before their faces. T^s in the time of Hester by a solemn (...) ^dained an
annual remembrance of (...) ^ance from the cruel design of Haman (...)
Agagite. The like course has been honorably taken in the Powder-Conspiracie,
by the great Counsel of our State, and (...) on most just and weighty
considera^ (...) For this hellish plot, being as it were (...) ^nt-essence of
Satan's policy, the fur^ (...) ^th and strain of humane malice and (...) not
to be paralleld among the savage Turks, the barbarous Indians, nor (as I am
persuaded) among the more then brutish Cannibals; and the deliverance being
wrought without any humane help, by the great watchman of Israel, who neither
slumbreth nor sleeps, so as our enemies must needs acknowledge with the
Egyptian sorcerers, Certe hic Dei digitus est: we shall be guilty of horrible
ingratitude, the foulest of all vices, if we do not embrace all means of
perpetuating the memory of so great, so gracious, and wonderful a
preservation: Nunquam nimis inculcatur quod non satis discitur. Besides, we
cannot forget this marvelous deliverance, without apparent danger unto our
selves and our posterity. Improbe Neptunum accusat, qui bis naufragium
fecerit. We have had many fair warnings from these Romish Amalekites; if we
hereafter fall into their hands, we shall not be pitied, but laughed at, by a
^o^r neighbor nations. I hope therefore your Grace, who should have acted a
woeful and yet principal part in the catastrophe of this Tragedy, will
vouchsafe the acceptance and perusing of this short Poem, written by my self
in Latin, and translated into English by a friend of mine: wherein you may be
^old as in a cristall glass, the irefull faces of your greatest enemies, and
the gracious and amiable countenance of the Almighty watching over the King
your father, the Queen your mother, that Prince of admirable hope, your
brother, and your self, for your deliverance from those snares and nets which
were so secretly and craftily laid, to have entangled all your selves together,
and to have put out and quite extinguished the lights of Israel in one day. The
same almighty Lord grant, that as he has been the sole author of your
preservation and reservation (as we all hope) for some excellent work which he
has to accomplish by your hands, so you may be worthy instruments in your
places of the advancement of his Gospel here in earth, to his glory, and your
own eternal happiness in the life to come.

Your Graces to be commanded in all dutiful services, Fr. Hering.

POPISH PIETY, OR The first part of the history of that horrible and barbarous
conspiracy, commonly called the Powder treason.
1
A Rise my Muse, to studies quite forlorn,
And intermitted overmuch, retire;
The walls with hanged up arms no more adorn,
But snatch them thence, herein to show desire;
If thou refuse, the posts and stones will scorn,
Nature in them should silence still require:
Each thing that is void of sense (if thou will not)
Will to the world resound this barbarous plot.
2
This barbarous plot, then which th'al-seeing Sun,
A more outrageous fact did never behold,
Not to be matched since the first age begun,
In marble records fit to be inrold:
O thou whose dole of grace is never done,
Unworthy us that do alive uphold:
O grant us life to celebrate thy praise,
Almighty Father favor our just lays.
3
I sing a strange black monster, rude and fell,
Late on that Whore which does the world besot,
In gross thick darkness, utmost caves of hell,
In cursed coupling Lucifer begot
A fearful monster, all our world to quell:
The purple strumpet soon again he got,
Sent back to Lerney lake, where with close mirth
She was delivered of her monstrous birth.
4
Which she nursed up with Romish milk a space:
This Snake, the prodigy of humane kind,
More dangerous then Hydra waxt apace:
Whom when the damme did well perceive in mind,
To swell in deadly venime, and to outface
In divellish guile all others, and did find
Instructed fully in all hellish arts,
Thus she bespake, and thus to him imparts.
5
There is a people that are Brittons hight,
(If elsewhere any) they to me do bear
No goodwill: thy great Father too they spite,
And have much damage done to Peter's chair,
And Peter's kingdom, once a Realm of might,
(Nor lesser yet) they go about I fear.
What rich rewards? O how great revenues
This wealthy nation yearly once did use
6
To pay the Sea Apostolic? how trim?
How gallantly it made our chimneys smoke?
(For which our greatest zeal has always bin,
The truth to thee, my son, I list not cloak,
What ere we did pretend, their eyes to dim)
What swarms of Friars linkt in holy yoke
Did it maintain? what stately monastries'
What goodly Temples, menacing the skies,
7
Did that same nation build, and consecrate
Unto the Virgin, that divinely bred?
And to some other heavenly ones, of late
Whom we among the stars have saintified?
There was no place as then (behold our fate)
Where our colonies not inhabited,
No place of wealth, of honor or renown,
Were it in city, country, field or town.
8
Through the whole Island did mine honors ring,
This wealthy Province England of it self
(Although but small) by daily suites did bring
The Roman treasury more store of pelf
Then any else. France though a greater thing,
Or Germany though large, not like this elfe:
Short tale to make, the profits got thereby,
Did far exceed the kings own treasury.
9
Perhaps it is strange I speak, but it is most true:
And do thou think that I can patiently
Endure so rich a prey by Luthers crew
Should be bereft me? I Will not easily
Pocket this wrong; lo, I Will revenge pursue;
Revenge that only sweetens injury:
After that Luther that vile run-agate,
That Church-robber, that spoiler of our State:
10
Our battles and camps Catholic forsook,
O with what troubles, with what sudden storms,
The gorgeous triple mitred kingdom shook!
Saint Peter's holy body he deformes
And rends; for with himself away he took
Germans and Frenchmen many; and reformes
Almost all those that live in Brittons I Will,
English and Scots, now Britains both in style.
11
I am a mighty Queen, I once did say,
No alteration shall I ever find:
No times shall see my Monarchy decay,
My state shall have no period assigned,
No age to come shall ever see the day,
When desolation makes me come behind:
But haste, with too long speech I weary thee,
Now come I to the point, my son, quoth sly.
12
Our state declining daily, does compel
Us to ask counsel, and to hammer out
On Platoes anvill some new wiles of hell,
To weaue some plots with riddles wrapped about:
Mine only hope's in thee, thou know well
Thy fathers lore, and all my purpose stout:
Go to fair England, luckily reduce
That rebel kingdom to our Scepters use.
13
He takes his journey onward, and with speed
He went about his cursed mothers will,
And to the Brittons comes with equal heed,
The Brittons who a second world do fill,
Divided from the other: by his weed
A Catholic: 't has been the custom still
Of Satan, that being clad in truths attire,
Closer he might deceive, and play the lier.
14
Here he was called Fawkes or False, I find
Elsewhere his names were Ionston, Foster, Brown,
A second Proteus, that could easly wind
And turn himself to all the shapes in the town:
Fitting the place, he to himself assigned
New names, in each new coast the old laid down:
But still the self same wicked mind he keeps,
His harmfull heart still wakes and never sleeps.
15
He every where solicites many men,
In love to Rome too seruent and too bold,
Who in their secret murmurings long again
For Egypts flesh pots, and the cups of gold,
Of her that was a mighty Empress then,
When by her self she ruled the world of old:
Such malcontents she stirs up amain,
And sets their hopes on cockhorse, though in vain.
16
And tells them how th'ineuitable time,
And fatal days do now post on apace,
Wherein the Caluinists no more shall clime,
Nor those whom Beza brought to state of grace:
And that the time's at hand, and in full prime,
When they may build Romes walls without disgrace,
Punish their foes, and Catholic faith restore
To the ancient splendour that it had before.
17
These men receive with gaping greediness,
The honey words that this false Sinon spoke,
And hid them in their minds with ioyfulnesse,
And of their own free will for Romes sweet sake,
Promise themselves, and all the readiness
That they or theirs by any means can make:
Yea they will pray, and that with feruencie,
For just event to this his prophecy.
18
Thus being proud of this his good success,
He does invade the Princes royal place,
Where joyfully he walks amid the press
Of Englands Peers, and gentlemen of race;
Where James the mighty monarch, with no less
Powerful hand does sway the Scepters mace.
James who with one applause and full consent,
Sits on that throne God his Ancestors lent.
19
Whose clemency at his first entrance here,
Did spread it self to all of every kind:
This noble Prince by such means thought it clear,
That he could supple their rebellious mind,
And bow their stiff necks that hold Rome so dear;
But now far otherwise he does it find:
For they abusing his most princely grace,
Began herein t'aduance their combs apace.
20
And every where to swell with such disdain,
As was outrageous; and to lay a plot
For new garboiles, and then to spread amain
Amongst th'vnstable commons, who knew not
The course of state, some odious speeches vain,
Tending to set Seditions bark on flote,
And openly to take offensive arms,
Evermore thirsting after others harms.
21
First Watson an old crafty Popish sage,
Dared to trouble this our peaceful state:
Fond Lancashire, I know not with what rage
Blinded, did second him; Wales after that:
But better it is to come to that sly page,
That subtle Sinon, whom we lest of late,
Walking along the stately sumptuous court,
Where all the gallants of the land resort.
22
Who having pondred in his plotting mind,
The subtle stratagemes that there were framed,
He meets with Percie, Percie most unkind,
Who by his style a Pensioner was named,
Yet a firm vassal to the Pope combined:
To him he vtters all, and never shamed,
Even all the business he had in charge,
With hels commission thereunto at large.
23
Percie both man and message does embrace,
And with affection entertaines them both,
Though he nor Percie had nor (...) nor grace,
Yet each to other gave their (...) troth,
Not to disclose what spee^^ ^^at place
Had past between the (...) unto an oath
Was added, and (...) ^ng hand in hand,
They swear the (...) ^erate league for ay should stand.
24
Mark how you cherish in your laps (great States)
Fell vipers, whilst the Papists ye admit,
Though but within the entries of your gates:
Under their fair show does a serpent sit:
Infamous treason with her hellish mates,
Damned rebellion, murders most unfit
Once to be named, with poisonous dregs that smell,
And savor all of the deceits of hell.
25
These are the studies of the Romish train,
Published abroad for all the world to view;
And these the lasting monuments of fame,
Erected by the Catholic Sect and crew.
These are their holy merits; by these same
They clime to heaven, and claim it as their due:
Hereby they think they shall supply a roame
In heavens Star chamber, free from other do^^^e.
26
Eftsoons this shifter Faulkes has changed his name,
Commonly taken to be Percies man,
And in that form unknown, himself does frame
To belch out deadly venime all he can,
Securely, void of fear, bereft of shame;
And by degrees he afterward began
To draw on many, who with full consent
Consorted with him in his lewd intent.
27
Beyond sea then he closely packes again,
And to his holy Mother does relate,
Both what, and how, and all in order plain.
She likes it well; and straight, at any rate,
Wills them go on, and spare nor cost, nor pain,
To make the end, and issue fortunate.
So well apaid, and well rewarded too,
She sends him back, with new charge what to do.
28
He Is quick enough in speeding his retire,
And bawkes not old acquaintance by the way,
But visits Austria's court, where that grave Sire
Is Lord and ruler, who, it is hard to say,
Whether he be a Priest of holy quire,
Or soldier fierce in fight, his foes to fray:
He straight assembles The English vagrants there,
Who wish for change, and harm to this land here.
29
Monsters of men, that take delight to fish
In troubled waters and tempestuous seas,
They see him forward, answering to their wish,
They spur and prick him on; and each of these
Gives his advice, though all not worth a rish.
They lode him home (such lode he thought an ease)
With new inventions, tricks, and subtle wiles,
And teach him knavery, cloakt by knauish guiles.
30
He back returns, serves his old master still,
And tells him all that happened; and withal
They must make have, their purpose to fulfill;
For he is prepared, and ready at a call,
With all the weapons that the wit and skill
Of Italy for fraud renowned of all,
Or yet the kingdom of that fiend of hell
Could yield, he knew them all exceeding well.
31
Now settle they to work, and to begin,
Among their wicked conforts counsel take,
Each man in order gives his verdit in,
Which way may most for their advantage make.
Go, kill the King (says one) pass not a pin,
To thrust him thorough for thy countries sake,
Brasutus-like, let nothing hinder thee,
Until thy purpose fully acted be.
32
Another thinks it best, in subtle show
Of friendly entertainment of the King,
To watch a time when he should weary grow
By heat or hunting sport, and then to bring
Him to the place where he to rest should go,
And there then act this cruel cursed thing,
When sweet sound sleep possessed him, as he lay
To throttle him, and take his life away.
33
It strikes a horror to my very heart,
To tell the story of their devilish plot,
My tongue as loath herein to bear a part,
Cleaues to my jaws, and willing opens not,
And do these country-killers never start,
Nor fear at all, that have these things begot?
Nay act, at least intend; these cursed deeds,
Fit fruits to come from such accursed weeds.
34
A hotchpot they, and mingle mangle make
Of things divine and humane, all is one,
They make no difference: yea, the oaths they take,
And leagues of friendship, which not those alone,
That Christians were, but heathens never brake,
But always kept inuiolate; yet none
Of these, these wicked monsters care to keep,
Though oaths and faith be sounded never so deep.
35
(...) heard each man's tale, and hearing all,
You miss the mark (said he,) for all your skill;
To petty matters, fits not us to fall,
But root and branches at one blow to spill:
Say that we kill the King, yet after shall
His noble heir Prince Henry reign, who will
Sharply (no doubt) revenge himself on those,
By whom his fathers death untimely grows.
36
We know he is a Prince of virtue great,
Exceeding toward, of great forwardness:
Therefore if he enjoy his fathers seat,
Our danger will be rather more then less:
And therefore we must cast to work a feate,
To help our selves this matter to redress:
For if we suffer him to live and grow,
His life will work our dismal overthrow.
37
So use small seeds to rise to great increase,
The little Heart at first unweaponed,
Small sprigs at first sprouts out, and does not cease
Till he grow captain, all the rest to lead
His fellows like himself horne-headed beasts:
Small sparks of fire have much endangered
Whole cities by neglect of careful heed,
Suffering one fire another fire to feed.
38
This little Henry makes me call to mind
Henry the eight, that mighty potent King,
Who first our holy Father (as we find)
With deadly wounds, so mightily did sting:
Henry that fatal name to all our kind,
I do abhor as an unhappy thing:
Thus stands my mind, this stock heretical
Pluck up at once, that all at once may fall.
39
This may be thus; near Percies lodging stands
That ancient house, where Englands Nobles all,
And all the chief estates of Britains lands
Do sit in counsel, when the King does call,
That have the kingdoms causes in their hands,
And order all things that in question fall,
And the first day of custom usually
The States meet there in great solemnity.
40
The King, the Queen, the Prince, will all be there
With mighty pomp, attended royally,
All in their robes, all glittering, bright and clear,
Their garments all beset most sumptuously
With gold and precious stones; and far and near
The people throng and flock exceedingly,
And fill the streets, to see the gallant show;
All these at once 'twere brave to overthrow.
41
This may be easly done; for it is not hard
Under that ancient house of Parliament
To place a fire, which with good regard
Set for the purpose whereunto it is bent,
Will send both them and the house to heauenward,
For fire to mercy will no whit relent:
So while the King is speaking, Nobles still
One blast of powder all at once shall kill:
42
And make them fly aloft into the sky.
Here Catesby ends: the rest applauded well
What he had said, and praisd it mightily,
Of all their plots this plot did bear the bell:
Then Faulkes thus seconds him, Surely (quoth he).
Thy counsel's good, and does the rest excel:
So shall the house which wrought the Pope such woe,
Be well rewarded with this worthy blow.
43
So shall we counted be in time to come,
The men that did the Catholic cause restore:
So by our holy mother Church at home,
As Saints we shall be canonized therefore;
So shall they bear the just revenge and doom,
Their sins deserve by making laws so sort*
(Unjustly too) brewing their hands in blood
Of holy men, religious Saints, and good.
44
They by our wealth and spoils are grown too gre^^
And proud withal; it is time they had a fall;
And never was invented such a feate,
To work their utter overthrow withal.
Henceforth some choice young men to work are set,
And sworn by oath, both joint and several:
Some dig and delue the earth and walls of stone,
To undermine at last the royal throne.
45
Some fly abroad, and get more company
To join with them, and wish them at the day,
That should amongst themselves appointed be
To be all ready armed, that so they may
Upon a sudden spoil their enemy,
And unawares may sweep them all away,
And rid the land clean of this hateful kind,
That not so much as one be left behind.
46
In Percies house the diggers first begin,
Which bordred near the house of Parliament,
And there they dig deep hollow trenches in,
Until by mining caves so far they went,
That they at last such ground thereby did win,
That they vnbared (to fit their lewd intent)
The maine foundation of that sacred place,
Which they so leudly labored to deface.
47
^ercie mean while a celler does epsy,
More fitting for their use, because indeed
Right over it, that ancient house did lie,
With hope of spoil whereof themselves they feed:
This for his money he did hire or buy,
And therein laid what should their purpose speed;
But made a show that he the same did hire,
To lay in beer, and wood, and coals for fire.
48
These things thus happening to their minds so fit,
They make no doubt but all will well succeed;
The close of all to False they do commit,
For he is the man that undertakes the deed:
Man's name's too good, for he deserves not it,
But Devil should I call this hellish weed,
Night-walking goblin, master of his skill,
Falsehood and fearful mischief working still.
49
Gunpowder store this fellow closely brought
Into their hired celler; and the same
In powder barrels fully stuffed and fraught,
Some here, some there, he placed as it came.
This did not serve his turn, but still he sought
Which way he might some newfound mischief frame;
Two barrels more he brought, full fraught likewise,
With cables, ropes, and such like merchandise.
50
These things he puts right underneath the throne,
Whereas the King himself in state should sit;
Next, many bars of iron he lays thereon,
And piles of wo^d again lays over it:
Of devilish means be slips not any one,
That might their devilish cursed purpose fit;
But all things ^^e with like device and skill.
He did contriue to work their wicked will.
51
These things in their disorderd order done,
This fellow thus possessed with harmfull heart,
Nouembers fifth (when Parliament begun).
With longing looks for, ready for his part
To act such mischief as never saw the Sun:
The thought whereof would make a good man start:
Old Romes bad member wicked Catiline,
And Jewish Haman may to these resign.
52
They never thought on such a villainy,
Nay toss and turn the monuments of old,
All books that write of any cruelty,
Yea look to Barbary, yet I Will be bold
Thus much to say, and to assure it thee,
That all these histories will not unfold
So great, so horrible, so vile a fact,
Nor such as odious, hateful, cruel act.
53
The King, Queen, Prince, and royal progeny,
The gallant Lords and Nobles of estate,
The buds and branches of Nobility,
Grave Fathers of the Law, that sit in seat
Of justice, and the reverend Clergy,
The flower of English gentry, and that great
And famous Senate House, yea all the land
Had perished all with turning of a hand.
54
From Percies house, one cruel piercing blow
Should spoil them all: even as the silly Hare
Securely sitting in her form so low,
One with his club does kill her unaware;
The name and nation of the Brittons, so
This cruel Dragon suddenly prepares
Quite to suppress; and English Christians all
To swallow up at once, both great and small.
55
Such huge wide swallows, throats insatiate,
Have these Italian monsters: and admit
They had at once both us and all our State
Brought to confusion, as they purposd it;
Who should have told the story, or relate
That days destruction? who could once befit
Amid those ruffling ruffians, to bewray.
The cities ruins, and the Realms decay?
56
Had I an hundredth tongues, they all would fail,
And to my tongues an hundredth wits withal,
All would not serve to tell the doleful tale
Of all the sorrows that on us should fall
By this their enterprise; that work would quail
Homer himself the Prince of Poets all,
If now he lift'd, his work he much would fear
To take in hand, as ouer-hard to bear.
57
For now me thinks I once again behold
That famous Troy in flaming fire burn,
And there where erst were pleasures manifold,
All to tumultuous noise and horror turn,
And gallant London gay and rich in gold,
Me thinks I see all sad, and set to mourn:
London the Empires seat, and Europes mart,
Of furious flames, me thinks, does feel the smart.
58
Me thinks the walls are broke and battred sore,
The streets with armed angry soldiers filled;
Dead corpse dispersed abroad, all rent and tore,
Streams running full of blood untimely spild,
Streets, Churches, houses (never like before)
Such fierce laments, nor can, nor will be stild:
No place me thinks is free, but all resound
Sighs, sobs, and tears, for losses lately found.
59
Poor woeful mothers, by their houses gay,
Wonder, me thinks, embracing in their arms
Their tender babes, with woe and well a day,
Wailing their own, and all the cities harms;
Giving their babes sweet kisses, but by the way
Salt tears among, as thick as Bees in swarms:
The houses they in gentle sympathy,
Suite women's moanes with mournful melody.
60
Me thinks the fire consumes and burns up all
The ancient seats of judgment, where of old
Grave reverend Judges sat; Westminster hall,
The tombs where former kings lie clad in mold,
Those tombs me thinks by fire to ruin fall;
And stately monuments bedeckt with gold,
Which in that famous Church and Chapel be,
And many years have stood untouched and free.
61
Nay more, the funeral and burial day
Of country, city, London, now the seat
Of English Kings that British Scepter sway,
(So politic their plot, their gall so great)
They meant not one behind alive should stay
To celebrate the same, or mourn thereat:
The King, the States, and court of Parliament,
Once being gone, thus was their mischief bent.
62
Their purpose was the fault themselves had done,
To turn the same upon their enemy,
And with the Puritanes to have begun,
To make them authors of the villainy;
And to proclaim that they were those had spun
The wicked we^^ or that vile treachery;
And so to banish, kill, and root them out,
By fire and sword through all the Realm about.
63
These be the devils arts and cunning slight,
No man's device, but forged in fire of hell,
An odious fact that dare not bide the light;
To hide and cover with a fact more fell,
To trouble and traduce the harmless wight,
And him by what he may to ouerquell,
Whole kingdoms to subvert, and glut his throat
With guiltless blood, by him untimely sought.
64
Either black Plutoes dark affrighting cell,
Is void of ghosts, or this is Satan's deed,
Plotted by man, though sprung and nursed in hell,
In humane form and shape of Adams seed:
But great Iehoua, who on's throne does dwell,
Has care of his, and from their foes has freed;
His watchful eye each corner does unfold,
His never winking lamp the seas behold.
65
The blindest corner cannot him bereave
Of piercing sight, who does the waves make still,
To whom a guilefull heart, thoughts to deceive,
Are known, and eke disclosed by his will.
To him are rebels hateful, that do weaue
We be to destroy poor infants free from ill;
But God approues of all things just and right,
And seeing our King now in a dangerous plight:
66
Our State in danger; from his throne aloft,
With such like words our peril did relate:
See, see, how Satan with his guilefull craft,
With hellish falsehood, and unheard of hate,
Has covertly prepared a deadly shaft,
To overthrow fair Englands royal state,
To place mute images and gods of corn,
And marble pictures, as the Gospels scorn.
67
If these his plots should take a wished success,
The triple crowned beast of Italy,
Babel the Queen of riot and excess,
The worlds illuder, full of villainy,
Would soon repair her ruinous state doubtless,
And so frustrate the sacred prophecy,
Which has diuin'd and told so long before,
The certain ruin of that Romish whore.
68
Let Us turn from England what their foes intend,
To bring upon them to their utter fall,
Destruction, thine, and a dismal end,
With cruel slaughter to destroy them all:
We see whereto their cruel plots they bend,
At once to massacre both great and small:
Let Us therefore now their plots withstand and stay,
Which they so fiercely against the English lay.
69
Though their defaults have merited this ill,
Though they be worthy of much punishment,
Because they have abusde our favors still,
Abusde our benefits that we have sent
To them and theirs; yet all at once to kill
By their unworthy hand we are not bent:
Better it is these flames so fierce and fell,
Now ready thus to burn, to quench and quell.
70
With that a swift winged messenger he calls,
And bids him quickly tread on English ground,
Warning the King by dream, what cruel thrals
Hang ore his head; what vipers do abound,
Nursed in his bosom; up and down they crals;
And now of late these vipers we have found
To have prepared a bloody treacherous gin,
To snare the King, and all his kingdom in.
71
And with advice bid him beware the place,
Wherein great Roman Julius once did fall;
Then to the Lord Mounteagle hie apace,
For he is forewarned to keep him from the hall*
A friend concealing both his name and face,
By letter sent, admonisht him of all,
For why? (forsooth) both God and men consent
To give this wicked age due punishment.
72
Into the country he was willed retire,
There to expect the event that should ensue,
And told that once the paper cast in the fire,
No further peril could to him accrue;
Call to his mind, and so his heart inspire,
What from the subject, is the Princes due;
Warn him that now his love he must not hide,
Nor from his country, nor his countries guide.
73
Bid him reveal the writing to the King,
Which was to him so secretly directed,
Without a name, but yet a happy thing,
That so the plot thereby might be detected.
Swiftly the legate with his featherd wing,
Makes have to England, as he was directed;
And there performed, and acted faithfully.
What was to him enioyn'd by God (...) high.
74
He straight inspires in noble Morleys heart,
A due regard of King and countries weal;
The King he lightens with a wondrous art,
Obscure dark riddles easly to reveal,
Like Oedipus to open every part,
And loose the knots, and tell it every deal.
One of the Privy Council Morley chose,
To whom in order he did all disclose.
75
One whom he knew, Ulysses match to be
For judgment sound, and sharp quickwittednesse:
He tells the rest; and then both they and he
Go show the king with great amazedness.
The letter's brought; and (as in doubts we see)
Each several man does give a several guess,
Our prudent King in's mind well pondring all,
Brake forth at last, and let these speeches fall.
76
What points out peril may not be despised,
I well remember how a little smoke
Does show huge flaming fires therein comprised,
In straw foul t^ades do often he hid and croke.
I call to mind (or I am misaduised)
Speeches of late have every where been spoke
Of busy Papists stirred by devilish hate,
Threatening so^e mischief to our Realm and State.
77
Preventing care did never prejudice
Monarchs, whose lives with foes are set about.
Perhaps their purpose is some new device,
Some Trojan horse or some seditious rout*
Some Iacobite to make an orifice
By stabbing me, to make my blood gush out.
Assure your selves they have some plots in hand,
Some monstrous mischief to subvert the land.
78
These are no rouings of a crazed brain,
The writing savors of some heinous plot;
He Is earnest with his friend, he should refrain,
And keep him absent out of dangers shot:
Some great, some sudden blow, some cruel baine,
As fierce as lightning it does seem to note:
Gunpowder sure he means so fierce and cruel,
Hels damned offspring, and destructions fuel.
79
Perhaps they mean this powder to abuse
To our destruction: gladly would I know,
Who dwell in houses near, or cellers use
Under the hall, against which they bend this blow*
Of these things would I have the certain news,
Ere we to any other matter go:
Make careful search therefore and what you find,
Return with speed, to satisfy my mind.
80
He that did keep the house of Parliament,
Made search forthwith, and viewed all things well,
Careful of's charge, in's duty diligent:
And what he found, he to the King did tell,
That Percie in the rooms next adjacent,
Unto that house did at that in slam dwell;
And that the cellers, vaults, and under holes,
Were stuffed and fraught with store of wood and coals.
81
Hence more and more suspicions did arise;
And so Nouembers fourth, a worthy Knight,
An ancient Courtier, trusty, grave and wise,
Kneuet by name, in mids of that same night
Was sent to search each thing with good advise,
And every corner, to bring all to light;
Feigning stolen garments of the Queens he sought,
Taking few with him, for suspecting ought.
82
First False he finds, the devil of the vault,
Alone, clothed, booted, standing at the door:
Fire-spitting Aetna he had lately fraught
Fit for his purpose, with provision store,
Whereby with flashing sulphur flames, he sought
To bring his country to destruction sore:
Poor England now within some twelve hours after,
Near to a deadly wound and bloody slaughter.
83
First him they fastened on, and by and by
Entering the vault, the wood-piles overthrow;
Forthwith in great amazement one did cry,
Some cruel treason, here be things do show,
Here Is powder hid, one barrel found have I,
No doubt here is more lies hidden here below,
Under this wood; let us search it carefully,
For sure there is some monstrous villainy.
84
Treason, ah treason great, they cry amain,
And pluck out powder barrels more and more;
In all they spied and disclosed plain,
Gunpowder pipes in number thirty four.
Two barrels more the celler did contain,
To furnish up this devilish wicked store;
All filled with hellish powder, dark and black,
Prepared for Englands fatal spoil and wrack.
85
In searching Faux, about his neck they spy
A crucifixe, which he had hanging there,
His body clothed with sackcloth inwardly,
And in his clothes match hidden did he bear,
Whereby he might fire to this heap apply,
To make it burn, and all before it tear,
And so fair Britains Empire, English nation,
Even in a moment bring to desolation.
86
The fault it self was plain and manifest,
He could not hide, nor color, nor deny't,
Nor was this mind, but shamelesly confessed,
And voucht the fact, and said, that all the spite,
And all the grief his spiteful mind oppressed,
Was that the thing was disappointed quite;
He blushed not to affirm himself distracted,
Only because the thing remained vnacted.
87
All in an uproar straight exclaim and cry,
O heavens, O earth, O monstrous wickedness!
O newfound plot! that savage Barbary,
Or Turkey (cruel be it) nerethelesse
They cannot this foul fact exemplify;
The bloody French massacre we confess
For bloodshed is the stain of this our age,
Yet cannot march with this in equipage.
88
The rumor straight is blazed abroad, and spread
Through city, court, and every country town
Both (...) and wide, on wings of fame it fled
Through all the land, each village up and down:
And every where, where it was published,
This great deliverance of so great renown,
Wrought wondrous joy to them, to God great praise,
With hands lift up to him with holy lays.
89
O thou that sway'st and rul'st the heavens above,
That rul'st the earth, and make the thunder crack,
That keep'st thy covenant always, and thy love,
That art to anger slow, to vengeance flacke:
How shall we do (as well does us behoue)
To sound thy praises, and keep nothing back:
What vows shall we poor souls repay to thee,
That thus from direful slaughter setst us free?
90
Thou did preserve us when we were appointed
To bloody sword, and fearful flames of fire,
To have our bodies every lim disiointed,
By cruel slaughter and destruction dire;
Thou safely keep Sion thine anointed,
And wak'st for us though we against thee conspire:
Thou keep'st us from the Bears devouring jaws,
From hellish harms, and out of Satan's claws.
91
Thy hand O Lord, it was thy right hand alone
Kept and preserved us (unworthy we;)
It Was Lord thy love, desert in us was none,
Whereby to challenge any good from thee:
When we like rebels had against thee gone,
Stiff necked, vicious, lewd as lewd may be,
Contemning still thy worship and thy name,
Scorning the Prophets that declare the same.
92
To live upright we hold it a disgrace,
And he is most blamed that does no man wrong,
As madmen use, when as there comes in place
A quiet, sober minded man among
Such mad companions, him they will outface,
And make of him their laughing stock, their song;
They think him mad, because he is not mad;
So him that does least harm, we think most bad.
93
Thy bounteous goodness Lord does far exceed,
That carest for such a people so unworthy,
And that at such a time, a time of need,
So carest for them that care so little for thee;
For thee or thine so small their care indeed,
As rather might to wrath and vengeance stir thee;
For, honor, pleasure, gain, is all their aim,
To get themselves a great and glorious name.
94
Lord let thy bounty soften at the last,
And mollify our hard and stony heart,
Dissolve us all to tears for follies past,
Rou^^ v^ our sloth with thy all-piercing dart,
Shake off our drowzinesse hangs on so fast,
So old, so strong, that we can hardly part:
Lighten our eyes, our sins fore past to see;
Seen, to bewail with tears (O Lord) to thee.
95
O Lord we know and must acknowledge it,
Thy holy word to be the only treasure,
The whole worlds compass cannot sample it
With equal worth, or near in any measure;
Lord let us live worthy the light of it,
To make thy word our only joy and pleasure:
Lord let not us that Christ his name do bear,
Live heathen-like, void of thy holy fear.
96
That year of late of great mortality,
Did thousands of our brethren sweep away,
When that great Plague did rage so cruelly,
And every where upon so many pray;
And now these hellish snares full narrowly
We have escaped in this happy day:
The sword now ready to have cut our throat,
Thou have pulled back, so that it hurt us not.
97
These things (O Lord) cry out, and cry amain,
That thou for sin art angry with our land;
Threatnest, although to strike thou do ref^^^er
Thou shewst the rod, and with a gentle hand
Thou shak'st it over us, and layst it down again:
Even as we may conceive a mother stand
With trembling hands, offering to beat her son,
But yet relents before the deed be done.
98
And if words, warnings, threatenings f^^^erly,
Will naught prevail, nor do us any good;
(For all of these we have had formerly,
And nothing now remains but ^^^pes and blood)
We may expect thy great severity,
That have so long against thy patience stood:
Now look that thou to punish wilt begin
And burn us up like stubble for our sin.
99
But Lord let us (so often warned by thee)
Learn now at last thy judgments to beware,
Learn to adore thy sacred Majesty,
Learn of thy word and Gospel greater care,
To bring forth fruit in more sincerity;
But after Babylon that Romish chair,
That seat of Antichrist, all goodmens foe,
That sink of sin, Lord let us never go.
100
Grant rather (Lord) those Prophecies of yore,
May now by us be fully complished,
That we may burn that great, that purple Whore,
That has so long with blood of Saints been fed;
And race those Roman towers, which heretofore
Were built by blood, and to that glory spread:
Grant Lord this glory to our worthy King,
Let him and his, Romes pomp to ruin bring.
101
Lord, as his life was precious in thy sight,
So let thy glory be to him most dear,
Still to advance thy glorious Gospels light,
Throng hall his Realms, and kingdoms far and hear;
Know and avoid his foes, and by his might
To punish those that hateful minds do bear:
To pity those that faithful are and true,
And (...) rebellious subjects to subdue.
102
Lord make his zeales of righteousness so great,
That he may make it run like water-streames,
Through all the coasts of his Imperial seat;
Each city, country, corner of his Realms,
So let him rule, so govern and entreat
His mighty people by his princely beams,
That living, loved; after death his name
May ever live in everlasting fame.
103
Those Worthy Peers and Nobles of the land,
And that great Senate of the Parliament,
For so great bounty from thy gracious hand,
So great deliverance to her country sent,
Lord let them ever for thy glory stand,
That still so graciously to them art b^^t:
There, let good laws by them enacted be,
For Church and kingdoms safe prosperity.
104
Even there I say, where they appointed (...)
like harmless sheep to slaught (...) to fire,
There let their care and wisedom^ (...) appeals,
To give their foes their due deser^ed hire;
Those Cananites, that Rome such love do bear,
And nor advancement do so much desire,
Let them by law be rooted out from hence,
That have (...) long been cause of much es^^^ce.
105
These many years to us and to our State,
They have been pricks and thorns; and now they meant
This stratageme which they deuisde of late,
Should to this land a fatal blow have lent;
All at one blow (as they had laid their bait)
To cut their countries throat was their intent,
That so the acting of their tragedy,
To Neroes wishes might compared be.
106
Such miscreants that breathe out naught but blood,
Slaughter of innocents, murders of kings,
Stealth, rapine, incest, nothing that is good;
Most filthy whoredoms are but trifling things
With them that are of this accursed brood,
Distaste to them no sin or mischief brings;
No, not those sins, whereof the very name,
True Christians do abhor, detest, and shame.
107
A filthy see, and yearly rent they take,
Of common whores, and never blush withal:
Of heaven and earth they do a mixture make,
A viperous general (...) are they all,
That in their countries bowels love to rake,
All full of poison, full of bitter gall.
And shall we harbor in our bosoms then
Such monsters, odious both to God and men?
108
Which care not to deface, and quite blot out
Even natures laws, engraven in our hearts
From heaven above; which daily go about
To break the sinews and the strongest parts
Of humane life; a cruel savage rout,
Which still delight in shooting deadly darts;
Which act such things, as Turk or Africane,
The Indian or Barbarian would disdain.
109
Lord of this people and their wickedness,
Long trial, many warnings have we had,
Our selves against our selves are witnesses,
If still we foster them so beastly bad,
Worthy we are to fall (remediless)
Into those pits that they for us have laid:
And thou (Lord) counted just in after ages,
If thus thou leave us to their cruel rages.
110
Let Us rather Lord, with all our force and mights,
The vigor of our spirits and our wits,
The (...) ^lots self and all her subtle sleights,
(...) audid and shun, as well bests,
(...) ^^ll befits us poor unworthy wights,
(...) by thee freed from their dangerous pits:
(...) lord let us henceforth never entertain
(...) ^^^endship or fellowship with them again.
111
Thou mighty Father, our eternal God,
Our portion, and the shield of our defense,
Which still have kept us from our enemies rod,
Under the wings of thy omnipotence.
As hitherto thou have out foes down trod,
So keep them under still, still keep them hence,
Still scatter and disperse their Romish wiles,
Their subtle sleights and Babylonish guiles.
112
That so they may be taught and learn thereby
No more to fight against heaven and heavenly powers,
No more to glut themselves so greedily
With blood of holy ones; as this land of ours
By woeful trial well may testify,
Having from them bid many stormy showers:
Lord teach them by thy judgments to surcease
Their plots, so far from piety and peace.
113
^o we thy power and mighty Majesty,
With thankful minds shall evermore record,
With cheerful ver^e and solemn melody,
Thy name, thine ^^nor, and thy praise O Lord
(...) temple, house, ^^^et, town, and color,
Of English nation aye shall be adored:
Thy worship there shall spring; and never die,
While glittering Sun circles the starrie sky.
FINIS

