PErlegi librum hunc cuititulus est [A Coal from the Altar; or, An Answer to a
Letter, etc.] in quo nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica imprimatur;
Modo intra tres menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Sa* Baker R. P. D. Episc: Londin: Sacellanus Domest.
Maij 5o. 1636.
A COAL FROM THE ALTAR. OR, AN ANSWER TO A Letter not long since written to
the Vicar of GR. against the placing of the Communion Table at the East end of
the Chancell; and now of late dispersed abroad to the disturbance of the Church.

First sent by a Judicious and Learned Divine for the satisfaction of his
private Friend; and by him commended to the Press, for the benefit of others.

HEB. 13. 10. We have an Altar, whereof they have no right to eat, which
serve the Tabernacle. LONDON, Printed for ROBERT MILBOVRNE, at the sign of the
Unicorn near Fleet-bridge. 1636.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
I Am to advertise thee, good Reader, of some certain things, for thy better
understanding of this Treatise. First, that whereas thou shall find here three
several Characters, Thou would take notice that the Roman is the words of
the Author; the Itali^k, matter of Distinction, partly, but principally of
Quotation by him used; and that the English letter does exhibit to thee, the
words and periods of the Epistle, or Discourse which is here confuted.
Secondly, that howsoever the Letter by him here replied unto, be scattered up
and down, and in diverse hands; Yet because possibly, the Copy of the same
has not hitherto been seen of all, who may chance cast their eyes upon this
Treatise; and partly, that the world may see, that he has dealt truly with
the Epistoler, and not omitted any Argument or Authority by him produced; The
very Letter it self is herewith Printed, and bound together with it, though it
be Apocrypha. Last of all, I must let thee know, that whereas the Acts and
Monuments, otherwise called the Book of Martyrs, being a Book which the
Epistoler makes much use of, is of a different Edition in the reply, from that
which is so often cited in the Letter; and that there have been many Editions
of the same: That which the Author deals in, is the last Edition, Printed at
LONDON in three volumes, Anno 1631. I have no more to say unto thee, but wish
thee good luck in the name of the Lord; And so adieu.

A COAL FROM THE ALTAR. OR, An Answer to a Letter, not long since written to
the Vicar of GR. against the placing of the Communion Table at the East^ end of
the Chancell, etc.
SIR,
The Introduction.
I Have read your Letter, and cannot but extremely wonder, that you should be
so easily over-weighed as I see you are. You say that you were willing once,
of your own accord, to have removed your Cammunion Table unto the East end of
your Chancell, according as it is in his Majesty's Chapel, and generally in
all Collegiate and Cathedral Churches: and that you had intended so to do,
had you not met with a Discourse written in way of Letter, to the Vicar of GR.
(and as you have taken it upon common report) by a Reverend Prelate of this
Church; whose Arguments have so prevailed with you, that you are almost taken
off from that resolution, though it be now exacted of you by your Ordinary. It
seems you are not rightly balanced, when you can be so easily induced to
change your purposes; especially as the Case now is, which requires more of
your obedience, than your Curiosity. And should we all be so affected, as to
demurre on the Commands of our Superiors, in matters of exterior Order, and
public Government, till we are satisfied in the Grounds and Reasons of their
Commandments; or should we fly off from our duty, at sight of every new
devise, that is offered to us: we should soon find a speedy dissolution, both
of Church and State. You know, who said it, well enough, Si ubi jubeantur,
quaerere singulis liceat, pereunte obsequio imperium etiam intercidit. Tacit.
Hist. lib. 1. Yet notwithstanding, since you desire, that I would give you
satisfaction in the present point, by telling you both what I think of the
Discourse, which has so swayed you; and what may be replied against it, in
maintenance of the Order now commended unto you: I will adventure on the
second, if you will excuse me in the first. You say, and probably believe so
too, that it was written by a Reverend Prelate, and indeed by some Passages
therein it may so be thought; for it is written as from a Diocesan, unto a
private Parish Priest in his Jurisdiction: and then, I hope, you cannot justly
be offended, if I forbear to pass my censure upon my betters. Yet so far I
dare give you my opinion of it, that I am confident it can be none of his who
is pretended for the Author: nor indeed any ones worthy to be advanced, I will
not say unto so high a dignity in the Church, but to so poor a Vicarige as his
was, to whom the Letter was first written. Nay to speak freely to you, I
should least think it his, whom you entitle to it on uncertain heare-sayes,
of all men's else: in that he has been generally reported to be of
extraordinary parts in point of learning, and of most sincere affections unto
the Orders of the Church; no show or footstep of the which, or either of them,
is to be found in all that Letter. And I dare boldly say, that when it comes
unto his knowledge, what a poor trifling piece of Work, some men, the better
to indeere the Cause by so great a name, have thus pinned upon him: he will
not rest till he have traced this Fame to the first original; and having
found the Authors of it, will conne them little thanks for so great an
injury. For my part, I should rather think, that it was writ by Mr. Cotton of
Boston, who meaning, one day, to take Sanctuary in New England, was willing to
do some great Act before his going; that he might be the better welcome when
he came amongst them: or by some other neighboring Zelote, whose wishes to
the cause were of morestrength then his performance; and after spread abroad of
purpose, the better to di^co^n^enance that Vnifor^^^y of public Order, to
which the piety of these times is so well inclined. Further than this, I shall
not satisfy you in your first desire; but hope that you will satisfy your
self with this refusal.

For the next part of your request, that I should let you see (if at least I
can) what may be said in Answer unto that Discourse, which has so suddenly
overswayed you; I shall therein endeavor your satisfaction: though my
Discretion for so doing, may perhaps prove the second Holocaust* that shall be
sacrificed on those Altars, which are there opposed. And this I shall the rather
do, because you say that the Discourse or Letter is now much sought after, and
applauded, and scattered up and down in several Copies: of purpose, as it
were, to distract the people, and hinder that good work which is now in hand.
In Answer to the which, I shall keep my self unto my pattern, and to the
business which is chiefly there insisted on: grounding my self especially, on
the self same Authors and Autorities, which are there laid down; though not
laid down so truly, at least not so clearly, as they ought to be. Nor had I
here said any thing touching the preamble thereunto, but fallen directly on the
maine: but that, me thinks, I meet with somewhat, which seems to cast a
scorn upon the Reverence appointed by the Canon, unto the blessed name of
JESUS; which the Epistoler, whosoever he was, would have so performed, that
they which use it, do it Humbly, and not Affectedly, to procure Devotion, not
De^ision of the Parishioners. That Herb, according as the saying is, has
spoiled all the Pottage. For when the Church commands, that at the name of
JESUS, due and lowly reverence shall be done, by all Persons present, and this
to testify (as the Canon says) our inward humility: Why should we think of
any man who obeies the Canon, that he does rather do it out of Affectation,
than Affection? rather affectedly, then humbly, as his own phrase is. Such
Censurers of the hearts of other men, had need be careful of their own. For
the next Caution, that those which use it, do it to procure Devotion of the
people, and not Derision; it is more unseasonable: There being none, I think,
who ever used it otherwise, then having testified their own Humility and
Devotion, to procure the like Devotion and Humility in other men: none, I dare
boldly say, that did ever use it, to procure Deri^ion of their Parishione^^, no
more then David when he danced before the Arc, intended to make sport for
jeering Michol. And therefore the Epistoler must either mean, that doing
reverence at the name of the Lord JESUS, is of it self so vain a thing, that
it must needs procure Derision from the looke^s on: or else, that honest and
conformable men, should rather choose to disobey the Church, and the Canons of
it; then by obedience to the same, incur the censure of some few, who as they
walk in the Counsel of the ungodly, so do they also sit in the seat of
Scorners. This said, we will descend to those three particulars, which are
insisted on in that Epistolary Discourse. viz. First, The having of an Altar at
the upper end of the Quire. Secondly, The placing of the Table, Altar-wise.
Lastly, The fixing of it in the Quire, that so it may not be removed into the
body of the Chuch: which things, the Vicar, as it seems, did both approve of,
and desire, and was therein crossed, and opposed by the Epistoler; how justly,
and on what sure grounds, we shall see in order.

SECT. I.
AND first of all he ^aith in his said Letter to the Vicar, That if he should
erect any such Altar, his discretion would prove the only Holocaust which
would be sacrificed thereon. Why so? Because he had subscribed when he came to
his place, that that other oblation which the Papists were wont to offer upon
their Altars* is a blasphemous ^igment, and pernicious Imposture, Artic. 31.
And here I cannot but observe, that there is little fair dealing to be looked
for from this Epistoler, that faulters thus in the beginning: there being no
such clause in all that Article. The Article has nothing in it, either of
Papists, Altars, or that other oblation: which is here thrust into the text,
only to make poor men believe, that by the Doctrine of the Church in her
public Articles, Altars and Papists are mere relatives; that so whoever
talks of Altars, or placing of the Table Altar-wise, may be suspected
presently to be a Papist, or at lea^t (...) affected. As for that other
oblation which the Papists were wont to offer upon their Altars, that is said to
be a plasphemous figment, and pernicious Imposture; therefore the only
Holocaust remaining to be sacrificed, the discretion of the Vicar. What had he
sacrificed his discretion only, and no more then so? The Article goes further
sure, for it determines positively, that The sacrifices of Masses in the which
it was commonly said, that the Priests did offer CHRIST for the quick and the
dead, to have remission of pain or guilt, was blasphemous fables, and
pernicious deceipts. And therefore had the Vicar of Gr. erected or intended to
erect an Altar for such a sacrifice, he had not only sacrificed his discretion
on it, but also his Religion; and been no longer worthy to be called a Son
of the Church of England. (...) ^hen as sure it is, the Church admits of other
sacrifices and oblations, although not of those: as viz. of the Sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, Heb. 13. 15. as also of the oblation of our whole
selves, c^r souls and bodies, to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice
to Almighty GOD, Romans 12. 1. both which, she teaches us to offer to him, as
our bounden duty and service is, in the holy Sacrament. [ Prayer after the
Communion.] And not so only, but she allows of a Commem^rative sacrifice,
for a perpetual memory of Christ's precious death, of that his full, perfect,
and sufficient sacrific^, oblation and satisfation for the sins of the whole
world, to be continued till his coming again: [Prayer of the Consecration.]
When therefore it is said in the First Homily of the Sacrament, alleged by the
Epistoler, that we ought, to take heed lest the Lords Supper (not the
Communion, as he lays it down) of a memory to be made a sacri^^ce; it
reflects not on any of the Sacrifices before allowed of. The Church is constant
to her self, though her Doctors are not: and thus discovers and expounds her
own intentions: W^ must then take heed (says the Homily) lest of the memory,
it be made a Sacrifice; lest of a Communion, it be made a private eating; lest
of two parts, we have but one; lest applying it for the dead, we lose the fruit
that be alive. By which it is most manifest, that the Sacrifice rejected in
the Homily, is that which is cried down in the Book of Articles: which the
Epistoler had no reason to suspect, was ever thought on, much less aimed at,
by the Vicar of Gr. though he desired to have an Altar, i. e. to have the
Communion Table placed Altar-wise, at the upper end of his Quire, or used the
name of Altar, for the holy Table. For it is granted afterward by the
Epistoler, that the Lords Table anciently was called an Altar, because of the
Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving: for which he voucheth Archbishop
Cranmer, and others; and cites the Acts and Monum. page 1211. which is Part 2.
page 700. of my Edition.

2 AS for the Canons of the Convocation, Anno 1571. out of which is alleged,
that not the Uicar, but the Church wardens are to provide for the Communion;
and that not an Altar, but a fair joined Table: its plain they tell us no
such matter, or not so much unto his purpose, as he would persuade us. All that
those Canons say, is this, and that in plain affirmative terms, without those
Negations; Aeditui curabuntmensam ex asseribus composite junctam, quae
administrationi sacro sanct ae Communionis inserviat; and mundum tapetem qui
illam contegat: that the Churchwardens shall provide a decent joined Table for
the Communion, and see that it be orderly covered with an handsome Carpet. And
there was reason why this Care (for so much as concerned the providing of these
things) should be imposed on the Churchwardens, rather than upon the Minister;
viz. because the Table and the Carpet both, were to be fitted and provided at
the Charge of the Parish. But the said Canons do not tell us, that the
Churchwardens shall provide this Table, exclusively of the Vicar, without his
counsel; or that they shall appoint either of what fashion it shall be, or
whether it shall stand in the body of the Church, or in the Chancell: or
whether in the Chancell, it shall be placed at the upper end, like an Altar; or
in the middle, like a Table. For any thing those Canons tell us, the Vicar was
to have a greater hand in ordering the said Table, being so provided, then the
Churchwardens were, or ought to have: as one that better understood what was
convenient in, and for ^ods service, than they did or could. Nor did the Vicar
any thing in this case against the Ca^on, for he provided not the Table; nor
caused any Altar to be built of new; but only caused the Table, which he found
provided by the Churchwardens, to be disposed of to a more convenient place,
than before it stood in: so that the Allegation was as needless, as the
reprehension without ground. Only it pleases the Epistoler, to give some
countenance to the Vestry-doctrine of these days; in which the Churchwardens,
and other Elders of the Vestry, would gladly challenge to themselves the
Supreme disposing of all Ecclesiastical matters in their several Parishes:
leaving their Minister, (in Towns Corporate especially,) to his Meditations;
as if he only were intended for a looker on, a dull Spectator of their active
undertakings.

3 FOr, besides what is here ascribed to the Church wardens, and denied the
Vicar, or Incumbent; it follows in the next place, save one, that Uicars were
never enabled to set up Altars, but allowed once, with others (i. e. the
Churchwardens) to pull them down. Injunct. 1^ Eliz. for Tables in the Church.
Whereas indeed the (...), or the Minister in that Injunction, is the principal
man, and the Churchwardens, or one of them, are added for assistance only;
perhaps, because they were to bear the Charges of it. For it is ordered that
n^ Altar be taken down, but by the oversight of the Curate of the Church, and
the Churchwardens, or one of them at the least, wherein no riotous or
disordered manner to be used* Not pulled down therefore, as the Epistoler has
i^, which implies (...) or a popular fury; but taken down in fair and orderly
manner: and that not by the Church wardens, as the principal men, but by the
Curate chiefly, and any one of the Churchwar dens, whom he pleased to choose.
It Is true indeed, the Bishop of the Diocese is he to whom the ordering of
these things does of right belong; and in the preface to the Common Prayer Book
it is so appointed. For in the said Preface it i^ said, that for as much as
nothing almost can be so plainly set forth but doubts may arise in the use and
practice of the same: to appease all such diversities, (if any arise) and for
the resolution of all doubts concerning the manner how to understand, do, and
execute the things contained in this Book, the Parties that so doubt shall
always resort unto the Bishop of the Diocese, etc. But then, it is as true,
or at least, more fit, that he should send his resolutions to the Priest, then
to the Parish; the Curate having taken an oath of Canonical obedience to him,
which the people have not. (...) of the Letter, that the Churchwardens (...)
other smacke of the said Vestrie-doctrine: and was there placed in front to
delight the people, who need, God wot, no such encouragements to contemn their
Parsons, being too forward in that kind of their own accord. Paroc pecor
stimulis -- Labor est inhibere vo l^ntes.

4 FOr the remaining passsage in this first Paragraph, where it is said, that
Altars were removed by Law, and Tables placed in their steed, in all, or the
most Churches in England; and for the proof thereof, the Queens Injunctions
cited, as if they did affirm as much: it is plain, that there is no such thing
in the said I^junction. The Queens Injunctions An. 1559. tell us of neither
all nor most* as it is alleged: but only say, that in many and sundry parts of
this Realm, the Altars in the Churches were remooved, and tables placed for
the administration of the holy Sacrament, etc. Sundry and many is not all nor
most; in my poor conceit. And it is plain by that which follows, not only
that in other places, the Altars were not taken down upon opinion of some
further Order to be taken in it by the Queens Commissioners; but it is
ordered, That no Altar shall be taken down, without the oversight of the
Curat, and one of the Church wardens at the least; and that too with great care
and caution, as before is said. Nay the Commissioners were contented well
enough, that the Altars formerly erected might have still continued; declaring,
as it does appear by the said Injunction, that the ^emoving of the Altars,
seemed to be a matter of no great moment: and so it is acknowledged by this
Epistoler, in the following paragraph, where he confesses it in these words,
It seems the Queens Commiss^oners were content, that they (the Altars) should
stand, as we may guess by the Injunctions 1559. In which we have that great
advantage which Tullie speaks of, Con^itentem reum. The Queens Commissioners,
as they had good authority for what they did; so we may warrantably think,
that they were men of special note, and able judgments. And therefore if they
were contented, that the Altars formerly erected should continue standing, (as
the Epistoler confesses;) it is a good Argument, that in the first project of
the Reformation, neither the Queen nor her Commissioners disallowed of Altars,
or thought them any way unserviceable in a Church Reformed. So that for ought
appears unto the contrary, neither the Article, nor the Homily, nor the
Queens Injunctions, nor the Canons of 1571. have determined any thing: but
that as the Lords Supper may be called a Sacrifice, so may the holy Table be
called an Altar; and consequently, set up in the place, where the Altar stood.

5 Now as there is alleged no Canon, Ordinance, or Doctrine, which if examined
rightly, do declare against it; so there is much that may be said in defense
thereof: and of that much we will use nothing, but that which will agree with
the capacity of the meanest man, and shall be proved by that authority, which
the Epistoler trusts to most; in all this business, even the Acts and
Monuments. To which we shall adjoyne, for our more assurance, the Testimony of
two Acts of Parliament; one under King Edward the sixth, the other under Queen
Elizabeth. First, for the Acts and Monuments, we find, that not a few of those
which suffered death for their opposing of the gross and carnal Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, did not only well enough endure the name of Altar, but
without any doubt or scruple, called the Lords Supper, sometimes a Sacrifice,
and many times the Sacrament of the Altar. So speaks John Fryth, Secondly, They
examin^d me, touching the Sacrament of the Altar, Whether it was the very Body
of Christ or not. Act; and Monuments, part. 2. page 307. John Lambert thus, As
concerning the other six Sacraments, I make you the same Answer, that I have
done unto the Sacrament of the Altar, and no other, page 401. And in another
place, CHRIST being offered up once for all, in his own proper person, is yet
said to be offered up not only every year at Easter, but also every day in
the celebration of the Sacrament; because his Oblation once for ever made, is
thereby represented, pa. 435. Archbishop Cranmer also, though he opposed the
Statute of the Six Articles, particularly that of Transubstantiation, which he
thoroughly canvast: yet at the phrase or term of Sacrament of the Altar, he
took no offense, but uses it as formerly had been accustomed, page 443.

6. NOr was it a new name taken up of late, but such as some of them
acknowledge to be derived from pure Antiquity; and those too, such as lived and
suffered, after the name of Altar had bin left out of the Book of Common
Prayer, which was last established. John Philpott thus, That partly because it
is a Sacrament of that lively Sacrifice, which CHRIST offered for our sins upon
the Altar of the Cross; and partly because that Christ's body crucified for us,
was that bloody Sacrifice, which the bloodshedding of all the beasts offered
upon the Altar in the old Law did prefigurate, and signify unto us: the old
Writers do sometimes call the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
amongst other names which they ascribe thereunto, the Sacrament of the Altar,
Part. 3. page 23. Thus Bishop Latimer plainly grants, that the Lords Table
may be called an Alt^r, and that the Doctors call it so in many places, though
there be no propitiatory Sacrifice, but only CHRIST, page 85. And lastly,
Bishop Ridley does not only call it, the Sacrament of the Altar, affirming
thus, that in the Sacrament of the Altar, is the natural body and blood of
CHRIST, etc. page 492. But in reply unto an Argument of the Bishop of
Lincolnes, taken out of Cyrill, does resolve it thus, That the Word ALTAR, in
the Scripture, signifies as well the Altar whereupon the Jews were wont to
offer their burnt Sacrifices, as the Table of the Lords Supper: And that S.
Cyrill means by this word ALTAR, not the Jewish Altar, but the Table of the
Lord: and by that saying, Altars are erected in Christ's name, Ergo, CHRIST is
come; he means, that the Communion is administered in his remembrance* Ergo,
CHRIST is come, page 497. Which being the language of the Prelates, and other
learned men then living, it is no marvel, if in the Parliament, 1. Edw. 6.
cap. 1. the same name occur. The Parliaments in matters which concerned Gods
Service, did then use to speak, according as the Church had taught them. Now
in that Parliament, however it was resolved, that the whole Communion should be
restored, which in effect, was a plain abolition of the former Mass; yet is
that Act which so restores it, entitled, An Act against such persons as shall
speak irreverently, against the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of CHRIST,
commonly called, The Sacrament of the Altar; and for the receiving thereof
under both kinds. And in the body of the Act, there is special Order taken for
a Writ, to be directed to the Bishop of the Diocese, on such delinquencies;
where it is called expressly, Sacro sanctum Sacramentum Altaris; the holy
Sacrament of the Altar. Which being repealed by Queen Mary, in the first
Parliament of her reign, because of the Communion under both kinds, in the
same allowed of; was afterward revived by Queen Elizabeth, both the head and
body, and every branch and member of it 1. Eliz. cap. 1. So that we have a
Sacrifice, and an Altar* and a Sacrament of the Altar, on all sides
acknowledged; neither the Prince or Prelates, the Priest or people, dissen^ing
from it: some of those terms, being further justified by the Statute Laws.

SECT. II.
NExt, for the second point, the standing of the Communion Table, Altar-wise;
the said Epistoler thus declares himself to the Vicar of Gr. If you mean
(says he) by Altar-wise, that it should stand in that place of the Chancell
where the Altar stood* I think somewhat may be said for because the
^njunctions 1559. did so place it. And I conceive it to be the most decent
situation when it is not used, and for use too, where the Quire is mounted up
by steps, and open, so that he that officiates may be seen and heard of all
the Congregation. Such an one I hear your Chancell is not. But if you mean by
Altarwise, that it should stand along close by the wall, so as you be forced to
officiate at one end thereof (as you may have observed in great men's Chapels)
I do not believe that ever the Communion Tables were (otherwise than by
casualty) so placed in Country Churches. This I have laid together, as being
but a Preamble to the next Discourse; and rather matter of opinion and
hearesay, than of proof, reason, or authority: For it stands only on I
think, and I conceive, and I have heard, and I believe not; which no man can
interpret to be Demonstrations. Therefore to look upon the passage, as it
lies together, we have a plain confession, that if by placing of the Table
Altarwise, is meant the setting of it in that place where the Altar stood;
there is then somewhat, at the least, to be said for that, because the
Injunctions did so place it: and next an absolute revocation of the said
confession; where it is said, that if by Altarwise is meant, that it should
stand along close by the wall, then he believes not that ever the Communion
Table was so placed (unless by causualty) in Country Churches. Quo teneam
nodo? This is just fast and loo^e, and I know not what; the reconciliation of
two Contradictions. The Queens Injunctions were set out for the ^eiglement and
direction of all the Churches in this kingdom, and it is said in them, that
the holy Table in every Church shall be decently made, (in case the Altars were
removed, which they left at liberty) and set in the place where the Altar
stood, and there commonly covered, as thereto belongs. If in the place where
the Altar stood, then certainly it must stand along clo^e by the wall, because
the Altars always stood so: and that as well in Country Churches, as in great
men's Chapels, all being equally regarded in the said Injunctions, as in the
Preface to the same does at full appear. Whereas in case the Table were to
stand with one end toward the East great Window, as is after said; it could not
possibly s^and in the place where the Altar did, as the Injunctions have
appointed: the Altar taking up much room to the North and South, which the
Table placed endlong does not ta^e up; and contrary, the Table taking up much
room to the East and West, which the Altar did not. However we may take what
is given us here by the Epistoler, where he affirms, that placing of the
Table where the Altar stood, is the most decent situation when it is not used,
and for use too, where the Quire is mounted up by steps and open, so that he
that officiates may be seen and heard of all the Congregation; and such an
one, as he ^ad heard, the Vica^s Chancell was not. W^ether the Chancell at Gra:
was mounted up by st^ps, or not, is no great matter. In case it were not so, it
might have easily been done, without much charge: and those of Gra: were the
more beholding to this Epistoler, for taking so much pains to save their
purses. If it were mounted up by steps, and that it were most decent for the
Tables to be placed thereon: Why not as well along the Wall, as with one end
thereof to the East great Window?

2. FOr this, there are three Reasons given us, First, because then the
Country people would suppose them, Dressers, rather than Tables. Secondly,
because the Queens Commissioners for Ecclesiastical matters, directed that
the ^able should stand, not where the Altar, but where the steps of the Altar
formerly stood* Orders 1561. And thirdly, because the Minister appointed to
read the Communion, ^which he, the Vicar, out of the Book of Fast 1^. of the
King, was pleased, as the Epistoler phraseth it, to call Second Service) is
directed to read the Commandments, not at the end, but at the Northside of
the Table, which implies the End to be placed toward the East great Window.
Rubric before the Communion. And would the people take the Table, if placed
Altarwise, to be a ^resser, not a Table? I now perceive from whom it was that
Mr. Prynne borrowed so unmannerly and profane a phrase, whereof I thought him
formerly to have been the Author [L^me Giles his haltings]: And from whom also
he did borrow the quotations in his Appendix, against Bowing at the name of
JESUS, the mistakes and all. ^ qq. * 4. Viz. Rubric for the Communion. Queen
Elizab. Injunctions, [Injunc. for Tables in the Church] The Book of Canons,
An. 1471. p. 18. I say, and the mistakes and all: for both with him, and this
Epist^ler, it is p. 18. whereas indeed in the old Book, which was th^^ meant by
the Epistoler, it is p. 15. which plainly shows, out of whose quiver Mr.
Prynne did steal those arrows. Just in that scornful sort, Doctor Weston,
the then Deane of Westminster, did in a Conference at Oxford with Bishop
Latimer, call the Communion Tables, as in King Edwards reign they had been
placed in some Churches, by the name of ^yster-boards, Act. and Mon. Part. 3.
p. 85. and so he called in a Sermon at S^. Paul's Cross also, p. 95. The like
did Doctor White, the then Bishop of Lincoln, in a Conference with Bishop
Ridley, where he does charge the Protestants in King Edwards days, for
setting up an Oyster Table in stead of an Altar, p. 497. The Church of England,
is in the mean time, but in sorry case. If she appoint the Lords Board to be
placed like a common Table, the Papists they will call it an Oyster-table: If
like an Altar, the Puritans, and Mr. Prynne, will call it a Dr^sser-beard. A
slovenly and scornful term, as before was said, and such as does deserve no
other Answer, than what the Marginall notes in the Acts and Monuments, give in
the one place to the Deane of Westmin^ter. viz. The bl^s^hemous mouth of Doctor
W^ston, calling the Lords table an Oysterboard, pat. 85. or what they give in
the other place to the Bishop of Lincoln; viz. Bishop White blasphemously
called the ^oord of the Lords Supper, (...) Oyster table* page 497. I would
there were no worse notes in the Acts and Monuments.

3. AS for the Orders published by the Queens Comm^ssioners, An^. 1561. they
say indeed as is alleged, that in the place where the steps were, the
Communion Table shall stand: but then they say withal, which is not alleged,
that there be fixed on the wall over the Communion board, the tables of Gods
Precepts imprinted for the said purpose. And in the Book of Advertiseme^ts,
entitled, Articles of Advertisement for due order in the public
Administration of Common-praier, and the holy Sacraments; and published in An^.
1565. it is ordered thus: The Parish shall provide a decent Table, standing on
a frame, for the Communion Table, which they shall decently cover with a Carpet
of silk, or other decent covering, and with a white linne^ cloth in the time
of the Administration: And shall set the tea Commandments upon the East wall,
over the said Table. Which put together make up this construction, that the
Communion Table was to stand above the steps, and under the Commandments: and
therefore all along the wall, on which the ten Commandments were appointed to
be placed; which was directly where the Altar had stood before. And in this
wise we must interpret the said Orders and Advertisements; or else the Orders
published 1561, must run quite cross to the Injunctions published 1559, but
two years before: which were r^diculous to imagine in so grave a State.

4. NOr does it help the cause undertaken by the Epistoler, that The Minister
appointed to read the Communion, is directed to read the Commandments, not
at the end, but at the Northside of the Table: there being no difference in
this case between the North-end, and the North-side, which come both to one.
For in all quadrilaterall, and quadrangular figures, whether they be a perfect
Square, which Geometricians call Quadratum, or a long Square (as commonly our
Communion Tables are) which they call Oblongum: it is plain that if we speak
according to the rules of Art, (as certainly they did which composed that
Rubricke) every part of it is a side; how ever Custom has prevailed to call
the narrower sides by the name of ends. When therefore he that ministers at
the Altar, stands at the North-end of the same, as we use to call it; he
stands no question at the North-side thereof, as in propriety of speech we
ought to call it; and so implies not, as it is supposed by the Epistoler, that
the end, or narrower part thereof, is to be placed toward the East great
Window. And this Interpretation of the Rubric, I the rather stand to, because
that in the Common Prayer book done into Latin by command, and authorized by
the great Seal of Queen Elizabeth, Ann. 2^. of her reign, it is thus
translated: Ad cujus mensae septentrionalem partem, Minister stans, orabit
orationem Dominicam. viz. That the Minister standing at the North part of the
Table, shall say the (...)

5. FOr the Parenthesis, I might very well have passed it over; as not
conducing to this purpose; but that it seems to cast a scorn on them, by
whose direction the Book of the Fast, in 1^. of the King was drawn up and
published, as if it were a Noveltie or singular devise of theirs, to call the
latter part of Divine Service, by the name of Second Service: whereas indeed
the name is very proper for it, and every way agreeable both to the practice of
antiquity, and the intentions of this Church at that very time, when the Book
of Common Prayer was first established. For if we look into the Liturgy of
our Church, immediately after Athanasius Creed, we shall find it thus: Thus
ends the Order of Morning and Evening Prayer throughout the whole year: i.
e. the form of Morning and Evening Prayer for all days, equally, as well the
working days, as the holy days, without any difference. Then look into the
first Rubricke before the Communion, and we find it thus: So many as intend to
be partakers of the holy Communion, shall signify their names unto the
Curates over night, or else in the morning before the beginning of Morning
Prayer, or immediately after. Where clearly it is mean^, that there should be
some reasonable time between Morning Prayer and the Communion. For otherwise,
what leisure could the Curate have, to call before him, open, and notorious
(...) Livers, or such as have done any wrong unto their neighbors by word or
deed, and to advertise them, in any wise not to presume to come unto the Lords
Table, till they have manifested their repentance, and amended their former
na^ghty lives, and recompensed the parties whom they have done wrong unto? Or
what spare time can we afford him, between the Reading Pew, and the Holy
Table, to reconcile those men, betwixt* whom he (...) malice and hatred to
reign; and on examination of their dispositions, to admit that party, who is
contented (...) ^^rgive, and repel the obstinate; according as by the Rubric
he is bound to do. Which, being compared with the first Rubric, after the
Communion, where it is said, that upon the Holi-daies, if there be no
Communion, shall be said all that is appointed at the Communion, until the end
of the Homily, concluding with the Prayer for the whole state of Christ's
Church militant here on earth, etc. makes it both manifest and undeniable, that
the distinction of the First and Second Service, is grounded on the very
meaning of holy Church; however the Epistoler does please to slight it.

6. THat which next follows, is a Confirmation only of what went before: Viz.
that The Ministers standing at the North side of the Table, was no new
direction in the Queens time only, but practiced in King Edwards reign; that
in the plot of our Liturgy sent by Knox, and Whittingham to Master Calvin, in
the latter end of Queen Mary, it is said, that the Minister must stand at the
North-side of the Table; (that only was put in to show, that ^ee had the Book
entitled, The Troubles of Francofurt:) that in King Edwards Liturgies, the
Minister standing in the midst of the Altar, (i. e. with his back turned
toward the people) 1549, is turned into his standing at the Northside of the
Table, 1552. And finally, that this last Liturgy was revived by Parl^ament, 1^.
Eliz. This we acknowledge to be true, but it adds nothing to the reasons
produced before: and so perhaps it is as true, that it was used so, when this
Letter was written, in most places of England; which in this kind had too much
deviated from the ancient practice. But where it follows in the next place,
that What is done in Chapels, or Cathedral Churches, is not the point in
question, but how the Tables are appointed to be placed in Parish Churches: I
think that therein the Epistoler has been much mistaken. For certainly the
ancient Orders of the Church of England, have been best preserved in the
Chappells of the Kings Majesty, and the Cathedralls of this Kingdom; without
the which perhaps, we had before this been at a loss amongst our selves, for
the whole form and fashion of Divine Service. And therefore if it be so in
the Chappells and Cathedral Churches, as the Epistoler does acknowledge; it is
a pregnant Argument, that so it ought to be in the Parochial; which herein
ought to president and conform themselves, according to the Pattern of the
Mother Churches. And I would feign learn of this doughtie Disputant, why he
should make such difference between the Chappells, and Cathedral Churches on
the one side, and the Parochialls on the other: as if some things which were
not warranted by Law, were used in the one; and such as are allowed by Law,
were not permitted to the other. The Laws and Canons now in force, look alike
on all. And therefore here must be some cunning, to make the Chappells and
Cathedralls guilty of some ^oule transgression, some breach of Law and public
Order; the better to expose them to the censure of a race of men, who like them
ill enough already.

7. AS for that fancy which comes next, that In some Chappells and
Cathedralls, the Altars may be still standing or to make use of their Covers
and Ornaments, Tables may be placed in their room, of the same length and
fashion the Altars were of; (...) dream, and a poor conjecture.
Questionless, neither the Chappells Royal, nor any of the Cathedral
Churches* have hitherto been so (...) brought, (Gods Name be praised) but that
they have been able to provide themselves of convenient Ornaments, without
being any way beholding to their former Altars. However, if it were lawful in
Cathedral Churches, either to suffer the old Altars to continue standing, or
to set up Tables in their places, of the same length and fashion that the
Altars were of, only in point of thrift, to save greater charges: I hope it
will be thought more lawful, by indifferent men, to place the Table
Altar-wise, in Parochial Churches, in point of decency, and due obedience
unto public Order That Altars do stand still in the Lutheran Churches, (the
Doctors and Divines whereof he does acknowledge afterward to be sound
Protestants) by the Epistoler is confessed, though it makes against him: as
also that the Apology for the Augustan Confession does allow it. And he
confesses too, not only that they stood a year or two in King Edwards time,
as may appear by the Liturgy printed 1549. but that the Queens Commissioners
were content they should stand, as before we noted. What, stood they but a
year or two in King Edwards time? Yes certainly they stood four years at
the least, in that Princes reign. For in the first year of King Edward, being
1547. was passed, that Statute, entitled, An Act against such persons as shall
speak ireverently of the Sacrament of the Altar. Anno 1548. The Common prayer
Book was confirmed by Parliament, although not publi shed till the next year;
wherein the word Altar is often used, and by the which it seems the Altars did
continue as before there were. Anno. 1540, A Let ter in the Kings name from the
Lords of the Coun cell, came to Bishop ^^^^er, for abrogating Private Masses;
wehrein it is appointed, that the Holy bles sed Communion be ministered at the
High Altar of the Church, and in no other places of the same. Act. and Monum.
Part. 2. p. 662. And in the year 1550. which was the fourth year of his
reign, came out an Order from the Council, unto Bishop Ridley, for taking
down the Altars in his Diocese, Page 699. So long it seems they stood
without contradiction; and longer might have stood perhaps, if Calvin had given
way unto it; of which more hereafter.

8. IN the mean time; from matter of Evidence and Authority, we must proceed
next unto point of Reason, and then go on again unto matter of Fact; as the
way is lead by the Epistoler, whom we must follow step by step in all his
wanderings. And in this way he tells us. That the Sacrifice of the Altar being
abolished, these (call them what ^ou will) are no more Altars, but Tables of
Stone or timber, and that it was alleged so 24. November. 4^. Edw. 6. And (...)
so alleged, that the Sacrifice of the Altar was abolished? I believe it not.
It was alleged indeed, That the form of an Altar was ordained for the
Sacrifices of the Law; that both the Law, and the Sacrifices thereof do cease,
and therefore that the form of the Altar ought to cease also. Act* and
Monuments part. 2. page 700. The Sacrifice of the Altar, and the Sacrifices of
the Law, are two different things: it being told us by Saint Paul, that we
(the Christians) have an Altar, whereof they have no right to ^are, which
served the T^bernacle, Hebr. 13. 10. That Altar, and that Sacrifice, must
continue always. And were it granted, as it need not, that since the Law, and
Sacrifices thereof be both abolished, therefore the form of the Altar is to be
abolished: yet would this rather help, than hurt us. For the Communion Table
standing in the Body of the Church or Chancell, has indeed more resemblance to
Altars, on which the Priests did offer either Sacrifice, or Incence, under the
Law; then if it did stand Altarwise, close along the wall, as did the Altars,
after in the Christian Church: the one of them, which was that for Sacrifice,
standing in atri^ Sacerdotum, in the middle of the Priests Court, without the
Temple; the other being that of Incense, in Templo exteriori, even in the
outward part of the Temple, and not within the Sanctum Sanctorum, as our Altars
do.

9. THat the said Tables of stone, or timber (though placed Altarwise, for so I
take it is his meaning) may be well used in Kings and Bishops houses where
there are no people so void of understanding, as to be scandalized, we are
glad to hear of: and if it be not true, would to God it were. However we may
safely say, that a small measure of understanding, is in this kind sufficient
to avoid offense: there being none so weak of wit, who may not easily be
persuaded (if at least they will, or that their Leaders will permit them) that
the disposing of Gods Table, rather to one place than another, it is not
considerable in it self, or otherwise material in his public worship,
further than it conduces unto Order and Uniformity. If any be so void of
understanding, which we hardly think, and plead their weakness in this
point, as did the Brethren in the Conference at Hampton Court; we ask them
with his Majesty of happy memory, not whether 45 years, but whether 80 years
be not sufficient for them to gather strength, and get understanding; whether
they be not rather headstrong, than not strong eenough. Confer. at Hampt.
Court. page 66. For it may very well be thought that it is not any want of
understanding, but an opinion rather that they have of their understandings,
which makes some men run cross to all public Order, and take off^nce at any
thing, whereof themselves are not the Authors.

10. THat which next follows, viz. that on the orders for breaking down of
Altars, all Dioceses did agree upon receiving Tables, but not upon the fashion
or form of Tables, is fairer in the flourish, than in the fact. For in the
Act. and Mon. p. 1212. which there is cited, being of my Edit. part 2. page
700. there is no such matter. It is there said indeed, that on receipt of his
Majesty's Le^ters sent to Bishop Ridley, the Bishop did (...) the right form
of a Table to be used in all his Di^cesse: but that it was appointed so in all
other Diocesses, as the Epistoler has affirmed, does not appear by any thing
in that place remembered. And though he did appoint it so, yet possibly it may
be doubted, whether the people, fully understood his meaning: it being there
said, that after the exhortation of the said Bishop Ridley, there grew a great
diversity about the form of the Lords board, some using it after the form of
a Table, and some of an Altar. So that the difference was not about the having
of a Table, wherein it seems, most men were ready to obey the Kings Command,
and the Bishops Order; but in the placing of the same: some men desiring, that
it should be placed after the fashion of an Altar, others more willing that it
should be used like a Common Table; in which both parties followed their own
affections, as in a thing which had not been determined of, but l^ft at large.

11. THat which comes after is well said, but not well applied. It is well
said, that In the old Testament one and the same thing is termed an Altar and a
Table* an Altar in respect of what is there offered unto God, and a Table, i^
regard of what is there participated by men, as for Example by the Priests. By
this might better have been applied, and used to justify the calling of the
Communion Table by the name of Altar, in respect of those Oblations made to
God: as the Epistoler does acknowledge afterward. That of the ^^ophet
Malachie, 1. ver. 7. is indeed worth the marking, and does demonstrate very
well that in the old Testament, Gods Altar is the very same with Gods Table,
but how it answers (...) place of the ^ebrewes, 13. 10. is beyond my reach,
the Prophet speaking of that (...) and those Sacrifices, whereof we have no
right to ea^e which live under the Gospel; and the Apostle of that Altar, and
that Sacrifice, whereof they have no right to eat, which live under the Law.
In case, that Passage had been urged by the Vicar of Gr: as the Epistoler has
informed us, for we take his word; against some of his fellow Ministers, as
before him it was by Master Morgan against Peter Martyr, in maintenance of an
Altar in the Christian Church: however it might possibly have been answered
otherwise by the Respondent, sure it had never been well answered by that text
of Malachie.

12. Where it is next said, that we have no Altar in regard of Oblation, but
we have an Altar in regard of Participation and Communion granted to us: Were
it no otherwi^e than it is here said, yet here we are all allowed an Altar, in
regard of Participation and Communion; which is enough to justify both the
situation of the Table Altarwise, and the name of Altar, and that too in the
very instant of receiving the Communion. Now for the proof that we have an
Altar also in regard of Oblation, we need look no further than into the
latter end of this second Paragraph; where howsoever the Epistoler does
suppose, that the name of Altar crept (he might as well have said, it came)
into the Church, in a kind of complying in Phrase with the people of the Jews,
as Chemnitius, Gerardus, and other sound Protestants were of opinion; (where by
the way, we may perceive that some may be sound Protestants, though they like
of Altars:) Yet he acknowledges withal, that it was so called, partly, in
regard of those Oblations made upon the Communion Table, for the use of the
Priest and the Poor, whereof we read in Justine Martyr, Irenaeus, Tertullian,
and other ancient Writers; and partly, because of the Sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, as Archbishop Cranmer, and others thought, Acts and Monum. page
1211. which is Part 2. page 700. of my Edition. Whereby it seems, that besides
the complying in Phrase with the Jews (which the Christians of the Primitive
times had little care of, when there was not greater reason to persuade them to
it:) the Communion Table, was called an Altar, both in regard of the Oblations
there made to God, for the use of his Priests, and of his Poor; as also, of
the Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving, which was there offered to him by the
Congregation. And therefore, as before we found an Altar, in regard of
Participation, and Communion; so here we have an Altar in respect of Oblation
also.

13. THis, though it be so clear a Truth, that the Epistoler could not deny
it; yet pulls he down with one hand, what he was after forced to set up with
the other. For so it follows in the Letter: The use of an Altar is to
Sacrifice upon, and the use of a Table is to eat upon: And because Communion
is an action most proper for a Table, as an Oblation is for an Altar; what
then? therefore the Church in her Liturgy and Canons calling the same a Table
only, do not you call it an Altar? This is indeed the in^erence which is made
from the former Principles. But if the Principles be true, as indeed they are
not, there being an Altar in the Temple, which was not made to Sacrifice upon,
as the Altar of Incense; and a T^ble also in the Temple, which was not made to
^ate upon, as the Table for the She^-bread: another, and a worse conclusion
would soon follow on it; which is, that men would think it necessary to sit
at the Communion. For if Communion be an action most proper for a Table, as it
is affirmed, and that the use of a Table to be Eat upon, as is also said: the
inference will be very strong, that therefore we are bound to sit at the
Communion, even as we do at Common Tables, which we eat upon. A thing much
sought for by some men, as if not only a great part of their Christian
liberty, but that their whole Religion did consist therein; but brought into
the Churches first, by the modern Arians (who stubbornly gainsaying the
Divinity of our Lord and Savior, thought it no robbery to be equal with him,
and sit down with him at his Table:) and for that cause most justly banished
the reformed Church in Poland. For so it was determined there, in a general
Synod, An^. 1583. Ne sessio sit in usu ad mensam Domini. The reason was, Nam
haec ceremoniea, Ecclesijs christianis and coetibus Evangelicis non est
usit^ta; tantumque propria infidelibus Arianis, domino part solio sese
collocantibus: Because it was a thing not used in the Christian Church, but
proper to the Arians only, who thought themselves haile-fellowes with their
Lord and Savior; and to them we leave it.

14. We are now come unto the Story of the Change, the change of Altars into
Tables, and the reasons of it, which is thus delivered: In King Edwards Liturgy
of 1549, it is every where; but in that of 1552, it is no where called an
Altar, but the Lords Board. Why? Because the people being scandalized heerewith
in Country Churches, first beats them down de facto, then the supreme
Magistrate by a kind of Law, puts them down de jure; and setting Tables in
their rooms, took from us the Children of the Church and Commonwealth, both
the name and nature of former Altars. What ever may be said of the change in
the Public Liturgy, the reason here assigned for taking down of Altars, is
both false and dangerous. Nor is it altogether true, that in the Liturgies here
remembered, the name of Altar is used only in the one; though true it be, that
that of the L^rds Board, or Table, is used only in the other. Though the
Epistoler had not, perhaps, the leisu^e, to ^earch the Liturgy of 1549, where
it is once called Gods board, and once his Table, as viz. in the Prayer: We do
not presume, etc. and in the Rubricke of the same: yet he could not be ignorant
that it was so observed in his own Author, the Acts and Monuments; and in the
Page by him often quoted. Where it is said, that The Book of Common Prayer
calls the thing whereupon the Lord's Supper is ministered, indifferently, a
Table, an Altar, or the Lord's Board, without prescription of any form thereof
either of a Table, or of an Altar; so that whether the Lord's Board have the
form of an Altar, or of a Table, the Book of Common Prayer calls it both an
Altar and a Table. For as it calls it an Altar, whereupon the Lord's Supper
is ministered, a Table, and the Lord's board: so it calls the Table, whereon
the holy Communion is distributed with Lauds and Thanksgivings unto the Lord,
an Altar: For that there is offered the same Sacrifice of Praise and
Thanksgiving. Part. 2. page 700. And this I have he rather laid down at large,
to show with what indifferency these names of Table, Board, and Altar, have
been used before; and may be used for the present: as also in what regard the
Lord's Table may be called an ^ltar. And this according unto Master Foxes
Marginall note, in the self same Page; viz. The Table how it may be called an
Altar, and in what respect: which shows that he allowed it to be called an
Altar, though this Epistoler does not like it.

15. NOw as the Story of the change is not altogether true, so the reason there
assigned, is both ^al^e and dangerous. First, it is false, the Alteration not
being made, because the people were scandalized with Altars in Country
Churches. The people were so far from being scandalized with having Altars;
that in the Countries of Devon and Cornwall, they rose up in Arms, because
the Mass was taken from them. Act. and Monum. Part. 2. pa. 666. And if we
look into the Story of those times, we shall quickly find, that it was no
scandal taken by the people, which did occasion that or any other c^ange in
the Common prayer Book; but and offense conceived by Calvin. It seems that
Bucer had informed him of the condition of this Church, and the public
Li^urgie thereof; and thereupon he wrote to the Duke of Sommerset, who was then
Protector. Epistola ad Bucer^m. In which his Letter to the Duke, he finds
great fault with the Commemoration of the dead, which was then used in the
Celebration of the Lords Supper, though he acknowledges the same to be very
ancient; calling it by the name of a piece of Leaven, Quo m^ssa integra sanctae
coenae quodammodo ace^ieret, where with the whole Communion was made sower.
Other things in the Liturgy he found fault withal, and then advises, Illa
omnia abscindi se^el, that they should all at once be cut off for ever. Epist.
ad Protectorem Angliae. Nor stayed he here, but he sollici^ed Archbishop
Cranmer to the same ^ffect, (...). 1551, being the year before the Al^eration
made, (as by the placing of that Letter does appear) complaining in the same
unto him, (...) That in the Church of England, there was yet remaining a whole
mass of Popery, which did not only blemish and obscure, but in a manner
overthrow Gods holy worship. So that however in his Answer to the Devonshire
men, the King had formerly affirmed, that the Lords Supper, as it was then
administered, was brought even to the very ^se, as CHRIST left i^, as the
Apostles used it, and as the holy Fathers delivered it; Act. and Monum. Part.
2. pa. 667: Yet to please Calvin, who was all in all with my Lord Protector,
and as it seems had took upon him to wr^te ^^to the King about it, Epistol.
ad (...) 1551, the Litu^gy then established, was called in by Parliament;
though in the very act it self they could not but acknowledge, that the said
Book of Common prayer was both agreeable to Gods Word, and ^he Primitive
Church. 5. and 6. of Edw. 6. cap. 1. So that the leaving of the word, Altar,
out of the Common Prayer book last established, and other altera^ions which
were therein made, grew not from any s^andall which was taken at the name of
Altar, by the Country people; but from the dislike taken against the whole
Liturgy, by Calvin, as before I said.

16 AS false it is, but far more dangerous, which is next alleged; viz. that
The people being ^^anda^ized in country Churches, did first de fac^o, beat
down Altars, and then the Prince, to countenance, no doubt, and confirm their
unruly actions, did by a kind of Law put them do^ne de jure. Where is is said
in all the Monuments of our Church, or State, that ever in the former times,
the Country people took upon them to be reformers of the Church; or that in
this particular, they did de facto, beat down Altars? This is fine doctrine,
were it true, for the common people, who questionless will hea^ken to it with
a greedy ^are; as loving nothing more then to have the soveraigntie in sacred
matters: and who being led by a Pre^edent, more than they are by the Law or
Precept, think all things lawful to be done, which were done before them.
But sure the people never did it. For in the Letters sent in the Kings name to
Bishop Ridley, it is said, that it was come to the Kings knowledge, how the
Altars within the most part of the Churches of this Realm, being already upon
good and godly consideration taken down, there did remain Altars in diverse
other Chu^ches, Acts and Monument Part. 2. page 699. So that the Altars were
not generally taken dow^e throughou^ the Kingdom: and those which were took
down, were taken down on good and godly consideration; which certainly
implies some Order and Authority from those who had a power to do it: Not
beaten down, de facto, by the common people, in a popular hu^our, without
Authority or Warrant. And had they all been beaten down de ^act^, by the
common people, that kind^ of La^ which after put them down de jure, had come
too late to carry any stroke in so great a business: Unless perhaps the King
was willing on the post-fact to partake somewhat of the honor; or durst not
but confirm the doings of disordered people, by a kind of Law. A kind of Law?
And is the Edict and Direction of the King in sacred matters, but a kind of
Law? The peoples beating down the Altars, was, as it seems, a powerf^ll Law,
a very Club-Law at the least, against the which was no resistance to be made;
the Princes Edict to remove them, but a kind of Law, which no man was obliged
unto, nor had regarded, but that they found it sorted with the peoples humor.
Just so he dealt before with the Queens Injunctions. The Queens Injuctions had
appointed that the Holy Table in every Church should be ^ecently made, and set
up in the place where the Alt^r stood: and thereupon it is resolved by the
Epistoler, that if by placing of the Table Altarwise, is meant the setting of
it in that place of the Chancell where the Altar stood, there may be somewhat
said for that, because the Injunctions did so place it. The Edict of King
Edward, but a kind of Law? the Order of Qu. Elizabeth* but a kind of somewhat?
This is no mannerly dealing with Kings and Queens, my good Brother of BOSTON.

17. YEt such a kind of Law it was, that being seconded by a kind of somewhat,
in the Queens Injunctions 1559, referring to that order of King Edward, it
has taken from us the Children of the Church, and Commonwealth, the name and
nature of former Altars. The Children of the Church? And who are they? Those
only which are bounded Intr^ partem Donati, the lot and portion of the
Brethren of the Dispersion; those who have kep^ their children's foreheads
from the sign of the Cross, their knees from bowing at the blessed name of
JESUS, or doing honor to him in his ho^y Sacrament; those who have kept their
hands from paying their Duties to the Priest; their eyes from being defiled
with looking on prohibited vestments, such as have formerly been abused to
idolatrous services. Those doubtless ar^ the Children of the Church here
meant, which must not use the name of Altars; as if it were the Shibboleth of
their profession. From us the children of the Church? Yes marry Sir. Now judge,
if at the least you know a Cat by her claw, if that which I at first suspected,
be not come about; For but with half an eye one may see by this, of what
strain the Episto^er is, or else unto what pa^^i^ he applies him self in all
this bu^iness^. As for the Children of the Commonwealth, it is time that
Criticisme were forgotten, and that they were the Children of the Kingdom too.
We live, We praise God for it, in a Monarchy, not in a D^m^cracie. And
therefore they that go about to coin distinctions, between the (...) of the
King, and the Commonweal; may perhaps pass for subtle Sophister^, but never
shall attain the honor to be thought sou^^ S^bjects.

18. But it is time we should proceed, and leave these Children of the Church
and the Common -wealth to their grand Directors; who, though in other things,
they are all for Novelties, new forms of Prayer, new Rites and Ceremonies of
Religion, if they brook of any; new offices, in the dispensation of God's Word
and Sacrament; must yet affect the name of Table, even for pure antiquity: the
name of the Lord's Table, being told them to be no new name, and therefore none
to be ashamed of it. A thing that might have well been spared, there being
none so void of Piety and understanding, as to be scandalized at the name of
the Lord's Table; as are some men, it seems, at the name of Altar: saving that
somewhat must be said to persuade the people, that questionless such men there
are, the better to indeere the matter. Nor is the name of Altar so new a name,
that any man should be ashamed thereof, as if it were a term taken up of late,
in time of Popery. For whereas the Epistoler pleads, That Christ himself
did institute the Sacrament upon a Table, and not upon an Altar, and that the
name of Table, is in the Christian Church, 200. years more ancient than the
name of Altar, as is most learnedly proved out of St. Paul, Origin, and
Arnobius, by Bishop Jewel, against Harding of Private Mass. p. 143: It may
be possible that neither CHRIST our Savours institution will of necessity
infer the use of Tables, ( Tables, I mean, placed Table-wise, toward the East
great Window, as before was said;) nor Bishop Iewel's proofs come home to the
point in hand. For howsoever our Savior instit^ted this holy Sacr^^ent at a
Table, not at an Altar* yet is the Table, in regard of that i^stitution, but an
accessorie, and a poin^ of Circumstance; nothing therein of Substance, nothing
which is to be considered as a Principal. For if it were a matter of
Substance, that it was instituted at a Table, then must the fashion of that
Table, being, as it is conceived, of an ovall form, be a matter of Substance
also; and compassed round about with beds, as then the custom was, for the
Communicants to rest upon whilst they do receive. But herein is the Table no
more considerable, than that it was first instituted after Supper, in an upper
chamber, distributed amongst twelve only; and those twelve, all men; and those
men, all Priests: which, no man is so void of sense, as to imagine to be things
considerable in the administration of this holy Sacrament. And yet should this
be granted too, that in the having of a Table we must conform our selves to
the LORD's example: yet for the situation of that Table, I doubt it would be
hardly proved by the ^pistoler, that the two ends thereof did stand a^^^ and
West; or that there was a great Wind^^ in the East end of the Chamber, toward
the which the Table was placed endlong, at the Institution; as he would have it
now at the Ministration.

19. AS little comfort can he find in Bis^op Jewel, or in S^. Paul, Origin,
and A^nobius, by him alleged. Of St. Paul there is nothing said in all that
Sectio^ (it is the 26 of the third Article) which concerns this matter:
nothing that sets forth the antiquity of the name of Table. St. Paul is cited
once only in that whole Section, and the place cited, then is this; Quomodo
dicet Amen ad tuam gratiarum Actionem. 1 Cor. 14. So that unless this Argument
be good, The people cannot say Amen to Prai^rs made in a strange tongue,
because they know not what is said, Ergo, the name of Table is 200 years more
ancient than the name of Altar: There is not any thing alleged from St. Paul
which can advantage the Epistoler for the Point in hand. Indeed, from Origin,
and Arnobius, it is there alleged, that generally the Gentiles did object
against the Christians of those times, that they had neither Altars, Images,
nor Temples; Obijcit nobis quod non habeam^^ imag^nes, aut a^ as, aut templa;
So Origin, contr. Cells. 1. 4. N^s accusatis quod nec templa habeamus, ne^
i^agines, nec aras. So says Arnobius, lib. 2. contr. Gentes. But unto this
objection we need no better an^wer, than Bishop Iewel's own in the self same
Section: viz. That th^n the faithful, for fear of Tyrants, we^e feign to meet
together in private houses, in vacant places, in Woods and F^rrests, and Caves
under the ground. But we will fur^her ^ay withal, that t^ough the Christians
had some Churches, in those perilous times, yet were they not so gorgious, nor
so richly furnished, as were the Temples of the Gentiles. And so both Origin
and Arnobius must be understood, no^ that the Christians in their times, had at
all no Temples, or at the least no Altars in them: but that their Churches were
so mean, that they deserved not the name of Temples; and that they had no
Altars, for bloody and external Sacrifices, as the Gentiles had.

20 FOr otherwise it is most certain, that the Church had Altars, both the
name and the thing; and used both name and thing a long time together, before
the birth of Origin, or Arnobius Afer. Tertullian, who lived in the same age
with Origin, but sometime before; and a full hundred years before Arnobius,
has the name of Altar; as a thing used and known in the Christian Church: as,
Nonne solemnior erit statio tua, si and ad aram Dei steteris? Li^ de oratione
cap. 14. Will not thy station, (or form of Devotion then in use) be thought
more solemn, if thou do stand by or before the Altar. And in his book de
Poenitentia, he remembers geniculationem ad aras; kneeling or bowing of the
knee before the Altar. Before him, Origin, or Arnobius, flourished Irenaeus,
who proves the Apostles to be Priests, because they did Deo and Altari servire,
attend the service of the Lord, and wait upon him at the Altar. Whereof see
lib. 4. advers. haereses, cap. 20. And so St Cyprian, who lived before
Arnobius, though after Origin, does call it plainly, Altar Dei, Gods Altar,
Ep. lib. 1. C. 7. ad Epictetum. See the like in the 8. and 9. Epist. of the
same book also. But to go higher yet, Ignatius ^seth it in no less than
three of his Epistles: (...) ad Magnes. (...), ad Philadelph. One Altar, and
one Altar in every Church; and finally in his Epistle ad Tarsens^ he terms it
(...). Gods altar, as both Tertullian, and St Cyprian did after call it. So in
the Canon of the Apostles, which though not writ by them, are certainly of good
antiquity, the same word (...) does occur in the 3* 4. and 5. Canons. And
above all indeed St Paul in his Habemus altar, Heb. 13. 10. In which place,
whether he mean the Lords Table, or the Lords Supper, or rather the Sacrifice
it self, which the Lord once offered; certain it is that he conceaved the name
of Altar, neither to be impertinent, nor improper in the Christian Church. So
that for ought appears in the ancient Writers, the name of Altar is as old as
the name of Table; indifferently and promiscuously used without doubt or
scruple. Nor does that reverend Bishop Jewel deny, but that the Lords table
anciently was called an Altar, and cites elsewhere diverse of the Fathers,
which did call it so: wherein consult his 13. Art. and 6. sect. though now it
be resolved by this Epistoler, that the name being so many years ^bolis^ed,
it is in his judgment fitter, that the Altar, (if we will needs call it so)
should according to the Canon stand tablewise; then that the Vicars table to
trouble the poor Town of Gr. should stand Altarwise. Hac est illa Helena. This
is indeed the thing most aimed at in all this b^sinesse, Popullo ut placerent
quas fecisset fabulas, only she pleasing of the people. It was to please the
people, who as it is affirmed in the beginning of this letter, had taken some
^mbr^ges and offense at the pla^ing of the table, where the Altar stood; that
the Churchwardens were appointed to remove it into the middle of the Chancell.
It was to please the people, that the authority of the Chur^h-wardens is
advanced so high above their Ministers. And now for fear of troubling the
poor people, we must not use the name of Altars, or place the table Altarwise;
lest they should take it for a Dresser, and in a pious fury break it all in
pieces, as, they are told, their An^estors, had done de facto, in King Edwards
reign. Ad populu^ phaleras.

SECT. III.
We are now come to the last part of this Epistle, viz. the fixing of the
Altar, or Communion Table at the upper end of the Quire: And unto this it is
thus said by the Epi^^oler, viz. that for the standing of the table in the
higher part of the* church, he had decla^ed his as^ent already in opinion* but
that i^ should be fixed there, was so far f^^m being Canonical, that it is
directly against the Canon. It may be neither so, nor so. Not so for certain
in the first. For in the Vicars judgment, the Communion^ table ought to stand
like an Alta^, all along the wall; and in the opinion of the Epistoler,
although he be content that it should stand above the steps, yet he would
have it placed tablewise, with one end toward the East great Window: which
certainly is no assent in, but a diversity of opinion. And for the second,
howsoever it be ordered in the Rubric, that the Communion table shall stand
in the body of the Church* or in the Chancell, (and not, o^ of the Cha^cel, as
the Epistoler has informed us); where Morning and Evening prayer are appo^nted
to be read: yet his illation thereupon, that seeing morning and evening prayer
be appointed to be read in the body of the Church, (as in most country
Churches, he says, it is), therefore the Table should stand most Canonically
in the body of the Church; is both uncertain and unsound. For seeing it is
ordered in the Book it self, That Morning and Evening prayer shall be used
in the accustomed place of the Church, Chapel, or Chancell, except it shall
be otherwise determined by the Ordinary of the place: he must first show us
where it was determined by the Ordinary of the place, that Morning and Evening
prayer shall be said only in the body of the Church, before he venture on such
new and ^trange conclusions. And for the Rubric, it says only, that it shall
so be placed in Communion time; And that too to be understood, according as it
has been since interpreted by the best authority, not as if ordered upon any
dislike of placing the Communion table where the Altar stood, but as permitting
it to the discretion of the Ordinary, to set, or cause it to be set in the
time of the administration of the Sacrament, so as it might be most convenient
for the Communicants; who in the former times, as it is well known, had rather
been lookers on the Sacrament, than partakers of it.

2 THe like construction is also to be made of the Queens Iniunction 1559.
which is next alleged, and of the 82. Canon now i^ force, being a recital and
confirmation of that part of the Injunction, where it is said, that In the time
of the Communion, the Table shall be placed in so good sort within the
Chancell (the 82 Canon has it within the Church or Chancell) as thereby the
Minister may more conveniently be heard by the Communicants. Which plainly is
a matter of Permission, rather than Command; yea, and a matter of Permission
only in such times and places, where otherwise the Minister cannot
conveniently be heard of the Communicants. So that in all the lesser Churches,
such as our Country Churches for the most part are, and in all others where
the Minister standing at the Altar, may be heard conveniently: the Table may
stand Altar-wise in the time of ministration, without breach of Canon. And this
in the Episto^er's judgment, the ablest Canonist, no doubt, in the Church of
England, who has already freely granted; that placing of the Table Altar-wise,
is the most decent situation when it is not used, and for use too, where the
Quire is mounted up by steps, and open, (which may son be done) so that he
which o^^iciats may be seen and heard of all the Congregation. This was the
thing the Vicar aimed at. Of wh^m we have no cause to think, or reason to
conceive, that ^ee intended so to fix his Table unto the wall, or to
incorporat it into the same, as the Altars were; that there should be no moving
or removing it, on just and necessary causes: but that in correspondence unto
former practice, and the Injunction of the Queen, he thought the place where
formerly the Altar stood to be fittest for it, at least, out of the time of the
ministration: and in that time too, if he might be heard conveniently of the
Congregation. And whether he might or no, no doubt he better knew, than this
extravagant Epistoler; and so in that respect might be as well Master of the
peoples ears, as he in Tacitus, whom this Epistoler has remembered, was of his
own.

3. I Say according unto former practice, and the Queens Injunction. For if we
look into the former practice, either of the Chapels of the King, the best
interpreter of the Law, which himself enacted, wherein the Communion Table
has so stood as now it does, since the beginning of Queen Elizabeth, what
time that Rubric in the Common Prayer book was confirmed, and ratified: or of
Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, the best observers of the form and order
of God's public Service; the Vicar had good warrant for what he did. And for
the Injunctions, howsoever it be said in them, that in the time of the
Communion, the table shall be placed in so good sort within the Chancell^, (...)
thereby the Minister may more conveniently be heard; being a matter of Permison
only, if occasion be: yet it is ordered in the same, that after the Communion
done, from time to time, the same holy Table shall be placed where it stood
before, that is, where formerly the Altar stood. So that the next clause of
this Epistoler, wherein it is referred to the Vicar's judgment, Whether this
Table, which like Daedalus his Ensigns, moves and removes from place to place,
and that by the inward wheels of the Church Canon, be fitly resembled to an
Altar, that stirr's not an inch; might have well been spared: as not being
likely to be any part of the Vicars meaning. For we may reasonably presume that
it was only his intent to keep the table free from irreverent usage; and by
exalting it to the highest place* to (...) the (...) reverence to the blessed
Sacrament, from the Common people; who if infected with the fancies of these
latter days, are like enough to thrust it down into the Bell-free, or some
worser corner. Nor say I so without good reason, it being so resolved of in the
Altar Damascenum, that any place, be it what it will, is good enough for the
Lords Table, the Communion ended. De loco ubi con^istat cur solliciti, cum
quovis loco vel angulo extra tempus administrationis, collocari possit. pa.
718. What need they be so careful (say those factious spirits which composed
that book) how to dispose or place the Table; seeing that out of the time of
the ministration, it may be put in any place or corner whatsoever it be. High
time assuredly, that such prophanenes should be met with.

4 THere is one only passage more to be considered in this letter, for the
close of all, and that is this; that If we do desire to know out of Eusebius,
Augustine, Durandus, and the fif^h Council of Constantinople, how long
Communion tables have stood in the midst of the Church, we should read Bishop
Jewel against Harding, Art. 3. p. 143. and we shall be satisfied. And read him
though we have, yet we are not satisfied. Eusebius tells us of the Church of
Tire, that being finished, and all the ^eats thereof set up, (...)* The Founder
after all, placed the most holy Altar in the midst thereof, and compassed it
about with rai^es, to hinder the rude multitude from pressing near it. This
proves not necessarily, that the Altar stood either in the body of the Church,
or in the middle of the same, as the Epistoler does intend when he says the
middle. The Altar, though it stood along the Eastern wall, yet may be well
interpreted to be (...), in the middle of the Chancel, in reference to the
North and South, as it since has stood. And were it otherwise, yet this is but
a particular case of a Church in Syria, wherein the people being more ming^ed
wi^h the Jews, than in other places, might possibly place the Altar in the
middle of the Church, as was the altar of Incense in the midst of the Temple,
the better to conform unto them. For if, as Bishop Jewel says in the self
sam^ place, The holy Table was called an Altar, only in allusion to the Altars
in the old law, or if as this Epistoler tells us, the name of Altar crept into
the Church, by a kind of complying in p^rase with the people of the Jews: (...)

5 THat of the fifth Council of Constantinople, as it is there called, being
indeed the Council sub Agapeto and Menna against Anthimus and Severus, affirms
as much in sound, as the Epistoler does intend; but if examined rightly,
concludes against him. It is there said, that in the reading of the Diptychs,
the people with great silence (...), gathered together about the Altar, and
gave ear unto the^. Where, although (...), in it self does ^ignifie a Circle;
yet (...), cannot be properly interpreted, round about the Altar, so as there
was no part thereof which was not compassed with the people: no more than if a
man should say, that he had seen the King sitting in his throne, and all his
Noblemen about him, it needs, or could be thought, that the throne was placed
in the very middle of the Presence; as many of the Nobles being behind him, as
there was before him. And certainly, if the man of God in the description of
God's throne in the kingdom of Heaven, had any reference or resemblance (as no
doubt he had) unto the thrones of kings on earth; we have hit right enough
upon the meaning of (...) in the aforesaid Council: it being said in the 4th
chapter of the Revelat^ on, verse 6. that round about the throne, (...), were
four beasts full of ^yes; and chap. 7. ver. 11. that all the Angels stood
(...), round about the throne. So that for all is said in the fifth Council of
Constantinople, the Altar might and did stand at the end of the Chancel,
although the people came together about it to hear the Diptychs; i. e. the
Commemoration of those famous Prelates, and other persons of chief note, which
had departed in the faith. The like mistake there is, if it be lawful so to
say, in the words of S. Austin. That which has been alleged from him, being
the 46 Sermon, not the 42, is this, CHRISTVS quotidie pas^it. Mensa ipsius est
illa in medio constituta. Quid causae est O Audientes, ut mensam videatis, and
ad epulas non accedatis. Which BP. Jewel thus trans^lateth, Christ feeds us
daily, and this is his Table here set in the midst. O my hearers, what is the
matter, that ye see the table, and yet come not to the meat. But clearly,
Mensa illa in medio constituta, is not to be interpreted, The table set here in
the midst, as it is translated, but The table which is here before you:
According to the usual meaning of the Latin phrase, afferre in medium; which
is not to be construed thus, to bring a thing precisely into the middle, but to
bring it to us, or before us. As for that passage from Durandus, where it is
said, that he examining the cause, why the Priest turns himself about at the
Altar, ye^^ds this reason for it, In medio Ecclesiae aperui os meum: that
proves not that the Altar stood in the midst of the Church, but that the
Priests stood at the midst of the Altar. It is well known, that many hundred
years before he was borne, the Altars generally stood in the Christian
Churches, even as now they do.

6 NOw that we may as well say somewhat in maintenance of the Altars standing
in the East part of the Church; as we have answered those autorities which
were produced by the Epistoler, for planting of it in the middlest we will
allege one testimony, and no more but one, but such a one as shall give very
good assurance of that general usage, and in brief is this: Socrates in his
Ecclesiastical History, lib. 5. c. 21. speaking of the different customs in
the Christian Church, says of the Church of Antioch, the chief City of
Syria, that it was built in different manner from all other Churches. How so?
(...)* Because the Altar was not placed to the Eastward, but to the Westward.
Nicephorus, Hist. lib. 12. cap. 24. observes it generally of all the Altars in
that City, and note's withal, that they were situate in a different manner
from all other Altars. And howsoever possibly in some other places which they
knew not of, the Altars might stand Westward, as they did in Antioch, or to
some other point of heaven, as the North, or South, if any stood so: yet it is
manifest by this, that in the general practice of the Church, the Altars used
to stand to the Eastward only. So that for ought appears unto the contrary in
this Epistle, the Vicar of Gr. might very safely hold his three Conclusions, at
the first remembered. First, that an Altar may be used in the Christian Church;
Secondly, that the Table may stand Altar-wise, the Minister officiating at the
North-end thereof; And thirdly, that the Table may stand constantly in the
upper part of the Chancell, close along the wall, not to be taken down,
either in the First, or Second Service, especially, if the Mini^ter there
standing may be seen and heard of all the Congregation. With the which Summarie
of mine I had concluded this reply, had I not found this Item given unto the
Vicar in the close of all, that by that time he had gained more experience in
the cure of Souls, he should find no such Ceremony, as Christian Charity.
Where if his meaning be, that Christian Charity is in it self more precious
than any Ceremony, no doubt it will be easily grante^: it being by St. ^aul
preferred before Faith and Hope. But if he mean, that they which have the
cure of Souls should rather choose to violate all the Orders of holy Church,
and neglect all the Ceremonies of the same; then give offense unto the
Brethren, the Children of the Church, as before he called them: it is like
many other Passages before remembered, only a trick to please the people, and
p^t the reins into their hands, who are too forwards in themselves to contemn
all Ceremony, though in so doing they do break in sunder the bonds of
Charity.

7. I Have now ended with the Letter, and for your further satisfaction will
lay down somewhat, touching the ground or reason of the thing required: not in
it self, for that is touched upon before, but as it either does relate unto
the King, the Metropolitan, or in your case, the Ordinary, which requires it
from you. For the true ground whereof you may please to know, that in the
Statute 1^. Eliz. cap. 2. whereby the Common Prayer book now in use, was
confirmed and established, it was enacted, That if there shall happen any
irreverence or contempt to be used in the Ceremonies or Rites of the Church, by
misusing the Orders appointed in the same: that then the Queens Majesty, by
the advice of her Commissioners for causes Ecclesiastical, or of the
Metropolitan, might ordeine or publish such further Ceremonies or Rites as may
be most for the advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and
the due reverence of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments. A power not
personal to the Queen only, when she was alive; but such as was to be
continued also unto her successors. So that in case the Common Prayer book
had determined positively, that the Table should be placed at all times in the
middle of the Church or Chancell, which is not determined of; or that the
Ordinary of his own authority, could not have otherwise appointed, which yet
is not so: the Kings most excellent Majesty, on information of the irreverent
usage of the holy Table by all sorts of people (as it has been accustomed in
these latter days) in sitting on it in time of Sermon, and otherwise
profanely abusing it, in taking Accounts, and making Rates and such like
businesses; may by the last clause of the said Statute, for the due reverence
of Christ's holy Mysteries and Sacraments, with the advice and counsel of his
Metropolitan, command it to be placed where the Altar stood, and to be railed
about for the greater decency. For howsoever in the Act, the Queen be only
named, not her Heirs and Successors; yet plainly the authority is the same in
them, as it was in her; which may be made apparent by many Arguments drawn
from the Common Law, and the Act it self. First, from the purpose of that
clause, which was to fence the Rites and Cereremonies of the Church, then used,
from all irreverence and contempt: and for the publishing of such other Rites
and Ceremonies, as might in further time be found convenient, for the
advancement of Gods glory, the edifying of his Church, and the procurement of
due reverence to Christ's holy Sacraments. But seeing that the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Church, were not only subject unto Irreverence and contempt
in the said Queens time, but are, and have been slighted, and irreverently
abused in time of her Successors: the Act had ill provided for the Churches
safety, in case, the power of rectifying what was amise, either by ordering of
new Rites, or stablishing the old, did not belong as well to her Successors, as
it did to her. Next, from the very phrase and style which is there used. For
it is said, the Queen, with the advice of the Metropolitan might ordeine and
publish, etc. the Queen indefinitely, and the Metropolitan indefinitely, If
then by Queen indefinitely be only meant, the person of the Queen then
being, not her Heirs and Successors; by Metropolitan indefinitely, we must
also mean the Metropolitan then being, and not his Successors: and then the
power here given the Queen, had been determined with the death of
Archbishop Parker, which was some 28 years before her own. Thirdly, from
another clause in the self same Act, where it is said, that If any person
being twice convict (of depraving the book of Common Prayer, etc.) shall off
end again the third time, and be thereof lawfully convict, he shall forfeit
for his third offense, to our Sovereign Lady the Queen, all his Goods and
Chattels, etc. where, though the Queen be only named, the penalty of the Law
(...) be, and is most justly taken by her Heirs and Successors; or else there
were no remedy, at this time, by the Laws provided, for the third Contempt.
Fourthly, from the usual form of those Acts and Statutes, which were made
purposely for the particular and personal profit, safety, and advantage of
the said Queen, which are distinguished from others by this note or Character,
viz. This Act to continue, during the Queens Majesty's life that now is only.
Such is the Act, against rebellio^s assemblies, 1. Eliz. cap. 16. Those against
such as shall rebelliously take, or conspire to tak^ from the Queens Majesty
any of her Towers, Castles, etc. 14. Eliz. cap. 1. And against such, as shall
conspire, or practice the enlargement of any Prisoner committed for High
Treason. cap. 2. That against seditious, Word^ and Rumors uttered against the
Queen^s most excellent Majesty. 23. Eliz. ca. 2. And finally, that for the
safety of the Queens royal person, and the continuance of the Realm in Peace,
An ^. 27. ca. 1. In the which last, although it be not said expressly that it
shall dure no longer the^ her natural life, yet the word, Person, in effect,
does declare as much. Fifthly, from a resolution in the Law, in a case much
like: it being determined by that great Lawyer Ploydon, that if a man give
Lands to the King by deed enrolled, a Fee^ simple does pass, without these
words, Successors and Heirs; because in judgment of Law, The King never
dies. Coke on Lit^. page 9. b. And last of all, it may be argued, that the
said clause or any thing therein contained, is not indeed Introductorie of any
new power, which was not in the Crown before; but rather Declaratorie of an
old, which anciently did belong to all Christian Kings (as before any of them
to the Kings of Judah) and among others to ours also: who, with the C^unsell of
their Prelate^, and other Clergy, might, and did induce such Rites and
Ceremonies into the Churches of, and in their several kingdoms, as were
thought most convenient for God's public Service; till at the last, all
Ecclesiastical authority was challenged and usurped by the Sea of Rome. Which
is the answer and determination of Sir Robert Coke, in Cawdries case, being the
fifth part of his Reports, entitled, De jure Regis Ecclesiastico; where he
affirms, that if the Act of Parliament, 1^. Eliz. 2. cap. 1. whereby it was
enacted, That all Ecclesiastical power and authority, which heretofore had
been, or might lawfully be exercised or used for the visitation of the
Ecclesiastical state, and persons, and for reformation of all, and all manner
Errors, Heresies, Schisms, Abuses, and Contempts, Offenses, and Enormities,
should be for ever united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm:
Was not an Act introductory of a new law, but confirmative of an old, for that
this Act does not annex any jurisdiction to the Crown, but that which was in
truth, or of right ought to be by the ancient Laws of the Realm, parcel of
the Kings Jurisdiction, and united to the crown Imperial. By this Authority
the Altars were first taken down in King Edwards reign, though countenanced
and allowed of in the Common Prayer Book, then by Law established; the better,
as the cause is pleaded by Bishop Ridley, to avoid superstition, Acts and
Monum. Part. 2. page 700. and by the same, or by that mentioned, 1 ^. Eliz.
cap. 2. his Majesty now being, might appoint the Table to be set up, where
formerly the Altar stood, (had it been otherwise determined in the Rubric, as
indeed it is not) to avoid profaneness.

8. I Will add one thing more for your satisfaction, which perhaps you know
not; And that is, that his sacred Majesty has hereupon already declared his
pleasure, in the Case of Saint Gregory's Church near Saint Paul's in London,
and thereby given encouragement to the Metropolitans, Bishops, and other
Ordinaries, to require the like in all the Churches committed to them. Which
resolution of his Majesty, faithfully copied out of the Registers of his
Councell-Table, I shall present herewith unto you, and so commend my self to
you, and us all to the grace of God in JESUS CHRIST.

At Whitehall, the third of November. 1633.
Present, the KINGS most excellent Majesty.
Lo: Archbish. of Cant. Lo: Keeper. Lo: Archbish. of York. Lo: Treasurer. Lo:
Privy Seal. Lo: Duke of Le^nox. Lo: High Chamberlain. Ear. Marshall. Lo:
Chamberlain. Ear: of Bridgewater. Ear: of Carlisle. Lo: Cottington. Mr.
Treasurer. Mr. Comptroller. Mr. Secretary Cook. Mr. Secret. Windebanke.
THis day was debated before his Majesty, sitting in Co^nsell, the Question
and Difference which grew about the Removing of the Communion Table in Saint
Gregory's Church, near the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul, from the middle of
the Chancell to the upper end, and there placed Altar-wi^e, in such manner as
it stands in the said Cathedralls and Mother Church, (as also in all other
Cathedralls, and in his Majesty's own Chapel) and as is consonant to the
practice of approoved Antiquity. Which removal, and placing of it in that
sort, was done by Order of the Deane and Chapter of St. Paul's, who are
Ordinaries thereof, as was avowed before his Majesty by Doctor King, and
Doctor Montfort, two of the Prebends there. Yet some few of the Parishioners,
being but five in number, did complain of this Act by Appeal to the Court of
Arches, pretending that the Book of Comm^n-prayer, and the 82. Canon do give
permi^sion to place the Communion Table, where it may stand with most fitness
and convenience. Now his Majesty having heard a particular relation made by
the Counsel of both parties, of all the carriage and proceedings in this
cause, was pleased to declare his dislike of all Innovation, and receeding from
ancient Constitutions, grounded upon just and war^antable reasons, especially
in matters concerning Eccle^iasticall Orders and Government, knowing how easily
men are drawn to affect Novelties, and how soon weak judgments in such
cases may be overtaken and abused. And he was also pleased to observe, that if
those few Parishioners might have their wills, the difference thereby (...) of
the neerene^s of St. Gregory's, standing close to the wall thereof. And
likewise, for so much as concerns the liberty given by the said Common book,
or Canon, for placing the Communion Table in any Church or Chapel with most
conveniencie; that liberty is not so to be understood, as if it were ever left
to the discretion of the Parish, much less to the particular fancy of any
humerous person, but to the judgment of the Ordinary, to whose place and
function it does properly belong to give direction in that point, both for the
thing it self, and for the time, when and how long, as he may find cause.
Upon which consideration his Majesty declared himself, That he well approved
and confirmed the Act of the said Ordinary, and also gave commandment, that
if those few Parishioners before mentioned, do proceed in their said Appeal,
then the Deane of the Arches, (who was then attending at the hearing of the
Cause) shall confirm the said Order of the aforesaid Deane and Chapter.

A COPY OF THE LETTER WRITTEN to the Vicar of GR: against the placing of the
Communion Table at the East end of the Chancell.
SIR,
WIth my very hearty Commendations. When I spoke with you last, I told you that
the standing of the Communion Table, was unto me a thing so indifferent, that
unless offense and vmbrages were taken by the Town against it, I should never
move it, or remove it. That which I did not then suspect, is come to pass. The
Alderman whom I have known this 17. or 18. years, to be a discreet and
modest man, and far from any ^umour of (...) together with the better sort of
the Town, have compl^^ned against it: And I have (without taking notice of
your Act, or touching in one ^^llable upon your reputation) ^ppointed the
Church Wa^dens (whom it (...) does concern under the (...)) to settle it for
this time, as you may see by this Copy enclosed.

Now for your own satisfaction, and my poor advise for the future, I have
written unto you somewhat more at large, then I use to express my self in
this kind.

I do therefore (to deal plainly) like many things well, and disallow of
some things in your carriage of the business. It is well done that you affect
decency and comeliness, in the officiating of GOD's Divine Ser^ice; That you
president your self with the forms in his Majesty's Chapels, and the Quires
of Cathedral Churches (if your Quire, as those others, could contain your
whole congregation;) that you do the reverence appointed by the Canon to the
blessed name of JESUS, so it be done humbly, and not affectedly, to procure
Devotion, not derision of your Parishioners, and that you do not maintain it
Rationibus non cogentibus, and so spoil a good Cause with bad arguments. These
things I do allow and practice. But that you should be so violent and earnest
for an Altar at the upper end of the Quire; That the Table ought to stand
Altarwise; That the fixing thereof in the Quire is Canonical, and that it ought
not to be removed to the body of the Church; I conceive to be in you so many
mistakings.

For the first, if you should erect any such Altar, which (I know you will not)
your discretion will prove the only Holocaust to be sacrificed thereon. For
you have subscribed when you came to your place, that That other Oblation which
the Papists were wont to offer upon their Altars, is a Blasphemous figment, and
pernicious imposture, in the thirty one Article: And also, that we in the
Church of England ought to take heed, lest our Communion of a memory, be made a
Sacrifice: In the first Homily of the Sacrament. And it is not the Vicar, but
the Churchwardens, that are to provide for the Communion, and that not an
Altar, but a fair joined Table: Canons of the Convocation, 1571. page 18. And
that the Altars were removed by Law, and Tables placed in their stead, in all,
or the most Churches in England, appears by the Queens Injunctions, 1559.
related unto, and so confirmed in that point by our Canons still in force. And
therefore (I know) you will not change a Table into an Altar, which Vicars were
never enabled to set up, but allowed once with other's to pull down.
Injunction of 1^. Elizab. for Tables in the Church.

For the second point. That your Communion Table is to stand Altar-wise, if you
mean in that place of the Chancell, where the Altar stood, I think somewhat
may be said for that; because the Injunctions 1559. did so place it; And I
conceive it to be the most decent situation, when it is not used, and for use
too, where the Quire is mounted up by steps, and open, so that he that
officiates may be s^ene and heard of all the Congregation. Such an one I hear
your Chancell is not. But if you mean by Altar-wise, that the Ta^le should
stand along close by the wall, so as you be forced to officiate at one end
thereof (as you may have observed in great m^ns Chapels:) I do not believe
that ever the Communion Tables were (otherwise than by casualtie) so placed in
Country Churches. For, besides that, the Countrey-people would suppose them
Dressers, rather than Tables; And that Qu. Elizabeth's Comissioners for causes
Ecclesiastical, directed that the Table should stand, not where the Altar, but
where the steps of the Altar formerly stood. Orders 1561. The Minister
appointed to read the Communion (which you, out of the book of Fast in 1^. of
the King, are pleased to call, Second Service) is directed to read the
Commandments, not at the end, but at the North-side of the Table, which
implies the end to be placed toward the East great Window, Rubric before the
Communion. Nor was this a new direction in the Queens time only, but
practiced in king Edward's reign, for in the plot of our Liturgy sent by Mast
Knox, and Whittingham to Mas^er Calvin in the reign of Queen Mary, it is
said, that the Minister must stand at the North-side of the Table. Troubles at
Frankford. page 30. And so in King Edward's Liturgies, the Ministers standing
in the midst of the Altar, 1549. is turned to his standing at the North-side
of the Table, 1552. And this last Liturgy was revived by Parliament, 1^. Eliz.
cap. 2. And I believe it is so used at this day in the most places of England.
What you saw in Chapels, or Cathedral Churches is not the point in question,
but how the Tables are appointed to be placed in Parish Churches. In some of
the Chapels and Cathedrals, the Altars may be still standing, for ought I
know; or to ma^e use of their Covers and Ornaments, Tables may be placed in
their room, of the same length and fashion the Altars were of. We kn^w the
Altars stand still in Lutheran Chu^ches; And the Apology for the Augustan
Confession, Art. 12. does allow it. The Altars stood a year or two in King
Edwards times, as appears by the Liturgy print^a 1549. and it seems the
Queens Commissioners were content they should stand, as w^e may guess by the
Injunctions, 1559. But how is this to be understood? The Sacrifice of the Altar
abolished, these (call them what you will) are no more Altars, but Tables of
Stone or Timber; and so was it alleged 24 Novem. 4^. Edw. 6. 1549. Sublato
enim relativo formali, manet obsolutum and materiale tantum. And so may be well
used in Kings and Bishops houses, where there are no people so void of
understanding, as to be scandalized. For upon the Orders of breaking down
Altars, all Diocesses did agree upon receiving Tables, but not upon the fashion
and form of the Tables. Acts and Monum. page 1212. Besides that, in the old
Testament, one and the same thing is termed an Altar and a Table. An Altar, in
respect of what is there offered unto God, and a Table in respect of what is
there participated by men, as for example, by the Priests; So have y^u Go^'s
Altar; the very same with God's Table in Malachie 1. v. 7. The place is worth
the marking. For it Answers that very Obj^ction out of Heb. 13. 10. which you
made to some of your fellow Ministers; and one Master Morgan before you to
Peter Martyr, in a Disputation at Oxford. We have no Altar in regard of an
Oblation, but we have an Altar in regard of Participation, and Communion
granted unto us. The use of an Altar is to Sacrifice upon, and the use of a
Table is to eat upon; and because Communion is an Action most proper for a
Table, as an Oblation is for an Altar, therefore the Church in her Liturgy,
and Canons, calling the same a Table only, do not you call it an Altar? In
King Edwards Liturgy of 1549. it is every where, but in that of 1552. it is no
where called an Altar, but the Lords Board. Why? Because the people being
scandalized herewith in Country Churches, first beats them down de facto,
then the supreme Magistrates by a kind of Law puts them down de jure, and
setting Tables in their rooms, took from us, the Children of the Church and
Commonwealth, both the name and the nature of former Altars, as you may see.
Injunction 1559. referring to that or^er of King Edward in his Council
mentioned, Acts and Monum. page 1211. And I hope you have more Learning than to
conceive the Lords Table to be a new name, and so to be ashamed of the Name.
For, besides that CHRIST himself instituted this Sacrament upon a Table, and
not upon an Altar, as Archbishop Cranmer observes, and others, Act* and Monum.
page 1211. it is in the Christian Church 200 years more ancient, than the name
of an Altar, as you may see most learnedly prooved out of Saint Paul, Origin,
and Arnobius, if you do but read a Book that is in your Church, Jewel
against Harding of Private Mass. Art. 3. p. 143. And whether this name of
Altar crept into the Church in a kind of complying in phrase with the people
of the Jews, as I have read in Chemnitius, Gerardus, and other sound
Protestants, (yet such as suffer Altars to stand); or that it proceed from
these Oblations made upon the Communion Table, for the use of the Priest, and
the poor, whereof we read in Justin Martyr, Iraeneus, Tertullian, and other
ancient Writers; or because of the Sacrifice of Praise, and Thankesgiving, as
Archbishop Cranmer, and others thought, Acts and Monuments, page 1211. the
name being now so many years abolished, it is fitter in my Judgment, that the
Altar (if you will needs so call it) should according to the Canon, stand
Tablewise, than your Table to trouble the poor Town of Gr. because erected
otherwise.

Lastly, that your Table should stand in the higher part of the Church, you
have my assent already in opinion: but that it should be there fixed, is so
far from being Canonical, that it is directly against the Canon. For what is
the Rubric of the Church, but a Canon? And the Rubric says, it shall stand
in the body of the Church, or of the Chancell, where Morning prayer, and
Evening prayer be appointed to be read; If therefore Morning and Evening prayer
be app^inted to be read in the body of the Church, (as in most country
Churches it is) where shall the Table stand most Canonically? And so is the
Table made removeable, when the Communion is to be celebrated, to such place as
the Minister may be most conveniently hea^d by the Communicants, by Qu. Eliz.
Injunct. 1559. And so says the Canon in force, that in the time of the
Communion, the Table shall be placed in so good sort within the Church and
Chancel, as thereby the Minister may be more conveniently heard, Can. 82. Now
judge you (...) and you shall be satisfied. Jewel against Harding of private
Mass. Art. 3. p. 145. The Sum of all is this.

1. You may not erect an Altar, where the Canons only admit a communi^n Table.

2. This Table must not stand Altarwise, and you at the North end thereof, but
Tablewise, as you must officiate at the Northside of the same.

3. This Ta^le o^ght to be laid up (decently covered) in the Chancell only,
as I suppose, but ought not to be officiated upon, either in the first or
second Service (as you (...)) but in that place of the Church or Chancell,
where you may be seen and heard of all; Though peradventure you be with ^im in
Tacitus, Master of your own, yet are you not of other men's ears; and
therefore your Parishioners must be Judges of your audiblenesse in this case.

Whether side soever (you or your Parish) shall yield to the other, in this
needless Controversy, shall remain, in my poor iudg^ment, the more
discreet, grave, and learned of the two: And by that time you have gained some
more Experience in the Cure of Souls, you shall find no such Ceremony, as
Christian Charity; which I recommend unto you, and a^ ever, etc.

FINIS.

