A merry Ballad of a rich Maid that had 18. several Suitors of several
Countries: otherwise called the scornful Maid. To the tune of, hoop do me no
harm good man.


I Am a young less, and my time does so pass,
That of late I did long for to marry*
I have for my dear five hundred a year,
And yet for all that I will tarry.
I had with a Scot, m^ckle many I w^^,
He strou^ed with ^apier and Poniard:
He is laid with fine lase, but I like not his face,
(...) fear he has lost his Whiniard.
Then came one from France who bra^ely could dance,
He is proper in every joint:
Yet in his Country, he escaped well the P^e,
So well he did cut the cross point,
A Signiour Spaniore, is late come ore,
And he thinks that he has no fellow,
He is ^ot in the Re^ne, and has got a strain,
By da^cing in a Bandello.
Then came a Duch-man can teuse well the can,
Till his head be as light as a feather:
The Spaniard had's Punck, and the Dutchman was drunk,
And so they went both together.
An Italian came post, and full well he can bost,
But I like no such fond fellows:
If I were his wife he should lead an ill life,
(...) I do like none so jealous.
From Rome one came to me, who daily did woe me
He fasted three days in the w^^ke,
But when prayer is done, if he spy a fair Nun,
His stomach is wonder full quick.
A troublesome Turk, did make hasty work,
But his suite it was quickly ended:
I scornd his belief, and so to be brief,
He did return home offended.
Then next a brave Dane, came marching amain,
But I answered him as the rest,
That he could not prevail, so he hoyst up his sail,
For his nose could abide no jest.
From Ireland I had a (...) brave lad,
Each Limb was proportioned mighty:
Truth was he was poor) yet I gave him over,
Cause his breath stunke of Aquauity.
From Sw^thland resorted, a man well reported
And he made a proffer to woe me:
His neck was so big, and so small was his leg,
That since he would never come to me.
From Rushia likewise, in an^^^k disguise,
One came which did think to obtain me:
But his hair and his hood, against my mind stood
Therefore he shall never gain me.
The Second Part of the scornful Maid. To the same tune.


A Grecian one day, my love did assay,
(Who stands at every Church doore^)
I never respected though he me affected,
I had rather turn fiddlers whore.
An Almaine Rut spide me, and presently tried me,
Who thought I would yield at the first:
But I could not abide he should lie by my side,
For some say they are devilish and ^urst.
From Pol did come hither in Summers hot weather,
He strutted and stalk't with a grace:
So soon as I spide him I could not abide him,
His nose was frozen of on his face.
He had a great mind, and was willing inclind,
No Nation so willing as those,
He swore and protested I gibed and ieasted,
And had him go get a new nose.
A Barbarian, a big bellied man,
Did pro^r to win me for's wife:
But I told him this, he should surely miss,
For I likt not his course of life.
From Amsterdame a vile Athiest came,
He was neither true Dutchman nor Pole:
But I do reject all that are of that sect,
For I doubt me that hell has his soul.
This hafeminded Creature does think that by nature,
Both heaven and earth is made:
He thinks there is no hell, where Athiests must
But my mind he shall not persuade.
A Gentleman of Wales did tell her fine tales,
That her had a house built on a hill,
Had Pig and had Goat, and green leek in the pot,
And could ^at good Couse bobby her ^ll.
He would keep me so brau^, if I would him have,
He would buy me a hood and a hat:
He would buy me five hose, with garters and rose,
And sweet heart how like you (...)
A English man came, but I know not his name,
And he bravely could quasse it an quarrel:
He Will drink till he bye, some says, but not I,
And sell all his lands for apparel.
If I would be his wife, he swore by his life, (...),
Ere long he would make me a Lady:
He would sell his ^^^d manners to buy him (...)
And that's but the trick of a baby.
Now which should I have, your councels I crave
If you can but find one will fit me:
The best I will take, and amends; I Will you make,
If Cupid ere then do not hit me.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London for Henry Go^^o^.


