A brief balet touching the traytorous taking of Scarborow Castle.
OH valiant inuaders gallantes gaie.
Who, with your compeeres conqueringe the route,
Castles or towrs: all standing in your way,
Ye take, controlling all estates most stout.
Yet had it now been good to look about.
(...): (...) ^aue let alone,
And take scarborow warning euerichone.
By Scarborow castle, not Scarborow:
I only mean: but further understand,
Each Hauene, each hold, or other harborow,
That our good King and Queen do hold in hand:
As dew obedience bindth us in band.
Their Scarborow castles to let a lone,
And take Scarborow warninges euerychone.
The s^alers of which castells evermore,
In books of old, and in our eyes of new:
Have always lost them selves and theirs therefore.
All this ye did forget: in time to view.
Which might have wrought both you and yours teschew:
Lettyng Scarborow castle now alone,
Taking Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
This Scarborow castle, symplie standing:
Yet could that castle slyly you begyle,
Ye thought ye took the castle: at your landyng:
The castle taking you: in the self while.
Each stone within the castle wall did smyle,
That Scarborow castle ye let not alone,
And took Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
Your puttyng now in ure your dyuylishe dream,
Has made you see (and like enough to feel)
A few false traitors can not win a reame,
Good subjects be (and will be) true as steel.
To stand with you, the end they like no deele.
Scarborow castles they can let alone,
And take Scarborow warnynges euerychone.
They know gods law: tobey their King and Queen.
Not take from them: but keep for them their own.
And give to them: when such traitors are seen
As ye are now: to bring all overthrown:
They work your overthrow, by gods power grown.
God says: let Scarborow castle alone,
Take Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
To late for you, and in time for the rest
Of your most traytorous sect (if any be)
You all are spectacles at full witnest:
As other wear to you: treason to flee.
Which in you past, yet may the rest of ye:
The said Scarborow castells let alone,
And take Scarborow warnynges euerychone.
This term Scarborow warnyng, grew (some say)*
By hasty hangyng, for rank robbry theare.
Who that was met, but suspect in that way,
Straight was he trust up: what ever he wear.
Whereupon thieves thynkyng good to forbear,
Scarborow Robbyng they let that alone,
And took Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
If Robbyng in that way, bred hangyng so,
By theft to take, way, town, castle and all,
What Scarborow hangyng craves this ^o?
Wear your selves herein Judges capital:
I think your Judgments on these words must fall.
Scarborow Robbyng who letth not alone,
Scarborow hangyng deserve euerychone.
We would to god that you (and al of you)
Had but considered: as well as ye knew:
The end of all traytorie, as you see it now,
Long to have lived, loving subjects true.
Alas: your loss we not rejoice, but rue.
That Scarborow castle ye leete not alone,
And took Scarborow warnyng euerychone.
To crafts that ever thryue, wise men ever cleave.
To crafts that seeld when thryue, wise men seeld when flee.
The crafts that never thryue, a fool can learn to leave.
This thriftles crafty craft then clear leave we.
One God, one King, one Queen, serve frank and free.
Their Scarborow castle let it alone,
Take we Scarborow warning euerichone.
Our sovereign lord: and sovereign lady both.
Lawde we our lord, for their prosperitee.
Beseching him for it: as it now goth,
And to this day has gone, that it may be:
Continued so, in perpetuitee.
We lettyng their Scarborow castells alone,
Taking Scarborow warnings euerychone,
Finisque
I. Heywood.

Imprinted at London in fleetestrete by Tho. Powell. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


