THE SPIDER and the Fly.

A parable of the Spider and the Fly, made by John Heywood.

IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLEET STREET BY THO. POVVELL.

ANNO. 1556.

T. P.

I H
portrait of John Heywood

The preface.
A Parable: is properly one thing,
That of an other does conceiving bring.
Yea: (oftentims (as parables are scand,
One score of things: by one, be understand.
Each one of all: scanned and used well,
May teach the scanner good: to take and tell.
Contrarily: scanned and used ill,
Like il likewise, the fruit a mounteth until.
Wherefore, before entrance to scanning here:
In present parable here to appear,
First to induct (for to conduct) the way:
How readers and scanners: redilie may:
Right scanning (in right reading) here purchase,
Good readers: read and scan (rightly) this case.
There chaunst at once: at one fair glass to be,
Them selves tatire at once, fair women three.
Where one an other enuide: till all were dressed,
Who might (when all wear dressed) seem dressed best.
But in the time of trimming of their gear:
There foreheads striking up: broyding their hear:
Lacing and laying it: with every thing:
Lookte in the glass: directing trim trimming,
In all this time: these women euerychone,
Beheld each other: but them selves not one:
That in the glass: upon her self cast iye,
Good or ill tiring (in her self) tespie.
One hear ley low: one other lay to hie:
On this side: or on that side: clean awrie.
But hereupon: when each had other espide:
In tire atired: all a wrie or wide,
Lord in all three: what inward sport there was,
Each one to se an other, in that glass.
All three sore sweld: but be it best or wurst:
Twain must vent upward straight: or both must burst,
While margret went a side: her pins to fet,
Marian and margerie: back they both get.
To touch thatire, of margaret thus worn.
Between them twain, to laugh that third to scorn.
Marion said to Margerie: se you not,
How Meg is dressed, yes Madge (quoth she) god wot.
Might not a beetill blind beast: bring to pass:
To dress her self as well at any glass,
Yes madge: and with one Iin: I can now se:
What spots (unseen to her) in her face be.
Ye Mall (quoth Madge) I think I should il hie me:
To dress my self so ill: the glass so nie me,
God has done his part: she has a good face,
Which gift of God, her self does ill disgrace,
Marion at this: stepping fro margerie,
Margret to Margerie: stepth by and bie.
And straight of Marion: margret falth in hand:
How fer from frame: Marions attire both stand.
Madge and Meg finding fault: at marion more,
Then Madge and Marion: found at Meg before.
The third corse was: that madge did start a side:
Whearwith Marion to Meg: hastily hide.
And Margeries atyre: they set a broche,
As ill (or worse (the worle her to reproach,)
Then she was tierde in deed. Thus all these three:
Divided thrice in twain, did thrice agree:
Each twain, the third to mock and geste vpone:
Till every one, had mocked euerichone.
Each mocking others fault: they fautie all,
Each mockers mock, most on her self did fall.
This done, one of these three to the glass went:
No face but hers, then being represent.
Where: when she did her self only behold,
Her silent sight: her fore folly so told:
That marking first her self, her self she a tierde.
And then the rest, (in their atyre) desierde,
That each upon her self: would set sure iye,
Ere she cast iye on other, low or hie.
They doing so: all wear atired so,
That whether a part, or they together go:
Had they been willing: they had been unable,
Spark or spek to spy: discommendable:
Each in others atire. Which women and glass,
Are a glass, this book, and readers to compass,
In scanning sense to towch men in this book:
As glass lookers lookte: if book readers look:
He upon him: and he on him: to scan:
Sense most and best, naie most and worst they can:
Scanning who is the spider: who the fly:
Neither of either: to him self taplie:
Scanning no whit: by scanning here to se:
In case spiders: in case flies: all scand may be,
Glass looking: and book reading: in such wise,
May well be scand, one like vain exersise.
Who that this parable does thus define,
This parable thus, is his and not mine,
To this, this one thing I must mind you to mind.
Concerning spiders, flies, and eke thants kind.
Wheare I: their natural operacion:
With the largest enlarge: tenlarge foundation:
Whereon I frame this top story: here to see,
As both: both in length and breadth: may most agree,
This (for this cause) strecht the more long and wide,
I pray you bear with me: wheare it is spide.
Wherein: my faut may seem sumwhat the less,
That wiser men then I (in like process,)
Have done the like and late: one wise and old:
In an old book did read (as he me told,)
That when so ever spiders, flies, and ants speak,
Their approprid properties, they likewise break.
Which if them selves do: ye will grant I hope:
That I (doing it for them) may have like scope.
Thus wishing wishinglie: in reading this,
Readers: to read and scan: all sentencis:
As we first mark and mend our selves: and then,
To mark: to mend: the fautes of other men:
Without more scanning here: I now herein,
End circumstaunce, the substance to begin.
FINIS.
ornament
THE TABLE.
THe Introduction to the matter, showing how the fly chaunsed to fall in the
spiders copweb. Cap. primu^, The lamentacion of the fly, with declaracion
(partly) of the property of Fortune, and of his own estate past and present.
Cap. 2. The dreadful wonder of the spider, at sudden shakinge of his copweb.
Cap. 3. The spider taking comfort, enters in quarrel with the fiie. Cap. 4.
The spider sterting into his house to comfort his shoushold, the fly deuiseth
what way to escape the danger of the spider. Cap. 5. The spider being
returned to the fly, after a few words between them had, the fly sewth to
the spider to be herd speak which he grants. Cap. 6. The oracion of the
fly to the spider, commending justice, and just iusticers, requiring to have
his cause heard thoroughly and adjudged justly. Cap. 7. The spider grants
the fly both to here and adiudge this case, as may most agreably stand with
reason, law, custom, and conscience. Cap. 8. They stand both in hope to
convince each other by just cause, the fly praying the spiders pardon, of such
rude speech and all behavior, as he may chance to ouershoote himself in,
the which the spider does grant. Cap. 9. They enter into the principal
argument. The fly supposing no lawful proof by wintesse of any ill there
against him: the spider allegeth the contrary. The fly (upon occasion,)
requiring to be bailde under surety, the spider denies it. Cap. 10. The
spider charge the fly, first with burglarie, which the fly answers unto:
than the spider charge him with single felony, which the fly reasons
unto. Cap. 11. The spider (in a manner) grants, that the fly came into the
copweb against the flies own will. which the spider so grants, for such
policy forthwith appering: as seems to wei sore against the fly. Cap. 12.
The fly herewith is abashed. but a none he gathers him self to a stay
showing a reason, that makes a manifest show cleerelie to overthrow the
spiders foresaid policy. Cap. 13. The spider checketh the fly for his
comparing above the spider in knowledge of law and custom. which the fly
meyntey neth by one reason comunlie reported. Whereupon the spider perseyuing
the polisie for which he seemed to grant the fly to cum against his will:
takes little or no place, that much weakeniug his part he drives the fly to
draw back that grant. Chapter. 14. They reason a fresh to try whether the
fly came in to the spiders copweb with or against his will. Cap. 15 They
continue in pursewte of trial whether the fly came thither willingly or
vnwyllynglie so fer, that the Fly at length offreth to take a book oath, that
he came against his will. Cap. 16. The spider not admitting the fly to his
oath, the fly bringth in the strength of the affirmative for his part: against
the negative on the spiders side. Whereunto adjoined his other reasons laid in
discharge of charge past, he hops according to Justice promised, to be
straight discharged. Cap. 17 The spider upon a case in law touching
thaffirmatiue, takes hold to deteyne the fly still in possession: but yet
under promise of justice before promised. Cap. 18. The spider, seeing that he
cannot take full hold of the fly in case of burglarie, nor felony: he
charge him now with trespass, to which the fly reasons. Cap. 19 The spider
(at the flies answering him to a question) charge the fly with procuring of
other flies to disturb him in his copwebs: which the fly denithe. Cap. 20.
They fall in comparison touching their evidence written or unwritten. Whereunto
the fly lays prescripcion of custom: which he before (alleged) supposing
thereby, that the spider ought both to deliver him, and make him amends. Cap.
21. The spider denith the flies description of custom, alleginge the saying
of ancient spiders for his intereste by custom. wherein anon both showing
each to give small credit to other, the fly moves to put the mattier in
arbiterment: which. (as yet,) the spider does not grant. Cap. 22 The fly
(after a few words conserning a peale) does briefly recapitulate, the
effect passed in the principal case. Cap. 23. The spider puts a case in a
peale ill (in a parence) for the fly: as the spider drawth it, and a none, he
by example of the Lords will had in cortes of coppie hold, seming to lean
toward will: the fly laboreth to qualify that will. Cap. 24. The fly
cleymeth all hooles in all windows to be flies in freeholde: and that spiders
should build by the sides or in the tops: which case to be tried by law or
custom, they in manner agree: but the fly moving it to be tried at the common
law, the spider refuses it. whereupon arises matter of digression, in which
the fly commends the spider for expedite heringe hereof, briefly definyng the
properties of justice, mercy, and tirannie. Cap. 25. The fly (for cause here
appering) desires to repete his distinction of justice, mercy, and tirannie,
which the spider denies. Wherewith the fly layth to the spider, breche of
promise made to him before. In discharge whereof, the spyder answers. Cap. 26.
The spider (reducing the fly to the principal matter) moves the trial to be
had in his own lordeship. which the fly misliketh. Whereon ensues a glaunce
at the diversity of government, between one spider and twelve flies. Cap. 27.
They agree to be tried by arbiterment, whether all or how many hooles in all
windows belong to spiders, and how many to flies. The spider chosing for
his part, the ant or pismere, the fly choosinge for his side, the butterfly.
Whereupon they, the one couple in one part, and the other couple in an other part,
talk together forthwith. Cap. 28. The spider to the ant, and fly to butterlie
(after words of greetinge) declare, that they are chosen their arbiters here
in: wherein the ant and butterlie promise to do their best. And they then anon
draw all four together in (or at) the copweb. Cap. 29. The spider declares,
and the fly grants the issue to be, that all flies claim (in freehoolde)
all hooles in all windows to be theyrs by custom. And spiders claim all
hooles with all parts of all windows to be their freeholde by custom. And
after talk between them therein had, the ant requires full instruction of the
two parties to them two arbiters. Cap. 30. They (in couples separate again)
declare each how he would have his arbiter handle his part: and first is here
told the tale of the spider to the ant. Cap. 31. The tale of the fly to the
butterfly how he shall use the flies part: which done, the arbiters
withdraw them selves toward the top of the window. Cap. 32. The ant and the
butterfly met together in the top of the wyndow, certain spiders on their one
side: and certain flies on their other side, Tharbiters command them to
stand back while they two talk together. Cap. 33. Thant declaring the cause
of that meeting, the spiders and flies acknowledginge the same, and that they
come to give evidence, the flies are appointed to depart while the spiders first
show, what they can say for their part. Cap. 34. After a few words between
the ant and the butterflye, one spider as might be for all, declares to those
two tharbiters, all evidence that all spiders for their part can devise. And
that done, the spiders are commanded away, and the flies bidden to approach.
Cap. 35. Upon a short talk between the arbiters, one fly: spokes fly for
all flies, discloseth all evidence for their part: wherewith the flies at
commandment depart aside. Cap. 36. The arbiters (in debating theuidence on
both parts given) can not otherwise agree, but that the same weyth eue^ as
much for the tone part as for the the other. At end whereof, they call again all
the said sort. Cap. 37. The ant shewth to them all, that theuidence weyth to
one effect on both sides. So that all rests now upon knowledge which part
to credit most: and upon that mocion, one spider and one fly fall in
argument to try the same: wherein is touchte (partly) the properties of
credence, woorship, and honesty. They agreeing that credence standth upon
honesty: as thus. as every spider or fly is honest, so is he credible. Which
talk ended; they are all again sequestered. Cap. 38. By thantes prouocacion
the butterfly repeteth thargument before made: in his gross terms, not fer
from full. And they twain seeming to agree upon the point herein, they
command the spiders and flies back again. Cap. 39. Thant telth them, that
where theuidence for both sides goth to one effect, and that in debatinge which
side is most credible to awarde the window unto, it is concluded, that credence
standth upon honesty: and that as all spiders and flies are honest, so are
they credible: now must it first be tried, which side is most honest: thereon
to iu^ge which side is most credible. Cap. 40. One spider and one fly
reasoning which side is most honest agreeing (in conclusion) that thonestie on
both sides appears to them ^wo: to be one, that fly requires the arbiters
to ponder the case as they shall think good. Cap. 41. Tharbiters commanding
all to go aparte again, they fall in talking somewhat at large touching both
credence and honesty in both these sides. which done, to show therein their
minds, they call all before them again. Cap. 42. The ant tells them, that
they two determine thonestie o^ both sides to be one. Willing them to go
forth in the matter. wherewith one tart taunting spider: and one sharp saucie
fly, forbearing till this time (with much pain) speaking or rather railing,
stand now forth (upon tip toes) to ^hop logike each with other in rude
reasoning of this case. Cap. 43* Where an other spider and fly reasoned late
before to prove which side of both is most honest, this said quareling spider
and cocking fly, labor to prove which part of both is most dishonest: in
words and deeds. As by usurpation in windows and other misbehauiour. At
end whereof infurious fumes, thence ^onth the spider one way, and the fly
flingth an other. Cap. 44. After a few words, which the ant speaks to the
rest of both sorts there, they are assigned to stand back again: while
tharbiters gather out of this railing, ^uche reasons as they can. Cap. 45.
Tharbiters consider in this said taunting talk, that sundry dishonest abuses
there are in s^dry parties on b^th sides. vp^ their agreement of conclusion
wherein, they have before them those other spiders and flies again. Cap. 46.
Thant declarth to those spiders and flies, that the tales of the pearte spider
and fly before told, do charge each others part in such sort, that they cannot
say which side is most dishonest. but they two adiudge clereli in dishonest
things, both sides of like dishonestie. Wherewith they all avoided back
again, tharbiters talk to fall to apoint between them selves what report
finally and fully to make. Cap. 47. Tharbiters being agreed on their report,
they call to them again the spiders and the flies. Cap. 48. Thant shewth them,
that the butterfly and he are at point what to report. devising it to be
reported before the head spider and the fly in the copweb: the two principal
parties. And to have with them to here and witness their report, two spiders
and two flies, witty and discrete. And the rest to stay there till their
return. Which being agreed, they set forth straight to the said copweb. Cap.
49. The ant associete with the said sort pronounces at length (to the spider
and fly in the copweb) this brief effect. That in as much as on both sides
the evidence is one, and that the cre^ence is one, by thonestie being one, they
two can (in reason) no way try how to lay thaccustomed right more on the one
side then on the other, they finally leave the case even at liberty, as they
found it. And so depart to the place of abitreme^t again. Cap. 50. Thant and
butterfly set where they had sit, thant repeteth to those spiders and flies,
the report made by him at the said copweb. At end whereof, the spiders and
flies, seeing that time spent all in vain, each side among them selfs fall
in mourmuring. Cap. 51. Upon the spiders and the flies mutring murmering,
sodenlie there cum nie about them: a wonderful nombre of all manner of flies:
in their warlike manner. Whereat with twynke of an iye (as it were) the head
spider (with a great nombre of spiders,) has builded a strong castle in that
copweb. With ordinance and weapons and spiders ready in order of defense. Cap.
52* This huge heap of flies light about tharbiters. Apprehending thant,
casting a halter about his neck: drawing him to their tree of reformacion (as
they call it) to hang him straight. But at his suit to be hard speak ere he
die, on fli flees into the tree, wherewith the captain commands silence.
Cap. 53. The fly in the tree: to perswarde the flies to here the ant speak,
wadeth honestly, politiklie to a lewre them, to quiet heryng of the ant before
they put him to death. His which tale told, he remoueth to his place again.
Cap. 54. The flies former fine tale, nowh^t sturreth the gross flies to the
hearing of the ant. Whereupon the butterfly (that was an arbiter) flees into
the tree: laboring the flies to have the ant heard speak ere he die. Cap. 55.
The butterfly (to get thant to be heard) telth his tale in such rude manner and
matter, that anon he setth them all (welnie) together by the ears. But upon
his gross tale grosely told, (much more lyked then the flies fine^ tale) they
grant to hers the fly speak. Cap. 56. The ant prayth to be herd speak
thorowlie before any part of his tale be adjudged. And then they to adiudge
the whole as standth with equite. First alleging matter to clear himself from
offending the flies. Finally geuinge them (as it seems) freendli counsel,
(touching this strife) grounded upon this common saying: before thou ought
begin, have an iye to the end. Cap. 57. Thant has set the flies in such fear
of the spiders, that most are ready to run away, whom to stay, the captain
fly deuiseth thant to set the spiders in like fear of them: by a tale told
on the same ground that he told this: in pain of hanging at his return.
Cap. 58. Thant after enter in talk (before the head spider) he to him, and all
the spiders (upon this said ground: ere thou ought begin: have a iye to the
end,) inueyth what he can to set the spiders in fear of the flies. Cap. 59.
Tha^t having brought the spiders in great fear of the multitude of flies, the
head spider taking great displeasure with the ant for the same, he answers
thantes tale so that he brings all the spiders in courage again. Geuinge (in
his own name and all theyrs,) defiance to the flies. Cap. 60. Upon defia^ce
geuin by the spider to the flies, the ant brought again to the flies, makes
full report of all said at the copweb. At end whereof, two flies argue wether
thant have deserved life or death. By keeping or breaking former comnant to
bring the spiders in fear of the flies. Cap. 61. At end of this last
argument. The captain axing the ant what he can say? why he should not die,
the ant after a few words submits him to their order. Whereupon the
captain goinge to the question, the ant is condemde by the voice of the most
nombre. The captain then willing him to make his last prayers, he does so.
Cap. 62. While the ant says his prayers on the ladder, two ^lies thinking him
to be wrongfullie cast a way, pitteing the case, They touch (in talk) three
sorts of flies seen there then. Wherein is touched sum part of properties of
new^er flies. Cap. 63. The ant having now made his prayers, being at point to
be turned from the ladder, a fly, a far of, cries hold. Who (lighting in the
tree) brings such a message from the head spider, as the Ant (thereby) is
repride, and carried to prison. Cap. 64. The captain fly, inueith upon matter
before past: in such sort so encoraging the flies again, that anon they all
crying to the captain to march forward, they bravely set forth. And laiyng
their ordinance to the copweb castle, they besege it rownde. Cap. 65. The
flies give onset in assawte upon the castle: the spiders defending it in
furious fight. And upon the slaughter on both sides, the flies retire to their
camp. The spiders wife and childerne on knese to him beseching him to take
peace with the flies. Cap. 66. The spider having compassion on his wife and
childerne as on him self, he says that he will: with the advice of his
council, in their suit do all that may be done for the best. Cap. 67. The
spider set with twelve of his counsel, declares his wives and childerns suit
(adjoining thereunto co^cideracions of his own) for peace to be taken with the
flies. Requiring those counselors while he depart and return) to determine
what way he shall take. Cap. 68. Straight as the spider is gone, the rest
arise withdrawing a sonder in three plumpes four in a plumpe, no one knot
knowing what the rest says, which done: they all set down again against the
spiders return. Cap. 69. The spider set again with his cownsaile, in those
three said sorts, arise three diverse ways to take herin. The best one whereof
to choose, the spider departs to devise upon. Willing them to cause all
corners of that castle to be cleansed and all battred places made strong
again. Cap. 70. The flies in camp be at cownsell: desirously devising: by
what mean to get peace best. Whereupon the captain inuenting a mean to drive
tha^t to sew for peace if they will be ruled by him, they thereunto agree. And
thereupon the ant is brought before the flies. Cap. 71. The captain telth the
ant that the flies have retired from thassaute: (wheare many spiders are
slain) to se whether the spiders will sew for peace, for which since they sew
not, the flies will assaute them again. But the ant they will hang straight
before they go. Cap. 72. The Ant upon soden short warning of his death: being
much dismayde, laying all that he can for his life, and yet can get no grace,
he prayth respight: while he be brought to the spider to se whether he will
grow to any peace to saus the antes life. Which granted, the ant is brought
before the spider. Cap. 73. Thant (in way of peticion) sewinge to the spider
for peace laying considerac^ons to provoke him the rather thereto, the spider
does attentively, give the ant hering. Cap. 74. The spider (upon thants tale
told to him) alegith certain things by which he ^emeth in doubt much to
grant peace to the flies. Wherein the ant and he traversing sumwhat: anon he
grants peace to them under condition expressed, wherewith thant is brought to
the flies again. Cap. 75. Thant declaring peace: as it is granted, the flies
in much joy set the ant thankfully at liberty, and home goes he. Whereupon
the captain commands all flies to draw nere to here him speak ere they
depart. But they flee all away a few except. Cap. 76. Upon a little talk had
between the captain and the few flies there left, touching the rewdnesse
and lightness of the common sort of flies, misliking their former light lewd
demenure, they depart. The camps on both sides, clear brooken up. Cap. 77.
Thant being cum to the molehill, solemnly received of his wife, and childerne:
and a great number of ants, he telth (to them all a tale discorsinge theffect
of all his trouble, had among the spiders and flies. Willing them diligently
to mark, what he says. Cap. 78. Thant having said: what he will say, wills
all ants to note why he said, that he said. Which is to warn them by his
arms to beware, how they meddle in matters between spiders and flies. Cap.
79. Four flies (in the name of all ^lies) at the copweb, thanking the spider
for pardon and peace, declaringe the conditions and the performance on their
part) ^ew to the spider on his part, to perform his grant: in laying out
and possessing them of their limitts with half the hooles in the window, which
he grants bidding them a little time stay. in which while: he sendth the
youngest spider of his twain to the ant, praying him to cum to him again. To
divide and deliver the hooles to the flies as the spider will apoinct them.
Cap. 80. Upon this message done, thant feinth a let of his cu^ming: by a hurt
mischansing him that morning. with which answer, the young spider returns to
the old. Cap. 81 The spider after a few words to the four flies, assineth to
them all the small holes beneth. Half the holes in number: but scant the sixth
part of the room. At which they sumwhat grudge. But they must take them or
none. Cap. 82. The four flies flowne thence, the spider to the fly in prison
leith: that in all kinds of trial that day on both parts laid, he thinks
his own part approved best. as he thinks the flis would think were he a
spider, contrary judgment whereof, the fly thinks in the spider were he a
fly. whereupon they agree to change places (each for the time) to imagine and
set forth others part the best they can. Cap. 83. They having Changed places:
they alege each for his dissembled side. Wherein the fly anon is so alured to
pride and ambyssyon in occupying (for the while) the spiders stately place,
that he at last with an oath affirms that spiders are owners of all windows.
The spider granting it true, sterteth to the fly, seeming to ^ake end upon
the flies own judgment. Cap. 84. The fly out of that chaier fallen flat
before the spider, perseyuing his oversight and danger therein, he declares
how change of place changed his affection. In discoorsing of which case, he
partly touches the commodity of adversity, and the discommoditie of
prosperity. Beseeching the spider to relinquishe all advantage therein to be
taken against him. Which the spider grants. Cap. 85. The sp^der upon a
glaunce given at his desert of thank to be had at the flies hand, allegeth
custom to be his warrant to distroy the fly: which the fly can not deny.
Whereupon he desires that the case may be reasoned in conscience. Which the
spider now grants. Cap. 86. They both lay sundry sharp reasons in
conscience for the spiders life and death. But the spider in conclusion draws
these four principles (reason, law, custom, and conscience, which he at
beginning granted to try all by) so to combine that he makes thereby an
aparence, to show the fli conuinst. and straight by custom: he gives judgment
of the flies death. To which the fly yeldeth. Praying to speak with twelve
flies before he die. And it is granted. Cap. 87 The fly (to twelve grave
flies for all flies) gives his advice for a voiding their parels by their
strife had in windows against spiders. the great ground of which tale
stands most upon consideration of these three things. Wherefore they strive,
with whom they strive, and how they strive. Cap. 88. As the spider is about to
kill the fly, the maid of the house comes in and strikes down the copweb
and the spider to the ground. Cap. 89. The maid being at poinet to tread the
spider to death: the spider prays her to here him speak ere he die: and then
to adiudge him justly. The maid granting to use him (as he did use the fly)
as may best stand with reason, law, custom, and conscience. She at his request
(for the time) withdrawing her foot, they fall to reasoning of the case. Cap.
90. In reasoning of both sides, the maid drives the spider to grant him
self conuinst (by custom eyded with the other principles erst said) as he
conuinst and adjudged the fly before. Whereupon she (by custom) decreth the
spider to die. He then desiring to speak with his son and his counsel.
Which the maid grants. Cap. 91. The spider to his son and twelve spiders
gives his best advise for most quiet and best governance. His tale standing,
most upon these three terms. First a declaration of him self, second an
exhortation to them, the third a submission for him self. Whereunto he desires
license to take his child in his arms: now at their departing, which the
maid grants. Cap. 92. After a few woeful words of the spider had to his
son (they both claspynge each other in arms very naturally) he kysseth and
blisseth him. Wherewyth that son with all the twelve spiders dolefullie
depart from the spider. Cap. 93. The maid (appering as woe to distroye the
spider as he is to be dystroyde) with her foot presses him to death. Cap. 94.
The maid has before her the twelve spiders and the twelve flies that had been
before in place. And upon her show that all harms done by those generacions is
grown by mysorder, she finally deuiseth full redress in poynting them to grow
to order. Cap. 95. The twelve spiders and twelve flies having heard their
order set by the maid, they thankefullie receive it. And upon her
commandment to them, to put this order in ure among all spyders and flies,
they ioyfullye depart that commandment to fulfill. Cap. 96. The spiders and
flies being now absent, The maid sweepyth the wyndow clean in every place.
As far as her breme and arm will stretch, which done she departs. Cap. 97
The maid being gone, the auctor cu^meth in. And upon his beholding the wyndow
fair and clean swept without any combirus copwebs or excessif flocks of
flies he departs. Cap. 98.
FINIS TABVLAE. ornament
I H
portrait of John Heywood

The Introduction to the matter, showing how the fly chaunsed to fall in the
spiders copweb. Cap. primu^.
depiction of spider and fly story

IN season what time every growing thing
That ripeth by root, has lively taken heart
Grass, leaf, and flower, in field so flourishing
That wintered withered stalks, stand in couart
Though weerie wythered hearts, play than like part
Covertly coucht in bed, them selves to hyde
Yet hearts of lust, the bed can not abide.
But up they must, proof of that lust to make
In which like cherefull time, it chanced me
From sleep one night, so timely to awake
That how far night, or how nie day might be
It past my reach, of search, sure sine to se
But straight, the search of nature wrought the crow
Of daunyng of the day, warnyng to show.
Upon which admonision I arose,
But by the time, that I could get me out,
The day apeereth and so broad breaks lose,
Leadyng mine eye, at large to look about
The fields, so fresh, that be ye out of dout
For savor, sight, and heringe each birds voyse
No change could chance, to choose the better choyst.
Which I (reioysynglie) herd and beheld
Till such time as the son, was cum in sight,
So that the dew (drawn by his power) must yield
From therth to thaire, from whence it fell that night
And having herein had mine appetight
I made return (temprately to remain)
Out of whot son, to temprate house again.
Where as (anon) a book I took in hand
Some thing to read, to fode forth fantasy
And stepping to a window, there to stand,
In at a lattes hole, right sodenlie
Even at a fling, fast flew there in a fly
That sang as shrill, and freshlie in my mind,
As any bird could do, bredde of that kind.
About the parler flew this fly full round,
And as apeerde: he sought for food in deed,
But when in no wise, ought would there be found,
In to the buttrie (hastily) he yeede
And stale in to the almerie to feed,
Where he (at pleasure) triumphed vncontrolde,
Till he had there (at will) wrought what he would.
From whense (anon) courageously he flang
Now here, now there, of winge he made no store,
But for a fly oh lord how he then sang
Two notes above his highest note before,
Wherein, encreast his courage more and more,
He flew, he friskt, he tossed, he turnde about,
The fly of flies, no fly I trow so stout
But as the firmament most clear and blew
The golden sonbeames bent to bewtifie
The courtaine drawn of clowdie weeping hew
Withdraws and changes, that crystal asure ski^
From blew to black: so fares it with the fly.
Amyd whose joy, at window to have past,
A copweb maskth his wings and makes him fast.
Thus chance has (by exchange) the fly so trapt,
That suddenly he lost his libertee:
The more he wrange, the faster was he wrapped
And all to thencrease of his ieoberdee,
Which parell, when he did conceive and see
Such was his rage in have from thence to flitte
As made him seem, welnie out of his wit
He wafted his wings, he wagged his tail
He shook his head, he frounde, he stared wide,
He spurnde, he kickte, but when naught would avail
To ryd him thence, but there he must abide,
As breath and breast would bear, loudely he cryde
And woefully as any one fly can
In following foorme, this woeful fly began.
ornament
The lamentacion of the fly, with declaracion (partly) of the property of
Fortune, and of his own estate past and present. Cap. 2
depiction of spider and fly story

ALas, alas, alas and welawaie,
To cry aloude alas, what cause have I
Alas (I say) that ever I saw this day,
My whole estate in twinklyng of an eye
Is here transformde from mirth to misery,
For froward fortune has led my mys hap
To lay and lock me in mine ennemies lap.
Oh sudden sorrow, from settled solas,
For so sat I in solas: as me thought.
Oh fortune, false flaterer that ever was,
In one moment, and in an other wrought
So furious, that both thaffertes forth brought,
Fury, or flaterie, which is worst in thee
Hard for a fly, to judge the certeintee.
Namely for me, who all my life have been
Lapped in lap of thy fair flattering flowers,
Till from those roses, now thou castest me cleene
Into thease nettles, of thy furious showers,
Wherein my lack of practice, lacks powers.
(My whole time having been spent in the tone)
To judge in thease two, which is the woorst one.
I lack (I mean) judgment to judge at full,
Both thease said sides: Howbeit here to declare,
Somewhat in both parts, I both can and wull
Mine entry now, in change from joy to care,
Has in this instant taught me to compare
Flaterie with fury, truth in both to try,
When Fortune tells treuth: and when Fortune does lie.
Who while she was (or rather seemde) my freende,
Thapparaunce of her pleasant countenance
Promised me, my wealth should have none eende,
But swifter then the star does seem to glaunce
That assemblaunce: turns to dissemblaunce,
Mine ended wealth, now turnde to endless woe,
Amyd monge her false flaterie, proves so.
And putting now her fewrie here in ure
Threatniug the danger of my life present,
Perfourmaunce thereof does appear as sure
As it in manner had experiment,
Her fewrie is a glass right excellent
Between fewrie and flaterie to devise
To take her threats true, and her promise liese
Flaterie, and fewrie, thus in her this gose,
When she speaks fair, then has she lust to lie.
When she speaks foul, then truth she will disclose,
Which thing showth somewhat strange, but commenlie
In man to man, man's use does verify,
In love, and hate, disclosyng truth and liese
The self show showde in daily exercise.
In sundry things experience does tell,
No friend, with friend (in friendship) will be plain,
As foe, with foe, will in his fewrie fell.
Love, to tell truth, does often for love refrain,
Hate hides no jot untold for to remain.
Love, lockth in truth, least truth might friends displease,
Hate, lashth out truth, foes to displease and disease.
Friends (in this case) will hide truth, and show liese.
Foes (in this case) will hide lies and show truth,
Of truth that towcheth in displeasant wise.
Hate hides naught, that memory endewth
In man, and fortune, who that fully vewth,
How use of truth, and lies herein has gone,
Shall se in both, small difference save this one.
Love causes friends to hide displeasant trowth,
To keep their friends in quiet while they may.
By love in friends to friends, a lothnesse growth,
In thing extreme, the truth extreme to say,
Where hiding of the truth, harmeth no way
Or that the truth, is better hid then told
There friend, to friend, by love will truth with hold.
But those respects, fortune does naught attend,
Her hidden truth, in pleasant present show,
Is to begile, such as on her depend,
When from her grace, their grief unknown shall grow
By fore purposed, following overthrow.
In quiet calm, she shadoweth shipwreck rocks,
To make her mariners her mockyng stocks.
And noting here (from her proclaimed calm)
How sodenlie her stolen storms, do arise
Of joy long sought, late had, the sodeine qualme
I judge to be her great joy, to devise
By her which joy: my sorrow in this wise,
Teatheth me (I say) to say that I have said,
And so much more, as is next after laid,
What is long liking life, the time once past,
Except the same, have been orderly spent
Thaccounted audite day, must cum at last,
When word, and deed, with thought of each intent,
Shall have a just account, with like judgment
Would god for all which dreadful doubtful doutes
That I had died even in my swadlynge cloutes.
For live we never so long a time here,
The time determined once that hence must we,
Then does all worldelie pleasure past, apere
Even as in deed it is, all vanitee,
Which pleasure has been long possessed in me
I think in no creature living more
That ever lived here, a fly before.
Full many a night, have I escaped harm,
When many a fly, to harm was bought and sold
And many a night have I lien close and warm
When many a fly abroad has died for cold,
And many a fly the flap has iobde and iolde,
When I have safely kept from ieobardee,
My self, and all the flies, that folowde me.
Whereby (with flies) I was then so esteemed
That few things passed without my council
And where I past: there was no danger deemed
Nor no cause why, for in all things that fell
My work did then approve my wit so well
That nowhit cared I, what fly did know it,
Nor yet how far or broad al flies did blow it.
I have been (ere this day) these many days,
By mine experience and mother wit,
Highly in estimation many ways,
And where I was present, no filie would sit,
Nor pertely prease, to blow or bite one bit
Till I were set, for where were flesh or fish,
The choice of both was mine in every dishe.
And I suppose as long as present tence,
May keep possessed possession peasably,
To stand in place and case of reverence,
Is thing much pleasant, to all flies welny,
But once in changed, case as now am I,
The preter tence, presently taking place,
Then has the present tence lost all his grace.
Alas my joyful joy of yesterdaie,
How can it cure my careful care present,
Of pleasure past, remembrance does alwaie
The pinche of present pain, right much augment.
Then in this present case this consequent,
Conclewdeth (I say) all pleasure past to be
Naught else, but vanished vain vanitee.
Thus lithe there now in charge of my repreefe,
Those things, which I have long time gloried in.
Which glory past, increases present grief,
And as my worthy wit did woorship win,
So shall show of my folly, never blin
To brute defame, report of this distress,
Shall toss and turn my wit to foolyshnesse.
As thus, the simplest fly which by my skoole,
Is taught (ere this) of copwebs to beware,
And sees his master play so far the fool,
To be my self now tript in the same snare,
Shall by report my folly full declare,
Which surely shall among all flies survive
As long as any one fly is alive.
And though, this fall, I take to be as clean
Without my fault, as without remedy,
And parience the medsonable mean,
To take all fautles falls, reioisinglie.
And eke where no help, helps malady,
To make a virtue, of necessitee,
Yet those two poinctes, are poynctes to high for me.
For be I faulty, or be I faultles,
Sins I, this dreadful danger must endure,
I am not mortified to bear distres,
And being clear remediles from cure
Of all my pains, that puts most pain in ure,
From step, to step, stretched on this straining staier,
No step like that, straineth danger of dispaier.
For where as if remedy, any wear,
Hope (out of hand) should set me there about,
As hope of help is drownde, so I for bear
All diligens, that hence might help me out,
Thus though the caged bird (with stomach stout:
And voise right sweet) can sing his songs by roate,
Yet can the fettred fly, so: sing no noate,
Example of my self, whose weeping eiese,
With sobbing sighinge heart, bewaileth my pain,
Appeering such, by ought I can surmiese,
As does (in manner) show my death certain,
Namely if so the spider now remain
In this his manshion, set here presently,
Then dred I doutles, here, forthwith to die.
Of such a death as most abhorth us flies,
Which, flies have felt, and folk have seen to plain,
Of property the spider has the gise,
First to suck out, and so eat up our brain,
To his small gain: and our most loss and pain,
Thus has it been, thus is it, and thus shall be,
Till pity may mitigate thextremite.
ornament
The dreadful wonder of the spider at sudden shaking of his copweb. Cap. 3.
depiction of spider and fly story

What time the fly, this to him self had said,
About the house he cast a doleful look,
Wherewith (to break away) he made abraide,
With such a thrust, that all the copweb shook,
At which the spider stert, and straight awooke
Out of sound sleep, full fast trembling for fear,
And feintlie spoke (anon) as ye shall hear.
Alas where am I: alas whence came I?
Or whither shall I? whates this an earth quake?
Or comes the day of doom now sodeinly?
Naught else (I trow) but that, my house could make
In every place to shatter and to shake,
What is this buzzyng blumberinge trow we: thunder?
Hold house, alas my seelyng riueth a sunder,
No part has rest, in all parts of this frame,
From roof to groundsill, within any room.
Is it the devil? or is it our dame?
Or is it the page? or is it the groom?
Or is it our maid with her birthin broom?
Between the devil, and all these, last and furst,
The devil take me, if I can choose the wurst.
But ill, worse, and woorst, devil, and all together
Do me assaute as it (to me* does seem,
Has fortune wrought my foes at this time hither,
And not so much as warnde me to misdeeme,
Now fie on fickle fortune thus extreme,
And I defy the guard of such a guider,
Alas (this day) I am but a dead spider.
These words thus spoken, down anon he sanke.
Kneling a while, devoutly on his knee,
And then round on a heap, to ground he shranke
Like an vrchyn under an aple tree.
No felon, fast in fetters for his fee,
Nor ape in chain, that ever lookte more pale,
Then look^e this spider, after this told tale.
So that these twain, stand now in one estate,
For in like langour, both be now here led,
And of their lives, both like desperate,
For now the spider, is as far in dred,
And by that dred he is even as near ded,
As is the fly. Who thinks he sees at eye,
His death aproachyng him, aparantlie.
ornament
The spider taking comfort, enters in quarrel with the fly. Cap. 4.
depiction of spider and fly story

Howbeit anon, the spider well espide
That ennemies were there none save only one:
And him he saw so safe, and surely tide,
That up he stood to stretche him, and anon
(His former fear from him now being gone)
To the top of his copwe^, he stepped boldly,
And in these words: began to common coldely.
Who are you that lithe there? speak if ye can?
Forsooth (said then the fly) sir it is I,
I, be you I (quoth he) I pray you than
What I be you? tell me that by and by.
What I am I? forsooth sir a poor fly:
What thou false thief, art thou here quoth the spider
Thou shall feel cause, to wish thou had gone wider.
And therwithall full furiously he flang
Toward the fly, but what time he espide him,
Oh lord how his feat feet and hands he wrang,
Beseching his great god, that day to guide him,
And from his mortal ennemie to divide him:
With out whose aid, from which his foe: to flit,
He saw it past a flies poor power and wit.
And his dreadful despair, was much the more
To see how speedily the spider span,
All round about his house each side to shore,
No weauing workman in this world that can
Weaue that like web of that like stuff wouen than,
In each weak place is wouen a weauing cast,
By ward, in ward, to ward the fly more fast.
Which done, these words the spider sewrely said,
Thou ancient enemy and arrant thief.
Whose lignage alwaie has shewde banner splaide
Against my parentage to their great grief,
And now thy self renewing their mischief
With malice of thine own in ure to put,
Art stolen in to my house, my throat to cut.
And never had my house, and household harm
By any fly, so much as now by thee,
I shrew thy naked heart, I was full warm
Naked a bed, a sleep so mo^e I thee,
There as my wife: and all my children be,
Where god knows what they do, or how they do,
By fear which thou at this time bring them to.
ornament
The spider sterting into his house to comfort his household, the fly deuiseth
what way to escape the danger of the spider. Cap. 5.
depiction of spider and fly story

ANd with these words aside the spider start,
Where his said bedfelow and offspring were.
Saying these words: now good mine own sweet heart
And my two babes be ye all of good there,
The present cause of all your present fere
Is past, I have the caiteffe fast in snare,
That was the cause of all your fearful care.
What horeson is it husband, (quoth he) wife
A flesh fly as big as a humble be,
That shall (if I live) surely leese his life.
The youngest spider there, at this cride he,
Oh, father father I hertelie pray ye
Remember when ye shall return again,
To bring me some part of that flesh flies brain.
How say ye to this babe (quoth the mother)
Will ye here this vrchin of eight weeks old,
It is a babbling brat above all ^ther,
Ye (quoth the father) child hardely be bold.
Thorns prick young, that shall be sharp folk have told,
Which shows in thee, in that thou art en^linde
To crave (thus young) according to thy kind.
And while the spider dalied in this wise,
The fly (considering this extremitee)
Did with him self, advisedly devise,
To escape with life, what might his best mean be,
S^ftely, as I might here, saying, I see
Like as much contension can naught prenayle,
So: to much cowardice might all quayle.
Between these two, cowardice and contension,
The spiders ire the rather to assuage,
I temprately must tempre mine inuension,
To plead my right in reason not in rage,
And sens my body lies in iayle forgage,
My iayler fair and gently to beseech,
That is (in flies) no flaterie but fair speech.
From desperate fear: hope makth me now suppose,
If I may obtain hearing reasonably,
I another life nor libertee shall lose,
But be let lowse from bondage by and by,
And hereupon the spider sodeinely
From where he was, returned back again,
And straight to gripe the fly began to strain,
ornament
The spider being returned to the fly, after a few words between them had,
the fly sewth to the spider to be herd speak which he grants. Cap. 6.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe fly (to him) lift up both heart and hands,
And in most mild behavior humblelie
Said: sir, sins I am bound here in your bands,
Under commaundment thus assuredly,
What brute might breed to you more infamy
Then here (in hucker mucker) me to murder,
The cause wherefore I die, published no further.
Fly: (quoth the spider) I dare say: the cause
Is open enough, for a thowsande mark
Will not repair that, which against all lause
Thou have here broken: behold thine own warke,
Wherein to answer all: that at me bark,
To whom thy doleful death shall be apparent,
To them thy diuelishe deed shall be my warant.
Sir (said the fly) if it in deed so be
That this my deed, aparantly appear,
So far my fault, that it may warrant ye,
To give me death therefore with conscience clear,
Then as my body is in prison here,
So with my body yield my will, will I,
Unto your will, at will to live or die.
But sir, before we shall be so fer forth,
I you beseech right humbly as I may,
Allow my sewte, for such: and so much worth,
To win your grant (ere I be cast away)
To here, what I can in this matter say,
So thou with speed show what thou have to break,
I (quoth the spider) grant to here the speak.
I thank you humbly (quoth the fly) but sur
Of a goose with garlic sauste: so late I eete,
That my breath stinketh, and sins I may not stur
From you, for you I think it very meet,
To step from me: a loofe: to air more sweet,
The spider stepping back a little way,
The fly therewith (somewhat lightened) did say.
ornament
The oracion of the fly to the spider, commending justice, and just iusticers,
requiring to have his cause herd thoroughly and adjudged Justly. Cap. 7.
depiction of spider and fly story

Master spider, note (I beseech you) this,
Ye know right well, the virtue of Iustise,
In every creature here living, is,
Both in you spiders, and eke in us flise,
And in every other wight being wise,
The thing: which is generally pretended,
And where it is in deed, highly commended:
And where that virtue, lacks in any wight,
All other virtues, there do bid adieu,
What virtue can (in place) take place of right,
In such as to show Instice, do eschew:
Who lacks Justice, he can not be true:
And who in Iudginge all things, Justly Judges,
To choost that Judge his Judge, no wise wight grudgeth.
Great lettes wherein are four, love, hate, meede, and dreede,
In all which judgments given, adiudgeyng geines,
Love, Iudgth the loved, more, then justice shows decreede.
Hate, Iudgth the hated, less, then Justice constreines:
Meede, Iudgth the meeder, more, then Justice conteinse.
Dred, in dred of the dreddid, the dredder drives
To Judge, more or less, as the dreddid contriues.
And tavoyde parshall judgment between partise,
Though the one party for judge, I wish none of them,
Yet change of mind or matter, does often so rise,
That the judge, is judge, and party one of them,
As you seem judge here, being the tone of them,
Self love in which judge, he the other part hatinge,
May judge much judgment, of much unjust ratinge:
Ye though the judge, hate the other party no deele,
That self judge, him self, loving more then enough,
Less right then enough, the other part may soon feel,
Self love, to him self tender, to the rest tough,
Is, of just justice, neither root, braunce, nor bough.
Love (namely self love) corruptibly growyng,
Is chief lodester of letes, in justice showing.
For though corrupt love, and hate: contrarise mere,
Work one like wrong, both in one like degree linkt,
Yet that love, worse then that hate: Jadiudge here,
It is more hard, love to our selves to extinkt,
Then hate to other, to pluck from thartes presinkt,
Thus, of justice no let ledeth intrupcion,
Like this love (named self love) grown of corrupcion.
But to the point, judges that justice use,
In all, between them selves and all the reff,
To claim or hold, by will who does refuse,
Things, whereof they would be, or be possessed,
And even as justice, justly has adresf,
Both give and take the dew extended rate,
Those are (for judgment) worthy most esfate.
Syns justice that sweet flower full fair does grow,
In persons such as of most base sort be,
That flower more fair and sweet must needely show
In those that stand, above the mean degree,
Being thereto knyt unto autcoritee,
As more or less, who may command at will,
So more or less, he may do good or ill.
And in our case, were just iustise clean reject,
What injuries might thereby here arise.
Offlies factes, if spyders wills weyd, theffect
Right soon, might wilful will, without iustise,
Draw unto death, a hundredth thousand flise,
Which: will may do (if will shall knit the knot)
Whether that we flies, offend or offend not.
Howbeit I hope ye will do instice, such
As may with this just justice join justly,
In mine accounte your wisdom is to much,
To blot or blur your fame, for any fly,
Whereby I stand in trust assuredly,
Just judgment in this matter, now to have,
And other thing then that, I do none crave.
Save that this case, may be first fully hard:
And fully perceived, by reasonyng likewise,
Which done, as equytee, best afterward
Shall you advise, my judgment to devise,
Without further apeale in enterprise,
I shall (as I say) other to live or die,
Into your hands, yield me contentedlie,
ornament
The spider grants the fly both to here and adiudge this case, as may most
agreably stand with Reason, Law, Custom, and Conscience. Cap. 8.
depiction of spider and fly story

Fly (quoth the spider) I epsy right well,
Thy brain is much, which I right much set by,
By which thy present sewte, the treuth to tell,
Thou show here wittely and honestly,
Request wherein, shows such conueniensy,
Full heringe and reasonyng, to win me to:
That reason bidth me grant, and so I do.
And for the rest, behold me now (quoth he)
Wherewith, his feet to his mouth he tossis,
Saying these words, now fly here unto the
I swear a sollem oath, by all these crossis,
Thou shall have justice, though I sustain lossis,
As reasonably may stand, for thy defense,
In reason, law, custom, and conscience.
In cumpas of which four principles towcht,
All debates, discourst, and discust should be,
Reason, to perceive, man's great ground is vowcht:
Law, on reason: must take ground to agree:
Custom, stands (or should) on reasons decree:
Conscience, with reason concurth: to withdraw
Thextremitees of custom, and of law.
Upon these four (each one) one corner post,
The stintyng of debate, takth standing stay,
Whereon this building, shall be so enboste,
That as I swear, again I swear I say,
Without corupcion on my part, this day,
Thou shall be used herein, at my hand,
As most with reason, and this rest may stand,
They stand both in hope to convince each other by just cause, the fly praiyng
the spiders pardon, of such rude speech and all behavior, as he may chance
to over shoot him self in, the which the spider does grant. Cap. 9
depiction of spider and fly story

THere never was Friar limiter, that duckt
So low, where beggyng won him twenty theeses,
As is the fly now to the spider ruckte,
He makth him sewre to win, who ever leeses,
And here with all (by chaunse) the spider sneeses,
Now (quoth the fly) chance I to win or leese.
Christ help, and long in health well mote ye sneese.
The spider herefore, gave the fly such thank,
As has in usage, course of curtesy,
But note these twain, so lately so like blanke
And both now, in like mirth immediately,
Me thought, that chaunsed very pretyly,
The fly thinks, reason shall sure make his way,
The spider, thinks in reason, surely nay.
Sir (quoth the fly) I must you here beseethe,
To ratefie your pardon my protection
In my behavior, namely in such speech
As may (by rudenes) rightly crave correction,
If I shall lark your aid, to this election,
Then may my reasonyng, for my libertee,
Leese my libertee, and wyn my ieoberdee,
This is encluded (fly) in my sworn oath,
By which Ierst have promysde the iustise,
Such speech as in thy case dyrectly gothe,
So that thou rail not, to fer out of sise,
For which thou seem a fly, as fer to wise,
Spare not to speak thy mind: and unto me
(So said) say what thou will: I pardon the.
That pardon I receive, with hearty heart,
And heartily thank your granting of the same,
The shale now of this nutte, shaled clear apart,
The crackyng of this nutte: to put in frame,
For winning of the carnill of this game,
To your pardon had, your patience praying,
To here for further serchyng, further saying,
Here stood they both, a while in silent stay:
The fly devising warely what to speak:
The spider likewise, warely watched at bay,
What great words, out of his mouth, small and weak,
Of challenge or defense, should there then break,
Wherewith at curtesy, low and reverent,
From circumstaunce, to substance, the fly went,
ornament
They enter into the principal argument, the fly supposing no laufull proof
by witness of any ill there against him: the spider allegeth the contrary, the
fly (upon occasion) requyring to be bailde under surety, the spider denies
it. Cap. 10.
depiction of spider and fly story

Master spider, the pith now to advance:
I pray you declare plainly (quoth the fly,
How can (by law) in reason this mischaunce
Support in you: to keep me cruelly,
To lie in prison, here thus piteously,
And with your fetters fettring me thus fast,
No laufull proof of cause, by witness past.
No laufull proof (quoth he) fly say thou so?
What proof can reason show in law more clear,
Then sight of him that one inche can not go,
From present place: where plainly does appear,
Such an act done: as thou have now done here.
I think the falsest fly, of all thy kin,
Would judge for heinous, thy thus breaking in.
But put the case, that I atached you,
In this my lordship, fast in iaile to sit,
But as suspect, no act aproued now,
Yet might I keep ye fast, least ye might fly,
Till ye were found guilty, or else a quit,
Except this case run right, the law runth wrong,
For this is law, and law it has bin long.
Keep (quoth the fly) I pray you in suspense,
The first aleged ease: of these last twain,
Till in this last, law ley experience,
Whereby it may apeere, ye may detain,
A fly: suspect of crime, not proved plain,
But under surety, out of common Iayle,
The prisoner shall at suit, be let to bail,
Let flies to bail: friend fly (quoth the spider)
Nay by my fathers soul, that will not be,
Except he here, will be such a byder,
That he will sit fast by the feet for thee.
And take thy turn: him will I take suretee,
Nay (quoth the fly) that tries a freende to much,
I have good friends, but sure I have none such,
To bind a fly herein, body for body,
Were bond sufficient: for a thing thus slight.
Well (quoth) the spider, fly call thou me noddy,
Except I prove this a thing of much weight,
But thou alluredst me in way of reseight,
Of one fly here, now fastened fast in Iaile,
To go lay salt on another flies tail,
ornament
The spider charge the fly, first with burglarie, which the fly answers
unto: than the spider charge him with single felony, which the fly reasons
unto. Cap. 11.
depiction of spider and fly story

THis reason dryueth us now (quoth the fly)
Straight to your reason, before suspensed,
Wherein mine act, apeering evidently
So huge, and heinous offense commensed,
As by that reason, it is precensed.
Then law and reason both, will that I fail,
Oflight surety, to borow me to bail.
But in mine act apparently committed,
Although the deed, I nowhit do deny,
Yet how can law, by any wight well witted,
Lay in my fault, offensive fact thereby.
Fly (quoth the spider) that can (and will) I,
And thy reproach, to broche forthwith at large,
I lay (in law) burglary to thy charge.
That charge is soon discharged, sir said he,
The breach of houses, in the time of night,
Shewth evidence where those offenders be.
But not only: the son does shine full bright,
Ere flies a morninges, cum abroad in sight,
But also at eeue, ere the son be set,
Each fly to his lodgeyng, again will g^^,
By this, this breathe, can be no burglary,
And ere I now came here, all men might see
The son apeeryng universally,
Though it (at thy coming) were day with thee,
Yet was it night (quoth the spider) with me,
I was a sleep, and no day yet had seen
These two long hours, had not this mischaunce been.
Sir (quoth the fly) admit that ye now were
A sleep, till that the son were six hours hie,
Could any reason, show reason to bear,
You to affirm, or firmly verify,
The day for night, till time ye day epsy,
So were it a thing, easy to be done,
With a wink, to make it midnight at noone.
Why fly, at noone: midnight is it with me,
If I at noone be a sleep: ye (quoththe fly)
But if ye against one noone sleeper shall see,
Ten thousand noone wakers, night from noone to try,
Ye shall poorly prove, this night noone burglarie,
And slept ye till noone: yet in course of the sun,
Ye are not ignorant, how the day does run.
Well said (said the spider) and put the case,
That I in this case, yield thee the maistrie,
Yet shall this other case (I trow) take plase,
I here arrest thee fly, of felony,
Which cause of arrest thou can not deny,
For breakyng in here thus, and never knock,
As good or better, were to pick the lock.
I brake into this house now (quoth the fly,
Like as a thief does break into newgate,
Saving that the thief, does most commonly
Pretend at his entry there, more estate,
For break a thief in there: erely or late,
He has as many leaders as a bride,
With weyters, attendant on every side.
And yet no thief is there of all the rout,
That into that house breakth so willingly,
But he would rather go ten mile about,
To shun this vanites of vain glory,
Then be reseiued so honorably.
Acounting his life: no day the shorter,
In taking pain to be his own porter.
And as the thief, full fer against his will.
Does break in there, so brake I now in here,
For thief or fly, what one has wit so ill,
To prease to rob where he has knowlage clear,
By robry: to steal ought, naught can apeere,
Nor no commoditee there consequent,
But death, or perpetual prisonment.
ornament
The spider (in a manner) grants, that the fly came into the copweb against
the flies own will, which the spider so grants, for such policy forthwith
appering: as seems to weigh sore against the fly. Cap. 12.
depiction of spider and fly story

So mote I thee good fellow fly (said he)
That allegacion recheth here, so ser and nere,
That in aparance, it concludes me,
For glad or willingly, who would cum where
As he should clearly know, his coming were
An evident and undoubted induction,
To his infallible fall of destruction,
Whereby it seems, I can no way avoid
Thy cummyng here, to be against thy will,
But now the fly, so fer is over ioyde,
That by no manner mean, he can sit still,
He stretched, and fet a hem right sharp and shrill,
Whereat the spider, smirke, and smothlie smiled,
To see the seely fly, so fer begiled,
And yet showde he, semblaunce of falsitee,
So as it might apeere, that he did smile
(For joy) upon the flies behalf, that he
So wittily wound out of this exile,
Which set the fly, in glory for the while,
In sight whereof: the spiders pleasure had,
From laughing look, to lowering look full sad.
These words he sowrely said, though I now yield,
Grauntyng that thou camst here unwillingly,
Yet shall the fly (at one stroke) leese the feelde,
In all the rest hereof immediately.
Even with the same weapon, thou wanst this by,
As thus, by the danger that flies here find,
Thou prouest to cum hither against thy mind.
This well excuses thy coming hither,
But (quoth the spider) for thy going hence,
When we have scanned these words together,
Thy reason is hardly worth forty pence.
It is a perfect proof in evidence,
For my part, and encludeth brief conclucion,
Of condemnacion, to thy confucion.
For though thy cummyng, were against thy will,
What hope to help thee hense: does that implie,
Sins death here had: or imprisonment still,
Is all thy proof, thy so cumming to try,
Now (quoth the spider) speak out good man fly,
This verdit thus given by your own consent,
Who can blame me, thereon to give judgment.
ornament
The fly herewith is abashed, but a none he gathers him self to a stay
showing a reason, that makes a manifest show clearly to overthrow the spiders
for esaide polycie. Cap. 13.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe fly at this, ^et such a persing sigh,
As made the heart in his poor carkas quake,
And clapped his hand, so hard upon his thigh,
That of that copweb, every part did shake,
And time it was for him, now to awake,
Such a chokyng check, to a fly in ^loister,
A mean wit may deem, it was a chokyng oister.
The spider yeldyng to the flies fore saying,
Was a cast beyond the flies expectacion*
Whereon the fly spiyng the spiders inuaiyng,
Thus far against the fly, in aprobacion,
He seemed to take great discontentacion,
With him self, to see his own words give state,
To the spider, to give him this blind matr.
Howbeit anon, stey in him self he took,
Saying these words, both with good heart and wit,
Good master spider, if ye rightly look,
In all yet past, all knottes between us knit,
Judgment with justice: shall fear me nowhit
Fly (quoth the spider) tell me that tale soon,
We have well begone, but nothing nigh done.
And yet even now: for all thy braggyng b^st,
Ta^ounte this case, if we now condisend,
The pa^ment of thacounte will be thy cost,
For though thou burglary do here defend,
And felony, that does hereon depend,
Yet of my purpose, thine own confession
Has peasably, put me in possession.
What though thou did unwillingly this deed,
Yet thy self confessing as thou do here,
Death or dealy prisonment to proseede,
What helps I say, thy proof to stand clear,
Sins not with standing though that proof apeere,
Thy self have confessed here thy self to be,
Dead, or dead prisoner, at least: with me.
In deed sir (said the fly) even as ye say,
Except my words for my now hither cu^ming,
May have expoci^ion sum other way,
Then it seems they shall have, after your suming,
Better for me were to exercise mu^ming,
Then that my speech should show me such an el^e,
To make mine own words condemn mine own self.
But sins my reason, ioynde with your consent,
Approves my cu^mige here against my will,
By fore known death (I say) or prisonment,
Then is my reason, to the point not ill,
For as ye have granted, and must grant still,
Discharge me (at full) it does and must do,
Of burglary, and felony, both two.
And thus this one reason of mine (ye see)
Answers all your reasons (save one) whereby,
Ye lay to me, that I acknowlage me
(In manner) by agreement here to die,
Or till I die, here in prison to ly,
But once mine answer to those words spoken,
If Justice hold, this prison is broken.
For though I acknowlage to know before,
Such danger, as witnesses my confession,
Yet lies the right or the wrong, still in store,
The which must try, whether your possession,
Of me here be laufull, or oppression,
But have I known parelles here, never so long,
Does that knowlage prove you to do no wrong.
If that were true, every thief might say,
In place where as robberies accustomed were,
That he might by custom rob there always,
Be cause custom auouchth that thieves rob there,
I see this example offends your ere,
And so it may: for it proves by proof clear,
That I am imprisoned wrongfully here.
ornament
The spider checketh the fly, for his comparing above the spider in knowlage
of law and custom, which the fly mainteyneth by one reason commonly reported:
Whereupon the spider perceiving the policy, for which he seemed to gra^nt the
fly to cum against his will, takes little or no place, that much weaking his
part, he drives the fly to draw back that grant. Cap. 14.
depiction of spider and fly story

THis is a good brag, ^^ie (quoth the spider,
To set in the fore frunt of thy battle,
And a meet reason, for an out rider,
That would by facyng, his ennemies expel,
And be ye sure it does wondersly well,
To see a fly, think him self presumtuously,
Better seen: in law and in custom: then I.
For sooth (quoth the fly) no displeasure taken,
My lernyng of reason, ought to pass yours,
In westminster hall, I am not forsaken,
But may be a ^ermer all ^ymes and howrs,
And that in aparance, passes your powrs,
For as common report, may be a proof,
There never cumth copweb, in that hall roof.
The buzzing being in westminster hall
Of a flesh ^^ie, every man may forbere
As well as my presens. And sure I shall
Prove it as hard, for thee to get out here,
As thou woldst prous for me to get in there:
And ere we depart, I shall turn that Journey,
From personal aparence to attorney.
And which of our lerninges also is best,
Shall cum to trial when we cum to end,
And my replication as yet shall rest,
Unto your answer, by which ye pretend
To prove me: by extorcion to offend,
Wherein in effect, ye say that I lay,
No reason of right, your body to stay,
In which, what matter I have to aledge,
By reason, conciens, custom and law,
Not only to keep you here as in pledge,
But also your body to death to draw,
That corsey would curstly your stomach gnaw.
How be it for an ease to your panting heart,
I shall (for a season) set that apart.
And partly peruse, by way of retret,
Sum part of this matter granted before.
Nay sir (quoth the ^lie) that were but a let,
Let us here retret, or repete no more,
Till time that indgement do try our hole store.
By gis fly, thou speak like a fool (quoth he)
The sooner we take end, the worse for the.
But I perceive thou would pas over this,
Thereby to win, all between us yet paste,
Wherein I grant thine advantage grown is,
By mean of my grauntyng, in over much haste
That thou arthere against thy will now plaste,
Which grant I granted, to make thine own grounds
Prove the, in prison here rightfully bound.
And yet my words in this grant thoroughly weyde,
Wey not this absolutely granted to be.
To thy words for cummyng against thy will leyde,
I said they (in aparance) concluded me.
And that as it semde I must grant it to the,
Which words import not full power to be able,
To bind this thus granted, ireuocable.
But sins thou have found this ^eate s^ertyng hols,
To hyde thy head in, thus promptly provided,
I will yet once again, quicken this cole,
Whether will or not will, the hither guyded.
Why sir (quoth the fly) then am I deryded.
Not a whit (quoth the spider) be content,
And old tale, misrecknyng is no payment.
And if thou think it an hinderaunce to thee,
This part of process to call back again,
When thou can take like advantage of me,
I graun^ thee, like libertee to obtain.
Agreede (quoth the fly) for when he saw plain^,
The spider, thus bent determinately,
^e thought it ^oly him to contrary.
ornament
They reason a fresh, to try whether the fly came into the spiders cop web
against his will or not. Cap. 15.
depiction of spider and fly story

Fly (quoth the spider) go we to the pith,
Thou say thou camst hither against thy will.
And thy only reason to prove it with,
Is, fore knowlage of death, or this as ill,
Perpetual prisoner, here to lie still.
Concludyng as no wight were so unwise,
Willingly to cum, where known parels arise.
Contrary whereof is seen every day,
In seeing daily that thieves every the one,
Committing robries in any high way,
Do know assuredly twenty to one,
If they be had, they shall hang therupone,
And yet if they totter twenty together,
Still do thieves rob there, now who leadth them thither.
That do them selves (quoth the fly) and cause why,
Each thief thinkth to escape thens, as has scapte mo.
Think they so (said he) then why may not I
Think, that thou thoughtst likewise from hense to go.
Nay sir (quoth the fly) I could not think so,
Never was there fly in this net, thus masked,
That ever scapte, as fer as I have asked.
Well fly (qoth he) if thou this part wilt save,
Answer well these questions that follow here.
Have thou had free will: as other flies have?
Ye sir. Is not (quoth he) thine eye sight clear?
Yes sir. Did ever fransy in the apeere?
Nay sir. Be thy wings good and each other lym?
Ye sir. And all thy body lusty and trym?
Ye sir. Then (quoth the spider) it should seem
Thou art thine own leader? Ye (quoth the fly)
Did any wight (quoth he) use means extreme
To bring the? None that I can verefie.
Did I send for the? Nay sir verelie.
And yet thou art here, art thou not quo^th he?
Yes sir. Against my will, I assure ye.
Well then (quoth the spider) thou grauntst to have had
Free will, and that thou have good sight of eye,
Lusty lims to lead the, and never wast mad,
Compelde to cum, as who say forsyblye,
Or to be sent for, thy self doste deny,
And yet through facyng, thou fainest here,
To cum now hither, against thy will clear.
Which false demeanor, consider who will,
Does well aproue the a crafty kind thief.
Lyeng and stealeng, will together still.
Oh (quoth the fly) this augmenteth my grief,
Thus to be chargde, with desertles repreefe,
I am a true fly, sure I can no false knackes,
Alas master spyder ye be to capackes.
As by this exsample may well be tryde,
Put case free will, and your lims led you now,
To pas sum narow bridge by sum high ways side,
And in that passage, should chance (god save you)
To slyp into the diche, and break your brow,
Or else (in a good hour be it spoken)
Ye were in perell your neck to be broken.
And that while ye were in that diche scrallyng,
And scratting in the mire to save your life,
The lord of that soil, would in that falling
Atache you of theft, and then would be rife
To charge you, as ye charge me, in this strife,
Against your will, ye were not thither brought,
But your will it self: brought your self unsought.
How would ye answer this sir (quoth the fly)
I would (quoth the spider) say that my will
Led me not to fall in, but to pas by,
What if that saying liked him so ill,
That he would say, he might call ye thief still,
In that for your passing, under or over,
Ye were of your will, let in neither another.
Then were I driven (quoth the spider) to move,
Sum part of the difrens between these three,
Will, power, and chance, wherein I might soon prove,
That although my will be never so free,
Yet in active things, will can not bring me,
To accomplish those acts, for power or chance,
Must join with will, ere outward act avaunse.
For would I never so willingly will,
To wear powles steeple for a turkey hat,
Yet sins I might in deed, eat a horse mill,
As soon as have power, so to pranke with that,
That will were as wise, as will of a wat,
My will: may will freely, this to optaine.
But will above power, thus wild, is in vain.
Will without power, as in things actual.
Can work naught, and where power and will both be,
Chance does right often, both power and will apall,
Above power and against will, often we see,
That contrary to powrs and wills decree,
Chance chances so, as when by power and will
We are pressed forth, chance charmith us to stand still.
Exsample hereof, let us here now make.
By the said bridge and diche, that you erst leyde,
At which though power and will, would vntertake
To bring me over, chance might se me steyde,
And both from power and will, so fer conueyde,
In going over that bridge, that chances tryp,
Might pop me in to that diche: even at a whip.
ornament
They continue in pursuit of trial, whether the fly came thither willingly or
unwillingly, so fer, that the fly (at length) offreth ^o take a book oath,
that he came against his will. C. 16.
depiction of spider and fly story

THis is vnanswearable (quoth the fli^)
And a reason for my part worth a pyke,
As chance against will might make you there lie,
Why might not chance even as well in case like
Ley me in this copweb, as you in that dyke.
Fly (quoth the spyder) thou art not asked
Whether chance so might, but whether chance so did,
What (quoth the fly) if this man did purpose.
That question to you, I could (quoth he) well
Make aparant proof, on my part disclose,
That into that diche, chance did me compel.
For naught is there to steal, but aparell,
And all men know I naught desire nor need
Those staryng garments of mire and green weed.
In faith (quoth the ^^ie) and I love as ^ll
To be in these russetes at witsontide,
I wear your gray garment with as ill will
As ye would the green, at the diches side,
Wherefore this reason is as well aplyde,
For my delivery out of this place,
As for yours (god sau^ you) were ye in case.
Ye (quoth the spider) but our two cases
Be as unlike, as our gray and our green,
Diches be common and open places.
Wherein to spiders, and all folk is seen,
That another now is, nor never has been,
For spiders in diches, ought to desire,
By stelth, gift, borowing, biyng or hyre.
But what commoditee here is for thee.
That is to thee: and to all the world hidden,
This house is to close thou see, in to see,
And also all flies that herein have slidden,
They have (as thou say) so long here abidden,
That by return of any messengere,
Tidings from hens (I know) thou could none here.
Wherefore although thou find naught here in deed,
Yet I think thou thoughtst sure, to have found better,
Sir though ye think, I thought better to speed.
Shall thinkyng lead you, without word or letter,
To cast me away thus, the proof no gretter,
Remember (quoth he) and began to tremble,
The peril of your soul, if ye dissemble.
For by the way that my soul shall goto,
I came hither against my will unfeigned,
Which clearly declares, I thought to do
No robry here, but feign would have refrayned,
Any part of this house, to have constrained,
Which to be true (quoth the fly) if ye look
To have me sworn, I will swear on a book.
ornament
The spider not admitting the fly to his oath, the fly bringth in the
strength of the affirmative for his part: against the negative on the spiders
side. Whereunto adjoined his other reasons leide in discharge of charge past, he
hops according to Justice promised, to be straight discharged. Cap. 17.
depiction of spider and fly story

Why have thou (quoth he) thou unhappy hooks,
No conscience to be a peri^rde wretch,
That oath (quoth he) by the way that god took,
Should: of my conscience another make bretch^.
Nor yet any part of my conseience stretche.
Well (quoth the spider) yet would I be loathe,
In this case, to trust a fly by an oath.
Sir mine affirmaunce in thaffirmatiue,
In law and reason, is much more credible
Then your denial, in the negative,
Your nay, to my ye, must needs be fallible.
And in case present, it is impossible,
To aproue your part, for how can it be,
That you, the secrets of my breast can see.
It is as certain, that you know them not,
As it is certain they are known to me.
Then: if I swear that chance me hither got,
Against my will, were it reason if ye,
Swear the contrary, believed should be,
As well as my self, when truth can apeere,
To none but my self, as apeereth clear,
I make my self sewere, your self thinks not so:
Which considered, let us now consider,
Sum part of this past, ere we further go,
Wherein proof proves my cumming hither
To be against my will, all together.
Which sqwyre shall sqware me, a s^antlin well bent,
For a right rewle, to show me innocent.
And in the ears, of all that ought can skill,
Shall discharge me, in all that has been lay^e.
Or ^an be laid, cummyng against my will,
How can burglary, against me be wayde.
And in this felony, what can be said.
Thanky^g my truth. I may here trewly say,
This wisp^, has wyped all this wo^rke away.
That wispe of yours (quoth the spider) showth wa(...)
Of cleanly s^owring, when all cumth together,
Proof of your tale, I take it very srant,
To make me take your present ^ummyng hither
To be against your will, for how or whither,
Could ye thus ^um, but ye might soon deny,
To cum with will, as long as ye can lie.
Though I can lie, that is yet no trial
That I have lyde, in which sir (quoth the ^^ie)
Only except s^iffe or s^erne denial,
Ye can aledge no reason to bide bie,
Wherein I have allegde aprobately
Your nay, against myye, can in this case,
By no reasonable mean, rightly take place.
Now sins this part, we have not only brought,
To ye, and nay, and that mine affirmaunce
Has fully brought, your negative to naught,
So that the same by grounded sure substance,
Discharges (in effect) this charged chance,
Perfoormed promise of justice I ^rist,
Shall from this court, now se me straight dismis^*
The spider upon a case in law touching thaffirmatiue, takes hold to deteine
the fly still in possesion: but yet under promise of justice before promised.
Cap. 18.
depiction of spider and fly story

VVoulde ye trudge in post have fly, nay not so.
Ye may report in me small courtesy,
Except I make ye drink once ere ye go,
I thank you (quoth the fly) but verelie,
I will not drink, for I am now not dry.
Though ye will not tarry to drink (quoth he)
Yet must ye tarry of necessitee,
Put case your allegasions match with mine,
And further set your ye, above my nay,
Yet will I not permute nor yet resine.
Possession of your body here this day,
For your affirmative which ye do lay,
Against my negative, for without witness,
Thaffirmatiue does no ty^^e dispossess.
Thus: though possession fully not su^^yce
To be a bar, against your affirmatiues,
Yet bryngth possession clause of warantise,
By which, I here may keep you in these gives,
(You lackyng witness) sum part of our lives,
But (quoth the spider) truth, truly to tell,
Thou have (for a fly) said excedyng well.
Concerning cummyng here against thy will,
Whereon (as yet) our matter all does stay,
Both parts apeere, of so pure perfight skill,
That we have brought each other, to the bay.
I thee to ye, and thou me to nay,
And as in law: thy ye, seemth to seem gretter,
Then does my nay, which showth thy part the better.
For that ye, once: by witness well aproued,
That thou against thy will do here apere,
Then have thou won the whole (as yet) here moved,
Aprouyng thy self clearly to stand clear
Of burglary and felony laid here.
For by what mean, can any wight make preefe,
That any wight without will is a thief.
But for as much, as that point is not yet
Laufully proved, I entend to keep
The in possession, a while here to sit,
Till we this matter wey, sum what more deep,
Nay fear not fly, thou art unwise to weep,
For I will not all only not destroy thee,
(Unrightfully) but further: not anoy thee.
Nor of or on, give judgment any way.
Till time thy self (if thou reasonable be)
Shall see, that I may justly do and say,
By justice erst promised unto thee,
All that shall be said, or done here by me.
Which justice shall prove me so just a judge,
That thou nor no fly, shall have cause to grudge.
ornament
The spider, seeing that he can not take full hold of the flse in case of
burglarie, nor felony: he charge him now with trespass, to which the fly
reasons: Cap. 19.
depiction of spider and fly story

HEreunto for entree toward an end,
Admit for time, thou camst against thy mind,
Declaryng thy defense, well to defend
Burglary and felony, of each kind,
Yet thou nor no fly, is so beetle blind,
But thou and they, aparantly may see,
That at the least, thou have trespassed me.
I say and thou do see, a thousand mark,
Framthe not this frame, as it framde ere this fill,
Were it then meet, in such a peer of warke,
I cry you mercy I thought you none ill,
Or else, I came hither against my will,
Should be full restitucion for the act,
Without a more amends made in compacte,
In case it is, and in case it is not,
As by example (quoth the fly) put case
That in sum high way, it should be my lot
To drive a carte, in sum one such a plase,
As from that ways side, within little spase,
There were standing a house on a fair green,
And I perceyuyng that way much more cleene
Then the high way, straight to that way I coaste,
And as I drive, the said house to pas bie,
My carte wheel catchth hold of the corner poaste
Against my will. and by violencie,
Asunder crussheth it, to which happily
The rest of that house, is so bent and bound,
That in defaute thereof, all falth to the ground,
In this case: master spider (quoth the fly)
Chance the chance by day, or chance it by night.
And chance it never so unwillingly,
Yet law and laufull reason, showth it right,
That recompense punish mine oversight,
Law maintainth no man, with or against will,
To do an act so, to any man's ill.
But now put case, that within this high way,
This house were set, where as my cart should go,
Which did so crushe the same, that there it lay,
For houses in high ways encroachyng so,
Cast I down one house, or a thousand mo,
There am I bound by reason nor by law,
To recompense, the value of a straw.
Weyth not the law (fly) these cases for such,
As both in the tone case, and in the the other,
The owners hurt to be fully as much
In one of these cases, as in an other,
His hurt is (quoth the fly) in the one and the other,
Hurtful a like, for be he leefe or loathe,
Down cumth his house, in either case of both.
But the doing diffreth, for the first fact
I did against the law, as law does tell,
And every wight is chargde with every act,
Of his own doing, at his own parell.
Whereby the law provides very well,
Drining my cart, by adventure at lage,
The hurt in thaduenture I must discharge.
But in this last fackte, the fawte (quoth the fly)
Is wholly turnde unto the suffrers side,
For him self did an act vnlaufullie,
His house to set up there, which deed so tried,
My self and eeke my carte, law does provide
Harmles to save, for sir the law is strong,
In taking such hurtes, for hurtes without wrong.
And in this last case (quoth the fly) stand we,
In all this hurt here done, I do no wrong,
But all the hurt ye have, is (ye may se)
By your wrong dooyng, on your self a long,
What can you spiders, show your selves among,
By any kind of law, what wey ye may
Lawfully bylde, within this my high way.
ornament
The spider (at the flies answering him to a question) charge the fly with
procuryng of other flies to disturb him in his copwebs, which the fly
denithe. Cap. 20.
depiction of spider and fly story

THy high way (fly) art thou lord of this soil?
A poor lord sir. but if truth may be found,
I stand in case to defend this spoil.
What is thy name (quoth the spider) speak round?
Buz (quoth the fly) with curtsy to the ground.
That name of buz (quoth the spider) does show thee,
Even for a ringleader, to make me know thee.
Of all the flies, that herein have been stayde,
Never was there one in my conscience,
But the first word that ever he has said
Was bvz. which is aparant evidence,
That all flies have thee in great reverence,
Thinkyng the policy or power of thee,
Shall set them all from hens at libertee.
Whereby I may (and do) take occacion,
To think: that thou have been the soole procurer,
Of every fly, that has made invasion
Into my house, and such alewde allurer,
Ought by good reason, to be kept much surer
Then forty flies, such as thou have beforne
Entiste hither: and then laughed them to skorne!
Sir (quoth the fly) truth is my true record,
I am giltles of this suspected blame,
I have enciste in ernest nor in board
Any fly hither, nor it is no game,
One fly to mock at an others harm or shame,
Nor by entisement to bring a fly, where
As the entiser does stick, to cum there.
And though (as I said) I can prove it such,
That this high way, is mine for free passage,
And that every fly has right here as much,
Yet was I never so set in dotage,
To set any fly (by vndescreete courage)
To put possession of his right in ure,
To his destruction, and your displeasure.
If ye can prove that ever I provoked
Any fly hither, by word or wrighting,
Or by sine of purpose craftily clokte,
To possession here, any fly erighting,
Then, without mo words by mouth or endightyng,
In our hole case much doughtfull how to try,
I yield my self condemde vndoughtedly.
ornament
They fall in comparison touching their evidence written or un written, whereunto
the fly leith prescripcton of custom, (which he before alleged) supposing
thereby, that the spider ought both to deliver him, and make him aniendes. Cap.
21.
depiction of spider and fly story

Well (quoth the spyder) though this suspicion
Were clearly clered: yet have thy self clear,
Brought in an other of worse condition,
As thus: thy claim to have thy high way here,
Bringth thee suspected, a thief to apere.
This is tholde use alwaie: all the world knows,
True men: in at doors, thieves in at windows.
Master spyder: harp no more on that stringe.
I cum the same way that your maistership does,
There is small melody in that harpinge.
Conferryng presidentes with present sooth,
Chaungth often, the barkyng tongue to biting tooth.
Bark or byte who will, fly I dare abide
To se title present, by president tried.
Sir: so dare I then: and shall be well able,
To void your suspicion. and prove my gyse,
Not only lawful: but thereto lawdable.
What evidence have you contrary wise.
But gnates, beese, waspes, hornetes, and all we flyse,
At creuis, and windows, with bag and baggage,
Have had egres and regres by old usage.
This weith as (who say) there is none evidence
Showth contrary, but this way thine may be,
Which is no proof, for thy part worth two pence
So might I claim every thing that I see
Which were in writing: not forbidden me
But it is not enough, not to be denide,
For tytels must specially be specifyde.
Sir (quoth the fly) specialties in writing
Specially to specify: yours and mine,
Should we be driven: to show such enditinge
That would (I fear) blanke both our parts in fine,
Our chief evidence that we can asine,
For proof or disprofe: by any decrees,
Standth in virtue, of unwritten veritees.
Fly, this tale weith not a fly tail (quoth he)
Can thou show ought: of proof or disprofe clear
By written or unwritten words to see.
But that our posession: shall clear apere,
As ancient as thy succession here.
Sir (quoth the fly) I stick not to agree
Ye have been posseste, here: as long as we.
And long mote be. For by the god of might,
I never knew fly: but was with the same,
^artely content as fer as by right
Your own ground might bear, to enlarge your frame.
But to be plain, this is the thing we blame,
That ye thus of will, without our consent,
Us(...) pe on us: by mean of encrochement.
Good honest flies a thowsande that I know,
Will say and swear: it was tharustomde gise,
That spiders builded in every window,
In the top: or by the sides in such wise,
As the rest of the latesse for all flise,
By common known custom, when we would iet,
^tode free at liberty: from any let.
But this is building of an other sise
How may any fly: this way easily get,
By any way that his wit can devise
Here is a frame: in such a ^acion set,
As all were fish: that might cum to the net.
So fer this latesse is over covered.
I marvel your self will se it suffered.
The case of the carte: in law laid e^ this
(Custom adioinde) this way mine own to try)
Auouchth for me that you have done amiss
To encroche or usurp unlawfully,
In my high way, then of reason think I,
^e ought: in law, custom, and conscience,
Both let me pass: and make me recompense.
ornament
The spider denith the flies description of custom, allegeyng the saiynge of
aunciente spiders for his intereste by custom. wherein anon vothe showing
each to give small credit to other, the fly moves to put the mattier in
arbiterment, which (as yet) the spider does not grant. Cap. 22.
depiction of spider and fly story

Law and custom, those twain of thy laid three
(Namely law) some what resoned here have been
But of conscience (save that name, namde we)
No word was touchte, since we did first begin.
Time comth not yet, to bring conscience in.
Oflawe and custom: to ease rygours force
Conscience at last course: procures remorce.
But thy carte case: and al cases last laid,
In charge of trespass thy part to defend
May be determinde (for ought here yet waide)
As they on law and custom do depend
which thou do allege, with me to contend.
But thy descripcion of prescripcion here
In our acustemde rightes, I deny clear.
Fly: I can bring forth spiders true and old,
More worshipful then thou canste bring forth flyse
To swear that to them, their forefathers told
Time fer beyond mind, customs exercise
Aproued us to bylde in as large syse,
As I have bilded here. and in thy plat,
Ten or twelve holes, to crepe in and out at.
Towchyng custom, thothe of ten thowsande flyse
Can (by wale of witness) bring naught to ease
In flies credence, to spyders, there does rise
No dyffrence in oath, the worth of a pease
Between a thowsond flies, and a thowsande flease.
Naie fly (quoth he) and shoke him by the neb
There shall no flies oaths, minish this copweb,
Where ye (quoth the fly) think flies perciall,
For witness herein, that challenge may be
In spiders and flies in this case equal,
Sins spiders be parties as well as we,
Why should not we fear percialitee,
As much in you: as you think it in us,
And trust you as little, this standing thus.
But reason (said the spyder) ye so do.
Then can this trespass not be tried this way:
We are at ye and nase again both two.
For you no credence give, to that I sase
And I as little credit that you lay
Naught grauntinge each to other: but denial,
How can we twain determine then this trial.
If (quoth the spider) I would condissende
To bylde in corners: at thine assignement,
And straight let the pass, we were straight at end
So were we (quoth the fly) were I content,
At your only word, my life to relente
Of which two ways, if the tone nor the the other
Be reasonable, let us look out an other.
What way (fly) by thy faith can thou epsy
That may seem mete: to make us twain agree,
If I be the deviser (quoth the fly)
Then shall you choose one, whom it pleases ye,
And I an other whom it pleases me.
And as they two awarde upon the whole,
We two to bide, happy man, happy dole.
So might I happily be happy (quoth he)
But I could not be: both bappie and wice,
This proverb proves this a fools decre,
A thing assuerde, to hasarde at the dyce.
It bought and had, to bie at a new price
Or bring a certentie for any saying,
To an uncertainty: by douwtfull daying.
All things considered in this time and place
What were wy wit: to put this thing in ure,
What could I win by that cast in this case
And what could thou here lose sms thou art sure,
at will, in my hand to die or endure.
The worste of this weie were hurteles to the,
And the best of this way: fruteles to me.
ornament
The fly (after a few words concerning appeal) does brefely recapitulate
theffect passed in the principal case. Ca. 23.
depiction of spider and fly story

Sir: if ye consider nothing but winnynge,
No doubt (quoth the fly) it is so in deed.
But by your promise: made me at beginning,
Of justice here. I hope no haste of speed,
For gredy gettinge shall make ye proceed,
Contrary thereto in hope of which dealing,
I did at beginning renoke apealyng.
But if your dealyng: deal dole otherwise
Contrarying justice erst granted here,
My reuocacion of apeale likewise
I will revoke, and as things now apere,
I must revoke that reuocacion clear.
Or else that justice here: although ye would,
Can not (acording to your promise, hold.
For so is now this matter brought about
That it to judge: neither can you nor I,
We both be parties so perciall that this doubt
Must be discuste and iudgde indifferently,
By folk indifferent. which if ye deny,
In such form as I have here erste devised,
Then by the Justice which ye erste promised,
I claim three common law. where I am sure,
To save me safe from harm, that law has ground.
For if your evidence, be put in ure,
That is so slight, I shall be gilteles found.
And being silent, if no witness sound
Then this bondage of prison to discharge
Proclamacion straight, shall set me at large.
Naie sir: ye must pay your fees er ye go.
But goth my part, fly in thine opinion,
No nere unto the pyth? for sooth sir no.
Your case in law: is not worth an inion.
Well fly (quoth he) sins thou art a minion,
Of so large learning: I pray the teach me,
Sum lesson: in this tale to believe the.
That lesson shewth here, not so far behynd^
In lack of learning as of remembrance,
For if it like you, here to call to mind
By brefe recytall: the very substance,
Argude (as yet) between us in this chance,
I doubt not in the same your self to se
Cause, in my former words to credit me.
As thus. ye remember our mattier paste
Your self has divided into parts three,
Burglary, felony, and trepas last.
And first: for burglary ye saw: and must se,
That flies: by nature no night thieves can be.
And though we could: yet might your self in sight,
Witness with me: to cum now by day light.
And unto this: touching the second charge,
Which charge me with single felony,
I am assured: you serching at large,
Remembering my cumminge unwillingly,
Shall well perceive, my pure innocence.
In talk whereof: the trewthe must make us sai^,
That we at length: were driven to ye and naie.
Wherein I prove, that mine affirmative:
Your negative, so crerely does confute,
That I dare say, any iewry alive:
(You letting not the case fall to nonsute,
But stand to trial, in that we dispute,
Shall, (upon hearing: what this mounth until)
Give verdite with cumming against my will.
And thirdely: in trespass you charginge me
With the hurt of your house: I nothing donte
The carte case shall make iewry and judge se,
This trespass on my side clean scraped out.
And this debate at end so brought about
That in this lates: law shall well aproue,
The holes all mine, and you to bylde above.
Now sins of us twain: no one can be judge.
Because we be both extreme perciall partise
I wonder what cause: does cause you to grudge,
At the arbitermente that I devise.
In these three said cases there can arise,
In your recovery by the common law,
None advantage, to the value of a straw.
ornament
The spider puth a case in appeal, ill (in appearance) for the fly, as the
spider drawth it: and anon he by example of the lords will: had in courts of
copy hold, seming to lean to, ward will: the fly laboreth to qualefie that
will. Cap. 24.
depiction of spider and fly story

THou shalt (quoth the spider) in this strife all
Answer thy self by thy answering me,
To one question: which now demand I shall.
My fellow fly, I put this case to the.
That this same day, at London chaunste to be,
Some man committing such a heinous deed,
That death (by law in London) should proceed.
The which deed: being at Louane committed,
Law (there) for that deed no death does provide.
The faughter herin, so wilely witted,
To save his life, apealth to be repride.
From London to Louane, there to be tried.
Were it (fly quoth he) reason in this case,
That this man's apeale should take any plase.
I think sir (quoth the fly) it were no reason
To grant request of such apeale in race
Of trymes, deserving death, at any season.
But thottender being taken in place,
Where he hid the deed, to stand to the grace,
Of lawful law, in that precinkte present.
Which: so iudgeing him, I take just judgment.
Ouoth the spider god have mercy on the.
A men (quoth the fly) but why speak you that?
I speak (and pray) it even of charity.
Never was there yet, any lark or wat,
Before hawke or dog, flatter darde or squat
Then by this answer: al thy matter is,
Thou haste condemde thy self, now in all this,
How so (quoth the fly) thus (quoth the spyder)
Thou grantst, where faughters do an enterprise,
Which, worthy death the law does consider
Thenterpriser shall apeale in no wise
But take such chance, as by law there does rise
Adewe arbiterment: and nisi prius,
Instead of twelve or twain: one shall now try us.
What one shall that be? my self quoth he.
Thy deed done here: has by law here, death sure,
Alonely to be tried at will of me.
At mine erste sewte, (said the fly) here in ure,
Ye promised justice to be so pure,
That with or against me, ye would naught do,
But as my self in reason must gre to.
Wherein we being cumminge toward the point
In performance of promise: to see trial,
Now is just justice, so iotted out of ieinte,
That ye here unjustly, stand at denial,
To do me justice and would by power ryall:
Sirecte mine acquitall or condemnacion,
Even as will in both: weith your acceptacion.
Fly: do thou way my will herein thus light?
In every pety court of copy hold,
All grauntes that pass, passing in their most might
Pass to hold at lords will, and so enrolde.
Sir (quoth the fly) copy holders of old,
Hold to them and theirs, at will of the lord,
As with custom of the manner does acorde.
But this term custom: stands not here idle
Custom (in many cases) seems to me,
To tenauntes a bukler. to lords a bridle.
From trespassing wherein if tenauntes se,
(On their parts) customs kept as they should be,
The will of the lord most wilfully bente,
Winthe naught worth a bente, by customs extents.
Were this window your manner in freholde
And flies here your copy holders known clear.
And that I: being your tenant, ye would
Ley in me, breche of custom to apere.
Yet should not your only will be judge here.
For as thomage (upon their oath) present,
So custom bindthe the lords will in judgment.
Fly: thinkste thou this case a bukler for the?
This case: to our case (quoth the fly) being scande
Is another sword to you: nor bukler to me.
With sword and bukler we may go or stand,
Between both cases and touch neither hand.
This case: to lords and tenauntes: is concurrant.
But you are not my lord, nor I your tenant.
ornament
The ^^ie claims all holes in all windows to be ^^^es in ^^eholde: and that
spiders should build by the sides or in the ^oppe^: which case to be ^ride
by law or custom, they in manner agree: but the fly moving it to be tried at
the common law, the spider re^^seth it: whereupon arises mattier of d^gression,
in which the fly commends the spider for expedite heringe hereof, brefely
definyng the property of justice, mercy, and tyranny. Cap. 25.
depiction of spider and fly story

I take not my self appointed to pates,
As you will set limittes and bownds fer or nere
But clearly I claim: all holes in all lates,
To be flies freholde. as may right well apere,
Where I distribed when I prescribed here.
Your auntiters buildinge: the sides and the top.
As ^^ise at libertee, in and out might chop.
And as law and custom or the tone of them,
Shall judge this point: wherein standth much part of all,
To that will I stand: refusinge none of them.
Standinge with your pleasure this case so stand shall,
Then quoth the spider take custom: let law fall.
^awe can ^ittle say herein. Law must refar,
The judgment, to custom to make or mar.
For ^rew trying of custom. Sir (quoth the fly),
The law (please it you) may try how custom weith,
What law fly? the common law sir think I,
Where shall we try fly: what that law herein seith?
In west minster halle sir. Why fly by thy feith,
Wold^^e thou place this case: whereon hangs the sum,
Where (thou saiste) I nor no spider may ^um?
How fer art thou from the quitee toward me,
That thou desyrest in me toward the to grow
Thou woldste bring forth a thousand flise for the,
Where no one spider: for me may make show.
And so by stelthe woldste win mine overthrow.
The law is one ground of four (quoth the fly,)
Which your former grant, graunth to t^ie all by.
And though custom (as who say) in respect
Of trial in this case: is it self law.
Yet (I say) la^e, for foorme in pleding direct,
Aparence of that trial for the to draw,
Is mete to be had. I grant thee that, dawe.
But not without this, that we both do agree,
The pleding to be: where both present may be,
It is meet (quoth the fly) and by you well we^de.
(Vrgente cause except) where mattier shall proceed,
Against any person: or persons leide,
That he or they answer presently in deed.
And in greattest crimes, this has greattest need.
For in crimes most criminal: that law is peine
The charged party: shall no counsel obtain.
Which shouth that law: in most need, least help ^alow.
Whereto: if the party be kept in absence,
So that he: nor no man for him may auow,
Any word in plea: pleadid for his defense,
This law is sumwhat sore, in my conscience.
Though fair tales in mine ear, peinte this a feire race,
Yet in mine Iie: this case has a crabed face.
Sins ye deny me not law: but ye deny,
To plead this plea: where ye present may not be,
Of that denial: apeerth so good cause why,
That I shall not only most gladly agree,
To have it pleaded where we both shall decre,
But also I rejoice: that your self espieth,
This gall in this case: and what ill therein lies.
One other joy (with many sorowse) I have.
The cause whereof, commendth you vnspecablie.
In less time (in manner) then my self could crave,
After I am brought ^ere: in prison to lie,
It stanth with your pleasure: most charitablie,
To here, ye and determine out of hand.
How my case standth, and whereto my self shall stand.
Oh (master spider (the self deeds done in this,
Commend you more, then may pen or tunge of man,
Thatachid of suspicion: or fact amiss,
Enquerie at full had, quickly as ye can,
As justice judges, streighte to dispatche him than,
Not letting him lie: till his lyms rot or lame,
Justice and mer^ie: both concur in the same.
Fly (quoth the spider) favor is not al lost,
Shewde unto the for thou canste consider it.
But many other flise therbe in the cost,
In having like favor: the devil speed the whit,
The^ do ponder it: wherefore it is not fit,
When chance or deserte: fl^se into prison strike.
To use froward and flexibill flise: a like,
Justice (quoth the fly) weith what, and why to do.
Not to whom to do, by favor, mede, or frey,
The man is not the mark: that iustise shoots to,
The man's matter: Justice shoots at alweie.
Between god: and the devil: Justice does displey,
His baner indifferently. Yeldinge each part,
In all dew dewtise, the very dew desarte*
Mercy: ioynde with justice does either remit
Or qualify peines, that dew by justice seem.
Tiranie not with justice, but against it:
Not weiyng deserte, awardth peines most extreme.
Tyranie, and mercy, thus may we here dems
Tyrany: not with but against justice showth,
Mercy with: and not against justice growth.
Justice place I here, in the mids as who say.
Mercy on the right hand of justice to stand.
Tiranie on the left hand. now if we sweie,
From the straight line of justice: to either hand,
That sweie must needs bring our sweiyng to be scande,
As we may apere to sweie aparantly,
Either toward mercy, or toward tyrany.
But in leaning to any hand of these twain,
From sole justice: when we incline to decline,
As common welthe in this case may us maintain,
From corrupt construction, this case to define,
I wish that we: each as our callinges asine,
May lean to that hand with mete strength, or vigor,
That mercy leanth unto: rather than rygor.
ornament
The fly (for cause here appering) desires to repete his distinction of
justice, mercy, and tiranie, which the spider denith, wherewith the fly leith
to the spider, breche of a promise made to him before in discharge, whereof the
spider answers. C. 26.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe spider hunge down both his head and his lyp.
Like one y^ had naught: or wist naught: what to speak.
Wherewith thought the fly: I have given him a nyp,
These distinctions: have shewde his part so weke,
That studiyng for matter: he findth none to break.
But where he thought the spider in study deep,
He was deceived: the spider was a sleep.
And herwith sterting awake, fie sloth quoth he.
I had forgot my self. I herd my self rout.
Naie sir (quoth the fly) ye had forgotten me,
The best part (for my part) ye have slepte quite out.
Naie not all fly: for I put the out of dout.
Of all thy words had: in my commendacion,
I herd every word: and can make relation.
But thine enter: to matter more serious,
Brought me a sleep: but I prey the hertelie,
What Is the point of that case so imperious,
The pith is the distinction: quoth the fly,
Between justice, mercy, and tyranie.
Which: sins you herd not: and it much mete to here
I shall repete to you in form brefe and clear.
That would (quoth the spider) make me sleep again.
And phisike forbidth me to sleep twice a day,
Repeticion hereof I deny thee plain.
Reason, law, custom, and conscience: ye say,
Shall (quoth the fly) all our present matter way.
But touching reason, law, custom, and conscience,
Two of those four principles: are gone even sens.
Which two (quoth the spider?) these two (quoth the fly)
Reason, and conscience as how fly quoth he?
as thus quoth the fly. Ye retreted lately,
And reuokte a case: which ye had granted me,
Touching cumming here: against my will to be.
At which: when I grudged: ye made me promise,
To have in the like case, lybertee likewise.
And now when I would (not revoke) but repete
This pe^e: for my part, ye plainly that deny.
What reason or conscience is here to get,
Good reason: and good conscience: fellow fly.
But since reason is sufficient this to try,
Let conscience (I say) stay: till the last instante.
Least narow conscience, resons wide scope might scant.
And upon perusing: let reason straight judge,
How far fled from reason: thy self herin art.
My retreted case (whereat thou did erste grudge)
Is: of matter present: a principal part.
Between which: and thy case thou may drive a carte.
Distinction of terms: in our maine matter mente,
Is (at next) a very fer fet incidente.
But though thou will say, thou can draw this thy case.
To stand with (or within) our gronnde principal.
Yet is it nedeles, to be brought here in place.
Distinction of these terms: and other all.
I know: and can weie: as well as a fly shall,
This degression: in tellyng: lost time before,
And now in repeting: it would lose time more,
Sir: it may length time: but not lose time: friend fly,
Length of time: is no loss of time to the in ded^.
Length of time is thy geine: but I lose therbie.
Long time winth the long life. And leseth my quick speed.
Which I should quikly have: wear this quikly decrede,
Of this my frewtles walk: avoiding the way,
To win weie more frewtfull: this way lets asaie.
From pith of this process (fly) where we fled out,
Thither retrete we: more loss of time to flee.
This repetition which thou woldste bring about,
As winnig thereof winth naught at length to thee,
So lesing thereof leseth naught at length by me.
Sins repeticion, the fly could not recover,
He shoke his head, and so let it pass over.
ornament
The spider (reducing the ^ly to the principal matter) moves the trial to be
had in his own lordeship: which the fly misliketh. whereon eusueth a glaunce
at the diuersitee of gouernemente, between one spyder and twelve flise. Cap. 27.
depiction of spider and fly story

Ere while (by prescripsion) of old fliese thou leydst,
All holes in lattes: to be other fliese and thine.
In which prescripcion against us: as thou seydst,
Acustomed right in windows does define,
In the top and sides: our building to assine,
Which I denide: saying our forefathers old,
Prescribed for us, to byld here: where we would.
Upon this issue thou sheudst thy self content,
That custom should (being pleaded in law)
Judge how the case stands by customs extent.
Pleading whereof: to common law thou did draw.
Pleading wherein: as thou said: and I saw,
Should be in such place as I could not cum to:
I denide trial there, and deny it I do.
Which denial to be reason, thy self told,
And here: from purpose principal: out fled we
By thy digressing. But again to take hold,
And go forth therein, now let us further see,
(Sins the common law) is as unmeet for me
As meet for thee (to plead custom herein)
What other meet mean: for us both, we may win.
What think you (quoth the fly) friend fly this think I,
Sins I will not: and thou can not, go hence,
So that we both shall remain here presently,
To here and answer in personal presence,
Law, in my lordship: must try customs defense.
Be ye there again (quoth the fly) by my fay
We shall catch bydres to morrow: and flies to day.
Will is now cum in again: and must be called law,
By thy ground laid for copy hold at will,
It seemth: thou needst not care for my will a straw,
As thomage presents (said thou) good or ill,
So does the lords will, in judgment save or spill.
So should the lords will do sir, I therein meant,
But here goth the hare away: right to prevent,
I: being another spider, nor spiders peer,
Nor spiders tenant, nor spiders friend (ye say)
I may have quick speed: and fail of good speed here.
Though thomage should uprightly the verdite lay,
And the lord (in judgment) with the right likewise way,
Yet sum say, sumtime, that the law is eended,
In sum case, in sum place: as folk are freended.
And I (quoth the spider) being another fly,
Nor to any fly, of aliaunce or kin,
Nor taken any flies friend: why may not I
In any pleading place: save that we be in,
Dought there (as thou dredst here) good speed to win.
This case shall keep our case: as the case now falls,
Both from westminster hall: and all such law halles.
Thou being abroad, buzzing in every place,
Where thou have more freendship, or les enmitee
Then I have: thou may in eury place purchase
Friends against me: mo then I against thee.
And when we in pleading, ioind in issue be,
Thou may find freendshyp, to impanell the quest,
Of twelve such freendly flies, as seem for thee best.
Which kind of trial (for my part) I like not.
Wise lernde counsel, costly fine pleas first devise,
With cost and peine long folowde. And after that,
Twelve unlearned rude ignorant corrupt flise,
Shall strike the stroke, as blind affection does rise.
By excellent wits: law is ever begoon,
And by ignorant wits: end of law often won.
Which to help, were I one of the procurers,
I would think it far better to breed up in brood,
One wise true judge: then twelve folish false iurers,
It is (quoth the fly) as old flise understood,
Not more hard (for spiders) to spy twelve flise good,
Then easy (for flise) to find one spider naught,
And now note we here: to what end this is brought,
In place of twelve flise: were one spider plaste,
To give verdite and judgment: of matters clear,
Yet might that change bring small good speed: in great haste,
One wyly lernde spider might hurt as much here,
As twelve vnlernde blunte flise: by ought does apere,
And twelve good flise should (for all flise are not ill,)
Do more good then one ill spider: wey who will.
Between one good spyder: and twelne ill flise,
Or those twelve flise good: and that one spider ill,
Apt comparison (quoth the spider) does not here rise,
But that one: and those twelve: draw we here until.
(To work good or ill) of one good or ill will
And so then best or worste, twelve or one: let us try,
The One best sort of two: to govern windows by.
And the one spiders part (in this part) I Will take.
And i will take part with the twelve flise (quoth the fly)
I Will ley first (quoth the spider your part to shake,)
Resons: leide by a learned clerk formerly.
For the rule of one ruler capitally.
Whose arche articles here together to wey,
In these next words here together: I will ley.
Exampling the government of one most hie,
He puth the three persons: which three, are god one.
And further he bringth in (this texemplifie)
The ship, on one keele all parts stand: eurychone.
The house: standth under one top rafter alone.
Thoste, under one captain. Bese under one be.
The cranes one crane. the herd one shepherde says he.
To this (quoth the fly) an other clerk answerith.
Similitude of god and man. To man and man,
As far wide: as far fet: the matter varith.
And lybertee (being gods great gift to scan)
To take from all, no one by autoritee can.
As who say: any one man's autoritee,
Shall not or should not, lose all men's lybertee.
Further (he says) one man's judgment is subdewde,
To ill affectes, sooner then many can be.
As one booket of water (in reason vewde)
May sooner be poisoned: we in reason se,
Then may a poole or a ponde, and more says he,
Though one crane gyde all, where ever cranes range,
Yet: now this one: then that one: they often times change,
Which exsaumple partly does your part apall.
For it as much may a senate signify.
As one: one time chosen, all times to rule all,
And where all beese follow one be: unchangeably,
Yet is that be: of a more exelensy.
And of an other kind: then the other beese are.
As the sheperde above the herd: he did declare.
This last sample moves choice of one ruler in place,
Of a more exelent kind, then the rest be.
The said lernde man (quoth the spyder) in this race,
Repliyng to your clerks resons, this says he,
First where your clerk says: one wightes auctorite
Can not take all from libertee, this man seith.
It Is not lybertee, to live as man's will weith,
But to live in thordinance of good lawse.
And the order of nature (says he) assinthe,
Sum to serve, sum to rule, as aptenes drawse.
The weak wit: strong of body, to service enclinthe.
The witty lernde head, reason toward rule combinthe,
And a king calde in scripture gods anointed,
Has (of god) gifts above the rest appointed.
God promises to rule the hearts of kings,
Which gift showth a king above the rest,
And where it is more hard (by your clerks sayings)
To corrupt many: then one, so our clarke witnes^e,
More easy to find one good, then many, thus self,
Thargument of these two, and our clerk anon,
Chokte your clerk with one reason ioinde hervpone.
These three kinds of common welthe, he tried.
Of a king, of the peers, and of commons last.
In which as there may be: three good rulinges weide,
So may be in these three, three ill rulinges cast.
In rule of a king, tiranie may blow blaste.
In peers, usurping. In few commons governance,
All to be governors: may them selves auaunce.
Now: whose contrary is worst (says he) thates best.
But tyrane is worste of these three, ergo,
Rule or reign of a king is best: manifest.
This is the conclusion of our clarke: and so,
Thargument (in effect) endth without word mo.
Which: for rule preferde in a senate or prince,
For one or many rulers, does thy part convince.
Sir (quoth the fly) these old clerks clarkly saying,
The repeting thereof let us leave of quighte.
And fall we to reason: of weighty waiyng,
Experience, herein seen in our own sight.
On whose side these or these like cases run right.
Beet (quoth the spider) but ere we enter that,
Here me clear a case: that might displease sumwhat.
In that we (in this case) draw nere to compare,
A spider to a king: and flise to a senate,
Contectors that capcious or curious are,
(If cause shall: to them: our talk communicate)
May chance to coniect^: that we two derogate,
Those two estates, in that we two do devise,
To cowple kings and peers, with spiders and flise.
But witness thou with me, as I will with the.
That for my part I know: and for thine I trow,
We no whit mean those states: Imbased to be.
By our talk, as a king in propertee to show.
Like a spider: or comparison to grow.
In flise and a senate. For propertee of flise.
Most rude of us. Not so rude: that tenterprise.
Sir (quoth the fly) as you here for your self say,
So may you here assuredly for me swear.
This example mean I: to respect no way,
But only thorder of rule: that those states bear.
And so resembling them and us, I while ear,
Intended, by way of example, to treat.
And do so (quoth the spider, an end to beat.
Then (with your fauer) have at it (quoth the fly.)
Passing from all former clarkely argument,
To our own experience familierly.
For flise government, I Will show good reason bente.
By sample of a senate. Standing in extente,
At this present day. From hundrethes of years paste,
To this day prospering, and so like to last.
It self being but a city, Does yet possess,
Kingdoms: fer from it: in civil order such,
As no king has one realm in more quietness.
Just justice goth forth there, who ever gruche.
Their people obedient, few other so much.
This sample of senate: for flyse rewle I say,
Against one spyder, or one king here I lay.
The most (quoth the spider) that this makth for the,
Is that, that senate: rewith as well as a king.
To which one senate (for mo there none be)
Many kings, in many realms: have sole governing.
Each one of whose governance, all (or most,) proving.
In both kinds of common welthe: since they began,
As good as that one ^enate, scan who can scan.
One kings rule as good: as one senates rule is,
Compares herin (For rule) both our parts even.
And many kings rulyng so, the number in this,
Shouth thy side, to the worste shore to be dreuen.
And by one reason mo, more weakness is given.
Unto thy part: which plainly shall apere,
In these my next words, now following here.
Although those senators in sundry respects,
Seem equal for governance in open show,
Yet in other sundry respects proof directes,
Show: of one among all: above all to grow.
One has of all, these place, and reverence we know,
In whose estate: stay of the rest does most stand.
Having voice, as much as twain: in his own hand.
In many and most things. Preeminence he has,
Most like to kyngly superiorite.
Two parts of three: in senates gyding path.
Are drawn out of kyngly rule, in properte.
Without which: to govern well, it will not be.
Thus a senates rewle. wherein ye your brag brought,
Backyng aid of a kings tewle (ye se) does naught,
I could (quoth the fly) say more but I will not.
This case standth not in our case principally,
This law: or that law: what law stand, it skill not.
So the law and ministers: give justice justly,
My cause is so just, that no just law fear I,
Nor for every fault in laws: or lawiers geste,
To remove laws or lawiers, I think not best.
Corrupcion in laws: or ministers of lawse,
I wish us to redress: rather then remeue,
Either laws or lawyers: without weighty cause,
The case: upon light cause: if we should often prene,
Where it should ease one: it might twenty agreue,
Deuysers in such things: may sooner devise,
To show ten mischeues: then shape two remedise.
Thou say well (said the spider) but to reuolue,
Thimpediment in law of fond fly Iurers,
I can no way other way resolve
But with them: and al pelting procurers,
To be quite cut of. As lawles enurers,
Of verdites false or foolish: in this or that,
Sumtymes they care not: most times they know not what.
And sure (I think) this sore might be salued sone.
Or the smarte much easde, did discrecion devise,
And diligence put in ure: things meet to be done,
But to lords: laws lawiers homage and iurise,
Corrupt friendship: thou leydst erste here in such wise.
As it generally apereth to repine.
Against all courts: as much as against mine,
As much? ye and so much more sir that except,
Your own self, no wight in your court I there touchte.
Your court of all officers is so clean swepte,
That none officer in that court can be couchte,
But your self. For your self has your self auouchte,
Plaintiff, pleader, iurer, Judge, and iailer.
Stop fly (what) from a reasoner to a railer?
I cry you mercy. Sir if this do displease,
I reuerse and revoke it straight, for I have:
As small apetight, as I shall have small ease,
To move you. Well since thou forgeuenes do crave,
Stand up fly. I forgive even as god forgave.
And how our said case (by custom) shall be tried,
Let us yet once again search how to provide.
Concerning that provision sir (quoth the fly)
If we here (in this your present court) did make,
Agreement: to try this determinately.
Though I hope (as I hope) I should no wrong take,
Yet humbly I beseech you: for my minds sake.
Sins my hartles heart against this trial swells,
To grant to try this case sum way, sum where else.
ornament
They agree to be tried by arbitermente, whether all or how many holes in all
windows belong to spiders, and how many to flies, the spider chosing for his
part, the ant or pismere. the fly choosinge for his side, the butterfly.
whereupon they, the one couple in one part, and the other couple in an other part,
talk together forthwith. Cap. 28.
depiction of spider and fly story

NOw (quoth the spider) by this cross of ten bonse,
There lives not thy like (for a fly) I trow,
For tunge wit: thou art the fly for the nonse.
But go to: let us toward end sum wey grow.
I shoude my mind last: wherefore thy mind now show.
What way (as thou thinkste) we may yet best puruey,
To knit up this knot, without further deley.
The best way in my mind when all waise are cast,
Is that one (quoth the fly) that I touched twyse.
To have been our trial, in all cases paste.
Which was: to put the whole in comprimise.
Fly: this last one case: to be tried in that wise.
I grant thee. I thank you (quoth the fly) praiyng,
That we may name our daisemen in this daiyng.
I name (quoth the spider) a cousin of mine.
Perce pismere. called antony ante otherwise.
Of person small, of wit great upright and fine.
And I (quoth the fly) what ever hap shall rise,
My graund sire Bartilmew butterfly devise.
Ofbody big: of wit and speech blunt, and plain.
Well (quoth the spider) agree we on these twain.
They did so: and forthwith there lighted by chance,
Hard by the copwebs side, the butterfly.
Wherewith one of the young spiders did auaunce,
At tholde spiders commaundment, in haste to hy,
For the ant to repeire to him by and by.
Speed came so to pass, that at tholde spiders hand,
The young spider out of hand, brought thante to stand.
The spider to the ant, and fly to butterfly (after words of gretinge)
declare, that they are chosen their arbiters herein, wherein the ant and
butterfly promise to do their best, and they then anon draw al four together
in (or at) the copweb. C. 29.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe ant to the spider made curtsy low.
Wherwithal the spider to the ant did draw,
Smiling and becking on him, in most loving show.
They shoke hands: manerly as ever I saw.
But for flise, as Stans puer ad mensam showth law,
For making of curtsy: or shaking of hands,
Butterflise pardon flise. bound h^^^e and foot in bands,
The spider: as of use in talk new entri^,
(Friends are of friends: the state of their friends friendly,)
Axte how his cosins (thantes father and mother) did.
His brothers sisters with all kyn and aly.
Thant said they did well. And in like words hearty,
Axte him how his aunte spider and all theirs farde.
The spider with thanks to thant, their helthes declarde.
The fly of the butterfly, with tears tender,
Axte: to know his grandam butterflise estate.
With all uncles and auntes, of their engender.
The butterfly said well. And did him animate,
To be of good ^here. False heart to captiuate.
Reason then ebbing: tears of natures flowing,
To show their grefes as reason might make showing,
The spider to thant. And fly to butterfly,
Discourste their greues a part: and how they therein,
Refusinge sundry weise of end: finally,
Chose them twain for arbiters: sum end to win.
And since the one twain: and the other twain: are of kin,
The One ^hooseth thon, the other choseth the other.
Both promisde their best, the tone and the the other.
The spider declares, and the fly grants thissue to be, that all flies
^laime (in freholde) all holes in all windows to be theirs by custom: and
spiders claim all holes with all parts of all windows to be their freholde
by custom: and after talk between them therein had, thant requires full
instruction of the two parties to them two arviters. Cap. 30.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe spider and fly thanking the other both,
Thei^oure thereupon drawing to gither all,
The spyder: directly to the matter goth.
Cousin ant: and fellow buterfly: ye shall,
Understand: that we twain do you twain now call,
Not to wey all cases in which we contend,
But one. on which one, all seem to depend.
The fly claimth by common custom beyond mind,
All holes in all lates: flies freholde to be.
And spiders (says he) by custom are asinde,
To bilde at sides or in top: whereto mark ye,
I say that custom awardthe all windows fre,
At spiders wills without that: that any flise,
Have any such right, by customs warantise.
That this is our issuee, we do both agree.
And upon this issue. we be both agreede,
That you two: by arbiterment shall decre,
What custom has herein: directely decreede.
Is it thus ^^ie (quoth thant) yea (quoth the fly) in deed.
As conscience in you twain: for us twaiue shall try,
How custom does stand, so (for my part) stand I.
Thou semste (quoth the spider) a costerde monger.
Conscience every handwhile thou doste cry.
I must (quoth the fly) se sum token stronger.
Ere I can suppose you of that mystery.
I call not for conscience more commonly.
Then you speak of it seelde, fly I told the erste.
Cause why: that conscience at last end should be perste.
Thates now (quoth the fly) if these two now take end,
As I hope they shall, but here me thinkth I smell,
That your cast is: conscience thus to suspende,
First till the end. And then at the end fair and well,
Cut conscience of: conscience so to expel,
As when all is done, conscience may saufely say,
And swear: that conscience came not here this day.
Then conscience or I: the tone shall be forsworn.
Reason, law, custom, and conscience, these four,
To be our growndes in trial: I swear beforne.
Then (quoth the fly) in last end: of this last hour,
Let conscience cum in: to save that oath of your.
What thing can conscience do here fly say thou?
Three things sir (said the fly) which I will tell you.
First conscience as even balance may euenly wey,
What custom yeldth to spiders, and what to flise.
Second, conscience may wey: what reason can ley,
What good and what ill, custom does exercise:
In either part. Thirdly conscience may devise.
To allow the good: and disalow the ill.
Whereon: these two may awarde: as conscience will.
These two fly (as my meaning was to take them,)
We chose daisemen: to try this by reason clear.
But, (not arbiters,) chauncelers thou do make them.
By conscience to judge, how much custom does here.
And what good or ill, in custom does apere.
Last case of which twain (by thee craftily couchte,)
In thissue that we join on: is no whit touchte.
The point that we pitche on: to try out the soth,
By reason (not scrupulous conscience,) is this.
Not what custom is, but what custom does.
How good or how ill: custom it self is,
Is an other farther case. (Which fly, I wis,
When we shall try (by conscience with reason)
It will bring small brag for thy side to season.
For fine: cousin ant, and good man butterfly,
What entreste custom does give to him and me,
How much or how little: in windowse low or by,
As you by reason agree, so I agree.
To this axte the butterfly (fly) what say ye?
Since: who may not as he will, must as he may,
I say (said the fly) as master spider does say.
There said thou wisely (said the spider) and note.
Thou shalt by that saying no damage sustain.
If reason win thee this case every jot,
Conscience (by reason) must me streighte constrain,
Iobey reasons awarde, at hands of these twain.
And pas they with me, I promise mine assente,
To use the gain, as conscience yeldth extente.
So said and so done (quoth the butterfly) in feith,
(Son fly) this is of master spider well waide.
Yea sir (quoth the fly) I here well what he seith,
God reward his maistership: it is well said.
Pleases you (quoth thant evidence may be laid.
By your selves or other: whereby we twain may,
Perceive (in reason) whereto custom does way.
Ye (quoth the spider) cousin cum we hither.
They as far as they list: withdrew them selves quight.
The butterfly and fly: drawing together,
As far, not as they list, as far as they might,
They two telling their tales, as I shall resight.
Which two tales though I: as in one time hid here,
Yet first the one: and then the other: must here apere.
Though two ears in one instant two tales here may,
One tunge: in one instant: two tales can not tell,
Since the one of these two tales: must stand here in stay,
Till the other be told, I think it will do well,
The flise and the butterflise talk to expel,
Or suspende. till the spiders talk with the ant,
Ye may understand: which is next aparant.
ornament
They (in couples separate again) declare each how he would have his arbiter
handle his part: and first is here told in Their persons the tale of the
spider to the ant. Cap. 31.
depiction of spider and fly story

Cousin ant (quoth the spider) that ye be wise,
It is to me known. Whereto all folk do know
That unto the wise, few words at full suffice.
And to your wisdom: I doubt not your show
Of friendship, naturally to me to grow.
For ye know: as we differ far in stature,
So we in kindred: join nie by nature.
President wherein sought, what old records carry,
Shall show no record of solemn solemnitee,
That ever spider and ant: did yet mary,
Which growth (I say) of kindred. not of emnitee
Did I (in you) by ingrate endemnitee
Doubt here: wisdoms judgment: or natures kyndnes,
I were a beast: of beetill heded blindenes.
Which two: in their workinges: to give or take right,
Nature workth friendely, wisdom workth surely.
Though right in each cause: seem the post of most might,
Yet want of wisdom (whose polycy purely)
In sentence or semblance: stern or demurely
Should set forth that right, might in conclusion quick,
Thwighte that myll post of right: to a poding prick.
As if Crossum caput, like an ass in a case.
Setting forth a right, homly in rewde terms bare.
A witty lernde head: that right in that place,
Did finely pronounce: those two tales should declare,
Forty pence diffrence, in right to compare.
One tale in two tellers: with one entente told,
May differ in show: as does brass and fine gold.
And wisdoms sure driftes had: if natures friendship lack,
To take, here, and tell, that tale: in friendly wise,
That right with that wisdom: may yet run to wrack
Thus: wisdom to work surely: by polisise
And nature: to work friendely: both must arise,
To join in one: in friends by friends required,
To obtain things: at hands of friends desired.
Which policy and friendship: where they are knit,
Against partise: to try things in strife growing
They call craft: and corrupsion every whit.
But policy and friendship: with partise showing.
Those partise praise both: with open mouth blowing.
Both standing against folks: folks daily accuse them.
Both standing with folks, folks hourly use them.
But to show our case: out of accusacion.
In putting policy and friendship: in ure,
Mark this short circumstance: in aprobacion.
Comprimise, the end of causes to alure,
Two sorts of election: in course does procure.
In choice of the chosen partise: (here mean I,)
To arbitrate all debates indifferently.
One is: that the two partise in strife meued
Do choose arbyters: to them both indiffrent.
The Other is: that either party grieved,
Does chose for him self: such as he knowth bente,
To take end: or leave end, as he will assente.
The first way of both (though it the besfe way be)
It can not be had: between the fly and me,
In this case present, among spiders and flise
We all: can no one: indifferent provide.
Affinitee, or affection, does so devise,
That all be partise: on the one or the other side.
but might (and should) this case this first wey be tried,
Then might ye honestly: lean parcially
To neither side, by frindship nor policy.
Howbeit this other case, bringth this other cause.
The fly, for him self. And my self, for me.
This choice have chosen: so that this thus drawfe
Another my self: I choose you here to be.
Whereby: in all friendly polisy (ye se,)
Of honesty to stick to my side just,
Not only ye may, but also ye must.
And (as I said) I doubt not but ye will,
And pray ye do. But promise formerly,
Of known reward at end, to flee the ill
Of suspecte bribry: though I presently,
Rate not reward: yet if hereafter I,
May you requite: in pleasure one or other,
Then think your self, as me it as another.
Sir said the ant: your rated rewlde reward,
Now: or at end: if I herein apease you,
Is not the thing: that I so much regard,
But at the end as ye se how I ease you,
I say no more: but use me as it please you.
Cousin: well said (said then the spider) and since
This point is paste, pass we now to the pith.
All holes in all windows (as the fly seith,)
Are flyse freholde. And that we spiders hold,
Right naught by right, but sides and tops on heith.
And we (say I) hold all, thus to be told.
Holes, sides, and tops, broad, narow, deep, and should.
Upon which issue: you two must first here,
And after judge which side bringth proof most clear.
Wherein for me, of ancient parentage,
Ye shall here spiders speak: both sage and wise.
And on the flies behalf: here now in gage,
There will cum forth a sort of forkte tailde flise
That will not stick to tell, a hundred thowsande lise.
And say: and swear that they say true: howbeete,
Ye will (I doubt not) trust them as is meet.
And when ye herein: have done what ye may
To make our evidence shine clear in show.
And darkened theirs, your wisdom shall sure wey,
The gross rude butterfly: to end to grow,
What way ye will. And thus for hie and low.
After words great and many: where few might seem fit,
Into your hands, this matter I commit.
Uncle (quoth the ant) I perceive your mind,
At full. And shall at full: do all my best.
Wherein to do you good: if I can naught find,
Yet shall ye (for me) stand harmeles at least.
Upon this conclusion these twain did rest.
And now: between the fly and the butterfly,
What way was had: ensues ensuingly.
The tale of the fly to the butterfly how he shall use the flyse part: which
done the arbiters withdra we them selves toward the top of the window. Cap.
32.
depiction of spider and fly story

GOod graundfather: since we two (said the fly)
One flesh and blood: by natures woorkyng are,
In that I: from you: desende linially
As in degrees: our petigrees declare,
And that nature: naturally takth care,
To see sucsesse: of her sucseded burdes,
I will not length this piece: with peinted wurdes.
But natures zeal I set: to intersesse
To you, for me, without more words of me,
To do your best: in this my deep distress.
Wherein: what way to work: as I best se,
That shall I show. But ere we so far be,
Here me disclose (for our purposed cause,)
A necessary brefe conceived clause.
We here and see: gifts of nature are diverse.
Sum be fair, sum tall, sum have strength, sum wit.
Sum: in science: excellent contriuers.
Sum have small wit, and have much truth with it.
With many mo: then now: to move were fit.
And this move I: to move here only now,
Diffrence in gifts: between the ant and you.
The ant has gift of right good wit (no doubt.)
And thereto (for an ant) lernde excellently.
And you have gift: of pleines stern and stout.
Not being given so much ingeniously:
To learned judgment: and yet this know I
No wighte can prove: from hence to Englandes eende,
That ever ye brake promise with your freende.
But that ye walde (and durst perform the same,
And this: to this: in you right well is known.
A ground once in your head, fastened in frame,
Let learned lawiers pype up trumpets blown
Of rules in law: to rule you as their own.
Yet shall their reasons no whit make ye starte,
From that grownde on your (or on your friends) part.
Which propertee: is worth ten thowsande mark.
In you to me, in case of comprimise,
For which: against the ant that cunning clarke,
Mine arbiter: I did you here devise.
To hold your hold: in blunte assured wise.
Either this matter wholly to recover,
Or save (at least) my side from giving over.
The ant is sharp and fine. As ye are blunte and gross.
The ant has circumspection: ye have nane.
You pacstaffe plain: the ant crafty and close.
The ant sciuile, you sturdy as the stone.
This said brefe blunte and sharp comparisone:
Shall show who shouth most brag to stinte this strife,
The blunte whetting whetstone, or sharp whetted knife.
To this the butterfly said: fly son mine.
The gross blunte whetting whetstone: fear thou not,
To match this whetted pen knife: sharp and fine,
Tell thou to me plainly: what is the knot
That I shall knit or unknit in this plot.
And thant shall with a tabor take a wat,
As soon as make me shrink from thee: in that.
Sir (said the fly) our issue which ye herd
To ripe remembrance, here yet once again.
I say all holes in windows, are referde,
In tenure of freholde, to us tapertaine.
All spiders: in fides and in tops to remain.
Which he denith: affirming they and he,
Hold all parts in all windows: in tenure fre.
In which two sides, you two the truth must try,
And then determine, as reason can decre.
Upon which side: this shall by custom lie.
Wherein ye shall have flies: to speak for me
Sage, wise, lernde, and well spoken as can be.
And for the spiders part, it is no doubt,
Of spiders there will be: a spiteful route.
The knot herein: which I would have you knit,
Is this. Either do me good, or do none ill.
If: in this matter ye can win no whit,
Then lose right naught: but let it stand even still.
As it erste stood. And if thante no way will.
Give any place, cum harken in your ear.
Wherein he whispred words, what I wist near.
Whereat the spider cast iye, to them both.
Wherewith: the butterfly from the fly flies,
And the ant from the spider away goth.
Each one of whom (anon) the other espieth,
And each of both to other hastily hieth.
The spider: streighte into his house stepte stoutely,
The fly: fell on kneeze to his book deuoutely.
Thanf and the butterfly, fogether drew.
To thextreme part of the window: on the top side.
And after saluting in their manner dew,
Both studiyng: how thentree should be first aplide.
They both: casting their eyes about espide.
On the one side: spiders aproching: six or seven.
And on the other side, flise ten or a leven.
Neither sort the other: ought saluted they,
But both sorts to tharbiters: made curtsy low.
The ante praide both parts in their aproche to stele,
Till the butterfly and he (in talk) might know,
And agree: what way of proceeding should grow.
With this they all, stepped back and there staide.
Whereupon: thant to the butterfly said.
ornament
The ant and the butterfly being met in the top of the window, certain
spiders on their one side, and certain flies on their other side, whom
tharbiters cause to stand back while they two talk together. Cap. 33.
depiction of spider and fly story

BEfore we further wade master butterfly,
No master sir: I am but a yeman (quoth he)
Thates no matter (said thante) as the case does lie,
But: gentilman or yeman: what ever ye be,
Since we two come hither: these two to agree,
Let us be agrede: on the next and best way,
To bring them agrede, in matter here to sale.
Our wase wherein (as thinks me) is this.
We both must banish all parcialitee,
That by corrupt affection, engendered is.
By affinitee, or consanguinitee,
So that we clearly cleue unto equitee.
As of these two: neither of either shall,
Drove us: or either of us: unequal.
Nay (by my fathers soul) said the butterfly,
I will play no whit of venum mecum his part,
Hold with the hare and run with the hounde: will not I,
Such reasons: as out of this blunte brain may starte,
For my friend, run they right: run they ouertharte,
Out will I power them: and in gods name,
For your friend, as ye see cause, do you the same.
These two tales (in these two persons) semde here told,
In the one of plainnes: in the other of policy.
The buttehfly spoke his thought (as he much would.)
Thant contrary talked dissimilately.
His moving the butterfly tendiffrency,
(Him self showing a show to be indiffrent,
Semde moved, for this crafty couerte intent.
The antes drifte was: the butterfly to drive,
From affectionate standing: on the flies side,
Indifferently to stand. While him self contriue,
To be parciall with the spider. which aplide,
Might (thought the ant) to the butterfly vnspide,
Draw him to withdraw: sum part of affection,
Fore bent in his breast, for the flies protection.
But when the butterfly: like a stiff nekte cur,
(As ye have herd) made answer unto the ant,
So that this way would not: the butterfly stur,
Thant (on this plain song having shifte of descant,)
Axed the butterfly: cum we this instant?
To help the spider and fly to take end,
Ye sir (said the butterfly:) that I entende.
If I: for the spider: and you for the fly:
Show our selves: not arbiters but partise,
Reasoning: each for each: affectionately,
What end between us twain: for them can rise:
More then them selves: in them selves can devise:
I cannot tell (quoth the butterfly) howbeit,
Hark what way is best, we take (after my wit.)
You, reasoning for your friend: and I for my freende,
Upon our euidance: to this issue leide,
If my reasons seem better then yours at eende,
You: alowing them above your own, here weide,
Or your the better reasons: in my head steide.
I alowing them likewise: above mine own,
Reason may set end, and time show end, well grown:
Upon this: they both were agrede anon.
The spiders and flies on both sides: to call nere.
Both being agrede: that the ant should propone,
The spiders: Now standing on the right hand to here,
The flies: on the leafte side, as nie did apere.
Both ant and butterfly (each in a chair set)
To declare the case, the ant his tunge has whet.
ornament
Thant declaringe the cause of that metinge, the spiders and flies
acknowlageing the same, and that they come to give evidence, the flies are
appointed to depart while the spiders first show, what they can say for their
part. Cap. 34.
depiction of spider and fly story

KInsefolke spiders: and friends files: I doubt no whit*
But in this terrible trembling tragedy,
Between the spider: and fly: in copweb knit.
Ye know: the mischaunce mischaunced lately,
And how those chances chanced to chance. whereby,
The spiders palesse is depely perisshed,
And the flies person deadly perilled.
Also (I suppose) ye know that we twain,
I for the spider: and he for the fly,
Are chosen arbiters. Such end tobteine:
As evidence shall show: both sides to try.
Which to show (I deem) ye apere presently.
Said one spider first: and then one fly: all this,
We know, and to give evidence: our cumming is.
This known (quoth thant) douting whether ye know.
How far our auctoritee stretches here,
To meddle in this matter, here me show.
Number and weighte of strifes cloudy and clear,
Between these twain: many and great apers.
Of all which: aurtoritee have we none,
To touch in this talk, save only this one.
The fly claims all holes in all windowse,
To pas and repas: to be free for flies all.
Alegeing that spiders (by all old showse.)
In tops and sides: have place especial.
The spider claimth the whole: in general.
To hering whereof, we our awarde would knit,
What part: each part shall have: from all to nowhit.
Sir (said the spider and fly) that erste had seide,
This know we, and have purueide evidence:
As clear for each part, as each part can se weide.
Then (quoth the ant) for our intelligence,
Will ye friend butterfllie: that the flies go hence?
While we here the spiders speak: ye (quoth he)
Cosins flies: stand back till ye called be.
The flies stepte back: the spiders forward drew.
Standidg before those two: in their cheires set
Declaracion: to whom: what they herein knew,
Was deuisde: and determinde. Ere they there met.
Wherein: for enter to let longer let,
The butterfly: straight entering as here enseuth.
Thant provoke the spiders to speak the treuth.
ornament
After a few words between the ant and butterfly, one spider as might be for
all, declares to those two tharbiters all evidence that all spiders for their
part can devise: and that done, the spiders are commanded away, and the flies
bidden to aproche. Cap. 35.
depiction of spider and fly story

Masters (or lords) spiders: what shall I call ye?
In things here now to talk: hark well this one thing:
At my blunte behauour, bark ye or ball ye.
If ye bring in sovistry: or book larning,
To blind mine eyes with: I give you plain warning,
Tom troth will not be wownde that way. And thereby,
Be warnde: to talk trewly and homlily.
They will do so (quoth the ant) I dare say
So will the flies than (quoth the other) I dare swear.
Then (quoth thant) without more delated delaie,
What ye spiders can speak, speak while we give ear.
With this, one spider (as all agrede wear,)
Standing formoste, and as a bolte vprighte,
Soberly said, with curtsy low as he might.
May it (masters) like you: a spider am I,
Of such years, as no living flies years may,
Witness (by remembrance) my full age for why?
I took life in this world, (old spiders would say)
Just in the leap year: before the ill may day.
My parents (as I am) wear black nebde and balde.
The long lived stock: of spiders they were calde.
By part: of my which parents, this I gather,
In their times, worshipful spiders (though I sey it,)
My father: graundfather: and great graundfather:
Would say: as they hard elder spiders wei it,
That every window: hunge it, stood it, or ley it.
All parts of the same: in lowest and hiest,
Were spiders freholde, both fardest and niest.
And ever have been (said they) at will to beelde,
In part: or in all: and that they could not know:
That ever fly (of right) any part there heelde.
These few words of forefathers spiders: make show,
In all parts: of all windows: the right to grow,
On our part. The contrary whereof to wafe,
No spider: has herd any spider: ought say.
Say all ye spiders thus (quoth thant?) ye (quoth they.)
Have ye herd (quoth the butterfly) any wighte
Say ought herein: saving spiders? quoth they, ney.
Have ye (quoth thant) ought else in this to recighte?
Ye (quoth one spider) standing behind all quighte.
I have a counter verse to singe: in this place
Which shall be countred, with the flies face to face.
Ye shall (quoth the butterfly) singe that verce anon.
But we must here the flies indiffrently.
As we have herd you. Till which time, be ye gone.
They stepping back: the flies forthwith soberly,
Stood in their place. Tharbiters glaunsingly,
Ere the flies ought said, in their repairing nere,
Had between them selves: these words, which ye shall here,
ornament
Upon a short talk between the arbiters, one fly: spokes fly for all flies,
discloseth all evidence for their part: where with the flies at commandment
depart aside. Cap. 36.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe spiders tale (quod thant) semth a choking choke plum
Against flies. Ere ye (quoth the butterfly) gruche,
Against any part, audum altum paltum.
This term fet far from the laten: and mo such,
Lernde in the scoole of ignorance, he spoke much:
And understood littell. But this being staide,
An ancient fly: stood forth, and thus to them said.
My masters arbiters I am a fly,
Of such age, as spiders few or none may boste.
My fathers hand writing (for witness) have I,
That I was bred, in the year of the great froste,
Before the great sweat. When many flies were croste,
Out of the book of life. Who by extreme cold,
Were frosen to death: midaged, young, and old.
In all which days: to this day, I have herd flies say:
All holes in all windows, where they stood or stand.
Have been (and be) flies freholde: as their high way,
To pas and repas. And that the spiders band,
Owners of the sides and tops only: are scande.
Whereto, I nor no fly (I dare verify),
Ever herd any fly, say contrary.
Flies (quoth the butterfly) take ye this tale true?
Ye (quoth they. know ye ought (quoth thant) but by flise?
Nay (quoth they.) Forth (quoth the butterfly) pursew.
Can you (or any of you) ought else devise:
Whereby further light in your right, may arise?
Ye sir: said one fly: then standing all behind,
To the spiders teethes: anon, isle tell my mind.
That shall ye do (quoth thant) but friend butterfly,
Will ye first require them to withdraw aside?
While you and I: sum part of this paste may try.
Hence (quoth the butterfly) wherewith thens they hide,
They twain then only there, them selves they aplide.
Each one with other: together to consowlt,
What frewt: out of this erst said, their brains could bowlt,
Ere either of other: did herein ought break,
Thant deuisde, what way best to enter it.
The butterfly studied not what words to speak,
But to speak with voice clear, he coughte and he spit:
Till his voice was much more clear then his wit.
And yet fer from witles: but plain blunte grosenes,
Showde his words: often times to show witles losenes.
ornament
The arbiters (in debating theuidence on both parts given) can not otherwise
agree, but that the same weith even as much for the tone part as for the
the other, at end whereof they call again all the said sort. Cap. 37.
depiction of spider and fly story

SAy (said thant) your opinion vprighfly:
What weith this evidence on both sides think you?
To try which side showth best (quoth the butterfly,)
These words as much matter: for flise do allow,
As for spiders, so do they (quoth thant) auow,
As much matter in words to allow, in likewise,
In spiders for spiders, as in flise for flise.
And more (for the one half: welny that spiders claim.
The flise do grant. But spiders grant unto flise,
No part of theirs, which is to the flise a maime.
The slies own tale: sides: and tops of windows trise:
To be the spiders, by customs warantise.
Whereto: the spiders tale for the flise part waide,
Weith no hear breed in windows for the flies aid,
Spiders (quoth the butterfly) show them selves here,
More siding to their side: then flies to their are.
As flies indiffrantly make custom to apere,
Sides: and tops of windows: for spiders share,
And that flies (by custom) the holes: theirs do clare
So should spiders: endiffrantly consither,
To leie (as flies do) both customs together.
Spiders (quoth thant) take those customs far unlike.
Theirs to grow of right, flies: of usurpation.
If (quoth the butterfly) the flies do here pike:
That quarrel to spiders, in customs vsacion.
That is tit for tat, in this altricacion.
So that for any thing: any part can get,
Both parts in all things yet, on even hand are set.
But to try: how good or how ill: custom is,
Is no part of our charge. ye know we must tri:
How much or how little: custom does in this.
Perferring or debarring: cleime of each parti
Wherein, for all laid here yet again say I
Flies leie (where reason and equalness be giders,)
As much for flies, as spiders leie for spiders.
Well (quoth thant) as we both heard both parts aparte,
So now let us both: both parts together here.
How we both: between both parts: can the hare starte.
Both agreede that all on both parts should apere.
They did so. And all on both sides settled nere,
The ant declaring the pith: of all yet wroughte,
Enter to matter more, thant induction brought.
ornament
Thant shewth to them all, that theuidence weith to one effect on both sides,
so that all rests now upon knowlage which part to credit most: and upon
that mocion, one spider and one fly fall in argument to try the same: wherein
is touchte (partly) the properties of credence, woorship, and honesty: they
agreeing that credence standth upon honesty, as thus, as every spider or fly
is honest, so is he credible. Which talk ended, they are all again
sequestered. Cap. 38.
depiction of spider and fly story

Friends all: ye all erste assembled in parts twain,
Before us twain here for both parts have declarde:
By the mowthes of twain, two tales: which two contain,
One effect. For the matter self in regard,
The only diffrence in both: being confarde,
Is this. What one spider for all spiders laith,
The self same sentence, one fly: for all flies says.
As thus: that spider said all spiders have laid,
All holes in all windows: to be spiders freholde.
Which self saying: that said fly (for all flies) said.
In few words at full then, theffecte to unfold,
Both parts present, to this tale is to be told,
Sum mattier to try: what appearance may rise,
Which part we shall credit most, spiders or flise.
With this, a well spoken spider stepte in place.
Saying: if comparison in credence grow,
Then must ye with us spiders rule this case,
Spiders have been and be worshipful ye know.
And flies honest (quoth a witty fly) I trow?
And of credence: the property or maiestee,
Stanth not more by worship: then by honestee,
Nor so much another: as all kinds of flies think,
No: no color of cause of credence: can stand,
Where as woorship with honesty: does not link,
And honesty without worship (skilfully skande.)
May have: and must have: credence at every hand.
If ye spiders woorshippes: for credence do here ley,
Flies honesties: shall spiders woorshippes outwey
Wear this gaie couchte case (quoth the spider) granted,
More credence for flies: then for spiders might be geste,
Which shouth you to deem: as you it auaunted,
That no spider: but all flies, are honest.
And all spiders worshipful: wherein ye express:
Cause of credence: in flies honesties: to grow,
Much more, then in spiders worshipes: there may show.
Credence, honesty, and worship, thus take I.
Credence in this word trust: plainly term we may
Honesty, virtue morally and ciuily.
Worship, reverence, or estimacion to say.
Honor: is also reverence: as use does way.
Honor and worship: both one in use take we,
Save: honor is reverence, in the higher degree.
Now note: that the full cause of credence or trust,
Springth and spreadth out of virtue or honestee.
And honor, or worship: is dewly discust,
Dew, where virtue or honesty is. then see.
Who is not honest, woorshipfull: he can not be.
For: woorship: and honesty: the one and the other,
The tone of the twain, dependth on the the other.
What (quoth the fly) means this circumquaquie,
This (quoth the spider) where ye (in your last saying,)
Separate in sunder: woorship and honesty,
Woorship: to spiders, and honesty: to flies laiyng.
Flies credence above spiders, tauaunce in waiyng.
Woorship: and honesty: I join so: that here,
Woorshipfull spiders: be honest spiders clear.
Honest spiders are woorshipfull (quoth the fly.)
By honesty. And credible to, no naie.
But where spiders honesty stands awr^e,
Woorship and credence, stand awrie to I say.
So (quoth the spider) be honesty away,
The flies credit: standth a crook even as far,
As the spiders. But let us touch this case nar.
Grant: hers a spider of honesty no whit,
To whom: admit a fly of great honestee.
The spider (not the fly) to auctoritee knit.
Is not that spider: in auctorised degree,
More woorshipfull and credible taken to be,
Then that inferior fly? (quoth the fly no.
Which ye shall here, but first here how your words go.
Credence. honor. woorship, or reverence,
To virtue or honesty, ye first auoucht due.
Last, auctoritee ye bring in assistence.
Thunhonest auctorised, thereby tensue,
In woorship and credence. Ye (quoth he thates true.
And in touching that first of these two cases,
I forgot this last, but both must have their plases.
As honor, or woorship, and credence do depend,
Upon all that are honest: by honestee,
So woorship and credence: in like case to bend,
On all in auctoritee, by auctoritee.
Naie (quoth the fly) (quoth the spider) friend tell me,
Is not auctoritee, to be woorshippid?
Yes master (quoth the fly) or else god forbid.
All auctoritee: not against the great god,
In spiders under him plaste: as potentates:
In them and their substitutes, that god has bod:
To be woorshipt and obeide, in humble rates.
But auctoritee: and auctorised states,
Cause of woorship due to both. differ as far,
As Ierico and Iersei, in ioining iar.
Auctoritee, for it self, woorshippid is.
Thauctorised, for good vfe of auctoritee,
Are duly reuerenst* which good use if they mis.
Woorship or reverence, to them given none should be.
Yet there is (quoth the spider) we daily see.
Before thauctorised: curtsy made as low,
To the ill as to the good, and more low sum trow.
That curtsy. (quoth the fly (rightly directed,
Runth to thauctoritee: in the auctorisid.
Not the auctorised person, respected:
Thauctoritie in the person: here reuerensid.
Thauctoritie for the person, not woorshippid.
Nor the person for him self: lacking honesty,
Because he lackth honest use of authority.
Spiders in authority: without honesty,
No woorship in them selves (I say) is tauouche:
Flies in honesty, without authority:
By that honesty, woorship in them selves* does couche.
And credence in both these parts: is tried by like touch.
Thus v^honest spiders: being auctorised,
Be: (for them selves) woorshiped, nor credited.
Beet (quoth the spider) but then to this pu^ea^e
One spider: and one fly, of one honesty are.
Thonest spider plaste: in auctorised place,
Thonest fly not. Does not that spiders state declare,
More woorship and credit: then that fly can compare:
More woorship? yes: but more credence, no say I,
Proof whereof ensues, (quoth the fly) by and by.
Honesty (I say as your self erste here said.)
Is the root: that credence and woorship: both twaine^
Grow on. So that our woorship and credence waide,
O^ woorshipfull auctoritee, do not remain.
But on our honest use thereof: thus our chain
That lingth us to credence: is not authority,
But good use of authority: by honesty.
Wherein I conclude: flies of most base degree;
Having like honesty: to spiders most hie,
Have in like wise: like credence of equitee.
Not like reverent woorship (I say) for why,
Spiders using auctoritee honestly,
For place and person both: where case so en^use,
Flies: to spiders, humble reverence must use.
What is (quoth the spider) the diffrence in show,
Of one degree of credence: in these two told?
This (quoth the fly.) By this exsaumple to know.
Two spiders webs wouen: admit here to be sold.
For stuff and all thing, both as one to behold.
Save the one: above the other, more fair gloss does bears.
More pleasant to the eye, both one to the wear.
Yet has that glossy web estimacion more
Then the other though both webes of one weauing be
And so for one credence: in the two before
Spiders auctoritee: used with honestee
They shine: in beauty: of a dowble degree.
So that though credence self, be one in these both,
Yet that gloss in that one, that other out goth.
Then (quoth the spider) it serves for sumwhat,
Honest spiders: in auctoritee to stand:
Above honest flies, ye: but it serves not:
(Quoth the fly) for your part of the point in hand,
To prove more credence, in honest spiders scande:
Then in honest flies: for in equal honestee
Stands equal credits, on both sides: ye see.
Which: you (my masters) having seen; being wise,
And that: which part has credence more: which has less,
Of spiders or flies: is the thing to devise,
We pray you: your judgment there in to express.
If we (quoth tharbiters) in this case adresse,
Our selves to give judgment: will ye that abide?
Ye ye (in pilates voice) all on both sides cride.
Let them all (to the butterfly said the ant)
Depart. while we herein seek an end to find.
Content (quoth the butter fly) at your instant:
Trudge hence ye flies (quoth he) as ye are asinde.
At wink of the ant: away the spiders wind.
They all here upon being gone forth forthwith,
They two: herein proceeded as folowith.
By thantes prouocacion the butterfly repeteth thargument before made, in his
gross terms, not fer from full and they twain seeming to agree upon the point
herein, they command the spiders and flies back again. Cap. 39.
depiction of spider and fly story

Will ye (quoth the ant) repete us this talk last?
I would: but I will not (quoth the butterfly)
For I can not: though my heart for it should brast.
I forbad here: all spouting in souostrie.
Now they speut: in speuting who may spent most hie
Save now a word and tan a word: here and tere,
Vengeance the whit, I am for their words the nere.
Tell (quoth the ant) as ye perceive even in gross:
What the pith is. As I (quoth he) had a glance,
Beginning of their comnicashin arose,
Wherein they argde: and fell at arging stance,
In comparson, who should have most credance:
Of spiders of flies. The fly. flies honest rate,
Took more credable, than spiders woorshipfull state.
The spider: then cast a compass rownde about,
That honestnes, is vertousnes, and woorshipfulnes,
Due where honestnes: or vertusnes, bearth rout.
So that woorshipfulnes: and honestnes,
Do pende each on other, by that spiders ges.
Of spiders and flies: by his almashin gest,
Honest are woorshipfull, woorshipfull are honest.
The fly to this: said spiders: by honesty,
Be woorshipfull and credible to. And than,
The spider brought in: a toy of toritie.
Thunhonest spider therein: thereby to scan,
In credance and woorship: each where and when,
More: then the fly: he being an honest one:
Haning to that honesty, toritee none.
The fly to this: for worship and credance: said,
Though toritee for it self: woorshipfull be,
Yet winth it no woorship (in any wighte laid:)
To him self: for him self, outsepted that he:
Use therein vsashin of said honestee.
But in misuse of toritee: the fly told,
Woorship or credance: no wight self can hold.
Then the spider legde, one spider: and fly one:
They both, in one gree: of honesty being.
That spider in toritee, that fly in none.
Whether woorship: and credance were not greeing:
More to that spider: then to that fly fleeing.
More woorship, he granted: because honestee,
And toritee ^^inde. But more credance, no said he.
For honesty: and not noritee, is root,
Said he^ whereon all branches of credance spring.
Then no honesty, no credance: had in boot.
Like honesty, like credance: in every thing.
The spider then axte, what diffrance: in showing:
Of one gree of credance: in these fore told twain
Which by a web saumple, the fly answered plain.
Two spiders webbes of one stuff and woorkemanship:
Save the one above the other has gloss more gaie:
To the eye. but for wear, they differ not a chip.
Yet does that glossie web: bear the bell away.
And so the spider: to his honesty in stay:
Having toritee above like honest fly,
Credance shinth in the spider, more bewteoussie.
Well said (said the ant) though these terms be but base:
Yet aproue they well: that you perceive the pith:
Which: concerning credence, concludth in this case:
That the woorste fly, and the best spider therewith:
Where one degree of honesty concurith,
There one degree of credence, concurth likewise.
Whereon, hark here what a strange case does arise.
Put case a duke of estate honorable.
Affirming a tale, on his honor for true:
A duck stepth forth: and says it is a fable.
Were it not a case (trow you) as strange as new:
That dewke: and that duck: of one credit to view?
The dewkes and duckes honesty (quoth he) being one,
Their credence is one: by granted grownde erst gone.
From which grownd (master ant) by my fatherkin.
I will not starte, but stand and stick even fast:
As unto this my body, sticks this skin:
Well (quoth thant) being at this point: with this past,
Further to proceed in this case: what way to cast,
Let us have these spiders: and flies: again here.
At bek of both, all before both did apere.
ornament
Thant telth them, that where theuidence for both sides goth to one effect, and
that in debating which side is most credible to awarde the window unto, it is
concluded, that credence standth upon honesty: and that as all spiders and
flies are honest, so are they credible: now must it first be ^ride, which side
is most honest, thereon to judge which side is most credible. Cap. 40.
depiction of spider and fly story

AT your last standing here, (quod thant) the case stood:
On trial in credence: of spiders and flise.
Theuidence for both: being one: and like good,
On which part of both, most credence might arise.
Wherein determinate trial to devise,
One cowple of you: one spider and one fly,
Reasoned (birlakin) pretily wittily.
Bre^e pith, whereof (to present purpose,) was this.
Honesty ye agrede: of credence is the grownd.
Concluding for all: as each wightes honesty is
More or les, so more or les credence: is bownde.
All spiders and flies, of one honesty fownde,
Are of one credence. In that credence does bend,
All wholly upon honesty to depend.
Then: as theuidence: on which side to ley best:
Where credence lith most, we thought best to have tried,
So must we now, for credence: see sum wei gest:
Which side bringth most honesty testifide,
And thereby most credit. To this, or that side.
Beit (quoth the butterfly) now let us see surs:
Who shall here win boot, in winning here his spurs.
Another spider and fly, to the helm stood.
A cumly cowple: as were of these two kinds,
Their manner showd their bringing up? to be good.
Curtsy low: to tharbiters, as curtsy binds.
Behauir most desent: in vttring their minds:
As their talk was: of honesty: to devise,
So devised they their talk, honestly likewise.
One spider and one fly resoning which side is most honest, agreing in
conclusion, that thonestie on both sides apeereth to them two, to be one, that
fly requires tharbiters to ponder the case as they shall think good. Cap. 41.
depiction of spider and fly story

TO speak (quoth this spider) truth honestly here,
Brefely: in honesty: both parts to compare,
Equalitee does therein: to me apere.
As right many spiders: right honest there are,
So right many flies: right honesty declare.
As honesty (it self) is one qualitee,
So both parts qualifide like, like honest be.
Sir (said this fly) this is of you qualifide,
Right honestly. Whereupon (with your assent,
(Under reformacion) I would se here tried,
One thing: herein to try: what diffrent extent,
Standth in one degree, of honesty here meant.
In both us foresaid partise, spiders and flise.
Which: in few words, I shall now to you devise.
Flies: mo then spiders, twenty to one there are.
Put then in each one person, like honestee:
In one spider, and ten flies: to compare.
Showth not here: that most number: in quantitee,
To show here: the most show of that qualitee?
It showth most (quoth the spider) and to show how,
Mark this short example that I shall show you.
One flower: before two mirrours: being set here.
The One mirror crakt: in ten pieces sundry:
The Other whole. This flower in these glasses shall apere,
At the whole glass, as it is: one flower only.
The crakt glass, showth ten flowrs aparently.
For of those ten pieces of glass euerychone,
Each one piece, (in it self) showth one flower alone.
So: this feire flower honesty: in one spider plaste:
And ten flies, each one posessed of like fame.
For honesty self, there is no more purchaste:
In the ten flies, then in the one spider to name.
The only diffrence (I say) in show does frame:
Ten flowrs in the crackte glass: as thus to respekt:
Ten flowrs in form, and one flowr in effect.
That whole glass does show one flowr: and is no mo:
That crackte glass: making show of flowrs: half a score
There Is yet but one flowr, at both these glasses lo.
As in both these parts, one honesty: no more.
Well (quoth the fly) yet as I have said before:
One honesty: in one spider, and in ten flise.
Most show of that honesty: in those flise rise.
Which show showth (thonestie in all being one)
A bewty: shining of more exelensy:
In those ten flies, then in the one spider alone.
Sir (said the spider) to speak indiffrently,
Even so take it I: and even so grant it I.
My masters (to tharbiters) the fly then seide,
Wey you: how honesty: is here to be weide.
ornament
Tharbiters commanding all to go aparte again, they fall in talkyng somewhat
at large touching both credence and honesty in both these sides, which done
to show therein their minds, they call all before them again. Cap. 42.
depiction of spider and fly story

THarbiters: willing both parts to step back straight,
Brother butterfly (said the ant) here ye se:
Honesty on both these parts: to peise in weight,
If mo honest flies then honest spiders be:
Yet of both parts: each one like of honest,
The nombre more and les: as these two declare,
Both numbers: of one honesty, they compare.
For thonestnes self, (quoth he) to that they grew.
But thonestnes in those flies: shewth more exalent:
As twenty flowrs in the broken glass: to ^ew:
Show of the one flower in the whole glass: far out went
Ye, in show (quoth thant) with you I do consent.
But by their equal degree of that qualitee,
This spider, and these flies, equally honest be.
Well then good master ant (quoth the butterfly,
We gre: that the show, of one honestnes here:
Upon the ten flies part: showth more shininglie:
Then on the one spiders side: in show can pere.
And for thonestie self, to draw to end nere,
You answering one demand: demanded by me,
Best part to sprinspall purpose, we shall soon se.
Is not this argnicashin of honestnes,
Tose who are most honest, spiders or flies?
To try thereby the side most credabill to ges,
In the one evidence: that both sides did devise,
Each side for it self? yes (quoth thant that none devise.
But graunth it. Since (quoth the butterfly) thates trowth,
Dark what proof to purpose: upon this case growth.
Let us here demit: one spider and ten flise.
All like honest: who seeing two sew at law,
That one spider, for the one side, a witness lise,
Those ten flise, to the other side: witnesses draw.
I never wist wight: that ever herd or saw:
But such ten flies euidance: more credably weide,
Then such one spiders euidance weide in eide.
Not so (quoth thant) for put case this foresaid sort:
In witnessing one word: in one tale erst told:
To them all: the one spider does after report,
That word was there and then said. And flies hold,
It was not said: in this case knowth young and old:
This one spider must have in t^ afirmatiue,
More credit then ten ^lies in the negative.
Master ant: Flies want of credance: standth not here,
In the weakness of credance in the flise,
But in weakness of credance in the case clear.
Negentiue, against firmentiue, weakly lise.
Forgetting, and remembering, thus this case trise:
We may sooner forget: that we herd last day,
Then remember that we hard not, anyway.
But for both parts here: put afirmentiue case.
This one spider affarmth here: firmentiuely.
That I lay (last night) in Northumberland place.
These ten flies say: in Westmurland place lay I.
In this affarmashin: deemashin to try,
Which part has here: most credance in your deming?
The flies (quoth the ant) aparently seming.
But since honesty and not credence: is now,
The thing: to towch here in place and case present,
And that (for thonestie self,) I prove to you:
One degree of honesty: in both sides bent,
That one: and those ten: have one honest extent.
Agree we for that part: thus to resolve.
Which resolucion, let me to them reuolue.
Beit (quoth he) but when talk of credance cumth (...),
I Will arg as I did now: for credance again.
Do (quoth thant) if ye se thereby ought to win,
All often erst called, they called again to them twain.
To whom the ant (as aptly did apertaine.)
In words: for the matter brefly coucht and caff,
Pronounst to all, what they two there passed last.
ornament
Thant telth them, that they two determine honesty on both sides to be one.
Willing them to go forth in the mattier, wherewith one tart taunting spider,
and one sharp saucy fly, forbearing till this time (with much peine) speaking
or rather railing, stand now forth (upon tip toes) to chop logike each with
other in rude reasoning of this case. Cap. 43.
depiction of spider and fly story

OF spiders and flies: which part is most honest,
The trial: is the thing: we now stand upon.
Wherein: for flies, one: his opinion expressed.
That as flies in number are twenty to one:
Above spiders, all on both sides euerychone:
Being like honest, most honesty does rise,
To the flies part: where the most nombre lise.
To this one spiders tale: of the two glasses touched,
Thexample showing more show of honestee:
In the more: then in the les number auoucht,
Yet both parts being honest in one degree,
Both parts of like honesty, they took to be.
And so to adiudge: we two having agrede,
Agree you: how herein further to proceed.
With this, before all these spiders and flies here flockt,
Up stood and out start: that cowple of hare breins:
The spider and fly, that erst there bragde and corkt.
Upon both their forheds: so swelled the veins:
That their thus long silence: was seen their great peins.
In cockyng currish countenance: nowhit to seek,
Staring each on other, they stood cheke to cheke.
Auctoritee they took, none was to them geeuin,
Of good manner void: in taunting smarte smatrers.
Plainnes: without honesty, they used eeuin.
They both: to side against side, wear no flatrers:
But like Iaise: in cheritrese such chatrers,
That being now bent to chat, their toonges to stop,
With an are: as soon: their heds of, ye may chop.
Their talk, whether to repete or to repress.
Rude railyng therein, brought me sumwhat to dout,
But finally, upon my show to profess:
The show of this matter: thus fer gone about,
I thought it meet: to show the show throughout,
Namely the case framed no more fer nor hy:
Then of a poor spider, and a more poor fly.
These all (I say) standing before these two set,
Both bending their browse: in case rehearsed erst,
This foremost spider and fly: in furius fret,
Frowning each on other, this prosesse they perst.
And vengeable venumly, each other verst.
Before they came to end, how beit they began,
In cownterfet coldness: this matter to skan.
ornament
Where another spider and fly reasoned late before to prove which side of both
is most honest, this said quareling spider and cockyng fly, labor to prove
which part of boch is most dishonest, in words and deeds. as usurpation in
windows and other misbehaviour. at end whereof in furious fumes, thence renth
the spider one way, and the fly flingth an other. Cap. 44.
depiction of spider and fly story

Masters (quoth the spider) without circumstance:
At reasoning on which part most honesty life:
Of spiders or of flies, in continuance,
Your judgment: both parts of like honesty trise.
Which honesty so tried, now contrariwise.
For a pithy purpose: let us here now see,
On which side of both: lyth most dishonestee.
Dishonestie: dare ye stir that, (quoth this fly?)
What dishonestie know you by flies sur?
More then flies know by spiders. Fly what know I?
Words and deeds. Such and so many will I stur,
As shall: by dishonestie, flies honesty blur.
And first for words, honesty: honestly to scan,
Honesty speakth well. Ye (quoth the fly what than?
This than (quoth the spider) take flies ten thowsande:
Where so ever they flee, go, stand, lie, or sit.
Few of the number have taken upon hand:
To give any good spider any good word yeet,
Except in flattery: which words show every whit:
As much dishonestie: in falls feire semblance,
As showth in fury, foul words of more greuance.
When flies flockt together, upon their ale benche
Begin to hizs or bizs, in their kind of talk,
No lords, no lawse, can their bizsing babble quenthe.
And so many words, so many lies: still walk.
If one devil with an other: for lies should calke:
They could never find the like, oh (quoth the fly:
Your maistership talkth wonderfoole honestly.
If ye gave ear to your self, ye might soon know:
Spider to fly: who speakth most ill of us twain.
Speak not spiders as ill of flies: as ye trow,
As flies speak of spiders: yes it shouth to plain.
Wherein these terms must we use: upon great pain.
When either of other papt: talk out of measure,
The knave fly (...) spider speakth his pleasure.
But grant: dishonest words each part of other,
Do speak a like much: which showth like dishonestee,
In both these parts: the tone part to the the other.
Of flies dishonest words, the cause is to see:
The dishonest deeds, of you spiders to be.
Example whereof: to prove this case most clear,
Does in this window (for all windows) apere.
All holes wherein: being ours in common right.
Late commonly ours, now severally yours.
Look where ye set in foot, by right or by might,
Like as the devil says: so sai you: all is ours.
For: as this window showth your usurped pours:
So: in all windows where so ever ye cum,
Ye graspe up all: and flies may sai naught: but mum.
Thus when we speak (I say) if our spech ill be,
Of your ill deeds: cum our ill words: euerychone.
Do you ^one ill deeds: to us good sir (quoth he?)
Yes sit (quoth the fly) flies to spiders do one,
In our curtsy made to you: down to grownd gone:
Most sinfully we commit idolatry.
For we therein, woorship false imagery.
Falls imagery (quoth he?) ye are a falls knave.
A right liuerey (quoth he) turnde on the wrong side.
But liuerey and wages: that spiders vouchsaue:
To give flies, of one substance are verifide.
Knave up: or take up fly: thy wandering words wide.
Truly to try: how truth the touch stone may touch,
On whose side: most dishonestie, is tauouch.
All dishonest words: in flies of spiders had,
Cum of dishonest deeds: in spiders to flise.
Thus say thou, which saying showth thee drunk or mad,
What ill or wrong deeds: do we to you devise?
Our own windows to use, as our own will aplise.
Your deeds were not ill: were all windows your own,
But no words: save your own, show windows so known.
The tops: and top sides: of all windows all yours:
We have granted and would grant: wear ye content,
To grant likewise all holes in all windows ours,
But spiders must have all, ye may naught relent,
And in your having all: mark thexperiment.
How the world before went, and since how it goth:
(For common wealth) in spiders: and in flies both.
When you in tops and sides there: kept your estate:
And we in the holes: as stood with our degree,
Spiders and flies: in all windows situate,
Dweld each by other in wealth and unite.
But since (like a sort of rake hels as ye be)
Ye lift each at other: and all at us lift,
There is in you, nor us: either love or thrifte.
But you: we: and our windows to: all go to wrack.
By you covetous cutthrotes: the devil choke ye.
Will thou wrech (quoth he) ley all this on our back?
Grown by our strives, nay fly and flies: I Will yoke ye:
With more then half part of the ill: to smoke ye.
It is and has been said: there is no good accord:
In place, where as every knave will be a lord.
Which is terbox to your side: for out of dout,
Your cockapert pride: and your covetous hearts.
Have brought: more then three parts of our ils about.
Your rude rebelins disobedient parts:
Much unto our (and much more to your own) smarts:
Ricking and wincing at every good order,
Has distroide good order in every border.
Good order: lost by pride and covetousness,
In grant. but how: lost by us? nay lost by you,
Flies may be covetous, but as for riches:
Flies get none: Except here and there one talow:
Yes (quoth the spider) many flies are rich now:
In occupiyng in windows under us,
By price of things reisde there: in foul overplus.
Whereflies: of spiders (by wrong quoth he) are driven:
To hyre our own: kept from us (we say) by might.
Fines incums: and rents, so great and many given,
With such straight restreint: of our accustomed right,
That one of those or all, eat up our geins quight.
Which exact exactions: in spiders began,
Ere flies in sale of any wares, from thold rate ran.
As I am true ientilman, thou list on us.
As ye are a true ientilman: even so I ly.
But as ye are a falls ientil manto discus,
Your falshod and my truth, may join iolily.
I Will prove straight (quoth the spider) that thou lie, I,
For rentes: and warse reisde, thou say spiders begoon.
But mark how unhonestly that ly does roon.
Five foot to two: in windows of this reme:
Ye flies hold yet, in lease at vnreised rent.
All holders whereof: sell their wares: as extreme,
As though their fermes at the most reised rent went.
Now who beginth here: the first extort extent?
The flies (quoth the fly) but yet spiders begun:
To reise rentes before: as leases did out run.
And as leases fall still, so reise they rent still.
And still (of their goodness) will reise: I dout not.
In new leases: of such couenantes to fulfill,
As the flies geins: no great priui tithes shall lot.
The lewd lords: their landlords: in reckning the shot,
The lot of alowance: in both parts to ley,
The spiders have the creme, the flies have the whey.
But spiders: letting farms, and flies holding farms.
The One letting farms hie, the other selling vitels dear.
And of all ware sellers: each shifteth from harms.
By reising his ware, as other wares apere.
But all that on their pencions (or pence) live mere:
In windows: without land to let, or ware to sell,
Where ever they dwell: may think they dwell in hell.
Well (quoth the spider) for leases not run out,
Fly fermers holding fermes yet: as old rent gave,
Why raise they their wares: with the other polling rout?
They take time (quoth the fly) while they the time have.
For when your time cumth, you will so polle and shave:
By reised rentes: turning head fermers to heardes.
That they know: ye will flit the fat from their beardes.
And ye hie head spiders: in a conspiracy:
Conspire in all windows, to keep fermes at heith.
Or keep them in your own hands, to keep things hie:
Where a fly (quoth the spider) doble rent peith:
More than he has paid. There experience seith:
Look what wares: at what price: that flies sold before,
Those or worse wares he selth for treble price more.
So that if spiders reise rentes, two pounds from one.
Three pounds from one: at lest flies reise their wares straight
Their which robry, hering any rumor vpone,
Of the fault, on us spiders they ley the weight
Roaring: in raging: how we our lands do height:
Making them begers (when they with that they win,
Are able to purchase the fermes they dwell in.
Well lide: well said: (said the fly) I would have said.
But now to our ground: on which our saying arose.
For dishonestie, on both parts to be leide.
Covetous and pride: being chief grownds in gross:
To prove on which part: most dishonestie gose,
Dishonestie by couetusnes does rise,
At the least: as much in spiders as in flise.
And as much in flies, as in spiders say I,
But what remedy fly: to remove this grefe?
Look they that list: they shall for me (quoth the fly)
We talk not now of grefe: to devise relefe,
By honesty, but by dishonest mischefe:
To charge which part most dishonest we can ges
In all ils, namely pride and couetusnes.
Wherein: as we in couetusnes have said,
Let us now: each part apose other in pride.
The which vice for both our sides uprightly weide,
Dishonestie therein, shall be verifide.
To lie altogether, on the spiders side.
Spiders, are of flies: always curtsy takers:
And flies to spiders, always curtsy makers.
And yet (I say) in bending our knees to ball:
Flies looking like lams: spiders like lions look.
As though poor flies, were made for rich spiders all.
Of which: though foolish flies: the suffrance may brook:
Wise flies can not brook it: for they find in book:
This demand written. When Adam dolue and Eve span,
Who was in those golden days, a gentleman.
None as who say. And were there none now (say we)
The world should be as good now, as it was then.
If yemen flies: were put in autoritee,
We would rule as well, as spiders gentlemen:
Shall Iak sauce rule now fly? sir by these bones ten:
We shall sure be ruled: in all kinds of lawse,
As well by Iak sause: as by master John dawse,
What wit: or what wealth* wins your estate stout,
Looke^ily: speak lordly: command all, and do naught.
Gai gear, goodly copwebs: to revel with the rout,
Without any housholdes. For the poor flies wrought.
But with disshes deinty: fer fet and dear bought.
One fat spider: an other feedth in fine feast:
More to set out him self, then to feast his geast,
These proud pea^oks propertise: wholly remain,
In you proud spiders. And not in us poor ^^ise,
But most proud, most fool. As flies proverbs contain.
Flies (quoth the spider) in their proud exercise,
Are to fer unlike lords: lords looks tenterprise.
Lordlyke to look, flies countenance can not brook:
Bu though flies look not lordlyke: knave like they look:
Shall we not find a knave fly: not worth two strawse:
Look more prowdly, the the best lord in a shere?
Yes. And take upon him in chop logik lawse:
To control us, and our households fer and nere.
So that by pride, les dishonestie showth here:
In lordly looks: of spiders lordlike bravery,
Then in flies knauish deeds, by knauelyke knavery.
Of which sort of sause malapert minions,
Thou art captain ^a^tif: against us to kick.
And sure: thou holdst perilous opinions.
Wear thou aposed pithily to the quick,
I durst ley my life, thou art an heretic.
I defy (quoth the fly) the wrech that so seith.
Hark: I will euin in your ear: confess my feith.
The f^ie: blowing a while, in the spiders ear:
The spider: that while: brething in the flies neck,
Both cride out, as they had been stoong on a spear.
I am kilde (quoth the spider) death cumth at beck.
This fly has blown fliblowse in mine ear a pecke.
I am poisond (quoth the fly, death rydth in the rode.
This spiders breath, makth me swell like a tode.
Triacle cride the one, an ear pyke: cride the other.
The fly flew, the spider crept, quight out of sight.
The fly flang one way: the spider ran an other.
Fewme of siry fury, in both was seen right.
But both being anon gone out of sight quight,
Thant: in reproach of their communicacion,
Told them all, part of his imaginacion.
ornament
After a few words, which thant speakth to the rest of both sorts there,
they are assigned to stand back again, while tharbiters gather out of this
railyng, such reason as they can. Cap. 45.
depiction of spider and fly story

IT is commonly said, and commonly seen.
Where as any number: of any sort be:
Of all sorts there be, and evermore have been.
And as in most base sort: sum right good we se,
So in the best sort: as ill to decre.
Example whereof: no better proof ensurth,
In no one example, then this one procurth.
Of you: both sorts spiders and flies: present here:
You use your selves honestly. Many and most,
But yet thereto s^ we: that here does apere,
On each one side: one so brimly brag and boste,
That they prove on both sides: sum knaves in the cost:
I mean these twain gone. Whom upon inquering,
Are: in honest audience, not worth the hering.
Forsooth (said a sober spider) even in deed:
They are unworthy hering: in any place.
True (quoth a wise fly) but since it was agreede:
By common counsels on both sides: to purchase:
Or provide: them to join with us in this case,
It seems unseemly for us to reject:
Such: as our electors to us have elect,
It semth so (said the ant) and I take it so.
Brother butterfly: will ye that they depart:
While we twain, to groping of this matter go.
Ye master ant (quoth he) with all my heart.
They all (once again) from them twain reuart.
While they two devise: sum way of availing,
To gather right reason, out of rude railing.
Tharbiters consider in this taunting talk, that so^^ry d^^ honest abuses
there are in sundry parties on both sides. upon their agreement of conclusion
wherein, they have before them those other spiders and ^lies again. Cap. 46.
depiction of spider and fly story

TO pas this last case (quoth thant) as in award,
Which part is most dishonest, the case erst weid:
Resoning which is most honest part: to regard:
Is a plain plat: to prove this likekise leid.
As honesty there is: equally displeid,
To show the tone part: as honest as the the other,
So show both here, like dishonest: the one and t^other.
What kinds of ^auts: we may in the spiders find,
The same (or the like) we may find in the flise.
So that (I say) as equitee has asinde,
One degree of dishonestie, in both lise.
Where our former talk (quoth the butterfly) trise:
Thonestie one: in both the sides: yet ye know:
That honesty in the flies, shinth most in show.
For that (which I told you I would in mind bear)
Flies: fer mo in number, then spiders apere.
True (quoth thant) and as most number winth flies there,
Most show of honesty, so most number here:
Most show of dishonestie: showth in flies clear.
As most number of thonest: shine most in fame,
Most number of dishonest, shine most in shame.
Then (quoth the buterflie) as flies here naught get,
So loose they naught: wherein let us be content:
To set the hares head, against the goose ieblet.
Both sides: to adiudge like honest: I assent.
And I (quoth the ant) do give the same judgment.
Hereupon they called all again to stand nere,
To whom wherein, thant declard as ensuth here.
Thant declarth to those spiders and flies, that the tales of the pearte spider
and ^lie before told, do charge each others part in such sort, that they can
not sai which side is most dishonest: but they two adiudge clearly in dishonest
things: both sides of like dishonestie. wherewith they al avoided back again,
tharbiters talk to fall to a point between them selves what report finally and
fully to make. Cap. 47.
depiction of spider and fly story

ALthough the railyng of those railers late gone:
For it self: or them selves, unmeet may be thought.
Either to be talked upon: or thought upon.
Yet since the matter of their talk: such talk brought:
That as one ground of our talk, talk has it wrought,
We have wrought thereto: conciderate consent,
To conclude therein, this extended extent.
Dishonestie in spiders and in flies both,
Apereth aproued: so indiffrently,
That on which side the most dishonestie goth:
We can not know: nor otherwise verify,
But like dishonestie, on both sides does ly.
So that out of hand: to declare our decre,
Both parts: in dishonestie, have one degree.
But for as much: as dishonestie here touched:
Was: to prove or disprove honesty before:
Which part of both: most or least honesty auou^ht,
And that dishonestie: does deside no more:
Then honesty did, leave dishonesties lore.
And by former talk: in honesty alone,
Take honesty on both parts here, judged one.
The grave nombre on both sides agrede to this.
Whereupon: thant axt who had further to sey:
Concerning evidence: in the premissis.
They all said: they had to say no fuder, they,
Well said they both: ye all yet again awey.
Which done, they both: each to other their minds brake,
What end (now at end) they finally might take,
Tharbiters being agreed on their report, they call to them again the spiders
and the flies. Cap. 48.
depiction of spider and fly story

BRother butterfly (quoth shant) how think ye now?
What makth all this evidence for either side?
All alich for both (quoth he) now how say you?
I sei the same (quoth thant) wherein is specifide,
To hard a trial: to judge the best side tried.
The best side of both: since doubt has thus drowned it,
Letes at last, leave it, as we at first found it.
Agrede (quoth the butterfly) by my good sooth:
They herewith called again, the spiders and flise.
Each hoping to here a tale, for his own tooth.
But thant being (for an ant) learned and wise:
Otherwise weiyng, otherwise did devise.
Of this process past, where to report the pith.
For which (unto them all,) he made wei forthwith.
ornament
Thant shewth them, that the butterfly and he are at point what to report,
devising it to be reported before the head spider and the fly in the copweb
the two principal parties. and to have with them to here and witness their
report, two spiders and two flies: witty and discrete. and the rest to stay
there till their return. Which being agreed, they set forth straight to the
said copweb. Cap. 49.
depiction of spider and fly story

KNow ye all: that we two being full agreede:
What we shall say, we must now full agree:
Where we shall say. Which saying must be decreede,
Before those two: that did us two decre,
As friends of trust: in this autorite.
The spider and fly (mean I) which two are,
Chief grownds in the case, that we must now declare.
The butterfly: and all the rest there: seide.
For that report, that was the place most fit.
Let us, with us, (quoth thant) have forth in eide,
Two spiders and two flies: of credence and wit.
And all the rest, till our return here to sit.
They two with the two twose: following in order,
Past on: till they came to the copwebs border.
The fly in copweb stood up, and prayer left.
Longing for meede: of preier preide ere than.
With deadly look: as death had life berefte.
But when the spider: into place came than,
Alas poor fly: how he lookte pale and wan.
All those without: unto the spider within.
At their low curtsy done, thant did thus begin.
ornament
The ant associate with the said sort pronounces at length (to the spider and
sly in the copweb) this brief effect; that in as much as on both sides the
evidence is one, and that the credence is one, by shonestie being one, they two
can (in reason) no way ^rie, how to ley thaccustomed right more on the one side
then on the other: they finally leave the case euin at liberty, as they sound
it: and so depart to the place of abitrement again. Cap. 50.
depiction of spider and fly story

MY great good uncle, and little good friend: ^^ie.
Where you two: chose us two: your arbytres late,
To adiudge (by reason) the custom rightly:
Of spiders and flies, in all windows situate,
Which part should have all: or what part we should rates
To either part, what has thereon risin since,
And what in fine for fine does rise, here the pith.
In the first talk between you tweyne: and us tweine,
Thissew to try was (as ye said unto us,)
How right in all windows (I sey) does remain,
To both sides, as reason may custom discus.
You: for you and all spiders, a leging thus.
All parts in all windows (none except) said ye,
Are yours: and all spiders, as in tenure fre.
Wherein you fly, as ye then affirmed) heelde,
All holse in all windows, are flies free of old.
Toys and sides, being spiders hold free: to beelde.
Head houses or tenantrees or what ye woolde.
So that for the hoise only: is all the hold,
Which (upon further evidence, to consither,
We (as ye wyld us to go,) went to gyther.
Where: spiders and flies, a certain nombre met.
Before a pointed: evidence to disclose.
And first for all spiders, one to us there set,
Said. As report of spiders: has gone and gose.
All holse in all windows: are theirs to dispose.
The ^lies then called, one fly for all verifide,
All holse: by all flies words long to flies side.
These two: in their two tales: showing diffrence none,
In matter: nor in words, save only that they:
Leid the same: each on the side: he stanth vpone,
They both: and they all: strangers to us (to sey,
This one sentence: on which of both sides to ley,
Both showing a like credible, to us too,
That was thing difficult: for us two to do.
Whereupon: both parts (before us both) called we.
To try on which part, most credence might apere.
Wherein one spider: and one fly: of grauitee.
Reasoning on which side most credence should show here,
They both: at last granted this, for a grownde clear.
As every wights count: in honesty does mount,
So every wights credence: amounth in acount.
For: honesty agrede they, to be the grownd:
(Or grownded cause) of credence. Then were we dreuer*
To search on which side, most honesty was fownd.
Wherein (on both sides) when all resons were given,
T honesty on both sides, in our judgment was even.
And so: for credence, (hit on honesty growing)
One honesty, one credence: in both parts showing.
Thus: their evidence being one: whereunto:
Their credence one: by being of honesty one,
To try the wrong doers: which we came to do,
What wey can we (in reason) take? for sooth none.
Wherein lacking power, since our goodwill alone:
Can do naught, honestly this charge to discharge,
As we this case found here, we leave here, at large.
Friend butterfly (said the spider) how sai you?
As master ant has said (said he) so sai I.
Then (quoth the spider) with thanks to you both now.
We both discharge you. Sir (quoth the butterfly)
My poor kins^lie here: that in durance does ly.
For charge or discharge: in every condeshin,
I beseech your maship handle him with screshin.
I will (quoth the spider) use him no warse.
Then standth with reason, law, custom, and conscience:
If (quoth the fly) those granted grownds not reuarse.
As: till I se them reuerst, in experience:
I see no cause: to conceive lack of credence,
Then shall I (and all flies) lawde your equite.
Vndoutfull trust whereof, much comfort me.
Fear not that fly (quoth he) and the fly (of trowth)
From dangerous dred: that he drooped in ear,
Hoppeth now in hope: as all outward show showth.
But yet for all thoutward brag: that he did bear:
Me thought he semde inwardly, not without fear:
Least fair feithfull promise of present plesance,
Might have foul feithles displesant performance.
But between hope and dread, he lying there still,
Thant: and butterfly: the four spiders and flise,
Took leave and departed. The same place until,
That they last ram fro. Where their company life.
To repete their doing, in this comprimise.
The spider in copweb, gone that to declare,
In thuper part of his house, where his flok are.
Thant and butterfly set where they had sit, thant repeteth to those spiders
and flies the report made by him at the said copweb, at end whereof the spiders
and flies, seeing that time spent all in vayns, each side among them selfs
fall in mourmuring. Cap. 51.
depiction of spider and fly story

THant and butterfly: set where they erst had sit,
Those spiders and flies: standing where they erst stood
Thant repeting this, they perceiving in it:
Much time spent on all parts: and no part take good,
They began generally: to change their mood.
The spiders, to gither clustring and cluttring,
The flies, together in murmering muttring.
ornament
Upon the spiders and the flies mutring murmering, sodenlie there cum nie
about them: a wonderful nombre of all manner of flies: in their warlike
manner. Whereat with twynke of an iye (as it were) the head spider (with a
great nombre of spiders,) has builded a strong castle in that copweb. With
ordinance and weapons and spiders ready in order of defense. Cap. 52
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

HErewith (euin sodenlie: at twink of aniye,)
Came such a flight of flies: in scattred ray,
As shadowed the son: from thearth to the sky.
No kind of fly a live, but was there that day.
Tag and rag, like lions: raging now rage they.
Fleshflies, butterflies, land flies, water flies.
Bees, humblebees, waspes, hornets, gnats of all sies.
The graund Captain, standing: amid mong this rought,
Was the fly, that flange from thence in fewrie erst told.
Seld has been seen such a sort. And all so stought,
Except here and there one: temprate to behold.
Staves, bats, clubs, pichforks, most begerlie most bold.
Wherewith the spiders that erst gave evidence,
In the copweb, took sentuarie for defense.
Where: whether this proud spider gave word before:
Who with that pert fly: had before there prated:
Or that spiders: of ordinary: have store:
Of all municion: for wars ready rated,
I wot not. But without more time delated:
Ordnance of all sorts round the copweb was leyde,
And all spiders with all weapons, pressed in eyde.
Daggs, handgoons, hakse, hagbussers, culuerins, slings:
Potgoons, sakirs, cannons, double and demie.
Feeld pieces, of all sewts, with all belonging things.
Byls, bows, partisance, pikes, to push fer or nie,
And to occupy all, spiders plaste aptly.
Each of them: harnest meet for his properte,
The rest, all in bright harness capa pe.
The flies, of all ordnance were not destitute,
Nor furnished: like as the spiders wear:
Rustie rotten pieces: their terror to brewte,
They shat of, and shot wide, of marks every where.
Drums, fi^^es, flags, and wi^^ers, none wanted there,
Baners displaide on both sides: all arms bearing,
In harolds books a vowde, for both sides wearing.
The flies, in number, a boue the spiders far.
The spiders, in order, fer better then thaie.
The flies, will adventure to make or to mar,
The spiders, (not sodenlie) sobreli way:
To defend or offend, the flies as they may.
The spiders, in copweb will bide this ieobertie.
The flies, in feeld will beseege them at liberty.
ornament
This huge heap of flies light about tharbiters. Apprehending thant, casting
a halter about his neck: drawing him to their tree of reformacion (as they
call it) to hang him straight. But at his suit to be hard speak ere hedie, on
fli flees into the tree, where with the captain commands silence. Cap. 53.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THis innumerable flock of flies: are now,
Marched unto tharbiters. And they there lighted,
They took thant prisoner: with an unadvised vow,
To spite the spiders, who had flies long spyghted,
That he should straight be hanged, and then endited.
Of selonie: against flies: as an adherent,
To spiders, in their usurpation urgent.
Hang him up (quoth one) with wild words and wide wit.
A falls wretch he is. And well known eueri wheare.
And would be known no where: where ever he flit.
He has two names: one name here, an other theare.
In this place called ant. In that place called pismeare.
And one susspected varlet: two names to have,
Is (in common judgment,) judged a false knave.
Then stepped forth a sort of fell flies, fewriouslie.
Who: having cast a halter about thants neck,
To their tree of reformacion standing by,
They fellie forced him, with many a chorlish check.
A ladder to that tree was set, at a beck.
Where he in have halde up: and the halter tide,
Turn the thief of the ladder: thousands cride.
Small was the maruaill: though thant were much abasht:
To se this sore sooden importable chance,
Who lives in nature: but he must be dashed:
Both out of courage, and out of countenance.
That should straight: be dashed out of continuance,
(...) none (or few) being fore warnd of deaths hour,
Can (...) feeling thought, of that sharp shower.
Fight now in worship set hie: as a judge:
Euin now, standing in shame to be hanged hie,
It w^^ to him, a feeling grief of grudge:
Unknown to all: that have not felinglie:
Felt of the same, in their experiensie,
His look and hew now, and late: so unlike,
I hat to the heart: a jew that sight must strike.
In which agony: calling to him his wit:
One wise fly: at all formar talk present,
Seming with all flies present in good credit,
He preyd to persuade all there: to be content,
To here him speak, ere he his life should relent.
But reason (quoth that fly) and therwithall, he,
To get thant that grace, gat him in to that tree.
The fly there bent to speak, the captain graund,
By mouth of an harolo: at trompet sownid,
In proclamacion, did silence straight command.
Whereat: a few words here and there in ears rownid,
To here that fly speak, their speech was all drownid.
Whereupon the captain bidding that fly say,
These or these like few words, he said straight way.
ornament
The fly in the tree: to perswarde the flies to here the any speak, wadeth
honestly, politiklie to a lewre them, to quiet heryng of the ant before they
put him to death. His which tale told, he remoueth to his place again. Cap.
54.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

BRothers (and brotherly friends) all: I dout not:
Ye know me a fly: and take me such a fly,
As for ant: or spider: in any what:
Will not be false, to the stock that naturally:
I ought to be true unto: to live or die:
For this ant and all ants: what I shall say now,
Shall approus me none of them, but one of you.
Of whom: each one: an other my self to sey.
And each one to other: (I hope,) likewise knit.
Let us all as one: entering this one journey,
Enter the path, as we may pas through it.
One deep enduction whereto: iuged in my wif,
Is to flee rash deeds rashly done here. For such,
Have undone all: in our like case, very much.
One of which danngerous deeds (under correction,)
We do in this deed: thant thus to death to draw.
Without accusacion or detection:
Whereby might appear any color of law:
To kill him. This lo does my conscience gnaw.
And yet more: the nombre here in ire so sturd,
That they would have him hanged, and not speak one wurd.
Which deed: if we do, wheare are our like monsturs?
First to apprehend an ant vndetected:
By any color, that any word consturs.
To be either detected, or susspected:
And not only straight unto death, directed:
But die, not suffrid to speak, defame of us:
That perpetual tromp, will blow: in shame of us.
Wherefore for us (and not for him) as I seide:
I sew to you, as he has sewde to me.
To here him speak, Which speech of you herd and weyde,
As you shall be a grede, so shall I a gree.
To hang him: or save him, as we cause shall see.
This tale thus told, down the fly again flitth,
And where he erst did sit, theare he again sitth.
ornament
The flies former fine tale, nowhit sturreth the gross flies to the hearing of
the ant. Whereupon the butterfly (that was an arbiter) flees into the tree:
laboring the flies to have the ant heard speak ere he die. Cap. 55.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

With this: a chirme in mumering there fell:
Amonst them all. They in flocks flocking anon,
Here and there a flock: like sort to like. To tell,
Their minds. And sum preysde* sum dispreysde the tale gone
This tale showth this fly honest and wise (says one)
He is a false flattring fly (seyth another)
He said well: but he meant ill (said some other)
Thant has bribid him: (quoth one) he is corrupt sewre.
An ant bribe a fly (quoth an other) wherewith?
With one of his eggs, that is a sore alewre.
To tempt a fly, nay* quoth one) this is the pith:
He is a spy: for the spiders (I se even since)
I herd no word (quoth one) to susspect him by.
(Quoth one) all his words sound susspiciously.
So many heds, so many wits. There were seen.
Thonest flies: that flies tale, honestly did broo(...)e.
The contrary took ^is tale contrary clean.
I herd by sum (...)s words: and saw by their look.
That thill sort: the good sort: against their wills took.
Good flies would have suffered: and have sit euin still:
Rather then have risin: by force of thyll,
But forth he must (they say) that the devil does drive,
Things are not wrought: by wisdom in such a rout:
Will: and not wisdom, must such matters contriue.
All suerte of safte, to bring in a dout.
Or to set safte undoubtedly Quight out,
In which safte: such flies: as sat fast before,
Must leave hold: to take hold, on contrary shore.
They being now dreuen, they must do as they shall,
And not as they would, and for this case in hand,
Hang the ant forthwith: cride the most nombre all.
The blont butterfly: that arbiter had stand,
Whipped into the tree: as feerse as a fire brand.
And at silence had: upon the trompets blast,
He must blow his blast. Or else his heart must brast,
ornament
The butterfly (to get thant to beheard) telth his tale in such rude manner and
matter, that anon he setth them all (welnie) together by the ears. But upon
his gross tale grosely told, (much more lyked then the flies finer tale) they
grant to here the ant speak. Cap. 56.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

VHhat a sort of captain cobblers have we here:
Under our graund capteyne, I charge euerichone:
Keep silence, and obediance all in fere.
In the circumsicion that we go vpone,
Think you: the victory lith on your hands, not one.
Sharmysh ye may: and like capon cockers cock,
But we butterflies must hear bide the shock,
And why not we wasps (quoth one) as well as you:
Why not we dors as well as both (quoth one dor)
Why not flies: and gnats? (quoth one) of each sort now:
Being a hewge heap: exeding all nombor,
To ouercum yonder spider senior:
As well as fewer great luburs. Mark this mark:
The old proverb says, many hands make light wark.
So light wark their light heds, for light hands made:
That each wons light fist was bent to others ear,
Sort again sort: they anon entered such trade,
That I thought they would all have gone by thears theare,
Til their captain: with cap in hand, to forbear:
In beseching entreated them. Which heat gone,
Let the butterfly speak: they cride euerichone.
The butterfly blontlie thus entered again.
What devil flies be you friends be you so hastise?
That your friends may not speak their wills: plat and pleine
A devils name (I say) your chating toungs chastise.
I wene you eat no skins meat but daw pastise.
Peace dawpates: while I tell a thing now reiounst,
An my head, which to utter I am compounst.
Ye would have the ant hanged, before he be hard.
For that think you most polisie. As scons my dear:
Ye may not here him first: and hang him afterward:
But every fly thinking him self stood now here,
Wheare this ant standth, and at hanging even as nere,
Should it not sting him like stang of an adder?
To think to be turned without speech from this ladder,
Wise flies say: it is sin to lie on the devil
Then here the troth told, of this present poor ant.
Who that can cause him, let him lege the evil.
But my soul from sauashin: slide to hell a slant:
If he in our bitterment, showd any want:
Of conshinable diffrancie. In his words dolt:
But between both parts stood upright as a belt.
You all; weing this thing in ponderashin,
In hering of him what equaltie ye show:
And in not hering him: what slaunderashin:
To us all: shall grow, that since ye all do know,
Wey it quickly, and your minds therein out blow.
Down he flew: whereupon the flies said they would,
Here thant speak And thereupon this tale he told.
ornament
The ant prayth to be herd speak thorowlie before any part of his tale be
adjudged. And then they to adiudge the whole as standth with equite. First
alleginge better to clear himself from offending the flies. Finally geuinge
them (as it seems) freendli counsel, (touching this strife) grounded upon
this common saying: before thou ought begin, have an iye to the end, Cap. 57.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

MY masters flies here all in general:
And each one perticulerlie: I humbly pray,
What things I shall touch, general or special:
To take to the best. And first that I may:
As remembrauncer of your remembrance, ley
One special mean forth here: remembered to be,
Drawing herers in all things to equite.
And equite, in all things: to give or to take:
(Among other virtues) is a vertew pewre.
Inequite, for wrong, no way can make.
Where equite, is set and settled sewre,
For equite in no wise may endure:
Balance, to any one side, cast or dreuine.
Equite, equally: kepth the balance euine.
Which mean: for which equite to be obteynde,
Is: that herers: in hereing this mi case,
Se: that diffinitiue judgment be refreynd,
In any part thereof: to take any place,
Till the whole be herd. Which hering to purchase,
Is my great sewt. Beseching all to susspende:
Judgment in every part: till all parts take end.
First for me: next for you and me: last for you:
I sew to be hard. And first for me, mark all.
From all offense by me done: to you here now,
Syns I came, in this case that does here fall,
I am clearde. By one vnspert for parshall,
I mean that worshipful master butterfly:
Who tries me: to have dealt here indiffrentlie.
He cleerth me sins I came. And before I came,
If any fly (Justly) to my charge can ley:
In any thing waying the weight of a dram,
By word, or deed: either open or priuey:
That ever I hurt fly: any manner wey,
Then let my ponishment here: be so ample,
That all ants may thereby take an example.
But being clear sins I came: and more tauow:
Being clear till I came: from word and deed ill,
Alas: why will ye ^^ll me, who hurth not you.
Nor never did hurt you, nor never will.
Nor never can: though will would ill fulfill.
This: for my self leyde, (as for my self proved,
I hope my self sure: from harm by you moved.
Secondly: for you and me both, this mean I.
If ye draw the blood of me: (thus innosent,)
As the los is small, so naught wyn ye thereby.
But (as is said) infamy of endless extent,
Which pain fro me: and shame from you to prevent,
The safe salve for both sides: is this to decre,
Save you my life, and that saves your honest.
Third: and last point: naught for me, all for you:
Prouyng me, not only: you no whit to hate,
But much to love: a tale I Will tell and a vow,
Which: you hering and following: in stedie state,
Shall stedilie stey you, from harm in debate:
That hangth over your heds: much more than ye se,
Wherein for you and not for me, (I say) here me.
Among many presepts philosoficall:
Given to all persons: to take profet by,
For time: place: and case present, above all.
One serves in sentence most singulerly.
The words short: the matter long: the reason hy.
Which words and matter, on these words do depend^*
Ere thou ought begin, have an eye to the end.
This pure presept: as all often in words sey it:
If all did do it, in effectual deed,
So that our deeds did it: as our words wei it,
Oh: what commoditee thereby should proceed.
Our full felicitee: should thereupon breed.
As contrarily breedth: in contrary show,
Infelicitee: as we feelingly know.
Who would begin a fray: and his so therein kill?
If he looked to thend, that should hang him therefore.
I wene all the world, should be kept from all ill:
Kept we this lesson well, in practiced lore:
To thend of beginning: to look evermore:
Before we begin, for when we have begoon,
The leaving of lightly, is not lightly won.
Small things begun: without looking to their end,
Cum often to ill end: great loss, and ieoperdee.
Great things: begoon than: none Iie on thend tatend,
At (or ere) their beginning: we must agree:
To be our much more discommoditee.
As things: greatter and smaller: differ in sise,
So diffreth here: discommoditee likewise.
And of all our great things: no one of more weight,
Nor thereby more meet: thend therein to wey:
At beginning, then is that bitter beyght:
Of wrechid war. The very lock and key,
That lacheth and lockth us all, from quiet stey.
Who that (in rash roof) begins to contend,
Be repenth beginning, ere he cum to end.
It is a thing: right far be yond an ants reche:
To blase the plat of poison: generaly:
Set a broche by war, but short sum to feche:
Wars harm: and good, stand both unspeakably.
Both are (I say) vnspeable for why,
War has done more harm: then tale of tongue can hold,
War has done no good, and naught can not be told.
War has wrought such woe: that all flies comunly,
And spyderseke. Of which two sorts I speak:
Having in all times had experiensy,
Of rash beginning of war: the peace to break,
They seeing (in their war) their winning weak,
Would leese half the good they had: to peace to fall:
Rather then ieberd in war: goods life and all,
And of both sorts in this case, weried in war,
Flies have had ever cause: to mislike war most.
When spiders and flies: have fallen at this like iar,
For quarrels: wherein flies, might most their right boste:
Who ever had the right, the flies the feeld lost.
To one score spyders sleyne, flies slain, twentyscore.
And much of their offspring, lost for evermore.
Which showth (as spiders calte, that no sedicion:
Can have good sucses. In flies inferior:
By stoburne war, but by humbyll peticion:
For thing interior, or exterior.
Flies must sew: to the spider superior.
They take this as a full hold: not to be remist,
Well framid flies, will suffer and not resist.
Flies wreks in wars: in time past: if flies reuolue,
How spiders copwebs: flies sepultures have been,
Your wise quiet retire, shall this war disolue.
But if smart of time past: be forgoton cleene,
Cast Iye to parell, at Iye presently seen.
Uew yonder copweb castle: with endifrent iye:
And mark whether ye be macht endifrentlye.
Behold: the batilments in every loope:
How thordinance lies: flies fer and nere to fach.
Behold: how every piece: that lith there in groope:
Has a spider gonner: with ready fired match.
Behold: on the walls: spiders waking ware wach.
The wach spider: in the tower a larum to strike,
At a proch of any number, showing war like.
Se thenprenabill fort: in every border.
How every spider: with his weapon does stand,
So thorowlie harnest: in so good order:
The capital spider: with weapon in hand.
For that sort of sowdiers: so manfully mand.
With copwebs: like casting netts: all flies to quell,
My heart shakes at the sight: be hold: it is hell,
Against whose strength there, your weakness here behold.
Sum have harnes: most have none: all out of rey.
Capitaynes: practiced: politic and bold,
Few or none have ye: this army to convey.
But each in others neck: as sheep start a strey.
Ordinance meet for the ship, ye bring to the feelde.
But force without order: winth victory seelde.
And put case: that of you forty thousand flise:
Thirty thousand: shall escape, and his window win.
Yet: if each one of you: in him self surmise:
That he shall be one: that shall die entering in,
What one fly (of all flies) will thassaute begin?
No one. but that one that from home now come,
Shall think him self wisest, that sonest goth home.
But to die all: and in this window naught geyne:
Of that: said practice of time past: assewrth ye.
To venture life: and suffer death, are things tweyne.
Ventring of life, tobteyne right, often se we.
But to benter life: where death has certente,
For these kinds of right: to die: while ye may live,
No wise fly will: but right rather over give.
But if your harms of time past: be forgoten,
Warning of present harms: at present time take.
Of which two measures: if none may be moten,
Time past, nor time present, (of which two I spoke,)
Let the third: time to cum: be mean, thend to make.
Weying that in time to cum. The end must cum:
To one end of four, which follow here in sum.
After this war begoon, either both parts shall:
Take end with condision: as both parts can gre,
Or continue in war, time perpetual:
Or the flies (by the spiders) conquered shall be,
Or the spiders conquered by the flies. Now se:
How: in each one end of these four: shall a rise,
Paynfull perelus penuries, to all flies.
First: if ye after a time had in conflickt:
Take end with the spider: by composicion,
Beside the flies: that to death shall be addickt:
The suruiuers: shall receive such condition:
At the spiders hand: as the distribicion:
Shall make flies at end: bid fie on their winning,
And after that end: repent their beginning.
Second: this war: continuing continualy,
Every year, month, week, day, hour, every minute:
Many flies shall die. and all may fear to die:
What fly can besure: one hours life texecute:
At points of all weapons, ever had in pursuit.
In vndoughted death: and doughtfull deadly life,
This end shows small difrens, where reason is rife:
Thirdly: if the spider do conquer you flise,
What so ever fly then: him self best be haues:
The best and the worste: all in one rate shall rise.
Now frank free franklin flies, then all vile bond slaves.
Now fly in light windowse, then sit in dark caves.
Flies beginning war: ending thus, they shall clear,
Their hell or purgatory, begin euine here.
The fourth: if you flies shall the spider conqueare,
Then shall all spiders go to wrack first: no dout.
And after shall the flies follow: eueri wheare.
When flies have killed spiders: that stey the rewde rout,
Then fly against fly: comun cuthrote most stout.
Four ends: in this one war: show (the one and the other,
The last being worste,) each end wors then other.
In time past: time present: and in time to coome:
Sins ye have won: do win: nor shall win here ought,
Beter wend your ship a loofe: and take sea room:
Then roon here on rocks, and to shipwrak be brought:
It is to fer fet: and ferder to dear bought:
To fet: and bye things: with no les los in strives:
But with los: both of all your liuinges and lives.
Here have I said my mind: under principles few.
First: desiring you to here me thoroughly.
Ere ye judge any part, of what I should show.
And then to judge me, by equite equaly.
Whereunto: for hereing in this case sewde I,
First for me, next for you and me, last for you.
Of which proses a brigde, brefe pith aprochth now.
For me: the flies and butterflies tales: I weyde:
To my discharge. Sins I came: of all offense.
And before I came, my discharge my self leyde.
Wherein: my case being giltles inosence,
For you and me, both in reason and consiens.
To save both sides upright, this counsel I gave.
You to save my life, your honesty to save.
For you and not me: in your present quarrel,
On this principle, my hole talk did depend.
Ere we ought begin: namely thing of parell,
Wisdom wilth us, to have an Iye to the end.
In parelus quarelus case: to contend:
Chiefly this: in time past: present: and to cum,
How ye sped: and be like to speed, I shoud the sum.
But to end at beginning: you casting Iye,
At this poor counsel: of poor Antonie ant,
Of shap and good wit small: of good will great and hye,
I shall rejoice. Hoping here shall be no want:
Of equite: in my discharge this instant.
Which I humbly pray: and so to end to fall,
I say no more: but the great God save you all.
This done: a noise began of such a huzzing,
Each one fly blowing in an other flies ear,
As if ten milions of flies had been buzzing.
And all: by this tale so astonide in fear,
That most of them: their weapons could scantly bear.
Thants persuasions: in dread of death: struck them so,
That hundreds cride out, home a gain let us go.
With this mounser graund captain the great bragger:
Was much a mased, and vengeably vexed.
To se these flies now: so vnstedily stagger,
So late so ready: to bring their foose perplexed.
This time (thought he) should give warning to the next.
If he escaped this: at all times to be ware,
With faint fond flies, to fiske again a warfare.
He began to cast: that in commun known gise:
In all like tumults: that flies do thus procure:
Of simple flies, most are pardned that thus rise.
But captain flies (as he is now) are hanged sure.
Of which present danger, to put delaie in ure.
He wound into that tree: and silence won,
The flies tencorage again, this he be goon.
ornament
Thant has set the flies in such fear of the spiders, that most are ready to
run away. whom to stay, the captain fly deuiseth thant to set the spiders
in like fear of them: by a tale told on the same ground that he told this:
in pain of hanging at his return. Cap. 58.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

SIrs: I se well this tale of this ant here told,
To pass this seen parel, putth you in such dreede,
That many are minded to leave of their hold.
As though leaving of now, should your safgard breed.
As it should not. Nor for that it should in deed,
His tale is told nowhit. But all told for this.
To save him self, and those spiders friends of his.
He sees what and why he says. Which you se not.
He foreseeth: if fear drive us to run away,
That we shall not only leese this window plat,
But in fleeyng, like flease killed in chase from raie.
Which shall be (he knowth well) our leyserlesse day:
To be iaylers to ants, and he thereupon,
(Being his own Iayler) breakth iayle and is gone.
This way: our enemies win all, and we leese all.
They laugh, and we weep. They live, and we die.
They in fame, we in shame. Perpetual.
And without cost, pain, or danger, by and by,
This ant at liberty, immediately.
Thus: where tha^ts words show him to be your great friend,
Pyth of thants words: prove him to be your great feende.
Sum clarks (of whom this little ant not least clark)
Can: fine lies: as finely as fine true tales, tell.
Right side: or wrong side: they can turn in each woork,
And make flies take either side, true as gospel.
Which turn in this tale: to appear in sequel,
I have deuisde a way: (having your consent,)
Here it: and speak to it as your breasts are bent.
As this ant clarklie (or craftelie here,)
Has cast many masing mists before your iyse:
Of much dread by much danger, here to a pere,
So: upon his life or death, let him devise,
Upon the same ground: that your fear does a rise,
A speech to the spiders. To show what deep dreads,
He can draw or drive, in to their hearts and heads.
Which ground is this. Ere any wight ought begin,
Have an Iye to thend. The wise wight says: (says he,)
Wherein: (to match the fear that you be now in,)
If he bring spiders: in as much fear of ye:
As he has brought you in fear of them to be,
Then at return pardon him. Goods, life, and land.
Which if ye do not, then hang him out of hand.
Be it so cried all: then said this one that all leads,
Choose forty flies: to guard this ant that here stands.
Twenty: whose hands we trust more then their heads.
And twenty: whose heads we trust more then their hands.
All of heart trusty: both power and polisis bands*
And for fear of falls measures: among all these,
Send sum, that sumwhat leave behind: loath to leese.
This said, and thant sworn, his best here to be bent,
An harold with trompet: and truce baner spleyde:
For their safe conduckt, to the spider they sent.
The spider: warnd watch, to se their cuming steyde.
It should (to his honor,) be reproach he said.
To treat with traitors: in order of arms,
But of grace, he graunth them to cum without harms.
The harold and that rest: to the captain fly:
And all flies, the spiders pleasure did declare.
Wherewith: to guard thant, they chose out flies forty.
Whom: while they were choosing, one cople their:
Two flies of bysie wit: as sundry flies are,
Fell to deuining: by conjecture to show,
What should: in this mesage, and mesenger, grow.
How seist thou my friend (quoth thoue fly) to this gere^
What would thou give to have the Ants office now?
Give (quoth the other fly,) not paring of a Pere.
Nor I (quoth he) but would rather make a vow,
Toleaue all that I have, and live at the plow:
Then take it. What Is thy mind therein (quoth the other?)
That shall thou here (hering this, quoth he) brother.
If so fall: that thant bring not spiders in fear,
Then seth he him self hanged: at cuming again.
And bringing spiders in fear: when he cumth theare,
He is in danger, of the head spiders disdain.
Which is a another death. And to escape both twain,
I take it to be, a bisie, piece of warke.
And to shoot at, a crooked crabid mark.
For both these cases (quoth the other fly) put case:
In either case of both, thantes death do ensew.
Yet in which case of both: death shall first take place,
That will thant labor, first and most, to eschew.
Whose first parell: in hands of us flies to view,
It shall enfors the ant: in all the force he may,
For fear of death by flies: the spiders to fray.
Note (quoth the other fly) to this, this objection,
Nature in the spiders and the ant: joins nie.
Which: shall make thant ieperd much: by affection.
In spightful words: to comfort spiders spightfully.
Rather then discomfort them: thus fearingly,
I have seen sum, that for this like cause vpstood,
Whose crafty coucht tales, have done more harm the^ good.
They have done so (quoth the other) and they do so.
Where fear is small, by penalte being small:
But where penalte (as here) to death does go,
In the ants like tales: few trip: or none at all.
Many say often, honger perseth the stone wall.
But honger and fear: where both cum in like ure,
Fear perseth: as deep as honger, make ye sewre.
The father his sonnne: and the son his father:
The wife her husband: and the husband his wife:
The brother, his brother, all these we gather:
To have seen: (compeld by fear,) where fear was rife,
Bewrey, and be trey echother. In fear of life,
Seeld se we: so natural a foolish kind elf,
But he will hang his father: to save him self,
Often (quoth the other) tys so, sum times otherwise.
Of flies condemd, the father and son, both have:
Upon their knees: sewde with flowing watered Iyse:
Each him self to be hanged: the other to save.
That suit (quoth the other fly) is no common slave:
But in his appearance: so strange a stranger,
That his presence (this time) will bring no danger.
But contrary: in these like storms we se often,
Where Ants, spiders, or flies, thants like tale must tell,
Or they in auctorite: forced up a loft,
Not for that their setters up: trust their truths well,
But (as this ant) made instruments at parell:
There shall fear force them: for fear of suspicion,
To stick fast, to their forsers disposicion.
They wet (or they ween,) that they be watched so,
That if they be but suspect: to wring a wrie,
They be undone: I would rather choose my fo,
To be my judge: in case iudiciallie:
Then my friend. in this fearful forced state: for why,
Fear of forcers shall force him: more eide to rate,
To his foe: whom they love, the^ his friend: whom they hate.
Ye say well (said the other) but I sey to this,
Said suspected sorts: in fear of auctorite,
Not withstanding: suspicion danngerus is:
Yet sum, in faction or affection we se,
Or other corruption, so affected be,
Though life lie upon it: yet by mean direct,
Or indirect, they woork their affections effect,
And so for this ant: our soole cause of talk now.
What ever oath in promise: he for fear make,
To bring spiders in fear: to bring them to bow.
Yet: either for natures: or affections sake,
I fear, he will wililie the wrong way take.
And I hope (quoth the other) his present parell,
Shall stitlie streine him, to strengthen our quarrel.
But between you and me: in fine thus is it.
You fear here the worst, and I hope here the best.
You in which fear: and I in which hope, let us sit,
Silentlie till practice by proof have expressed,
In what scope (for what escape,) the ants tale shall rest.
The other fly being a greede unto this,
To se this end, both attend as meet now is.
This talk done, forty flies (and thant with them flew
Straight to the spider: before whom thant now stands.
But how thant flees now, that shall eftsoone ensew.
The spider was guarded: round about with bands.
Saving: a lane, made with tipstaues: and other wande(...)
That thant to the spider: in hering and show,
Might say (as he did say) at curtsie made low.
ornament
Thant after enter in talk (before the head spider) he to him, and all the
spiders (upon this said ground: ere thou ought begin: have a iye to the
end,) inueyth what he can to set the spiders in fear of the flies. Cap. 59.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

HOnorable sir may it your honor like:
To consider: that in affairs meare mundeine,
Polisie: and power: do not the stroke so strike:
That strife (at staves end) for victory or geyne:
Winth alwaie the strong, on the weak tobteyne:
But sumtime we see: fortune, hap, or chance,
The weaker: above the stenger, in strife a vaunce.
Whereof: my selfhere mirror to behold,
Sum polisie, politic heads think I have.
And of your power at hand. Might have been bold.
But polisie and power: my self now to save,
Chance would not suffer: but chance both away drove.
Sodennesse of chance: this change in me has wrought,
From liking lively life, to doleful death brought.
With halter here about my neck, as ye se.
Respight have I won, to se you ere I die,
For two things. One to pray all to pray for me.
An other, (as I am bound naturally:)
To warn all: of deep danger here presently.
At iye, in hand. But ye your heads draw nere,
To here and use my counsel following here.
This sage saying, the wise have said and say.
Have an iye to the end, ere thou ought begin.
Of this debate: begone then, thend here way.
What small or no pleasure, ye can therein win.
And what great displeasure, ye may be brought in.
Proving you: (at best) naught to win by this war,
And proving you: (at worst) utterly to mar.
One point of four, this strife cumth to of need.
Either: after strife: tagree by a greement,
Or ever to strive and never be a greede,
Or you to subdew the flies: by the swoords dent,
Or the fllies to conquer you, by force fervent.
Now: if this beginning. shall further begin,
Last a line to thend, and mete what ye shall win.
First: tagree after time of strife tasted,
In mean time: on both sides the mortalitee,
Your copwebs, their cotages, worn and wasted,
All windows vacant: of most fertilytee.
All from good order, to sinful ciuilitee.
The best end (for both sides, being extented,
The beginning (on both sides) shall be repented.
Next: to continue in perpetual strife.
Purgatory that (nay that is hell say I,)
Better dead. then ever live in fear to loose life,
As both sides shall live: evermore dyingly.
Still sterting from sleep, all sleapt with waking iye.
I better like mine end: looking for end straight,
Then thus upon this endless end: still to weight.
Third: if you in subjection the flies subdew,
Thacount bringth small gain: to that end wedded:
All flies ye can not kill: What shall then ensew?
As many as ye keep in dred, to be hedded,
So many you dread: then who is most dredded.
One fly put in fear, putth you in fear of ten.
Tell here your cards, and tell what ye win then.
Fourth: if the flies conquer you, oh dreadful day.
Dead in half a day: ye shall be every one.
Of the three other ways: in every one way,
Both sides (in effect) like ill: end upon.
But in this fourth, (fear whereof is my most moan)
Where all flies shall win all: and bravely bost all,
All spiders shall lease all, and spiders be lost all.
If ye reply here: and say flies (to this day)
Never wan this way: but ever in loss lapt:
In reioyner: reioyning with you, this I say.
Hit hapth in one hour, that before never hapt.
As it hapth me this hour: with flies to be trapt.
And that this is more like to hap this present,
Then it erst has been, mark this present bend bent.
See (I say) echone his death here (as who say.
Five thousand spiders: on the one side to fight,
Against fifty thousand flies, (oh fearful fraye)
A heap to a handful. The more side so light:
The less side so heuie: it is a heuie sight:
In sondrie respects. Wherein no one of any.
Fearthe me so much, as so few: to so many.
Were they all cowardes, as they are hardy flise.
Not the least fly there: but he dare bite his bit,
On the greatest Ox: that in the sh^mbles lise.
No weapon but the flap, shall make him thens flit.
Of the which weapon: spiders can skill no wit.
But though flies: but cowardly stacke to the helm,
Yet must the number: this copweb ouerwhelme.
Ten to one (in war) an unmeet matched match.
They will march on, as thick, as motes in the soon.
Ten thousand (in a moment) if ye dipache,
Twenty thousand mo, upon spear poinct will roon,
The desperate, dreadth: another byll, bow, nor gone.
And what gain you? to kill flies thick as motes?
The rest entering on you straight, and cut your throtes.
And though they guess: that many of them shall die.
Yet: if each one think sure that escape he shall,
As I think, all so think: assewredlie.
Then that persuasion, shall persuade them all.
Echone with other, straight in strife to fall.
Who may be foremost fly: with courage hawte,
Thonset to give, this castle to assawte.
Your wisdom: and your wisdoms all: I know.
Much more: can here consider. Then I can
How beit good will, wilth me: warning to show,
Of harm to cum: in this begoon to scan.
Before the end, what thend may be, and than,
To flee the worst, to fall (as you think best,)
At sum poinct with the flies, to be at rest.
ornament
Tha^t having brought the spiders in great fear of the multitude of flies, the
head spider taking great displeasure with the ant for the same, he answers
thantes tale so that he brings all the spiders in courage again. Geuinge (in
his own name and all theyrs,) defiance to the flies. Cap. 60.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THe spiders at thants tale, wear much abasht.
The flies (as thant set them out) feared the spiders sore
Their weapons fell from hand: they wear quight quasht.
Take peace with flies, they cride. At which rumorus rore,
The head spider (with wheat tuskes fomde like a bore)
In that rage: had not his honor line therone,
Had thant had a thousand lives, he had been gone.
At this hurly burly, that spider le graund:
In his cheyre fretting fewriouslie he frownith.
His look was commission: silence to command.
Whereupon: stately and sternelie he entrith:
A discors. The ants last told tale to meetwith.
But first: thant to discredit, to thants dispreyse,
On thants properties, this spider thus inueyse.
Friends: I perceive the ants tale (more false then fine,)
Makth you: your own shadows to dread (as it wear:)
To prosede in war. But stey a little tine:
Lift up your hearts all, and each one lend one ear:
Till ye have hard: how I this tale shall answer.
But ere I touch the pith: of thantes tale in this,
Hear of what property, thant him self is.
The Ant (cumne into the world out of the shell,)
For a time (in his time) creepith on the ground.
As we spiders creep here: and his piss as fell
In stinging as our poison (welny is found.)
Which properties, woork him toward our nature wound.
Whereby Antes be and have been taken: in all age,
Our half cosins: a lide in side half lineage.
This time, is the Ant, the creping ant named.
In time after this time, he to more time grown,
Wings does he gather. And those in him framed,
The flieing ant: thensforth he is called and known.
Then dispersth his nature, in two natures thrown.
He pertisipateth, with both these in this wise.
A creper with spiders, and a flier with flise.
When he crept hither first (at my request hear,)
I was diseyued in his age. (As the devil would.)
I thought him to young to have wings, by a year.
But now, he wingd with flies, his flieing tale told,
Does show him old enough: and a year to old.
Mark this creeping Ant: sins wings wownd him a loft,
How he pleyth on both hands: as Iuglers do often.
He corageth the flies now, discoraging us.
But did thou not erst, promise me otherwise?
Here: is thant brought to a narow straight, as thus,
If thant tell the spiders: how he fraide the flies,
Then sees he his death, at flies hands: straight a rise.
And if he say he coragde the flies, that lie,
Shall make the spiders hate him, without cause why.
Thant: having to this demand: good answer none,
None answer made he: but stood still silently.
To (quoth the spider) is not thant a good one?
Were he charged in law herwith: by and by,
This obstinate silence, should show him gilty.
But thant him self now: thus fer forth disclosed,
Go we now to thants matter: erst preposed.
His great ground is this: (whereon the whole dependth,
View thend of all, ere the beginning be won.
Wherein: if he a ledge here charge: that extendth:
To us spiders, that we this war first begoon,
That charge is wrong charged, for that charge must roon;
Unto the flies: for they enuaders here be.
And we but defenders: as all iyes may se.
And for the four points: whereof one must thend make:
In three of which: he laid loss indiffrentlie,
To lot on both sides a like: I under take,
In few words: to prove that tale a loud lewd lie.
First: war here taken up condisionallie,
Flies never won end of us: after beginning,
But flies (at end) ever bad fie on their winning.
The second: concerning war contiuuall:
In weat open feelde they, in dry warm house we.
Between these two plats, though the distance be small,
The biffrence is great. Of the years four parts: three,
Or two parts at least,) they can not trouble ye.
In winter, summer flies no windows keep.
Under men's house eaues: like eauis droppers they creep.
The third point: in our conquering of the flies:
For fearing of all flies: that we make a frayde,
The fool, or the infant, that his shadow spies:
Will oftimes cry out in fear: calling for eyde.
But wiser foolk weing this, thus is it weyde.
Like fear to be had: on their conquered knaves,
As has the great Turk: fear of his galie slaves.
Last, to the fourth: if flies shall spiders conquer:
Then are all spiders lost: as the ant says sure.
And flies to (say I) but as touching that fear:
For time past, of practice: put memory in ure.
For time to cum, let liklihod you alure.
To search that kind of conquest: and ye shall se,
It never was, nor is, nor never like to be.
From the beginning: it is in books to show.
When flies (against spiders) have thus rebelled,
They: either had miserable over throw:
In rebelling, or straight after refelled.
Namely one: the which generally swelled.
In flies against spiders, the time past sir year,
Which one (were there no mo) showth this case clear,
This time: sondrie. But chiefly, two flocks of flise.
For religion: with sum other thing to that,
One sort by east, an other by west: did rise.
Of opinion, contrary: as fer and flat,
As in distance, each far from other in plat,
^hone sort of both: to be in right faith elect,
All flies (faithfully) did believe or coniect*
Those flies did much harm: six or eight weeks anoying*
Which time: spiders had small rest, and those flies less.
Spiders copwebs: went to wrack. by distroying:
And flies wealth wasted: to begerie from richesse
Forestore lasht out, in excreable excess.
Fruits then grown, much lost for help to get them in.
How lookte flies here? to thend ere they did begin.
But what was the end of this? for soth even this.
The captayns, most hanged. Soldiers, many slain.
The rest (ought worth) given in pray for pilagis.
So that (to this day,) they bid fie on the gain.
Thus were these two sorts: of opinions twain,
One of the twain: in the right way to be thought,
Both brought to one end, and both brought to naught.
Which showth: that where flies in matter of most right:
Atempt tataine matter right: in manner wrong,
There: their wrong manner, marth their right matter quight.
For spiders against flies, great Gods law standth strong.
Which law (in leading flies) has willed this long.
You base inferiors to work your lords will,
Obey your superiors, be they good or ill.
Thus: were their matter as good, as it is bad.
And we as weak, as the ant has made you deem.
Yet should thill manner: in flies here now had,
Set that God upon them, to strike strokes extreme.
As by thexample told, the show does well seem.
Thus: for the flies conquering of us this day,
Gods eyde all days before: takth all fear away.
But put case we had not (as we have) the Godds eide:
But both sides: acording to force of our powers,
Should conquer or be conquered, or (as thant said)
Hap hapth in one hour, as has hapt in no hours.
Which he last a leaged, to schape our sharp showers.
With other his framd fears, of our confusion.
Yet: thant here to confute, here my conclusion.
In the later part of his saing (I say)
He says we may be distroide: as hap may fall.
And it must be granted: that hap so fall may,
But grant that hap so may: ergo hap so shall,
That argument has strength, like a paper wall.
May fall: and shall fall, are fer diferent marks:
To shote at. But when the sky faith we shall have larks.
For the fear, that his tongtromp (to you did sown:)
By thus many flies: to thus few spiders seen,
Setten flies with ten axes, one oak to hew down.
That Oak shall be hackt at: a good while I ween,
Ere it will shrink for flies: be it sear or green.
And the least twig: that out of that Oak can fall,
(The Oak standing still:) shall slay those ten flies all.
And so we Oak spiders: against these twig flise.
Were they all great flies: as most of them be gnatts.
And to one of us, forty of them do rise.
Yet as the giantes paws: pat down dandipratts,
So shall we put down: these dandiprat brag bratts.
Their most nombre: with our most strength to compare,
^ooding prikes they, mylposts we: comparde are.
And where he says: though flies think many shall die:
Yet: each fly thinking him self shall escape with life,
They will strive: who shall set on first: here say I,
At end of that strife: they entered in this strife,
The fool hardy flies: now most ready or rife:
To cum with the first: shall feel the taste so tough,
That: who cumth last: shall think he cumth time enough.
Thants tale (from point to point) now full answered.
All force of our fear here: it wiping a way,
Tenforce you from fear: further encoraged,
Hear: and bear a way: what I shall herin say.
A few words, hilie to your comfort this day,
Which shall set you all: as fer out of all fear,
As the antes tale set you all in fear: while ear.
Mark: all you: that in marking your enemies,
Their force (and not your own) do only behold,
A deadly dreadful sight it is: in your iyes.
But on your own force: your iyes being round rold:
The self sight of this force: shall you so enbold,
That had you no weapons here: but hasill wands,
Yet might ye count, your enemies now in your hands.
Mark more: that your foes: in beholding you:
Are strikin in as deep dread: your force to view,
As you are of theirs: which setth both sides euine. now:
Mark yet more: they have y^ wrong part, you have the true,
Against godds and manns law: this wrong they pursew.
Both which: so strike them: when they would prevail,
That their atempt, ever has quaild, and shall quail.
So coward a spider: where can be seen one?
That will not live and die: in this his known right,
Should all spiders die: (as few shall or none)
Yet in this quarrel, spiders go to bliss quight,
And flies to bale, without respect of respight.
Wherefore let the flies, the ants lesson atend:
At their this beginning, to have iye to thend,
And now (at end) dear friends all, pluck up your hearts.
Take your weapons in hand: and stand up again.
Stick to your takling: in this plat on all parts.
And as for the flies, (their fare to show them plain)
When ever they cum, they shall cum to their pain.
Stand stiff to me, and stand stiff to you I shall.
Flies and flies kin, we defy you traitors all.
The spider thus answering thants tale at length:
From point to point: no point thereof omitted,
All spiders: agains in full coorage and strength:
Those flies to their flock: with thant again flitted.
Two of them (to the captain known well witted:
Tostie into the tree: he straight commands,
And thant unto the ladder again, forthwith.
ornament
Upon defia^ce geuin by the spider to the flies, the ant brought again to the
flies, makes full report of all said at the copweb. At end whereof, two flies
argue wether thant have deserved life or death. By keeping or breaking former
comnant to bring the spiders in fear of the flies. Cap. 61.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THat Captain wild one of those flies to declare,
What had (since they parted) passed in this case.
And if he ought addid: or minished their,
The Captain wild the other, tentrupt him in place,
That truth: trewlie, might appear without deface.
Whereupon the fly: assigned to say than,
In a solemn order, the process began.
First: thants tale told the spiders: he did repeat.
And the fear: that that tale brought the spiders in,
Then in repeat, the spiders tale he did treat.
And what recoorage that did the spiders win.
With defiance given flies, their alie, and kin.
The captain then axt: you that went forth tell me.
Is this tale true and the whole treuth? all said ye.
Two things (quoth the captain) are to touch here on.
First: whether thant have deserved to live or die.
The second, apeece of the spiders tale gone.
Which I shall touch soon: but first thantes case lets try,
Upon his life or death, standing presently.
To se that case: by agreement fully scande,
It being (I say) first case to take in hand.
It is so in deed (quoth one fly) in the tree.
Wherein: whsle memory keeps matter in mind,
I pray you all pacientlie to here me:
Vprightlie declare (as equite does bind.)
Without affection: any wrong way to wind.
But enin as conscience: to speak: does me compel,
So shall I speak this tale, which I shall now tell.
Where I have heard wise flies talk: I have herd l(...),
In weighty cause: weighty considerasion.
And there is no matter: more weighty to be weide
Then that: in which: upon consultasion
^ithe life or death: in determinasion.
And presently present this Ants case: mean I:
To wa^e consideratelie, and indifferently.
Whose life: or whose death: before we determine:
Which of both to determine: meet is to wey,
Your late determind condition, pith wherein,
Mas: that thant should bring spiders in such like ^rey:
Of us, as he brought us of them. and I sa^e:
Behath done so. So that in my conscience,
Life and liberte must he have, to go hence.
And I say naie (quoth the fly) in the tree by:
He has not performed that condision at full:
To have his life, has he not (quoth the other fly?
To make proof a pere here: to wits quick and dull:
That performance will we reason, if ye wull,
Beet (quoth the other fly,) but all flies give an ear,
To one thing good for all: away to bear.
My brother fly, (and I seeming here to vary:
Both being on one part: seeming on parts twain:
In that in this one point, we are contrary:
Each one to other: it may make you retain:
And detain a dout, whether we both remain:
Constant, on that part that we profess: or no.
But here me further here: ere we further go.
Thargument of us tweine, is only this one.
Concerning the condision touched formerlie:
Either by performance: or performance none,
How the ants desert standth, to live or to die.
Thant should live says he, thant should die (say I.)
Now consider: that this present argument,
Is: to principal case, but an incident.
Our chief cuming is: on spiders to make war.
By cause we no way else, can obtain our right.
Wherein: we join with you, without jot of iar.
This remember I you of: to scrape out quight,
All doughtes of our truth: in judgment of heddes light.
For this case: or like case in case: used thus,
Showth mistrust in no wight: any case to discus.
And now we tweine to satisfy (as we can)
Our selves: and to se you the rest satisfide,
Aleage brother fly: what ye can herin scan.
Whereto, mine answer shall forthwith be applide.
Thants life or death: in our judgments to se tried.
That shall (quoth the other fly without delay,
Cum in ure: as briefly, as it fully may.
Thant (in his charged tale) to spiders told erst,
Grounded thus: ere ought begin: have iye to thend.
At end of thants talk, spiders hearts it so perst,
That it stagard and stonide all that hole bend.
Weapons fallen to ground. this out cry they extend.
Shaking of their headdes: and casting up their iyes.
Take peace with the flies, take peace with the flies.
Thant made spiders of flies: as much a frayde tho,
As he made flies of spiders, in tale erst told.
I grant (quoth the other fly) in deed he did so.
Whereto you must grant: that that fear did not hold,
For spiders (forthwith) were again brag and bold.
Though they so were (quoth he) thant performde cumnau^t,
That (quoth the other fly) for true, I can not grant.
There is (in thants cumnant) further meaning meant:
Then the very words therein fully express:
To bring spiders: in fear of flies: by bond bent:
Is not all, that all flies look fore: in sucsesse:
But to bring and keep them in that fearfulness.
Bringing them in fear: not keeping them in fear,
As fruitful to flies, as paring of a pear.
To answer this quidite (quoth the other fly)
You can have no more of the Fore but the skin,
The ant has done all that he can possibly,
To bring spiders in fear: and keep them therein,
Whose good will not wanting, though power cannot win,
Thing that good will would win: yet is it not ill,
Rather then blame lack of power, to thank good will.
Put case (quoth the other) thant outh you forty pound,
Bound in obligacion, to pay at a day.
At which day, he cumth to you (as he is bound:)
And where he should bring power: forty pound to pay,
He bringth good will: and will pay you when he may.
Whether would ye more: (in this case, of your)
Accept thants good will, or blame thants lack of pour.
What I would do (quoth the other) I know not.
But what I should do, that right well I know.
Thant showing full good will, to pay me that:
And that lack of pour: without his faut did grow,
I would in trobling thant: in conscience show:
A rigur. ye (quoth the other fly) but in law,
To what end: would thants good will without pour draw:
In this case (quoth he) commun law condemth thant.
In that the words of the bond, are fulfild no whit.
Performance whereof: in thants case, has no want.
Which may a pere to flies, of most simple wit.
In marking these words: of this cumnant here knit:
Thant (pain of death) shall bring spiders in like fear:
Of flies, as he brought flies, of spiders: here care.
These are (in thanis cumnant) the words in effect:
Which bind the ant: the spiders in fear to bring:
But to keep them in fear, no word runth direct.
And commun law: commonly in every thing,
Constrewth words, in their common plain se(...)lieing.
And that thant made spiders a fraide, ye do grant.
Ergo, thant (by common law) has kept cummant.
Now: to bring this case in court of consience:
Declaring our meaning in these words: to be:
That thant should keep spiders in fearful suspense,
Thant answering to this: that never meant he:
To be bound: to that inconvenient decre,
The judge (in this case and place) must needs assent,
With thants meaning (against ours) to give judgment.
* In law, conscience, and reason, as thinkth me,
The desert of this ant, does his pardon crave.
Lands, goods, bag, baggage, life, and liberte.
Friends (quoth the other fly) I have a soul to save:
Whereupon I proteast: I no malice have:
To thant. But in reason, I think he should die.
This said, those flies to their place again did fly.
ornament
At end of this last argument. The captain axing the ant what he can say?
why he should not die, the ant after a few words submits him to their
order. Whereupon the captain goinge to the question, the ant is condemde by
the voice of the most nombre. The captain then willing him to make his last
prayers, he does so. Cap. 62.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THe captain (to this) axt thant how say thou?
What have thou to say, why thou should not die here
The talk (quoth he) for me, by the fly had now.
In reason, law, and conscience, does me clear.
Whose which tale, does much more pithilie appear.
For my self, then if my self had told it.
And as he told it, I pray all to hold it.
Wherein: as I have kept comnant at the full,
So crave I of you, to keep cumnant with me.
Here stand I: to live or die now, as ye wull.
But in killing me (a poor ant) what win ye:
Or what leese I: neither profit nor honest,
Honest death, in honest fame, shall persevere.
Dishonest life, dishonest shame shall have ever.
Then said the captain: friends though I now at will:
Only by virtue of mine auctoritee:
Might give judgment here: this ant to save or spill:
Yet will I not give it: but grant to agree,
To se this case decreede, by comun decree.
Which shall be tried, by these two words: ye, and no.
And straight to the question herein, let us go.
All you that will have the ant live, say ye.
Ye, ye: (with a loud voice) cride a great number tho.
Now (quoth the captain) on the other side: lets see:
All that will not have the ant to live, say no.
No, no: cride out many, and showde many mo:
Then wear on the other part. Then said the captain,
Ant: of thine own death, thou herest here judgment plain.
I commit me (quoth thant) to the great gods will.
Say thy prayers (quoth the captain) ere thou dye.
On the ladder, down on knees half dead he fill.
Forthwith saying his devotion devoutly.
In which while, two flies together wondringlie:
Thinking thant: to be wrongfullie cast away,
In talk between them selves, as folowith did say.
ornament
While the ant says his prayers on the ladder, two flies thinking him to be
wrongfullie cast a way, pitteing the case, they touch (in talk) three sorts
of flies seen there then. Wherein is touched sum part of the properties of
newter flies. Cap. 63.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

OH friend (quoth the tone fly) what a chance is this?
An innosent ant: among fllies to be cast:
The deed in deed (quoth the other) damnable is.
I thought sure, we should with thants life have past.
For where forty flies irefullie: on thant fround fast,
Three score, piteously looked: as they thant would save.
And yet thant cast by voice, great wonder I have.
To the two sorts, that ye speak of (quoth the the other)
The One sort given to save thant: the other thant to kill,
A third: sort indiffrent to the one part or the other.
Did here (and do else wheare) most part of all ill.
Whose mischeuous manners, partli show I will.
Cumming (comunlie) in practiced exercise,
Both among spiders, and also among flise.
These indiffrentes (or newters) that part most take,
That strongest is, or strongest like to be.
And which side they lean to, such nombre they make,
That they bear the bell away: and most apt we se,
To cleave to the ill part, euine of properte.
Which properte proves (in sorts last or furst,)
That of all sorts, this last said sort is wurst.
And yet often: estemid with the best. For why,
They fashion them selves: to follow ever more:
Those that be (or like to be (I say the most hie.
But to all: late a loft: now laid on low shore,
To whom: they have made curtsie most low before:
They either se them not, or over look them.
If chance once imbase them, they may not brook them.
Two buckets in a well, thoue up and the other down,
They stand on the bucket, that standth on the brim.
Which bucket desending, they begin to srowne.
The bucket assending: midwaie they mete him.
And bucket for bucket: straight thexchange made trim,
For among all buckets (take this a plain matter)
They bide with no bucket: that's driven to drink water.
They must have wine: with fare and chere of the best.
Which: where and while it lasts: in any place,
Who may show gratitude in semblance fairest:
Therein contend they: to give gloss of good grace,
To their viander: who may him most embrace.
Where they may win ought: by fair disimilate show,
There they flickar, and flatter, in sauer to grow.
But their enterteinment once drawing to end,
They make none a count: of thanks from beginning:
Thend of their chere, endth the thanks of that bend.
Straight from that place: they are speedily spinning,
To an other host, good cheer: good cheap winning.
But to pay for board, where ever this flock boords,
Their current coin: is low curtsie, and fair words.
Which coin (to them) not costly: and yet so scant,
That where and when soever their there fail,
Then does all curtisie, and thanks for there had, want,
And not only good words: in most of them quail,
But some of the worst sort, that are given to rail,
To turn recompense on the wrong side or shore,
Give ill words, for good decdes, of friends had before.
These folike friends: otherwise feendlike fose,
Are much like mermaides: the one half flesh the other fish.
On all texts: for all sides, they do give such gloss,
As may seem to serve all sides, as wit would wish.
By which desimulation double deuilishe,
They wind: in and out: here and there: to and fro.
As the Reed with the wind, every way they go.
And like as we se the Oak: in stought storm of wind:
Standing stiff against the wind: overthrown,
And the Reed: wauing with the wind, still we find:
Saving it self, in all our blastes of wind blown,
So in spiders and flies: like lot oftims grown.
True stiff standers against the wind: overthrow,
Falls stattring folowers with the wind, stand and grow.
Of our open known friends, we may be sure.
Of our open known fooes, we may be ware.
But these unnatural neuters: here in ure,
Neither sure of, nor ware of, any wightes are.
Either flattring lies: they sotlelie declare:
Or when they say true (if ever they say true.)
That sale they: for false or ill purpose tensew.
They are friends to no man. But in respect,
Them selves to take good: or to avoid harm:
Or to do harm: of revenging effect,
They will attempt: by corrupsion to charm,
Those: under whose wings, they may sit close and warm.
To cool and control: such as make any show,
To bend any way: from the bent of their bow.
To regard a right, a dog has deuocson:
As much as they. But be it right or wrong:
For love, hate, dread, or meede, in promocion,
If it serve their turn: to make the wrong part strong,
That part will they sing, in all their sung song.
As these indiffrent newter flies: have done here,
Whose wrongful cleaving to the wrong, kilth thant clear.
This (quath the other (your saying has made me se.
Wherein: I pray to the great god heartily,
Be we spiders, be we flies, what ever we be,
That we all may (by his grace) cut of clerelie,
All unkindness, of newterlike indiffrencie.
Thant now at point: from the ladder to be rold,
A file far of flinging toward them, cride hold hold.
ornament
The ant having now made his prayers, being at point to be turned from the
ladder, a fly, a far of, cries hold. Who (lighting in the tree) brings
such a message from the head spider, as the Ant (thereby) is repride, and
carried to prison. Cap. 64.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

Upon lighting in the tree, this said this fly:
Being in scoutwatch: a spider spiyng me.
In the head spiders name: wild me speedily.
To tell this to you all: if so be that ye:
But this ant to death: by currysh crewelte,
He proteastith: that his prisoner flies head,
Shall stand on a stake, before thant be all dead.
The spiders favor to thant, made sum flies dout:
How it came to pass, whether the spider then thought:
In fearing spiders before. Thantes tale so stout,
Was: more to save his life, among flies then cought:
Then to fear spiders: for which, the flies thant brought,
And that the tauntes: that the spider thant gave,
Wear to cloak mystrust, that flies to thant might have.
Or that the spiders wife: pitteing thants case,
Obteynd it by suit, or that the spider would:
Use the occasion, offered there then in place.
To rid the fly, by that color: and not hold,
His bond. By promise made to the fly, erst told.
Which was: to charge and discharge him of offense,
As standth with reason, law, custom, and conscience.
With this, a formal fly into the tree flew.
Beginning thus: friends: wise flies say (and have seide)
Of two inconveniences, the worst eschew.
The worst of which two here: a side to be leyde,
The best of these two: is here first to be weyde.
To save this poor ant: to save that pure fly,
Or to slay thant, and both ant and fly slain thereby.
Consideracions herin are so great,
And so many: and most of such weight,
That they are: in counsel more meet to treat:
Then to make an alebench talk of: to bebeight:
For babbling tounges to babble on, wherefore straight:
Mine advice is: that six or eight flies most wise,
Closlie consult here, the best way to devise.
Nay nay, (cride a thousand) we will none of that.
We will be of counsel all. Yea will quoth he?
That kind of counsel: is more meet to hallow at:
Then to talk in. for if all of counsel be,
Yecan in that counsel: have no secrese,
But (in counsel) where secrets lacks any,
There is (ant least) one counseler to many.
Werefuse that way: cride the gross flies again.
Lest great wise flies, by and sell foolish flies small,
If ye (quoth he) take to counsel all this train,
Then: naught being secret: all your enemies shall,
Be of your counsel: and bie and sell you all.
But sins ye will have counsel cride at the cross,
I will disclose: that I would have had kept closse.
The fly in copweh: with the spider deteinde,
We know what he is: we need not here to boste him.
To kill thant: and have that fly killed, what is gainde?
That shall all flies feel: after we have lost him.
But sins the spider: in such sort will host him:
As we host the ant, our best way does apere,
To keep thant (as gage for gage) prisoner here.
For though thant (truth being fold before his face)
Be far to base: that fine fly to counterpeise:
Yet if the spider esteem thant: in like case:
Above the fly: as we him above thant preise,
Then for delivery of both (without steise,
The spider will (in exchange) change as gladly,
The fly for thant, as we will thant for the fly.
Briefly: the best way is here (in my mind)
To keep thant prisoner in stocks fetred fast.
Under guard of certain flies, to be asinde,
I ill we se sumwhat of this war, further past.
And if we se cause, we may kill him at last.
Or change him, for sum fly that spiders may take,
To this mine advice, show yours, an end to make.
At this: much bumbling among them all: there was.
Many words, little matter, and to no purpose.
Nombre of sentences here, I may let pas.
As things not worth the hering here to disclose.
And pas they must: for neither in rhyme nor prose:
I can win memory well to write with pen,
The tenth sentence geuin there, against that then.
And though: memory might the nombre, have conteind.
Yet was all confused so: in such bibble babble,
All a like loud, and all to loud, in voice constreind,
That all parts of best wit: had been unable:
To catch, keep, and make, thacount explicable:
Of all sayings there said, Wherefore (as I say:)
Not only they may, but they must pa^^e away.
^ But finally: all their that chatted: anon,
To the flies last tale: they all did so agree,
That thant (guarded) went to prison. Whereupon,
Ouoth the captain: sins this is past by decree,
Being one point of two: erst moved by me:
To be moved to you, in the other point now,
Conseiue, and reseiue the thing I shall show you.
ornament
The captain fly, inueith upon matter before past: in such sort so
encoraging the flies again, that anono they all crying to the captain to
march forward, they bravely set forth. And laiyng their ordinance to the
copweb castle, they besege it rownde. Cap. 65.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THis thing I mean which brought spiders in ^ere
Thant moved all the spiders: to cast their iyes,
Upon us their enmies. Whose show of strength there,
Showde so puisant (by huge nombre of us flies,)
That they (much by that sight) gave up thenterpries.
Whereon the spider, three inuencions inueide.
Reviving the spirits of the spiders in eide.
First: the spider to this wild the spiders all,
To cast iye from our force. And behold their own.
Which sight, such strength (he said) to their hearts must call,
That a hartlesse hearted spider: should be grown:
Hardy to fight, till we flies be overthrown.
Hasill wands in their hands: to hawberds in ours,
He macht: to over match us, in our most powrs.
Secondly: he bad them think: that we do dread:
The sight of them, as much as they do fear us.
Thirdly: to set cock on hope and run on head,
Their right seen (says he) to fight in: to death thus,
The most coward will fight. And by his discus,
Straight to bliss go they, straight to bale go we.
But: here me part the stake: in these casis three.
First: we them beholding: and they us vewing,
The fear falth indiffrentlie: on either side.
Next: each side vewing it self has ensuing:
Of like coorage: to both sides to be a plide.
Thirdly: he labring right by fight to be tried:
With clear conscience on their side, let that be weyde:
Upon this my next saying: when I have seyde.
The spider to thant: in this told tale: erst said,
Laid to us flies rebellion. He laying,
Example of plages past. Where flies disobaide,
The great gods commandment. Which disobaying,
Has plaged such flies, according to his saying.
Upon his which saying: here me somewhat say,
How case of rebellion from our case does way.
All subjects: in violent varience grown:
Against the hie powrs, they by that great god plaffe,
His work has showd his will, to bring overthrown.
Suffer, and not resist, that must be here enbras^e:
And sulfild. Or else as such flies, in time paste:
Have been scourged: for resisting, so shall we.
And so to be scourged, well worthy we be.
But perceive: thesehie powrs: must take hie place,
As standth with law of the great god: rightfullie.
For otherwise, it falsifith in this case:
Their said defense at godds hand. and contrary:
Where extort pour: usurps place wronfullie,
The god does right often: in such usurpation,
Put miraculus pour, to thexturpacion.
Often: making thinffrumentes of the overthrow:
As fer to compare: under the overthrown,
As flies under spiders: in comparison show.
And how this spider has vsurpedlie grown,
To potentate state, that is to us unknown.
Ineuer herd fly yet, that ever could tell:
Ground of title, why his state should thus exsell.
And he: an usurper: as I think he is:
You thinking so to, can we think that he?
Breaking the Gods law (as he does doing this)
Shall in thil deed: by good god, defended be:
Whom he and his offend: offending his decre,
Naie: hasell wands in our hands: the godds pour leads,
To beat back their hawberds, to break their own heads.
And where he alegith: that the spiders right:
I^ a safe warrant: with safe conscience to die,
For all such spiders: as shall die in that fight,
And that flies diyng therein: die damnably,
That loud lusty lie: for a lie warant I.
With safe conscience (in this case) courage a rise:
To bale go all spiders: to bliss go all flies.
The flies: upon hering and doing of this,
All stert up, and stood up, most coragiouslie:
With one voice all cride: sir captain our mind is,
To give saute to the copweb euin by and bie.
Wherewith: much more wilfully then wittelie,
(And yet not witless) into a ray they got,
Marching toward the copweb, within goon shot.
The watch tower struck a larum: thenmyes discrieng
The goonners gave fire: and first at raundon, they:
Shot of, the goonstones among the flies flying.
Which gald the flies curstlie: cumming on the way.
But forth flying the flies now: as fast as they may.
Without trenching: or such defensife forstalles,
Ordnance they ley, to batter that castle walls.
Great shot, and grievous slaughter of flies, there was
Ere they could: any piece of the walls batter:
To make it sawtable, but so came to pass:
That in short time, that wall they did so shatter:
That their waielaie plain, and straight to the matter:
(For which they came. (they went. To such a fears fight.
As never fought spiders and flies, in man's sight.
ornament
The flies give onset in assawte upon the castle: the spiders defending it in
furious fight. And upon the slaughter on both sides, the flies retire to their
camp. The spiders wife and childerne on knese to him beseching him to take
peace with the flies. Cap. 66.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

IN a^li battred brackes: flies rageing in a rank,
Ferstie flew in, all black as the cloudie sky.
Spiders defending them. Spider nor fly shrancke,
Hundreds strikin with gou^es, in peeses twenty.
Theare a leg, here an arm, there a head does fly.
And piece from piece: by violence flowne round,
A flight shoot a sonder, and as fer from ground.
Both sides to se: so busily occupide,
With polaxis, partisans, hawberds, bills goons:
Trompets on both sides: each tencoorage their side.
The auoyans of the noise: thorough my head roons.
The soonlesse flies fathers: the fatherless flies soons:
With this thing, above all thing (a lack alack)
Oh what woeful widow flies, go now in black.
Three quarters of an hour, this fight endewred.
Which time, I imagined domes day present.
And that all the damd souls: had been procured,
To cum with the devil thither: in his band hent.
There to set up hell, to suffer their tornment.
For dewring the time, I think no worldly sight,
More like hell, then was sight of that hellie fight.
Terror whereof, was to be witnessed well:
To se so many alive so late, now dead.
Thousands setting on that copweb (with heart fell)
Hang now there (like hearings in nets) by the head.
And spiders for their part: not scorfree lead:
Here sum, and there sum, snacht up a mid the rour:
That were within half a hour a fore, full stout.
At end of this fraie, no part saw cause to bost:
Five thousand flies, and five hundred spiders sleyne.
Wherewith the flies: seeing so many flies lost,
And of their purpose: could yet no part obtain,
At retret of trompet, they retired a meyne.
Where they before had campt. There to take a breath,
To save their honesti, and keep them from death.
The spiders were as glad to se the flies backs,
As flies were to show them. For what time they:
(Beholding dead spiders) each sees his friend lackes,
Few spiders (or none) saw cause to joy that day.
The spiders wife: and childerne: nere dead in fraie:
On knees besought him, in way of petiscion,
With the flies to take peace, on sum condiscion:
ornament
The spider having compassion on his wife and childerne as on him self, he
says that he will: with the advice of his council, in their suit do all that
may be done for the best, Cap. 67.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THe spider: in hering of this their request,
Seeing them in such fear: as he saw them there,
That sight and hering, may at first sight: be gest:
In husband, and fathers: that any zele bear,
To their dear wives: and sweet babes, at iye and ere:
The sight showth, and hering soundth such sight and sound,
As may their zelus hearts, to death welnie wound.
What kind hearted husband: can se his kind wife,
In like careful case, without woe at his heart.
What natural father can se: for his life,
His natural childerne, in dread quake and start.
Without his heart smarting, in most smartfull smart.
I think, ye think none: and euin so think I.
Meruell not then: though the spider be touched nie.
He tenderly tendreth his childerne and wife:
Refusing to stand up: when he bad them rise,
Till he would grant them (his grace) to stint this strife,
His sight of fear in them: and fury in flies,
Added his more perplexite: to devise:
To use pity to them: as nature drove him,
And polisie to flies, as reason gave him.
To this: he said my dear wife: and sweet babes two.
Great wear the thing: by you of me desired:
That I could deny, in what I can do.
But for this treason, spightfullie conspired,
And so put in ure: by flies now retired,
Your suit therein: if I should grant out of hand,
As the case standth: I dout how that grant should stand.
This case: touching me and ill spiders most nie,
In me and my counsel, shall forthwith be scand.
Go in, and be cherfull: and fear not: but I,
Will fauer and forder your suit: as may stand:
With most safte of us, and all our whole band.
They raze and made curtsie: forthwith whervpone,
(They and he weeping) they (from him) thens are gone.
ornament
The spider set with twelve of his counsel, declares his wives and childerns
suit (adjoining thereunto eocideracions of his own) for peace to be taken with
the flies. Requiring those counselors (while he depart and return) to
determine what way he shall take. Cap. 68.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THe spider: with his counsel, to counsel gat.
The flies: stocking together, as was then need,
In consultacion: full besilie sat,
Each side for them selves, best way to se decreede.
I gave ear to both sides: to here them proseede,
Stretching my memory: to a double charge,
To hold (upon hering) both theffectes at large.
And first: what I gathred on the spiders side.
That shall ye have: and then the talk of the flise.
The spiders: at a board: them selves did divide,
Sir on the one: six on the other side. To devise:
(And diside, (such matter as should there arise.
The head spider: in a cheyre at the boordes end,
Entrith: as follows here after pend.
Dear friends: our present parell in words to dilate:
It in deed: in heart felt: and at iye here seen,
Should show folly. Our case is now to debate,
Our best way: to wind out of this danger cleene:
To stey our state, as before stayde has been.
Wherein: between two things: I doutfullie dout,
To which one: I shall vndoutedlie, stand stout.
My wife and children: upon their knees all three:
With dead hearts: as death in their faces: did show,
As I love their lives: humbly be sought me,
By some mean forthwith, to peace with flies to grow.
For should they (said they) se the like overthrow:
That they had seen: between our enmies and us,
Of their present deaths, they felt feling discus.
This perplexth me: what one way to take of twain:
Nature prokth me (in pitteing those three)
To take peace with the flies, to run a maine.
Reason prouokth me: politiklie to flee,
The show of desire: in peace with flies to be.
Which pity to use: and policy to refuse,
How cruel flies will cock with us, that's no newse.
Now: on the other side: if I pity omit,
Naught weyng my wife: and offspring in this case,
But do bend upon policy, euerywhit:
To out face the flies: to stand face to face,
And these three (by dread) to die in the mean space,
Then am I double dead. The One: that they death have,
The Other to se them die, whom my self might save.
I pray this whole boorde: this case first to reuolue,
Each in him self, and then all together speak.
Devising your best. Wherein while ye resolve:
Your full minds, to me (at my return) to break,
I Will go, to cheer my wife and babes, woe and weak.
They praide him to do so: which rang in mine ear,
That they were more glad, to have him thence then theart.
ornament
Straight as the spider is gone, the rest arise withdrawing a sonder in three
plumpes four in a plumpe, no one knot knowing what the rest says, which done:
they all sit down again against the spiders return. Cap. 69.
THe spiders back turned, straight these twelve a rose
By four, four, and four, flocking into flocks three.
Every flock talking, and standing together close.
Each flock unto other (by ought I could se,)
As strange, and as loath that their talk herd should be,
As all could have been: that that spider that season,
Should have heard their talk, had they all talked treason.
All showde one manner, which showd them all meeuid:
Beating their fiftes, be^ding their brows shaking their heads
In fear and fewrie, all were greatly greeuid,
Talk of two: of which three flocks: whereto it leads,
I could not yet know: soft wispring, not fer spreades.
But talk of the third flock (standing sumwhat nere,)
Harkning sumwhat to them,) sumwhat did I here.
Friends (quoth one of those four) we four being one,
We may talk (and let us talk) frankly our minds.
This spider (our ring leader) to his flock gone,
In debate of this case: to which he us binds,
Is to me not un geast: how he with us winds.
But first, not to teach: but to tell what he is,
And then what he meanth here, here me say in this.
The spider is of wit, wonderus dark and deep.
And double as double, as he is deep and dark.
Loure where he loves, laugh wear he hates to creep.
To botum of bosum: for to spy what spark,
Kindled: with or against him, he may there mark.
Much for which purpose: he gives us now a bone,
Of pity: and pollisie, to gnaw upon.
But exepf: we spice pity and polisie both:
As the sesoning may sauer in taste to stand:
As in his taste and sauer: sauerlie goth,
He will gnaw our bones out of taste: out of hand.
Which ye shall se: when I this scantlin have scand,
Between his politikelesse pity (erst said)
And his pitteles polisie, (here erst laid)
This dought: to bring out of dout, he has us set.
Whether (by pity) to save his babes and wife:
He shall seek to flies: sum peace of them to get,
Or by polisie: to stand stiff still in strife,
And leese: both his babes, and also his wives life.
First case: showing our danger in general,
Last case: showing his danger in special.
This trap (not for mice) for spiders is baighted.
To se what bit we bite: or on what string we harp.
If his pity here: be restreynd or straighted,
And that (on his polisie) our tounges do earp:
More to save our selves: from danger of death sharp:
Then to save him and his, we plaing those parts,
He will sure suspect, that we have traitors hearts.
And if we leave polisie: and pity take:
Concluding: that we will bide all Ieoberdie:
Rather then see: of him or his: one finger ache,
I Will hold a hunderd pound (to an halpenie)
That he will take all that talk: for flattery.
Though his iye on us thereat pleasantly pinke,
Yet will he think, that we say not as we think,
These two: two edged cases: take I for such,
That they may be taken: a two edged sword.
Each side of both cutteth, where ever it touch.
But when we shall resolve: at yonder board,
Leaving these two ways: I have deuisde a thoord.
Wherewith, a tale he told them: so silently,
That (till he told it at board,) no word herd I.
But in taking end, I herd him to them say:
The spider will: our minds, severally know.
And I the youngest, shall speak first, (no naie.)
And so each other following: sitting a row.
Wherein: as you in coorse to speak (after me) grow:
Say you: in this deep case: upon deep waying,
Ye have naught to say, but taffirme my saying.
And so shall we (said he) save our four lives.
They agreede. And to touch the second sort now,
Ancients to the first, one of them four contriues:
To conclude. In matter what: or manner how,
From hearing I was yet kept (as I told you)
But the talker to that flock at end, spoke out:
These words. This way shall save our four lives: no dout.
Of the third and most ancient flock likewise,
One at end of his talk: these words a loud spoke.
This way shall save our four lives. Or at least sise:
Our honesties, and honest spiders undertake:
Life much rather: then honesty, to forsake.
Ye say truth (said the three) and we three a gree,
With you to lose life, rather then honestee.
^ With this, they all at the board sat down again.
That they (at the solders return) might appear,
Set as he left them: all as one to remain.
(While he went to (and came fro) his stock most dear.)
Who (so finding them,) with sad and sobre cheer:
Sat down in his cheyre: Whare he had sit erst.
And this prosesse to his purpose, promptlie perst.
ornament
The spider set again with his counsasle, in those three said sorces, arise
three diverse ways to take herin. The be(...) one where of to choose, the spider
departs to devise upon. Willing them to cause all corners of that castle to
be cleansed and all ^attred places made strong again. Cap. 70.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

AS I told you I would go, so have I gone
To comfort my wife and mine: in your names all.
Assuring them: of your good hearts euerichone:
To pity and releue their dread. As may fall:
In your most portable parell, cum what cum shall.
Which has (and naught else could (comforted them so,
That quiet they hark to here, how thend shall go.
Now: in case of pity and pollici: erst leyde,
Touching the two doughtes: which I was, and am in,
I require fully to here: what ye have weyde.
Wherein: your sentences severally to win,
You shall severally speak: and the youngest begin.
Wherewith that youngest (as he erst said he would,)
In words next following here, his tale he told.
In these two cases: bulted, sifted, and fand,
To sew for peace: in pity of you and your,
Or (by polisie) to war stiflie to stand,
The doubts debated here, in most might of our,
Require this demand: judged in my most pour.
Whether to take no peace, or what peace to take.
Labor wherein, I think vein: all that we make.
If I be worthy in your counsel to live,
My counsel is: that all your study shall be:
Not what peace ye shall take, what peace ye will give:
The flies being fraide: as much or more then we,
Will not they seek for peace* yes I warant ye:
Trust not my wit: except ye have out of hand,
Flies, sewing to take peace, as your will shall stand.
Wherein: what your will shall be ere the flies cum,
Good is to dreme: to what point in peace to wade.
And not when they cum: to stand muet or mum:
In lark of an answer (by you or yours made.)
Needful haste in this case, does me full persuade:
From nedles hasty device: in the other cases:
Both which (this taking place) they take no places.
This (under your correction,) is my full mind.
And mine (quoth the second) and mine (quoth the thurd.)
And mine (quoth the fourth: quoth the fifth) I am enclind,
Of an other mind: then this tale has now sturd.
For two causes. the one: for that this touchth no wurd:
Of the case proponde, which is our charge to touch,
The Other, for that I have other matter tauouch.
The pith of these two cases: I take to consist,
Whether (by pity: your fearful flock to save,)
We shall take peace with the flies: as the flies list,
To our common danger: by pride of flies brave)
Or politically show: that we no peace will have.
To fear flies, and save us: yours and you: in parell,
By their fear of wars continual quarrel.
I hold: the best one way of these both: to be,
To save your wife: and children: your sucsession.
And thereby you. For lacking you, what are we?
Who can (like you) save us: from oppression?
Our benefits (by you) enforce confession:
For notable governance in governors,
Never was felt our like governance: to yours.
Your offspring so toward: to rule after you:
As you rule before them: to their erudicion:
For our inestimable wealth now, and after now.
No spider has the contrary suspicion:
But all spiders, in most humble submicion:
Submit them whole to you: so loved or drad,
As never was ruler, that ever spiders had.
Our commoditees: won by you: being huge,
Huge were our loss likewise: by your being lost.
You: and yours: appering here our whole refuge,
Pity: or policy: which shall be the post:
In this case to stick to: my sentence bendth most,
Ere danger (by bread): to you or yours shall rise,
To cleave here to pity, and take peace with flise.
So say I (says second) of that second sort.
And we said the third (and fourth) which said: a none,
The first of most ancient four: his report
Beginth. but first: this tale last gone,
He seems to commend (in part) where upon,
He showth his mind. But first (I say) in words fayer,
He says as follows next, of this last sayer.
Said (this said ancient spider) this tale told last.
Sumwhat to touch (under pardon) I entend.
The tellers mind, I dispreyse in no part past.
But in sondrie parts, I can his mind commend.
Namely: in that his mind is bent to defend:
You and yours, from the death: as he ought to do.
As fer as deutie deulie drawth, and we to.
But as these two doutful dangers touch our state:
From top to toe, (as woe say: hie, mean, and low.)
So: from brim to botom: them both to debate,
In faithful plain manner: (as in heart may grow:
All dark dissimilasion, to overthrow.
Sotellie sounding to sense depraved,
That trace shall I tread, under pardon craved.
In these two tossed terms: pity, and policy,
To turn and toss, recital: of this whole case,
No need. After recital so sondrilie,
The terms but namd, where memory is most base:
Remembrance of the whole, those terms bring to place.
Which pity: is here aplide, to save you and yours,
And policy: here aplide, to save us and ours.
Beseching you: and all you before I say,
Till all my saying be said: judge therein no part.
But thoroughly here me without stop or stay,
And take in good part, my plain true meaning heart.
Good tales: ill taken, may make the teller smart.
But here, I pray hering. And having expressed,
In following the effect, do as semth you best.
But first: these two terms: pity, and policy,
(As I understand them) here me, them define,
Pity: is an affect of all clemency
That does always: most clementlie incline,
To have regard, to remittible disipline.
In matter of Justice: or any case else,
All displeasant suffrance, pity it expels.
Policy: is the thing that circumspectly weith^.
Wisely (and warelie) to put things in ure.
As resons ferdest fetch: in foresight purueithe,
An over: rech above the weak wits cure.
So to put things in ure, that they may endure:
As no light blast of wind: do over blow them,
Nor lack of firm foundation, over throw them.
And policy: (right taken (as I take it)
In good part is taken, and construed ever.
Policy: is not as sum spiders make it:
Witty wreched wile, that does all indeuer:
In wrongful ill, to invent to persevere:
The name of policy there, is to be laft:
And to be namd falshed: otherwise false craft.
Pity: wrong named, and wrong used also:
May be and has been. As where it is aplide,
To help one: or few, to the hurt of many mo.
The pittide part: being deep offenders tried,
The Other part innosent. This (clear to disside:)
Is either not pity: or peuish pity:
Which (as thold saying sayith) marth the city.
But the right use of pity is (as I guess)
To pity part, as pity may pity all:
Without wrongful hurt, any one to oppress.
This mean I: in use of pity general:
But touching case (namely yours) especial,
How it and such, from this general case swar^^,
Shall Be touchit anon: as my mean wit may sarue,
But: policy, and pity, pictured thus,
I take man and wife. and temperance (as who sa^^)
Minister in this marriage, I discus.
Knitting this cupple: in stedie stinted stay,
Policy to command, and pity to obaie.
Policy her husband: and pity his wife,
Politically to keep al, from pittelesse strife:
Where policis may bring pity: promptlie plaste,
That husband will not keep that wife: out of place:
And that wife (that husbands assent not purchaste,)
Will not presume to take place, both to disgrace:
Her husband: and also her self to deface:
Thus policy and pity: in case general,
Join (for commonwealth) in common gouernall.
But now: to grow toward specialitee,
Where I laid misuse of pity before:
To stand: in not pitteing generalitee:
By pitteing the less nombre before the more,
Though that rule: lean rightly to the right shore:
In case of pity: much misusde generally:
It may (and does) feyle: in sum case specially,
Sum three or four: are in pity to be weide:
More, then sum other three or four thousand are,
In sondrie cases: which policy does eide.
Namely, and properly, new here to declare:
In particular case, of your present care.
To save us and ours, and leese you and yours,
Or leese you and yours, and save us and ours.
The loss of four thousand of mean spiders now:
Touching dangerous disturbance of thestate,
Were less loss then were you four: and chiefly you.
But the loss of the whole corpse, of us to rate:
With loss of you four: the most loss to debate.
This case: to our case: presently directed,
Is nedelesse: or bootelesse, to be respected.
Needless I take the talk: as in this respect.
First our case rechith not: determinatelie:
To death of you, or us, but it does direct:
A dread of death in yours: and in you thereby.
Or danger of death in us: not death clerly:
But dread: or danger of death: and death out right,
Are often (and now I hope) fer distaunt in sight.
Yours in dread, and we in danger, of death much:
All may be brought: and death yet follow no whit.
Neither in yours, nor ours. And this case is such,
As if ye will therein: policy admit.
To out face flies, the corpse of spiders to knit:
In coragious countenance, then shall ye se,
The flies in fear, and your fear nedlesse to be,
As the talk is nedlesse: to compare the loss:
Of us all, with you four: for none shall be lost.
And otherwise, bootelesse, in this talk to toss:
In matter on this side or that side to bost.
The most or least loss: for all least and most:
Shall die. if ye shrink and seek peace, flies will none.
Then we being first slain, you and yours are gone.
Will they flea us and save you, seeing this war:
Against you: is chiefly or only begone?
Nay make ye sure. Ye are the principal bar:
Or beam, in their iyes: as the quarrel does roon,
Wherein, I perceive no way: ought to be won,
But politiclie tencorage all our whole rout,
A fresh a against the flies, in ray to stand stout.
We in courage, out of courage the flies are.
And we out of courage, in courage are they.
We spiders presing forward, back the flies bare.
Spiders drawing back, forth prese flies without stey.
Thus ye se: policy here must make the way,
If any way may be made, by possible pours:
To preserve all, both you and yours, us and ours.
This: under pardon of you and yours: erst praide:
Is: both my conscience, and my counsel plain.
And mine (quoth the next of the three) with him steide.
And like wise ours also (quoth those other twain.)
The spiders outward words, showd show to retain:
All their sayings: and all a like: to like well.
But how he likte inwardly, I could not tell.
But: on these three diverse tales: a part to muse,
Which one to take: or which to leave of all three,
He said he would (and did) depaxt to peruse.
Willing them in mean time, an order to see.
That castle in warlike case, again to be.
Whereupon he: to his inner mansion gone,
To the soudiers spiders, they went a none.
To whom, that most ancient spiders repeated:
Such part hereof, as was meet for them to here.
But first, he invented in that he treated:
To encorage them all, to be of good chere.
And pluck up their hearts, if flies again march nere.
Matter of which rule such: and the tale so told,
That it brought the spiders again, brag and bold.
Then entered he: into repeticion,
Of commandment given, for that sort renewing.
For clensing and strengthing: in each condition,
As it was, before former saute in vewing,
The parell of a second saute, eschewing:
To ley down their wepons: and set to their hands,
To scour: and to repeire, all there, that in need stands.
The whole nombre (saving reserved to watch)
The watch in the watch tower: and upon the walls,)
Ley by their weapons: each one his place to catch:
To strengthin weak places, each one to work falls.
Strongly they stop up, al goon hole galls.
All places spide: in any kind of fauting,
Made strong in defense of a second sauting.
The dead spiders they buried: in the castle closse.
The dead flies hanged out in Iebets openly.
But to se the spiders: how they turn and toss:
Sum making of graves: sum the spiders bury:
Sum making iebets: sum hangin flies on hie:
Sum spinning threeds: to repeir that castle wall.
Xneuer saw the like, nor I think never shall.
Which: while they bring in pre estate, now to here:
What the flies (in commun counsel (not private)
Be in devising: what way may best a pere:
On their part, each party to save his own pate.
They: being set in counsel: it to debate:
In a troop: be side the reformacion tree,
Thorder and thend folowth here, to here and se.
ornament
The flies in camp be at cownsell: desirously devising: by what mean to get
peace best. Whereupon the captain inuenting a mean to drive tha^t to sew for
peace if they will be ruled by him, they thereunto agree. And thereupon the ant
is brought before the flies. Cap. 71.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

THe flies discoragid (as erst disclosed,)
They all cride to take peace sum manner of way,
A warfare to fare: that fare them disposed:
Rather to fast, and to fare full hard (that day:)
Then sharp sauts, with sour sawse: to taste more in say,
Their bumbling buzing: at their capteyns cry sest,
This advised advice, to them he expressed.
Friends all: that ye all would have peace, ye all show.
But what way to cum to peace, none of you tell.
Two pleyne ways theare be, to provoke peace to grow.
One: to submit us on knees (to our foes fell,)
An other, to offer them talk, war to expel.
By taking peace: under condiscion such,
As may extinkt (in both parts) all cause of gruch.
But first: if we submit us, all are undone.
Mean mercy, nay main misery: shall be our end,
Flies knees: to furious spiders, win no boon.
The second, and the best way is, to extend:
Sum talk as I told: which if ye condisend:
To follow, we must enter talk in the same:
By sum other bye mean: then in our own name,
If we sew directly, spiders will be proud.
And we either get no peace: or such a peace,
As between war and that peace, small choice a vowd^.
Exactions, raunsums, or fines, shall never cease.
Bonds of good abearing: shall have no release.
Flies lands, flies goods, flies lives, and flies liberte,
Many clearlie lost, and all in ieoberde,
But you following (as ye ought) my counsel,
I will drive thant to make suit: this suit to sew:
By a tale told to him here. Which I will tell:
If ye will here it and soth it, the flies grew:
To a gree. Wherewith certain flies for thant flew,
Who: fet and set at ladder foot by the flise,
The Captain (to thant:) did this tale devise.
ornament
The captain telth the ant that the flies have retired from thassaute: (wheare
many spiders are slain) to se whether the spiders will sew for peace, for
which since they sew not, the flies will assaute them again, But the ant they
will hang straight before they go, Cap. 72
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

ANt (pleyne and true, short and sharp) a tale of me:
Told to thee, thou must here. Thus standith the case.
A great conflict (euin now) the spiders and we,
Have had: which slew spiders a piteous pace.
Till pity wrought our retire, to se what grace:
Might a pere in them: to sew to us for peace,
In giving us our right, this war to sursease.
And: that they do us wrong intolerable,
I durst make thee (their friend) our judge (for my part)
The abhominacion is enscrewtable:
To pronounce at full, how they (by will peruart,)
Have wrongfullie wroong us, to wrongs of most smart.
Which we have borne: and never thereon wrokun,
Till the burden, our backs and necks has brokun.
And when we hope (if we at any time hope:)
That our breakbacke burdens: shall cum to end,
Then showth thencrese of our burdens: so large scope,
That they seem but be goon. None end seen tentende.
Wherein, their force forsith us, to band in bend.
Rather: then bide their perpetual shakling,
To stand against them, and stick to our takling.
As we have stikt now here (I say) to their pain.
And to avoid their more pain (I say and said:)
Being loath: to set a broch their blood again,
We have traynd a long time (endiffrentlie weyde:)
To keep them: from thextreme extremite stayde,
To se their sewt for peace: us to peace tatempt.
Which: through their own faut, (we say) is exempt.
But since they sew not, we will set on a gain.
To leave no spider (or else no fly, (a live.
But ere we go: we have made decre certain:
To hang thee straight. Ant: it booteth not to strive,
Get a gostlifather: that can shortly shriue.
Dispatch hangman. Sum fly go: sum bell to toule.
That spiders and flies, may pray for thants soul.
ornament
The Ant upon soden short warning of his death: being much dismayde, laying
all that he can for his life, and yet can get no grace, he prayth respight:
while he be brought to the spider to se whether he will grow to any peace to
save the antes life. Which granted, the ant is brought before the spider.
Cap. 73.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

Never was there ant, (I wene) so assonsde:
As was this ant upon this chief flies tale told:
Had he been an ant plenteouslie ^^onide,
He would have given sacks full of silver and gold:
To have been safe thens, but he preide them to hold:
And hear him speak once again before he die.
Which granted, this began the ant by and bie.
Master Captain (and all (my masters) here flise:)
I beseech you consider, consideratlie.
Not only: that none enmite does a rise:
In me to ward you: proved aprobatlie,
Before nor since my suffrance, captiuatlie:
But friendship in aduising you peace to keep,
Wheare war has sins, brought many flies in dead flepe.
Also to vewe: I humbly you instant,
What time ye have hanged me, what thing ye have won.
The carcas of a poor wretched seely ant.
Not worth the rope that it hangth by: in the soon.
Way well (with your selves) what a threede this were spoo^
An innosent: by tiranie: to death to draw,
No stie thereby winner, the worth of a straw.
Note more: this thing once done, can never be undone.
And till it be done, may be done when ye will.
Which being now done: and repented as soon,
To late cumth that repentance: to avoid thill.
Mark more. If you in this fury: me here kill,
Then the feyre flower of flies (as ye take him) dies,
As from the spider, thretning therein erst lies.
Quoth the captain turn the ladder: thant cride stay.
If all this before said: my life will not save,
Here this device: devised an other way.
That is: it may like you: I your grant to have:
Of one poor petission, which I last here crave.
Let me go: gardid to the spiders again,
To prove: what peace I can for my life, obtain.
Beete so cride the flies: who made a harold go:
To make most humble suit: in behalf of thant,
That he and (save forty flies with him) no mo,
Might be admitted to his speech: that instant.
The spider (seming to grant it: hard and scant,)
Bad him cum. Wherewith away the harold went,
Showing the flies and ant, the spiders assent.
Forty flies garding the ant, flew forth bravely.
The spiders fort, renewde and furnished again.
The head spider in the mids: standing gravely:
And (for terror) on Iebets and galows remain,
Flies thousands hanging: sum in rope sum in chain.
Thant: being brought before the spider to speak
His mind (as folowith) forthwith he did break.
ornament
Thant (in way of peticion) sewinge to the spider for peace laying
consideracions to provoke him the rather thereto, the spider does attentively,
give the ant hering, Cap. 74.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

Right exelent hunkill, if I woeful wretch:
To call you mine vnkill: may here be so bold,
Two things: to pronounce playnlie without fer fetch,
Is my present purpose. First of which does hold:
Thanks, for saving my life. Second to be told,
Standth upon a request by petiscion:
For parell, like the first in condiscion.
As thus: of life: I am in like danger now,
As I was then* (except your merciful eyde:)
The flies: being bent to live and die on you,
To sawt this castle a fresh, they have purueyde.
And had been here ere this: saving that they steyde:
To hang me first, which has no longer stay:
But till I (of peace) bring them word, yea, or nay,
Nowhit at their suit: but all together at mine.
They respight my life: till my return: to try,
What good luck: your good love, to me may a sine:
By enclinacion to peace, charitablie:
At my suit, for my sake. Both to save thereby,
My life: and as many of yours: as shall,
In this feerce force, be clapped in the necks withal.
And since: your own estate ye can better wey:
What way is best: (for you and yours) then I can,
And that ye know: the worst peace: (as wise wights sey:)
Is better then is the best war, to scan,
As proof showth partly here, since this war began:
This considered: considering of your part here,
I lean of to consider mine own part clear.
First: beseching you with me, and for me now.
To consider: I am in this parell brought,
By my self, for my self, naie by you for you:
Without my seeking: by your own request wrought.
And stinted reward, coruptlie to be bought,
None ye offered, none I axid, nor none I have:
Nor none I sought: but your fauer to vowsaue,
Secondar^lie: your case erst arbitrated:
I forthered: (as fer as my wit might force pour:)
Which showde so, when I the same Iterated,
That I had words of thank: from the mouth of your,
Thirdly: where chance of war: was to me so sour:
That I (for you) was captive and should have did,
What (and how) things grew thereon, here them specifide.
At the flies first approach: toward this assa^t,
To a tree they drew me: straight to hang me there.
Axing of me, or laying to me: no faut,
But that I was your friend. In which deadly fere,
One fly: erst at tharbiterment (as other were.)
I prayed to speak, that I might speak ere I did.
Which was at last granted: but first long denide.
My tale there, stood on two entents in effect.
One: to save mie self, an other to save you*
And yours. And therein to escape vnsuspect.
First for my self, I laid that no fly could ad(...):
That ever I offended fly: ere naw or now.
Praing them (thereupon) to here and adiudge m^
As might most equally stand with equite.
And for the saftie of you: and of yours here:
To qualify the feerce fury of the flies,
All trembling terror: that I could make apere,
That might discorage the flies: in any wise,
That did I at the full: to the flies device.
Which wrought such effect: and did their hearts so pall,
That they cride for peace: and would have fled ny all.
But the chief fly steying them: then against me,
Spoke his pleasure theare, as you did after here.
He saw and said to the flies: that they might se:
My counsel given them, was against them clear.
And that I put them in fear to cum here mere:
Only for the love: that I to spiders bare,
And to set my self at liberte, from flies snare.
Whereupon he moved, and they did consent:
That I should be sent hither as sent was I,
To tell a tale, to abate your fury bent.
Wherein: if I brought you all as fearefullie:
To fear them: as I had brought them formerly:
To fear you, then should I be set frank and free.
Or else (at my return,) hanged straight should I be.
Here: to prolong my life, nature prouokt me:
To make you afraid of them, sumwhat to say.
But yet again to that: affection yokt
To reason so fayntlie, when that I did inuey,
That you (by reason) straight wiped that fear away.
For which, I was no sooner returned uneath,
Ere I had (at the flies hands) judgment of death.
First at your request, for you: and not for me:
I came: craving no reward: but your good will.
Second: in tharbitrate case I wrought decre,
To the best for you. As fer as I could skill,
Thirdly, for your sake: to death most vile or ill,
I was then drawn: and am now drawing again,
Except my grief: sum grace, of you obtain.
That is: that it may like you, to flies to grant,
Peace. Such as despair give no cause to refuse,
And pride give no cause, it proudly to auaunt.
But as mesurable mean: measure endewse:
So (of your grace) graciously them to use.
This love toward my life: please it you to show,
No reward else (at your hands) crave I to grow.
This endid: the ant made curtsey to the ground.
At which the spider gave him a beck low boude.
But: before he any word: to thant did sound,
He pawsde solemnly, as any spider could.
Which done: very lovingly: but not very loud,
In manner assewred. And in words right grave,
First thentre: and then thend of answer he gave.
ornament
The spider (upon thants tale cold to him) alegith certain things by which
he seems in doubt much to grant peace to the flies. Wherein the ant and he
traversing sum what: anon he grants peace to them under condition expressed,
wherewith thant is brought to the flies again. Cap. 75.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

Cousin ant: a long matter in short speech here,
Ye have (as ye can) right wisely declared.
Which: as ye grounded on three things to apere,
To draw me to pity you, in case thus snared,
So: this mine answer to those three prepared:
Has in it: other three things. Two of which three,
Stand sore against ye: and the third standth with ye.
First the harm (by wrong) that flies have done me.
Second: my will to be reuengde on the same.
Third: the pity I have of you. I promise ye:
Of two things: between these three: which one to name,
I can (as yet) no determinacion frame.
Which is: one of these two: to determine at eende,
Whether to slay all my foes, or save one freende:
Naie: whether to slay or to save: foes and friend both,
And whether to slay or save: both you and yours,
On this question (quoth thant) this case rightly goth:
But peace sauith them and theirs: us and ours.
War sleath (or daungerth) all: in short sharp showrs.
Ye save all: in pitteing me: the least one,
Not pitteing me, ye slay (as semth euerychone.
But two of your three points last touched: here me touch.
Omitting the third, till I them have touched.
Of your harm: your will to revenge: as ye a vouch:)
To the one ill past: the other ill to cum, couched:
When all is reuoluid, that can be a vouched.
Your reuengement to cum: of the flies ill past,
May bring you more harm: and the flies away cast.
Yea: cast you and yours away to, (I say) it may:
And (under your pardon) to speak my mind plain,
Your desire of further reuengment: to way,
Declarth much crewelte: in you to remain.
The least flies raunsum has been loss of his brain,
That in time past has touched here: and now in sight,
Thousands of flies slain, and hanged in present fight.
Thus for their ill, and your will: thill to revenge:
Your pointing of those two points: dispoynted be.
In that quarrel: charitee does you challenge:
In deadly defiance: of all enmite.
Then passing these two points, to this third pas we.
Pity: whereby charitee here to enbrase,
A boue all cases, pity this pitefull case.
And pity: in you showde here now unto me,
Commodite is your self: I think shall gain.
If you (in this respect of pity) agree:
To take peace with the flies, though ye loss sustain:
My life to save: in recompense of my pain:
Hands and hearts of Ants: old and young: great and small,
To serve you in your need, ye are sure of all.
And contrariwise: if I here now go to wrack,
Where you shall me flea: in that ye may me save,
Not only freendship: of all ants ye shall lack,
But all creaturs living: shall you deprave:
And abhor. where they: speech or thought of you have:
Against you (in this case) least mite in a cheese,
In his most might: will fight, in blood to his kneese.
To this (all that I can say) what ye will do,
I humbly beseech you (forthwith) to declare.
Life, or death, which one of two to trust unto,
Is my deep desire. That I may now prepare,
My stomach ready, according to my fare.
My mind I mean to die: or else to live,
As your pleasure is, my death or life to give.
Cousin ant (quoth the spider (pity toward you:
And anger toward them, wreastleth in me sore.
The flies spite to spiders: to show what and how:
They have spighted us: from long before:
Laying their fauts on our backs. and evermore:
By clayming our commons and such other like,
Slaundring our titles: quarrels still they pike.
Sir (quoth the fly) fauts on both sides I have herd,
Which on both parts, I wish to be mendid.
The next way whereto, is peace to be preferred.
By war, no part mended, all parts offended.
War wastes all things: where war is thus bendid.
In pity whereof, by peace all ils to mende,
Peace to all parts: I wish still an end.
Well cousin: chiefly: yea only for your sake:
In recompense of your pains: at my desire,
Pardon I give flies: and peace thus shall they take,
I will all flies, out of hand hence to retire.
And that they in tumult, no further conspire.
But that they clear dissolve this conspirasie,
And every fly flee home, to live pesablie.
^^ They shall now: set you at liberte also
Bag, and bagage: to go straight home franck and free.
And in this window and all, (wheare my powrs go:)
Half the hooles for theirs, I grant to them fro me.
And the fly that this began, still here to be.
Standing upon his trial in consequence,
As standth with reason, law, custom, and conscience.
Which (as I promised him, (I will perform.
This is your end. And flies warn your fellows flise:
To be ware henceforth, of these deeds enorme.
And by their harm here present, to war so wise:
That they never atempt more, thus to arise:
Against their beggars or betters: such as be,
Placed thus, above files in auctoritee.
Great god save you (quoth thant) quoth those flies amen.
Low curtsie they made, and away they flew:
To the camp of flies: and there and then,
Presenting thant to them, about thant they drew.
With panting hearts. To perceive, what would ensew.
Wherewith: the ant at curtsie with knees low boude,
These sweet words he began, in voice right loud.
ornament
Thant declaring peace: as it is granted, the flies in much jove set the ant
thankfully at liberty, and home goes he. Whereupon the captain commands
all flies to draw nere to here him speak ere they depart. But they flee all
away a few except. Cap. 76.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

PEace: and pardon: I bring now into your laps.
Upon these words spoken, there was such a shril showte
Holding up their hands: casting up their caps,
Such ioying and rejoicing: the whole camp about:
As selde has been heard and scene, in such a route.
Long was it: ere silence would fully be won.
But at last it was won: which done thant begoon.
Peace to pronounce, in form as it was granted.
And that it was granted only for his sake.
When he at end (to them) had it a vaunted,
And that he: of his guard thither: did witness take:
They all of the same: affirmacion did make.
Straight way: the halter taken from the ants neck,
The captain fly gave thant, a lovely low beck.
Praying him: to let all hard handling past, pas.
And to consider: that in nombre so great,
All be not one flies brood: and we he was,
That he had showde him self so ill: him tentreate.
Desiring him, it to forgive, and forgeate.
(Sir quoth thant) forgiven and forgotten, all is:
For my part, and ever shall be after this.
And such flies as erst, had frowninglie fast him:
Lovingly they then, on him did smothlie smile.
The captain and cheef flies: having embraste him,
They giving him thanks, in words of pleasant style:
Discharging him thence, I let him pass a while:
Most ^ocund and joyfully: homward to flee,
While ye: the flies conclusion have by me.
The ant being gone, the captain forthwith:
Made proclamacion, to be herd there say.
But thousands (after hundreths) are gone euin since.
Till all: within forty, wear nowne quight away.
The rest, most against their will: forced to this fraie,
Gathering about the captain: to hear him speak,
He to them: and they to him, their minds did break.
ornament
Upon a little talk had between the captain and the few flies there left,
touching the rewdnesse and lightness of the common sort of flies, misliking
their former light l^wde demenure, they depart. The camps on both sides, clear
brooken up. Cap. 77.
depiction of the army of flies

depiction of the army of spiders

HOw like ye this rudeness of these flies (quoth he?)
As ill as any sight I have seen (quoth one)
Well (quoth an other) it is no nouelte:
Common sort of flies (in manner euerichone)
As gidds cum and go, so flies cum and are gone.
Oitimes when striuis are (by wrangling flies) begoon,
In the mids of the matter, away they roon.
Leaving flies in the briers: whom they forced thereto,
As they forced me. But I am this time tought:
Against an other time: what I shall do.
And we (quoth other) thither forsiblie wrought.
My mind (quoth the captain) was to have brought:
Our camp in order disolued. Sir (quoth one)
Ye know they that know none order, can keep none.
I told at first (those flies that forced me out)
Though I took (as I took and take) our claim right:
Yet against our superiors, to be stout:
To attain our right: by force of furious fight,
A blind fly might se that out of the way quight.
Which would not be heard: but ere I again stur:
As I uow sturd, I le be hanged at mine own dur.
And we (quoth the rest). Friends (quoth the captain)
I was not forced at beginning: to cum forth.
I rather foreced other: but to be plain,
The gain in this io: ney seen: what it is worth,
And what danger this and like enterprise stoorth
I Will not stur thus again, if I may sit still:
And foorst to stur thus, I Will stur with an ill will:
Better snioth words to give: then smart stripes to take.
Namely where stripes win naught: and words may will all,
Against the streme, strife again I will not make.
But take at spiders hands, as in peace may fall.
I se what it is: to spurn against the wall,
Home will I in peace. and in peace a bide there,
Wishing peace thinstrument, right to try each where.
We wish the same (said the rest) all taking flight:
From thence: nothing theare left: but themptie place,
Whereupon: the spider, brake up his camp quight.
Which done, I sterted up a speedy pace.
Looking out at the window: there to purchase:
A sight (if I could) of the ant: cume home new,
What solemn salutasions, should there ensew.
ornament
Thant being cum to his molehill: solemnly reseiued of his wife, and childerne,
and a great number of ants, he telth (to them all a tale discoorsinge theffect
of all his trouble, had among the spiders and flies, willing them diligently
to mark, what he says. Cap. 78.
depiction of spider and fly story

OVt at a lates hole, castinge mine iye,
A molhill I spide: as the emerod green.
The grass low leyde: and unto the window nie,
Thant new entering the same: who when he was seen,
On so soden warning, never was (I ween)
Such a nombre of ants, as were on that hill.
To show outward tokens, of inward goodwill.
At thants first enter, a lane of ants was made.
Every ant by the way, shaking that ants fist.
And sumwhat more then the midwaye of that glade,
His wife met him: whom he full sweetly kissed.
His babes fell on knees. Whom he devoutly blist.
Whereupon: all ants having that ant imbraste,
These words said he to them: amid mong them plaste,
Dear kinsfolks: and alies many: and friends all.
What ye have herd of me: sins I from you went,
That know I not. But my self here report shall:
Of my trobulus tragidie, theffeet fervent.
In telling which tale, mine effectual intent:
Is: that ye all shall now mark much: what I say:
And all mark much more, why I say: that I say.
But what I say: mark first. I think ye know all.
That my young cousin spider was with me here:
To cum to his father: my hunkle: at call,
But the cause wherefore he wild me to appear:
Whether ye know or not: that know I not clear.
My knowledge whereof: to witness that ye know,
In full and few words, (as I can) I shall show.
A notable fly: has late chaunsed to light,
In that spiders copweb. the spider by that,
Charging the fly: with desert of death: by right.
The fly: to deserve to die, denying flat.
Beseching the spider, to here him speak sumwhat.
He granting him speech. and to judge his offense,
Standing with reason, law, custom, and conscience.
The spiders challenge to the fly, gave great charge.
Whereto (as fer as I could there understand,
The flies defense, was very lusty and large.
In whith challenge and defense: when all was scand,
To cum to end, they two could not take in hand.
But being dreuen to choose arbiters tagre,
The fly choose a butterfly, the spider chese me.
This one: of their many matters tarbitrate.
At trial (by custom) on which side to lay,
All holes, in that and all windows in each state.
The flies claiming freehold: for free passing way.
The spiders for spiders said: so, all hold they.
Whereon: we hering all sides what could be leide,
We could not agree, how the case might be weide.
To any one side of both: so that at end,
In our report, (to that spider and that fly,)
The case as we first found, we left it to depend.
The spider and fly in copweb: thend to try,
Whereupon the flies: in a fume by and bie,
Were sodenlie up: in a rought, on a rore.
Such a flock, as I have never seen before.
Nonede to ask them wherefore their cuming was,
Their warlike fashin: showde them bent to fight:
But in a moment, a bout me they compass.
And withoutworde of cause declarde, wrong or right.
They drew me to a tree: standing nie in sight.
Wheare: with halter about my neck: on ladder set,
Turn the ladder they cride, none other glace to get,
Saving the forsayde arbitter butterfly,
Upon great and long suit, at last obteynde.
Of them to here me speak: before I fhoule die.
But ere I spoke (what to speak) seeing vnfaynd
Life or death lie before me,) I was constraind:
(As that short time would serve) to premeditate,
How to conserve my self, and the spiders state.
As affection natural: moved me more:
To lean to the spiders: then toward the flies,
And of my tale: the very carnell or core,
Must stand on two points (me thought in any wise.
The One, to persuade no fault in me to surmise:
Against them. The Other to make them to relent,
By enforsing the force, of spiders force bent.
In first part of which tale, my fautes I clered:
That they (to touch me with) could any way late.
And where: by the rest of my tale, appeared,
Their deaths plain: (as I there fooes force did displase.)
They thereupon all: weinie ronning away
I handling the tale so, from first part to eende,
That the most part (simple flies) took me their freende.
But the crafty fly: capital captiteyne,
Opening (to the flies) my politik intent,
Unseen to the flies: till he made them se it plain,
Him self seeing his danger above all bent,
If the flies did flee, their flight then to prevent,
He inueyde such matter to them: that a none,
He coraged them to stand, all former fear gone.
Whereupon: with their consent, he awarded,
That I: before the spiders, a tale to tell,
Should be sent forwith, with forty flies guarded.
Wherein: if I made spiders fear flies: as well:
Or as much (in my saying serius or fell:)
As I brought flies of spiders before in fear,
I should go quight. If not, at return hang theare.
I said I would do my best. and therwithall,
Standing on the ladder, my two wings stert out.
As in a time of our time, is natural.
Which had: I flew guarded with this guarded rout,
Before the spider, having look strange and stout.
But what of that: my curtsie ons low made,
I used words: my matter to persuade.
Where: although I would have told an other tale:
Yet who may not as he will, must as he may.
Life was sweet, death was sour: nature did me hale
To save my life, while my life in my tongue lay:
Short tale to make, in tale so did I there say:
That spiders in fear of flies, had agony
As much, as flies of spiders had formerly.
Wherewith: the head spider fell in fell fury.
I feared he would (with his wepon) have killed me:
And suer: all my friends from Iersey to Jury:
Had not saved my life: but he would have spild me:
Had not his fore grant: waranted and wild me:
To cum and go safe, but this passing over.
He entered a talk, the spiders to recover:
And encorage again. Which in fine he did.
Bringing me in much disdain, and more distrust.
He said, that one both those parts, I disemblid.
Creeping with spiders: at times when I lust,
And flieng with flies: othertimes, euine as Just.
Where I to him, meant nothing but honestly.
He reported my meaning, clean contrary.
Ensampled, by my creeping with spiders furst:
And last exampled: by my fleeing with flise.
In rest of his tale told, he telling the wurst:
Against me and my tale: that he could devise,
He such matter laid, and laid it in such wise,
That in courage (I say) were the spiders again.
We with his defiance, returning a main.
To the flies: by one fly: all past repeated,
Which: declaring me: the spiders to have frayde,
As I was wild to do, straight was it treated:
(Upon demand) whether in that I there said,
I should have my life or not. which to be waide:
Between two flies: a serius argument:
Whether I should live or die, was biglie bent.
The one said: that I by cumnant, ought to line.
Nai said the other: by cumnant he ought to die:
The first said: as words of cumnant do give:
To bring the spider in fear, euine so did I.
The Other said, that fear heeld not permanentlie
And: the words fulfild: the meaning not fulfild,
The cumnant is not kept, In judgment well skild,
This argument they turned and tossed till at last,
The friend, quight overthrew thaduersarie.
And yet against me, the most nombre straight past.
As though thargument had ron, clean contrary.
On the ladder I stood, straight to miscarie:
From which: at turning of, by the fly hangman,
Hold: cride a fly fer of, flinging toward us than.
Which fly said: the spider had made a decree:
The fly in close prison with him deteynde:
Should straight leese his life, if the flies did kill me:
Whereupon they repryede me to prison cheynde.
With harnest flies watched: and in stocks remeinde.
Between hope and dread, whether to live or die,
As this side, or that side, should win victory.
Forthwith herewith, on the spider they gave saute.
Where five hundredth spiders: and five thousand flies,
Wear slain. Abating on both sides courage haute,
The flies retired: peace sum way to devise.
The spiders: wear desirus of peace, likewise.
But which part should begin suit: that peace to move,
Both parts showde as much curtsie, as little love,
The flies had me before them braging in bost.
That sins spiders to them: for peace would not sew,
Spiders: or flies one part of both should be crossed:
Quight out of this life, none left a live to view.
And straight to the ladder, again they me drew.
Protesting that I should die: ere they marched thence,
I praying them, my life might hang in suspense,
While I wear guarded again, to the spider.
To sew to the spider, all in mine own name.
To see: of what peace, hap might be prouider.
At mine humble suit: unto him for the same,
They granted, and sent me. to whom when I came,
I sewde for peace. beseching it the rather,
For certain respects, which I then did gather.
Such as showd then: hie time: peace to give and take.
As: danger to him and his: and then for me:
Most Innosentlie cast away, for his sake.
Having, or looking, for no comodite:
But only his fauer: and hereupon he:
(Seming loath to grant: and glad to grant in deed,
Granted peace, in form as forwith shall proseede.
Under general pardon: for all fautes past,
The flies must all away: and all war sursease.
I: set at liberte: no longer to lie fast.
Flies in windows, to have half the holes in pease,
The fly with him in prison, not to release:
But to take an end at his hands. theare or thence,
As standth with reason, law, custom, and conscience.
But note: I must take this done all for my love.
In recompense of pain and parell had theare:
This done, I and the flies theare, as did behoue:
Giving thanks: and taking leave, thence gone we wear:
To the flies. who flockt about me giving ear:
To here of peace. Which when I theare had declarde,
With thanks I was discharged, of all captive guard.
From whens I am (as you se) hither now cum.
The one half of my whole tale: having displayde.
For: of what I have to say: this is the sum.
But now wherefore this what (now said) is said:
As I: at beginning wild this what: well waide,
So wyshe I this wherefore: to be wayd as well.
For saftie of all ants, which I shall now tell,
ornament
Than thauing said: what he would say, wills all ants to note why he said,
that he said. Which is to warn them by his arms to beware, how they meddle
in matters between spiders and flies. Cap. 79.
depiction of spider and fly story

Wise ants are warnd: by other ants harms (ants say)
And you: avoiding your harms: by harms of mine,
The why: of my former tale, ye then well way.
For of the what, that is the why: in fine.
Your heareing and following: of which displine
(With heareing and following: my next words here set,)
Defense fro my like harms, I hope ye shall get,
My which harms: though they show outwardly to grow:
By wars froward chance: without faut of mine own.
Yet the high god knowth, and my conscience does me show:
That these my harms, of these my two fauts are grown,
Pride, and covetousness: by corrupt blast blown.
Into my heart inculked: by fancy fond,
Which to warn you of, I Will make you understand.
Though the spider sent for me: ere I hence went,
Yet when I was sent fore, proud was I to go:
Wheare: I thought to grow: in state more exelent,
Then any ant before had grown, and so:
Pearking with spiders: in top of the windo,
I thought there: with the spiders equal to be,
And here, in anthils, ants a god should take me.
And for the mayntenance: of that proud estate,
I couetouslie cast, what way to sinde mean.
Being above all ants, in place situate,
By preserment (at the spiders hand, (to gleane.
Office, fee, all that I could, to gather up clean.
Low curtsie, great riches, mirth, ease, love, and laud.
I thought all should be offered, me to a plawde.
But in fine, this was the fruit of this vain hope:
Love, or laud, on no side: on all, hate and blame.
For goldin cheine at my neck, an hempen rope.
For reverence and praise, disdain and defame.
Looking to win much, lease all. As in the same:
Showd my reward: at end of all, at hands all.
Namlie at spiders hands, who did me thither call.
As he: in granting peace to the flies, showde plain.
Which peace he said, (I say) with flies he did take,
To save my life, and to recompense of my pain.
And for no cause else. But let us here make,
As it in deed: had been done all my sake.
Yet: the head and tail of this tale: Joined nie,
Shall show: that I right naught did win thereby.
What if: to save my life, that peace he then gave:
My life was out of parell: till I came theare,
Brought by him: for him, to the brinke of my grave,
Had I kept me here, neither parell nor fear:
Had my heart wounded, as it did theare while ear,
This gift is like as if a these (by false train,)
Robo me of my good, and gave it me again.
I lost my time theare, and I lost my thrift here.
In somer (ye know) we ants work busily:
For winter to prauide, our food every year.
But: lack of this summers days diligentsie,
May make me fast two days in winter (happlie,)
And drive me (per haps) ere winter all done be,
To beg of ants, that might else have beggde of me.
In all my which punishment: at all whose hands,
I take them: but as the great gods instruments.
His judgment are secret: he uses his wands,
Sum times: in appearance of outward intents,
To one purpose. when his high wisdom assents,
To use them for an other. And sure,
I think he now put so, my trouble in ure.
For my two said fantes. willing you to beware,
Of all ambitius: and couetus desire.
In a voiding (for my like offense) my like rare.
Which if ye do, fleeing desire to aspire,
Then can ye this lesson: as I would require.
And not doing it: upon this warning geeuene,
Ye will thereto (by my like plage) to be dreeuene.
And did we consider, but this present life.
Yet must we live in an order here (perde:)
The god has plaste us all: to live out of strife:
Spiders, flies, and ants, each sort in their degree.
Spiders, in head parts of windows: the heads be.
Flies, in the mids: the body as it wear.
Ants at the low part: the feet, acounted theare.
And as a spider: over matcheth a fli,
So is a fly, as fer to big for an ant.
Which seems wrought by divine providence (think I,)
As our degrees (are in order) distant,
So the degrees of our strengths, are discrepant.
And where all three sorts: keep quietly their plase,
All live together, in quiet welthy case.
But if they (for change of place) begin to strive,
As spiders and flies (two parts of three) did now,
They may hastily strive, and sloulie thrive.
And to the spider: in our alegeant vow:
In all lefull things, all we ants alwaie bow.
Without grief or gruge. but if war again rise,
What should ants meddle: between spiders and fliese.
Be warnd here again (by my harm) of meddling.
Meddle we in things, of our vocation.
One flies finger thrusth ten ants, down hedling.
Ants are not made: to walk in wars stacion:
Nor to meddle in severe consultacion.
Meddle we in our molehils: at the windows feet:
And let spiders and flies do: as they think meet.
They shall for me, (quoth he) and for us cride thaie.
And to their business, busily they went.
Wherewith cum four flies fleeing, fast as they may.
And at low part of the window: by assent,
They lighted. and the spider then him self bent,
From his house to his their: and I forwith,
Set in my place: of their words, to note the pith.
ornament
Four flies (in the name of al flies) at the copweb, thanking the spider for
pardon and peace, declaring the conditions and the performance on their part)
sew to the spider on his part, to perform his grant, in laying out and
possessing them of their limitts with half the holes in the window, which he
grants bidding them a little time stay, in which while: he sendth the
youngest spider of his twain to the ant, praying him to cum to him again. To
divide and deliver the holes to the flies as the spider will apoinet them. Cap
80.
depiction of spider and fly story

ONe fly of those four (made the mouth for all,
At curtsie to the spider had) these words had.
Framed in manner (to the matter) formal.
Right honorable sir: most dear and most drad.
All flies, (they of your prosperus estate most glad,)
Have commanded us: to commend them: to you,
Humbly, and dewlie as deutie bidth them bow.
So thanking your gifts to them, perdon and peace.
Upon these conditions: as they understand,
Wars: and conspiracies, on their part to seace.
Than tto be set free, out of their captive band.
The fly here in prison: to have end at your hand,
As standth with reason, law, custom and conscience.
Half holes in windows theirs: all times from hence.
Which cumnants they receive, and put in ure.
In what they should do, and in what they shall have,
They thereupon send us, to know your pleasure.
What time: and what way: ye will take to vouchsaue,
To poinct and possess them, in that ye them gave.
Binding them: (by indifferent divided rate,)
To wish contenuance, of your present state.
At their curtsie made, to this: the spider said:
This suit I grant: tarry my return again.
In he went: and herin to have the ants aid,
To thant, he sent the least spider of his twain.
Praying thant to cum to him: and take the pain,
To be his deputy: tenfette the flies in fine,
With half the holes wheare as the spider would a sine.
Thant spying his cousin cumming, likte it not.
Sum thanklesse office was toward again (thought he:)
Through the window, I saw he quickly gat:
One leg, and his waste, in swadeband rold to be.
And crutches by his side, a two or a three,
That spider cumming to thant: where as he lay,
These: or these like words, that spider did first say.
ornament
Upon this message done, thant feind a let of his cu^ming: by a hurt
mischansing him that morning. with which answer, the yongespider returns to
the old. Cap. 81
depiction of spider and fly story

Cousin ant, rest you merry. Cousin (quoth thant)
Ye be welcum. what good tidings do ye bring.
My father prays you (quoth he) at this instant,
To cum to him: and for the holes delivering,
Which he in windows granted: at wars ending,
To be therein, his deputy of trust:
To se flies possessed, of their nombre just.
Good cousin (quoth the ant) it will not be.
In a dark house (right now) where candle was light,
The light dasling mine iyes: it so blinded me,
That against the snuf of a candle: burning bright,
I flew* force of which fire and snuf: in which flight,
Mischaunce (that all misaduentours alwaie brings,)
Brake one of my legs, and burnd one of my wings.
So that I now: can neither creep nor fli.
The which: for mine own harm greeueth me right sore.
And as sore for his sake: that now can not I
In this case, serve him as I have done before.
Thus commend me cousin: I can say no more.
That spider took his leave: and to his father straight,
Told what answer he had, at thant in reseight.
Who seeing the ant did not cum. forth he went:
With a long rod in his hand: taking his cheyre.
Which when I saw, to se further what he meant,
To my cheyre in my place: I did then repeyre.
The four flies before him, stood in order feyre.
Whearwith (in few words) a brief tale there told he,
Which done he possessed them, in plat here to se.
The spider after a few words to the four flies, assineth to them all the small
holes beneth. Half the holes in number: but scant the sixth part of the room.
At which they sumwhat grudge. But they must take them or none. Cap. 82.
depiction of spider and fly story

Friends sties: friends I say: if ye friendly use me,
You four, and all flies: your friend shall find me.
And to make you unable to accuse me,
In lack to perform: as promise does bind me,
Upon your present suit, I have enclinde me:
To assine and possess you: here and else wheare,
Of half the holes in windows: wheare I pour bear.
Exampled: by these holes: just half, as they stand.
Them: and none but them: to have and to hold.
Wherewith: he pointed benethe with his wand,
To all the small holes* saying what fly that would:
Touch any hole theare: but those to them then told,
He should die therefore: which plat thus disposed,
One fly (to the spider) these words disclosed.
Sir (may it like you) the meaning of all flies,
Was to have: with half the holes, half the plat here.
And I fly (quoth the spider) meant otherwise.
Without further pleding: take as does appear.
And think your selves well handled: for this is clear.
I might (if I would,) my grant again withdraw.
And that withdrawing, Justify well by law.
At time of this grant, I was (as who say.)
Stressed by you: you prisoner (as it wear)
And all bonds so forced, of no force are they:
Be answered: and warnd, rebellion to for bear.
As every fly: had had a flea: in his ear,
At curtsie low made, from the spider they slank.
They meruelus blank, and the spider as crank.
What have we won now, (quoth one) as they took wing.
Wise flies say: as good sit still: as rise and fall.
But what a fall have we now: by our rising?
Before, we had sum part: now we have lost all.
In effect, yea (quoth one) this has been and shall.
Wheare flies (with spiders) in this kind of strife strive,
We win naught but wrechidnesse, the craft will not thrine.
ornament
The four flies flowne thence, the spider to the fly in prison leith: that in
all kinds of trial that day on both parts laid, he thinks his own part
aproued best. as he thinks the fly would think were he a spider contrary
judgment whereof. the fly thinks in the spider were he a fly. whereupon they
agree to change places (each for the time) to imagine and set forth others part
the best they can. Cap. 83.
depiction of spider and fly story

THey being thus gone: the spider sitting still,
The fly fast before him: as he erst had been,
To draw to end, in hand with the fly he fill.
Fly (quoth he) now have thou in this matter seen,
All kinds of trial, that can be seen I wine.
Reason, law, and custom, full resoned and cast.
Arbiterment, and rebellion at last.
Which rebellion (I think) thou did devise,
When thou did rowne the butterllie in the ear.
Naie (quoth the fly) the truth is clear otherwise.
I praide him to pray flies: all war to forbear,
Which he will say. fly (quoth he) say he or swear:
I trust none of you. This trithe truth like in preefe,
As to axe my fellow, whether I be a thief.
But wear it so: or not: I forgive it thee.
In all this bybble babble: had here this day:
What have thou won thereby: that let us se.
All cases past here: indifferently to way:
Way more on my side: then on thine, I dare say.
I say and think naie (quoth he) and so think would you:
Wear ye a fly, in case as I am here now,
And wear thou a spider: as I am bear pla^^e,
I think thou would think as I think: and to grow:
Sum way to end, one trial mo to taste,
Lest us change places a while: for to know,
What change of oppinion, that change may show.
I^maginning my self, to be a ^ie.
Thou: thinking thy self, a spider vnfaynedlie.
Thou the spider: and I the fly: to be namde.
Thou resoning for the spider, all that thou may.
And I for the fly: in like case will be framde.
This take I (quoth the fly) a very good way.
Place and case (in appearance) forthwith change they.
The fly: solemnly set in the spiders cheyre,
The spider: to the flies base place did repeyre.
ornament
They having Changed places: they alege each for his dissembled side. Wherein
the fly anon is so alured to pride and ambyssyon in occupying (for the while)
the spiders stately place, that he at last with an oath affirms that spiders
are owners of all windows. The spider granting it true, sterteth to the fly,
seeming to take end upon the flies own judgment. Cap. 84.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe fly: being once set in the spiders place,
Aduaunst him self, setting hands under his side.
The spider croucht in countenance mild and base:
Looking pale and wan, as though he should have did.
Which change (upon this soden) when I espide,
It prinnted in me: a wonderful wunder,
To se partise (from their parts) so a sunder.
New matter they laid small. But that most touched:
That had been erst alegde. Both parts growing:
Little and little, stoughtlie to be couched,
Each to others: against his own part now showing.
Namlie the fly: for the spiders part crowing.
With spiderlike: spightfull words: as hot and hie,
As he had been the spider, and the other the fly.
He was from the flies part: so carried a way,
By being sodenlie: there thus eliuate,
That: all cleyme leyde by the spider there: that day,
The fly ruld, for right of most lawful right rate.
So ferforth he forgot: where and how he sat:
That upon the cheyreboll: hard beating his fist,
Spiders owe all windows, he swear by gods blist.
The spider granted it true sterting out streyfe:
To the fly. saying sir ye have said right well.
We need no longer (for judge or judgment) weyte.
Our chief point in judgment, your self does here tell.
Oh sir (quoth the fly, and flat to ground he fell.
I beseech you here how (by pride here now had)
I was stricken beetill blind, and bedlem mad.
The fly out of that chaier fallen flat before the spider, perseyuing his
oversight and danger therein, he declares how change of place changed his
affection. In discoorsing of which case, he partly touches the commodity of
adversity, and the discommoditie of prosperity. Beseeching the spider to
relinquishe all advantage therein to be taken against him. Which the spider
grants. Cap. 85.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe spider leaning to his cheyre, said: say on.
Sir (said the fly) by veynglorious pride,
It stealing: sly and sodenlie: me upon,
I was so puffed up here: so blindlie my self to gide,
That I neither saw yours, nor yet mine own side.
I: once but set, in place of your auctorite:
Took my self straight, in case of your prosperity.
Which place and case: how they may right judgment blind,
That se I now, and never till now could se.
Whearin: I being but a shadow assinde:
For this time to sit. yet mark (I beseech ye,)
How from a flies state, to a spiders degree:
I (at moment) avaunst my self to proseede.
Not with flies, but with spiders: all I decreede.
My which blindness (in sum respect) does streche,
To those: in places paste, as debiteese.
They keeping countenance: of my like high reche:
Looking each as high, when he his suter seese,
As his head master, offer higher degreese.
Which flock (as I am now) where ever it flocks.
All made (in reason,) reasons mocking stocks.
Se more: how beastly blindness, did my bent bend:
Life, and liberte of me, and of all flies.
Here lying and bleding, except I it defend,
All that not withstanding: pride blearde both mine iyes,
Against them and my self, sentence to devise.
I was a spider I. I took flies as flease.
Pride goth before, shame cumth after: me to sease.
But pride had here, a sotell fly a lurer.
Which, the countenance of prosperity was.
Vein liking of which state: was my procurer,
To pride and blindness thereby, that here did pas.
Which pride to present, prosperity is a glass.
As does (on the other part (aduersite,
First procure: and then present, humilite.
Prosperity (we se) made me forget clear:
My self, my matter, al flies, and also you.
Which in aduersite, I heeld in mind here.
To you, as deutie required: I could there bow:
Reasons for me: and all flies: I could a vow:
Our parfight sight: from blindness: standth not (I se)
In prosperity, but in aduersite.
Which showth in this one change: of our two places,
My place of aduersite: gave you such sight,
That: in our reasoning of both our cases,
Your saying showde you, to se the very right.
Your place of prosperity, blinded me quight.
As I perceive) it does blind all (in like case.
Save such as therein, have especial grace,
In lack whereof: I (thus graceless a minion,
Thus loudlie and lewdlie to lie,) humbly pray:
Neither my judgment, nor yet mine opinion.
Any word to be iudgde, that I here did say.
But (as all lies should) let these vanish away.
Thou art (quoth the spider) a monster now woxe.
In mine iye a fly, and in mine ear a fox.
Like a fox: wililise thou doste here devise,
For helping of thy part: and hurting of mine,
To take my life true tales, and thy true tales life.
And further slaundring me: and my state: in fine,
Thou haste here set forth, this deuilsh dissipline.
Pride hides knowledge (say thou) by prosperity,
Humilite showth knowledge, by aduersite.
As though captife caitifs: saw all in misery,
And prosperus princes, saw naught. But I se:
Thou art in a wrong box: for case presently,
The fly (seeing rightnought won herby would be,
But danger of displeasure, thereupon he:)
Past over this argument: and upon that,
Said this to the spider, at his foot laid flat.
Sir: I beseech you: my blindness showde here last,
For give: and none advantage on me take.
In any word of mine, against me theare past.
Fly (quoth he) I forgive thee: for pitties sake.
To change places again, a sonder they brake.
Wherewith the spider: in form^ formal and cold,
These words following, to the fly forthwith told.
ornament
The spider upon a glaunce given at his desert of thank to be had at the flies
hand, alegeth custom to be his warrant to distroy the fly. Which the fly can
not deny. Whereupon he desires that the case may be reasoned in conscience.
Which the spider now grants. Cap. 86.
depiction of spider and fly story

F^ie: if thou can use the reason that th^n has^e,
Thou can (and wilt) thank me in many respect^
Never was there fly: in copweb thus plaste,
That ^ad the like favor: in the like effects:
That thou have had: but nesessite directs,
This to be ^rew: in the day most long here past,
Yet they (evermore) ring to euensong at last.
As who say: things most long after beginning:
Yet must they (at last) ned^e cum to an end,
Which (after long time) wrought to have in winning,
We now shall win which end shall brief^ie depend,
Upon one brief reason that I shall ex^ende.
Which reason to confute thee, shall be so plain,
That straight to yield thee, reason shall the constrain.
Which lurkth (and I all this time have let it lurk:)
In custom: one principle of the four,
On which pillars, I promisde should stand all this wurk.
Which in vinsible reason: I (to this hour)
Have kept: to here (as I have herd) bran and flour:
Of all that thou could (this day) for thy part lay.
Which (for full conclusion, here me to thee say.
Custom: one chief post principal (as erst said)
Declarth: and has declarde this six thousand year,
All flies (or any s^^e) (...) copwebs (or copweb) staide:
How ever they cum theare, if they theare appear:
No reason: in reason and law: aledge here:
Could discharge the^ thence, but straight there cu^th a maine,
A spider: who sleath him and suckth out his brai^e.
Here see thou thy life lost: to begin with all:
By custom: and for windows claimd in entres^e:
For flies general, agreement general.
(With their resceiuing it) an end has expres^e.
Thend had I mean, upon rebellion se^^e.
But for thy life (by custom) can thou ought say:
Why thou should by custom live? sir (said he) naie.
Well (quoth the spider) thou see reason and law:
So yield to custom here, that in any trial:
Those tweyne to conquer custom here: we never saw,
I have to this (quoth the fly) no denial.
What thing (quoth the spider) have thou in sepciall:
To help thee: by side law, custom, and reason:
Conscience (quoth the ^^ie) I hope cumth in season.
True (quoth the spider) now at end it has place.
What haste thou (in conscience) for thy life to lay:
Against accustomed custom in this case.
Enough (quoth he) if conscience bear any sway,
Yes (quoth the spider) be bold of that ye may:
That fourth: shall have full place, as firm as those three,
I thank you (quoth the ^^ie) this showth charity.
ornament
They both lay sundry sharp reasons inconscience for the spiders life and
death. But the spider in conclusion draws these four principles (reason,
law, custom, and conscience, which he at beginning granted to try all by) so
to combine that he makes thereby an aparence, to show the fly conuinst and
straight by custom: he gives judgment of the flies death to which the fly
yelde^h. Praying to speak with twelve flies before he die. And it is granted.
Cap. 87

depiction of spider and fly story

BY conscience I claim here now (quoth the fly)
In this place (till now place of mine inprisonment,)
Not to be in prison, but in seyntuarie.
Wheare as charged parties be inosent,
Of all such charged crimes: as to them are bent,
Theare does conscience in every place defend,
Those charged parties: discharging them at end.
If (quoth the spider) theare were no difference:
Between a fly inosent: and arogant,
Then must I discharge thee (euin of conscience.)
But if innosensie on your part here want,
Then is this clause (for your discharge) no warant,
But go to: make proof approbatlie appear:
How ye prove your self, an inosent now here.
Sir: prof: that I inosentlie hither came,
Appeerth in my known cu^ming, against my will.
And sins I came, that I an inosent am,
I hope your conscience: and I know your skill,
Will judge: my fact here not ill: or not so ill:
Whereby ye (with conscience) can rightfullie:
^ither kill me, or keep me here thus to lie.
What have I done: in conscience strayte or large:
To make reason, law, or custom, bight or bark.
I leie and leide (quoth the spider) to thy charge,
Brech of my house: not made with a thousand mark,
No (quoth he) but one quarter of one hours wark,
Without one penie cost: or one pins worth pain,
Reaedifithe your house, in prime state again,
Which your self may do: and must naturally.
That work, is your talent: given for exercise.
In lack whereof, (by idilenesse) ye straight die.
But put case custom, my fact a wrong here trise:
Yet how can conscience: death or pain devise.
To me, for that I to you: occasion give,
To work the woork: lacking which, ye can not live.
Though (quoth the spider) by nature woork we must.
Yet is it neither conscience, nor our avail:
To woork in copwebs: have we lust or no lust,
At wagging (in copwebs) of every flies tail,
So does it (quoth the fly) conscience likewise quail.
To hang a fly: by the neck or by the neb,
For wagging his tail, in a spiders copweb.
This case is (in conscience) very much like,
As a fysh breaking a fishers set net:
It set to take the fisshe. and the fissher did pike,
A quarrel to him: and would conscience set,
To kill the poor fisshe. This were fer and foul fet,
And no fouler fet: then conscience set to be:
To kill me. for brech of this net: set for me,
But did I (maliciously, do you much wrong:
And sum harm: as harm (or wrong) here ye have none.
Yet shall your reuengment, show malice more strong:
If ye both deteyne: and kill me thervpone:
Cum that wrong here in ure: conscience is gone:
As for from you: as from him: that had now sworn
The death of an inosent, but last might borne.
You not offended (as ye will not I hope)
This last principle of these four: conscience:
(It giving me (above the other three) full scope)
Of advantage: as custom gives assistence.
To your part, in present charge of mine offense:
I must make my shoot anchor: to make my way,
As you make (and I grant) custom yours (no naie.)
Spare not (quoth the spider) that anchor shoot ought:
The best thou can therewith to take ankerhold.
I thank you (quoth he) and would crave (if I might,)
Your answer in conscience: full to unfold,
To one question of me: in few words told.
Thy question (quoth the spider) propone thou,
And mine answer to it, thou shall have euin now.
This is then sir: I put case quoth the fly:
My young master spider your son: went a straie:
Wandering here and theare (at adventure mean I,)
Wherewith: slilie: one laid a thing in the way:
Whereat the babe fell, and it thus brought to bay,
The Other: for falling theare, killed it out of hand.
Think ye: conscience would warrant this deed to stand?
Naie (quoth he) conscience is the doer of right.
Mittigacing ferce force of extremitees,
That gives or takes right: by rigorus might.
Conscience (quoth the fly) my judgment so decrees.
And my case: with this case: in all points a grees.
No difference between them: to be lost or won,
Saving: that I am not your masterships soon,
For in like case put: I wanderid about here:
Inosentlie, as that inosent there did.
And by these copwebs: cast in my way thus nere,
In this babe exampling, I am examplid.
Inosentlie as he was, I am maskid.
Think if I wear your child: what ye could think than:
Conscience, or no conscience this to scan.
In says fly (quoth the spider) to tell the troth,
No conscience (or hard conscience) I take this.
Nay no conscience (quoth the fly) troth so showth.
So that conciens, on my side clerlie is:
As custom is of yours: and ye know I wis:
That custom a lone: does often, and may ever:
Use judgment of abuse: and conscience never.
Well said fly (said he) had I no more to say:
To this that thou now seist: then I have yet said,
Then had thou here won the victory this day.
But reason, law, custom, and conscience, erst leide:
How I granted thee hering: in those four weide,
Thou shall here in few words, and we there vpone,
Shall the more clerli, conclude this case anon.
The words of my grant tadiudge thee: thus they draw.
As standth with reason, law, custom, and conscience,
Not with reason, custom, conscience, or law:
This, and, and this or, fly: make much difference.
That and, implith all four plaste: in assistence.
That or, importh one: or ante one of all.
And here is the gap fly: wherein lith the gall,
And a point for flies learning: at spiders hand.
Though ye: flies learning above spiders compare:
But here learn of me fly: this contunctiue and,
Conioynth: these four said terms: jointly to prepare,
Trial in this case: as they all may declare:
The tone with the the other: all in properte,
Knit best in knot, of conjoined unite.
Well (quoth the fly) then concience shall be one,
Ye (quoth the spider) and custom another.
Sir then will those two, fall at a fraie a none.
If they do: reason shall stikill them brother:
To make them a gree. Where each impoungth other:
But bring conscience: thy champion armd compleete:
How conscience chalength custom: let us weete.
Sir: I cuming (as I came) unwillingly,
And none offensife harm: in me does appear,
Conscience charge custom, with tirranie.
In killing (or keeping) me: inosent here.
Which case, reason recordith for case clear.
This charge (quoth the spider) to discharge plain,
Here what custom says, to concience again.
Custom says: all windows are spiders of right.
Then conscience must say: that flies have done wrong,
Through windows (without leave) to take their flight,
To make conscience grant this, reason is strong.
Till spiders (quoth he) time present, and past long.
Do prove windows theirs: as they never did yeet,
Conscience and reason, denith this eueri wheet,
But admit we: that all windows were your own:
Flies (without your leave) passing offensiflie.
Though custom a lege: for thoffence: death here grown.
yet conscience (in this case) sethe death tirrannie.
Reason granting it, to show tiranniouslie.
It wear to much here: to fine by the purs.
But to fine by the polle, what feend could polle wurs?
Thou think (quoth the spider) conscience thinkth it strange:
That flies: by custom, should die for this offense.
But conscience: with reason raunging in raunge,
In cause of customs usage: as conscience:
May have with reason herein: full conference,
Reasonably reasoning: this present case,
Conscience (by reason) shall give custom plase.
I say (as I erst said) when a fly or flies:
In this: or any window: in copwebs light,
Any spider: that within that window lies,
Shall kill him, and suck out his (or their) brain quight.
Which: begoon by nature, custom folowth right.
Nature conseiuing: but for this her sharp law,
Flies would have mard all: for lack of orderly aw.
And as nature in spiders: wrought this defense,
So reason in man: was driven to woork the same.
Caims generation making resistance:
Against all men: that quiet order would frame,
(as you against us do) then those men to tame:
And defend the quiet: in their quiet cause,
Reason to thvnquiet, gave our like sharp lause.
But reason to them wrought not this: to thentent:
To catch them: and kill them: tixanioufly,
But to save them: by terror in their iyes bent:
To provoke them to flee thoccacion: whereby:
They might flee their ill, felt thereby formerly.
Which: as reason in man did (and does) consither,
So did nature in us, both concur together.
Nature in us, reason (I say) so loud,
That this law of nature in us, laid on flies,
Reason: to man: for order in man, has vowde,
For breaking a wall by night: man as sone dise,
As flies for copwebs brech by day, which exersise:
Conscience (by reason) not kicking at: for man
Conscience (by reason) kickth not at. for flies than:
Reason in man: woorkth man to work (quoth the fly)
Sharp laws: more to save the good: then to slay thill,
Nature in spiders, woorkth sharp laws: cruelly:
Not to save the good, but good and ill to kill,
Only killing all: on all, to feed their fill.
Thou lie (quoth he) we work copwebs every wheare,
To save flies by fear, copwebs to for bear.
Thus: reason has concience and custom agrede.
Whereto: law not repungnant, all the world knows.
Whereupon (without more parting) to prosede,
Concordance of these principles: here so shows,
That here, here thine end fly: for here thine end grows.
By custom (it eidid with these other said three,)
Thy present death, I presently here decree.
The fly farde as thongh he would have spoken more.
But: his heart wunderlie faynted, and failed.
His judgment of death: astonide him so sore,
(In that he sew his speech: right naught prevailed:
To be (from death) delivered or bayled,)
That down he sank upon his knees and hands.
Requesting the spider, in case as next stands.
Good master spider: sins the case stands thus,
That die I must, folly were it for me here:
To plead this cass further: it past by discus:
All pleading: or reasoning, I give over clear.
Submitting and committing: my life most dear,
Into your hands. beseching you ere I di,
To grant me: one petission: mo crave not I:
That is that I (before you) my mind may say,
To twelve flies, which speech I promise faithfully:
Either with you, or not against you shall way.
I grant (quoth the spider) and by and bie,
I know not whether by chance, or purpostie.
A dosen flies: about the copwebs side plaste wear,
To whom: this following, the fly said then and theare.
ornament
The fly (to twelve grave flies for all flies) gives his advice for a voiding
their parels by their s^rife had in windows against spiders. the great gronnde
of which tale stands most upon consideration of these three things. wherefore
they strive, with whom they strive, and how they strive Cap. 88.
depiction of spider and fly story

COsins and contrie flies: each one of you all,
Another my self: as each of all flies are.
I have (at suit) obteind, you hither to call,
Minding: my conscience to you to declare,
In such a time: and such a thing, to prepare,
As the time, most meet to make you credit me,
And the thing, most meet to you: told to be.
First: as touching time, no time in my time past.
When I was more prosperous (and so more frail:)
Then I this time am: yet all times first and last:
Your trust in my truth, did not any time fail.
But what time should credence: set up so his sail?
As this time: when life time shall no more time hold.
But till time this my tale (to be told) be told.
In all sorts of seckts: of civil dissipline:
Of all times in life: of any fly I trow,
In time of his known death: cumming straight like mine,
Credence of his word (he feende nor fool in show)
To credit his matter: must that time most grow.
What vanite wear this: in ought to devise:
^ieing now a dieing, to lie and devise lise.
Of all times: for credit (I say none like this.
And secondly: touching the thing, here to tell:
Hering thereof, no dout most meet for you is.
Which thing, is the strife of furius force fell:
Between spiders and flies. wherein to exepell:
And kill all occasions in time to cum,
Of my last will (in my last words) here the sum.
What way is herein best: for spiders to take:
That can them selves tell: much better then can I,
I am a fly: no spider nor spiders make:
To control the spiders part, but heartily,
I pray the great God: their hearts to molify:
As temperance may temper their cleime: touching this,
To give right, and take right, as most rightful is.
But: in right of either part: to determine ought:
What they for their part: or you for yours should have,
Shift that among you: for it forsith me naught.
Me semth, I here the matok digging my grave.
The crown of the whole world: who it me now gave.
His good will must I thank: but for ought to win,
I take not the gift, worth the point of a pin.
And wheare you (and all flies) are as sure to die,
As am I now: your times to you unknown sure.
Advantage of you: in my known death have I,
In having some time of remors: to procure,
Forgiveness of former life, led in lewd lure.
Wheare you may (without remors) sodenlie go:
And where the tree faith, theare lithe it: clarks say so.
But: for profitable purpose toward you:
In purpose purposed to you here by me,
Your imaginasions: I pray: to draw you now,
Into my person: as in my case to be.
To woork affection: to win effect in ye:
To consceiue and resceiue things: that I shall move.
Which: to your behofe, behouinglie behoue.
Three principles, Whereon my tale to contriue:
And to proseede upon, are these to prepose.
Wherefore we strive: with whom we strive: how we strive.
Wherefore we strive: ye know the cause thereof gose,
For hooles in windows. which quarrels to disclose:
Our cumming to them: and going from them sought,
Shall show our winning small: or rather rightnought.
First for our cumming to them: who can disscriue:
How many flies have preaste: possession to win,
That never could get possession a live.
But maimd and killed down right: at their enter in.
And such as do cum in (where spiders do spin)
Most wise fly: devising to sit there most fast,
May think his first hour (or each hour) there: his last.
Few flies (I think) have escaped longer here then I,
My which time being spent: between hope and fear,
Yet at last (for all my shifts) lo where I lie.
Where no raunsum: my redemption, may rear.
But my life, remediless I must forbear.
Cum with danger, bide with fear, depart with death.
To hasty a journey to take with one breath.
In this said first principle: what we strive fore,
Commodite therein: proof does thus witness:
The more flies have of it: flies danger the more.
The less flies have of it: flies danger the less.
Then is nowhit best: for who does ought possess:
Each peniworth of pleasure: of such possessed ware,
Bringth more then counterpaise: of danger and care.
Beggars flies: before theeuis flies may (...) (we say)
Rich flies before tr^w flies here, do weep (we see)
The richest winning fly: in windows to way:
If any winning there: any riches be,
As the best thing won theare is but flies liberto
What is the winning: won and kept with such strife,
That hourlie winth death: or deadly fear of life.
It is a winning: better lost then won.
And so: these windows are: wherefore we strive.
With whom we strive now: secondli to roon:
With our biggers to contend: we here contriue,
A match: as much unmeet for us to thrive,
As may be macht. for two things here to try.
First thing their pour, most thing their pollisie,
To their much pour: our pour oftimes thought more*
By number: many small making a great.
There pollisie (keeping their pour in store:)
Has most times erst, brought us our selves to beat.
What winning is in this macht mache to geate?
None. Wherefore with whom we strive (I think it best;)
To leave of strife: and live by loss in rest.
Now: thirdly: how or in what manner we strive:
To tell plain troth: in my worst time to lie,
Spice of rebellion our strife showth to contriue
Spiders are plaste a boue superiorlie
And flies beneth them plaste inferiorlie.
Then may it seem, as they above us have plase,
So have they above us like rule in like case.
Which case granted: in striving against them thus:
Our matter: standing in state of most right:
Yet is our manner wrong: and sedicius.
No law alowth flies: to win their right by fight,
Between private flies. and law inibbitih quight;
Any flies to fight: against their high heads,
But rather suffer, as obedience leads.
Wherefore we strive: ye se trifils they are.
With whom we strive: their pollisie passes our pour.
How we strive: does sedicion declare.
Three parts without melody, in the part of our.
Our part has a face here: no crab more sour.
To move flies (hens forward) to turn their fares,
From strife with spiders, in quareling cases.
To which: you drawing your imaginacion:
As though ye stood in my state: at this present,
Your own consent must give confirmacion:
My words herin past, to have a true extent.
And further the shoot anchor: experiment:
What ye lost at spiders hands: late before this,
A full ratificasion, of my tale: that is.
And if that any fly: will demand of me:
What mean flies may use best: their right to obtain,
Mine answer is: not in harnes capa pe:
Beseeging (sted of beseeching) to constrain:
Nor stur: with every fly: sturd by bedlem brain,
Sturdilie standing: with bills in foull fighting,
But humbly sewing, with bills of fair wrighting.
By ought (in any law) that ever I wist:
Thus may flies sew, for right and not only male,
But sew so: flies must: forbiddin to resist:
Their higher powrs: by violence (any way)
Which way not helping flies: their way is to pray:
Unto the great god. To work spiders consent,
To give and take right: in right rated extent.
But further (in this case) wheare any flies go:
Of long time: of late time: and this time is seen:
Yea: seen, hard and felt: in our present wrought woe:
That we are wrong doers, and ever have been.
Our woorks herin witnessing so: that I wene:
No fly so foolish: but he does understand,
Our harm: for wrong woorking: we have at gods hand.
This to be true I think and have thought
Which (master spider) may suspicion clear,
In your susspecting me, for late tumult wrought,
But on my death I take (which I shall take here)
I never a vowde (nor a loud) to draw nere:
Any nombre: by lawles usurped powrs,
But as peasablie stood, with gods peace and yours.
But for fine: friends: in your beholding my death:
As thimage of your own deths: pleinly to purport,
In that: one howrs quarter: ye are sure uneath:
To escape the same: to get ought by pour extort,
Or get or keep ought: in any wrongful sort,
That sight: with thinking of my words in the rest,
May: hensforth of strife here: bring your side surfeste.
Behold your deths in me, by uncertain life.
Behold your dread in me: your lives a count: to make.
Behold wherefore ye strive: and that does endth your strife,
Behold with whom and how ye strive: (as I spoke.)
Behold the loosing gain, that winth loss to take,
Beholding these winnings: with the i^berdees,
Showth holes in windows (to behold) vanitees.
And: so all holes in windows: to take and use:
That none offensife strife: flies abuse procure,
But peasablie: as dew obedience enduse:
To put (having or craving of right) in ure,
This crave I of you: for love to you most pure.
And thus (paying you to pray for me at end,)
To the almighty lord, my sprit I commend.
The flies (unto these words) no word could speak.
But yielded tears: like drops in April showrs.
Saving in^outerie: as they thence did break,
They cride farewell: (of flies) the flour of flowrs.
But well: the last hour has no following howrs
The hour is cum: wherein the fly must die.
For which: he weitth, at spiders foot prostratlie.
ornament
As the spider is about to kill the fly, the maid of the house comes in and
strikes down the copweb and the spider to the ground. Cap. 89.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe spider toward the fly, furiously drawse.
And being stepped to the fly: staying in step,
As he would have perst the flies head: with his pawse,
The maid of the house, to the window did chop.
Setting her brom, hard to the copwebs top.
Where: at one stroke with her brom: stricken round,
The copweb and spider, the struck to the ground.
ornament
The maid being at poinet to tread the spider to death: the spider prays
her to here him speak ere he die: and then to adiudge him justly. the maid
granting to use him (as he did use the fly) as may best stand with reason,
law, custum, and conscience. She at his request (for the time) withdrawing her
foot, they fall to reasoning of the case. Cap. 90.
depiction of spider and fly story

THe maid (by mine absence) to be the more bold,
To work her will, as she came in, I went out.
And lookte in at the window: her to behold.
She swept down the copweb: the fly flew about
The parler round. Never more lusty nor stout.
The spider on the ground: under the maids foot,
To tread him to death, and was about to doote.
But the spider (on knees (lift up his hands hie.
Beseching her (of mild maidenlie pity,
To be concent to here him speak ere he die:
And to declare. First what he had done, and then why:
He did these deeds: and so to judge him justly.
And that she would (in mean time) her foot withdraw,
Sight whereof: made his head ache, and his stomock gnaw.
To banish (quoth the maid) all pershall pretense,
I Will hear and judge thee, as thou did the fly heert.
As standth with reason, law, custom, and conscience,
So shall thou have good, bad, hie, low, fer or near.
And since: fear of my foot: abateth thy cheer,
Least thou might take harm: of thine own conceight,
That I withdraw: and so withdrew it straight.
ornament
In reasoning of both sides, the maid drives the spider to grant him self
conuinst (by custom eyded with the other prin ciples erst said) as he conuinst
and adjudged the fly before. Whereupon she (by custom) decreth the spider to
die. He then desiring to speak with his son and his counsel. Which the
maid grants. Cap. 91.
depiction of spider and fly story

FEyre and good maistres maidinlie maid (quoth he)
Leaving the brim: to the botum to wade,
What deeds I have done here: you have seen and se.
Which are: the copwebs in windows here made.
Of all spiders, the natural trase to trade.
Which to be impungde, we never herd nor saw,
In reason, custom, conscience, nor law.
Spider (quoth the maid) know ye that I hard:
All: this day between you and the fly here said.
Wherein I saw: the cause wherefore ye iard:
Was not for that ye: copwebs here wrought and laid,
But for the place ye wrought them in: as thus waide:
You: to beelde in top and top side: the fly heelde,
You heelde the whole yours: in all places to beelde.
The fly heelde: that all flies hold all holes in freeholde.
You (for all spiders) heelde that frehold all yours.
In reason, law, and custom, each to other told,
Your minds in this matter: (at least) five long hours.
At end whereof, it past both your wits and pours:
To take end your selves, but wear driuine to devise,
Arbiters: to take an end by comprimise.
Which matter: as both sides writhed it and wound it,
Your arbiters theare: the ant and butterfly,
Wear driven to leave it, at large as they found it.
Whereupon ye finalli: burdenuslie:
Burdend the fly, with custom: thereby to die.
Which he could not deny: and for his defense,
He gat the case to be reasond, in conscience.
Wherein (by nature in you: and reason in man,)
Ye fet a discoorse: reasonabli sounding,
With reason: and conscience: that custom to scan.
Whearvpon appeerde: infallible grounding,
To bring the fly justly, to his confounding.
And: had not been your usurping: in this plase,
Conscience: with custom: had stand in this case.
Custom grants: and conscience not denithe:
Disturbing your copwebs: wrought in top post,
The fly (for thoffence) accustomable dithe.
But copwebs upon copwebs: pirld in each cost:
All parts of windows to be so enboste:
That no fly can pass: without deths entrupsion.
Conscience construth that custom: corrupsion.
In taking the flies part here: I take mine own.
I: being maid of the house, my charge it is:
To se copwebs corrected. Thus over grown,
And so will I do (spider) be sure of this,
Well (quoth the spider) if I have done a mis,
Redress mine ill doing: and let me go free.
Naie naie spider (quoth the maid) that may not be.
Swept I these superfluus copwebs now hence:
^etting thee pass: in this window to remain,
Custom: has so corrupted thy conscience:
That wheare is now one copweb, there should be twain.
Well (quoth he) sins ye like not (as apperth pleine)
What I have done, yet here why: I have done it.
Which shall (I hope) appease your Ire eueriwhit.
The whi (or wherefore) I did that I have done,
Was: that flies (beyond nombre) did here resort:
Blowing meat here (raw and roste) beyond the moon.
Which wrought your master and maistres in speech short:
To rebuke you sore, to your deep discomfort.
Which to redres: I, in pitteing of you,
Set nets to catch flies: as I do now.
Here is (quoth the maid) one truth told, and one lie,
That flies have my meat here outrageouslie blown,
That is truly said: and it for true grant I.
But that thou did set nets here: all ouergrowne:
Ought for my pleasure: and not all for thine own,
That's a false tale. To which: pollisie thee drawse,
To win fauer at my hands, clear without cause.
But wear it as true as it is false: yet thou:
And thy family: do me displeasure more:
Then pleasure in this: for your nie approach now,
Is: to my master and maistres: an iye sore.
Above the flies blowing: by degreese a score.
They both: loathe less to have (be it flesh or fish,
Ten flies in their meat, then one spider in their dish.
And in their dish woldst thou and thine sureli be:
If I (rather to late then in time dew)
Took thee not up: as is my charge in dewte:
Executing mine office, did I eschew:
To correct such pride in thee: as never grew:
In spider erst, then my master and maistres:
Of my rebuke, had just cause of encres.
And haste thou been never so seruisable:
In doing thy dewtie: in many things right.
Yet: this thy vsurppacion abominable,
Has drowned thy thank of those dew done deeds: quight.
Which is to be witnest, in all the worlds sight.
All reasons: in law, custom, and conscience weide,
Against the fly, are now against thy self leide.
And as thou made custom thy shootanker chief,
(Conioyning thereto: reason, law, and conscience,)
Of the flies death (by right) to make perfight preefe,
From first age of the world: had in consequence,
So bring I custom: fet like fer time from hence.
Custom: is thy warrant: to such the flies brain,
Whereto: mark how custom warrantth me again.
From the beginning: it is thaccustomd gies.
When spiders in windows their copwebs so make:
That they to fer o^^ende: their beholders iyes,
The maid of the house with her brom: at a struck,
Swepth down those copwebs, and those spiders take.
Under her foot. And for any intersesse,
Those spiders (with her foot) to does she does press.
Which custom is underpropped (as I said)
With reason, with law, and with conscience: for me,
As strongly in my case, as for thee in thine laid.
Now speak spider can thou deni this (quoth she?)
Nay for soth: I can not deny it (quoth he)
But am driven to grant it: and euin so I do.
Your merciful hands, I commit me into.
Thou shall have (quoth she) mercy euin as much:
At my hands, as the fly should have had at thine.
Cast of all vein hope: sins thy fortune is such,
Thy self framing fortune: to thy this ruin,
Make patience thy salve, for this sore in fine.
And make thee ready spider: for finally,
I assuredly assure thee, thou shall die.
The change of his chere at these words made me se,
How the dread of death, could lambs of lions make.
This lionlike spider: erst feerce as could be,
Fear, did all his fury: full fer then aslake.
His heart: in a pursnet was easy to take.
Change (by chance) brought him) at twinke of an iye,)
From twig top of the tree, at the rote to lie.
These two things are meet things (as me thinkth) to note.
The spider right now so hie: euin now so low.
The fly right now at eb, euin now a flote.
The tromp of his fame, never so hie did blow.
Thothers tromp of shame, as hie in sound does show.
Which blasts of which tromps (in mine ear) blew this blast:
Fickill fortune, will never leave her old cast.
But to the matter: the spider praide the maid,
To speak with his son and heir: before he did:
And with his counsel. She was content (she said)
Chance being messenger, chance thither straight hide:
His son: and twelve councellers, hard by his side.
Whereupon: he theare and then discoorst his mind,
In matter such, as ye next this may find.
The spider to his son and twelve spiders gives his best abuise for most
quiet and best governance. His tale standinge most upon these three terms,
first a decleracion of him self, second an exhortacion to them, the third a
submission for him self, whereunto he desires lice^re to take his child in his
arms: now at their departing, which the maid grants. Cap. 92.
depiction of spider and fly story

MY dear chslde, my nere friends, and counselors late:
My short time: not a lowing long talk with you,
When I would most long: and most deeply debate:
(Mine estate past and present) with you all now:
My talk most short: and thereby most slight talow:
I must: and (sins I must) will device to tell.
Charging my child: and praing you, to way it well.
This short tale: shortened by short time (as I sey,)
For a ground: of ferme framed foundation:
Upon these three principles, I will here ley.
The first: of my self, a declaracion.
The second: to you, an exhortacion.
The third, for my self: a submission:
For remission, of my ill condission.
First: I declare and confess my former life,
Chief: in time and place of mine auctorite:
To wring to the worse (by right or wrong in strife)
All flies or spiders: that would stand against me:
Their destruction, was my felicite.
My displeasure: (as I used it in quarrel,)
Was: as judgment of death. or dethlike parell,
Mine ambicius desire, here to declare:
In winning in windows, no one so nie all.
(Which I might have kept: quietly to my share.)
When my winning was most, I thought it to small.
The shooting at all: was my mark principal,
And now: shooting at all, I have lost all quight.
The mean: is the merry part: being soong right,
And of the two extreme parts: (as I take it)
The base: is better then the treble: to sing.
Treble prosperity, reason does make it:
Worse then base aduersite, it approving:
In the flies base: and my treble state: erst moving.
Prosperity, (as that fly said) makth us blind.
Aduersite, (I feel) gives sight by kind.
When I had all: that could welnie begof,
Restreint of liberty, had been my hell paint.
Now I have naught, I wear content with lot:
To sit and beg: fast locked in a chain.
I never to obtain: more estate or gain:
But only life and living: such as would,
Maintain a beggars life, baselie to hold.
But life, liberte, lands and all, must I loose.
And I confess me to leese all, worthili.
Every wight is worthy to have: as he doose.
Lands, life, and goods, of many flies: had have I.
And now must I leave life, lands, and goods, semblably.
This long learnd leason, I late had forgottun.
Our mesurs met to other, shall to us be mottun.
But in this measure, here me measure right.
How wrong iudgers, wrong judgments: in this text lay.
Sum expound it so largely, that in their sight:
Wheare aucthorised judges: ponishment way:
Mesuring harm: to harm doers: thill to stay:
If any ill: cum to those judges: eft sone,
That judge thill to be done, for thill to them done.
But: those judgments grow of this condission:
Malice arogant, or ingnorance insolent.
Mothers: of erronius exposission.
This text has a limit: how fer it has bent:
Such harms as chance judges: or such as assent:
To procure ponishment: to such as are naught,
Those harms: unto them: for that, are not wrought.
Judgments of the great god, are secret (we know:)
A judge using justice: of just true dealing:
The god may ponish, for other things that grow.
Which he knowth, and we know not: (by revealing)
And oftimes the good: (their glory ensealing:
He ponishth sum here, as stands with his will.
Whose mesures he knowth, (of man's mesurs) least ill.
But: for such false mesurers: as I have been:
This mesure is made, and dewlie put in ure.
At hands of the great god, often directly seen.
Right mesure motun, for wrong motun mesure.
And (oftimes) he does his instruments procure
As now this maid: right mesurer to me is,
As I to other, have mesurde wrong ere this.
This declaracion: one part of these three,
What I have partly been, has made you here.
Whereby: what case I am in, here you se.
Which sight and hereing, may be mirror clear:
To look in: all times of the day and the year.
For spiders hie: and spiders underneath.
To keep with life, that I have lost with death:
And so to do, I shall you all exhort.
And first my son, mark mine advice to thee,
(That shall succeed me straight in place of such port,
As I first began: in superiorite.)
In few words (which smart small time limitth me.
For the which while (my child to me most dear:)
Thy weeping leave, and ley thine ear to here.
Those things: that thou have herd me here declare,
By which: thou see thy father cast away,
To save thy self (my child) se thou prepare:
To flee the same: by temperate stedie stay.
The contrary of my demenure ay:
Shall ay defend thee so in every case,
As thou both loved and drad, shall keep thy plase.
Against my sotletee, use thou simplicitee.
Against my wrong usurping, use thou right.
Against my pride, use thou humilitee.
Against my wrath, use charity: in sight.
Against my hate, in love have thou delight.
Against these ills: and other following me,
Note these next ills: not to follow, but to flee.
Wheare truth is taken treason: and traitors in trust:
Wheare faith is framd fancy: and fancy feind feith:
Where losels over lords: ley laws at their lust:
Where witless: as wiseste: the witty out weith:
Where mercy to the meek: meare malice dismeith:
Where dawcocks: in doctrine: have dominacion,
There does division, bring desolacion.
Let truth be the vage, in whom thou trust do take.
Let not firm faith be left: for fikill fancy,
Let rewld lords: rewle rewlesie losels, when they crake.
Let wise wisdom, over wey witless folly.
Let malice pass: use mesurable mercy.
Let thunlearnd: in doctrine: to the learnd: give plase.
Let pastors be plaste, as I place them in case.
In place of a shepherd, place not a sheep.
In place of a sheep, place not a shephard.
In no place: place a wolf, the flock to keep:
The sheep or the wolf, to the shepherds place prefard:
By faintness: or fercenesse, the flock must be mard.
Place thou thy shepherds: such shepherds to be,
As from the sheep: and wolf, use the mean decre.
Offenders penitent (for offenses past,
Saving of whom: offendth not the standing state,
Nor encorageth other: to offend the more fast)
Correct, as mercy may rigor moderate.
But to this, make this a ground inuiolate.
Upon sturdie stif standers: in violensie,
Draw thy sword of justice, sharpened sharply.
And mark (my son) these points that I now cum to:
In commun order, of thy governing.
Who: honestly does, as other honest do:
And says as those honest say: or says nothing,
Are him not what he thinkth, for mark this othing:
Whose deed and his thought: repungnantlie vary,
His word and his thought: iar likewise contrary.
Love to be loved, and hate to be hated.
Of those that love good: and hate ill, otherwise,
Having hate of thill: for justice justly rated,
Hate so, be thou glad to have, and by justice,
Continue that hate: in insessant sise.
In whom (by their fauts) to thee fautlesse it drawse:
To continue: by their continewed cause,
Touching right or wrong: of both must thou choose one,
As thus: either to do wrong: or to take wrong,
Rather take it then do it: se thou do none.
The wrong that I have done (the flies here among)
Of mine ill: their ill: has been partly a long.
Answer mine ill all (alas) straight must I do.
And as much of theirs, as mine has forced them to.
Of spider or fly: sewde to: for ought in grant,
Ere thou grant, look what, where, and why thou grauntest it
But graunts once past thee (at suitors suits instant,)
Perform them full: without restreint any whit.
Performance of promise, perfitelie does knit:
Such credence: to all: (they performing the same)
As winth them fast freendship, and perpetual fame.
Thy council choose, in these condiscions bent.
Few, wise, secret, expert, temperate, and true.
Satiffide with sufficiency, and diligent.
All sale of justice: and all offers teschew:
That shall to thee, or commun wealth hindrance brew.
Their taking whereof: seming winning to be:
May leese them with all theirs, and all thine with thee.
Here have I given thee son: such exortacion,
As weak wit: and short time will suffer in me.
Which: if thou use, at thy fathers contemplacion,
Behold then (my son) thine own prosperitee.
Yfnot, behold thy fathers aduersitee.
As rightly and rightfully on thee to light,
As on thy father, thou see it now light right.
Now: to you of his counsel: mark what I deuies.
In you, lithe the putting in ure of all this.
You are his hands, his feet, his ears, and his iyes:
Hering, feeling, or seeing, in him small is:
To walk or to work with: you woorking amiss:
You are the myrrors: that all lookers look in.
As you work, they work: but you must first begin,
In which work, this walk, I exorte you to take.
Walk in amite, work in unite.
The answer of suitors, expeditelie make.
Search their subiestions: how they may agree:
To be granted, with honorable honest.
Offenders against you, when ye will challenge,
Never draw his sword: your quarrels to revenge.
These be the great grounds: presently brought in mind,
They passing two parts: of my promised three.
Me to declare, you to exort, in such kind,
As may show cause of repentance in me,
For ils past: and for thills to cum: in ye,
Warning to a void. thirdli and lastly now,
To witness my submission, I shall pray you.
First to the great god, I humbly and wholly:
Submit me: euine so beseching his mercy:
For all my great sin: and all offensife folly:
Against him committed. Secondarilie:
Of all the whole world here: I generally,
Are forgiveness. Where: and in what: mine offense:
To crave forgiveness: chargith my conscience,
Thirdly (and specially) good maistres maid:
Your displeasure toward me: to bring appeased,
I pray: your beningnite to be displaide,
To forgive my gilt: which has you displeased.
And not only displeased, but diseased.
Namely now: in streyning your arms long and small,
To cleanse your window, of vncumlie copwebs all.
Fourthlie and finally, remission sought:
By submission, to all spiders and flise:
That I in this window have offended ought:
In taking or giving the hooles in such sise:
Or stretched my copwebs here: in such wide wise:
As straightened any part: of their lawful right,
Of them, on knees: I pray forgiveness in sight.
Here end I: saving six words here to be said:
Unto my child: I: (him in mine arms haning:)
Pronounsed in your hering (good maistres maid:)
Your lisence whereto, is mine humble craving.
Without word of any ill, in deprauing.
Content (quoth she) whet with in arms he took him,
Saying these words, while she did over look him.
After a few woeful words of the spider had to his son (they both
claspynge each other in arms very naturally) he ^ysseth and blisseth him.
Wherewyth that son with all the twelve spiders dolefullie depart from the
spider. Cap. 93.
depiction of spider and fly story

OH deep desired sight, of thee my child dear:
Behold thy father, how he beholds thee.
To thy mother, and brother, thou shall appear:
After this weeping time: worn out of you three,
To your comforts oftimes: but no time more to me,
Our departings differ, nothing more (uneath)
You fro me to life, I from you to death.
Now here in sight, as I should never be hence.
Straight hence from sight, as I had never been here.
Well: farewell: use to thy mother obedience.
To thy brother, let brotherly love appear.
Commend me to them both (my Iuels dear)
I bliss thee: kiss thou me: they did so: and so,
Lothlie he losed his arms, and leete him go.
ornament
The maid (appeering as woe to distroye the spider as he is to be dystroyde)
with her foot presses him to death. Cap. 94.
depiction of spider and fly story

The water ran down the cheeks, of them both two:
The maid pitteing both, wept as fast thaie.
But for that she must do: more then she would do,
The spider had been forgeeuen, and gone his way.
But they gone weeping away, (without delaie:)
The spider laying prostrate: she thereupon,
Seiting her foot on him, he was forthwith gone.
ornament
The maid has before her the twelve spiders and the twelve flies that had
been before in place. And upon her show that all harms done by those
generacions is grown by mysorder, she finally deuiseth full redress in
poynting them to grow to order. Cap. 95.
depiction of spider and fly story

Upon this execucion done, she has now:
Before her, these twelve spiders with those twelve (...)
That erst wear there: they erst mensioned to you.
Unto which nombre, she did the are devise,
Certain precepts geeuen: in words weighty and wise,
Which to repeat: as rightly as I can,
I will. And in this wise her tale began.
To train the time and tarry you (quoth she)
In talk of your forefauts, folli it wear.
The smart: both does and will, still tell it ye.
But what thing brought that smart: each when and wheare)
That: hear to here, each one ley to his care.
Which thing briefly to tell: brief end to forder,
Was only in you all, this thing: misorder.
As god orderly created creatures all:
So wear they treated, to orderly intent.
To use them selves, each creature in his call.
Of which created sort: the creator meant,
Spiders and flies twain, to order to relent.
The lack whereof on your sides: witnesses we will,
To have wrought displeasure on all sides, euerideele,
On all sides I say: meaning these sides thereby.
Your sides, my side, my master and masters side.
First for your sides: the smart showth feelingly.
On my side: ^uch rebukes as I a bide,
Of them for you, seeming your fauts to hide.
And on their sides: their most displesaunt sight,
To se spiders and flies, out of order quight.
Spiders spinning in windows welnie, in their faris.
Spightfullie have sponne. And flies innumerablie:
To blow their meat: have made their commun tracis,
Thus: lack of order on your two sides prove I:
To have brought all sides: to live displesantlie.
To my masters and maistres grief, greatli grown.
Whose which grief: to me, is more then mine own.
By whose appointment under them as now:
I (having here the cure,) must have the care.
To assine redress: for which I sent for you.
To you: and to all yours in you, to declare:
Order, to ease all spiders and flies that are.
And all other: such as have been anoide,
By lack of order, which ye ere this distroide.
That spiders and flies: are the creatures of god,
And all his creatures: in their creacion good,
I know and aknowledge. Or else gods forbod.
I hate neither the spiders: nor the flies brood.
I love all: as behooves maidenlie mood.
All his creatures in an order, we must love:
That orderly use them selves: as does behoue.
And such as be ill: yet may we not hate:
The persons, but the ill in the persons seen.
This learnd I of a preacher: that preached late:
And of my self (I thank god) I have not been:
So much given to hate (any person I meene
Be they spiders: be they flies: what ever they be:)
But I can use all, as standth with charity.
And charitablie such an order to set:
To set you in rest: and the said rest thereby,
All fauts in all past: to forgive and forget,
That will I you all to do. And orderly:
Ethone to use him self ordinarily:
And each use other: in every kind of cause,
As thold known well ordered custom, dewli drawse.
And that is this: ye spiders in tip of top:
Or in top sides of windows: copwebs shall make
Above the rech of my broom: to crush or crop
Any part thereof: not set like an ale stake,
Proudly to brag your selves: and bring flies in brake,
But in place to lie: most hie and most hiddin.
Spiders thus plaste, customs order has biddin.
Flies in the body of the window shall pass.
Not by thousands at once: sediciouslie,
But thorough hooles of lattes: or broken glass:
Not blowing hensforth (so sawsmalapertlie:)
My masters and maistres meat: as years latlie:
They have dane, but pass and repasse in nombre
And usage such as shall no house accombre.
This ancient order (in few words) here geeuene,
Is all that I axe: in you to be used.
In lack whereof, in all sorrow you are dreeuene,
In use thereof, in solace you in clused.
Mysorder: bringing you thus confused,
Let order: by your leaving of misorder,
Quietness on your sides, and all sides forder.
By order (from misorder) you to redeem,
(From sorrows of all sorts to solace so sorted,)
Is cause of my cuming. Not by means extreme,
But by most mild means: that may be imported:
In order to set you: and se you comforted
To keep order. Wherein you obeying me,
We may live in love all: each in his degree.
Each in his degree (I say) mark that point well.
Your lack of living so, (ye see) mard you all.
Cheeflie you spiders: usurping to excel:
In governance: out of your place natural.
Which for few years past, brought and kept flies so thrall,
That you (welnie) brought flies: to grant to agree.
You: as head gouernous general be.
In which usurpation: ye offended,
Nature, reason, my master, maistres, and me.
Governors, nature has commonly bended:
Over such kinds to govern, as them selves be.
Beast over beasts, foull over fowls, as we se
Man over men. And in fear and aw is than,
Thunreasonable beast, to reasonable man.
Nature ye offend: in planted plain proof here,
To take rule of other kinds, then your kind is,
Reason: ye offend, in that ye here appear,
To take upon you, the use of mine offis.
Me: ye offend in the same: and unto this.
My master and maistres ye offend. As thus.
Head rule here, is their gift by customs discus,
But leave this, and take that: mine order erst told.
Keep you your places, and let me keep mine.
As nature: and custom: wills you of old.
While reason: and custom: do me clear incline:
My masters and maistres will: to woork in fine:
As I under them: and you under me,
May lovely live (I say) each in dew degree.
The spiders and flies: perceiving by her stay:
That she (in this matter) had said what she would,
All rejoicing, one spider assinde to say:
In such manner: as good manner: might him bold,
This effect in these words, to this maid he told.
At beginning of whose talk she set her iye,
And laid her ear toward him diligently.
ornament
The twelve spiders and twelve flies having herd their order set by the maid,
they thankefullie receive it. And upon her commandment to them, to put this
order in ure among all spyders and flies, they ioyfullye depart that
commandment to fulfill. Cap. 96.
depiction of spider and fly story

MOst excelent maid, and maistres of ours.
Your mild and motherlie precepts: given us thus,
In order old: revived now: at hand of yours,
Lack whereof (as ye said) the sorrows in us:
Have witnest that, of them, the cause in discus.
Your words wherein told: to our deeds therein felt,
Do instruct us, with a doble witness dealt.
And double or freble (yea quatreble) cause:
With many causes mo: then I can now tell:
Have we: to keep order as your will us drawse,
Spiders and fllies have lived, like as in hell.
Sins new misorder: did thold order expel,
Thus: our bound duty obaiyng your precept,
Is your pleasure, but our profits, to se kept.
Which: I promise for us, and all spiders else:
To be observed. As ferfoorth as we may,
And I (quoth one fly) for all flies as he tells:
Promise: for order to walk the same way.
Rejoicing all, that ever we saw this day.
Praying the great god: for you now and ever,
In prosperus prosperity, to persevere.
Well friends (quoth the maid) to enter order now:
Depart. And plant this in all spiders and fliese.
In top of windows, spiders exercise you.
And flies the hooles: moderateli exercise.
In most joyful joy, that both sorts can devise.
From thence most joyfully: they all flang and flew,
While the maid used her will there, as does ensew,
The spiders and flies being now absent, The maid sweepyth the wyndow clean
in every place. As far as her brom and arm will stretch, which done she
departs. Cap. 97
depiction of spider and fly story

THe spiders and flies (for the time) being gone,
The maid swept that window, clean in all places.
In all corners: that her broom might light upon,
Each copweb (with her broom) she full defaces:
No wem seen: in casemunds, nor casemund cases.
Upon her clear clensing whereof: out went she,
And in came I, her woorkmanship there to se.
ornament
The maid being gone, the auctor cu^meth in. And upon his beholding the wyndow
fair and clean swept without any comberus copwebs or excessive flocks of
flies he departs. Cap. 98.
depiction of spider and fly story

BEholding the window: seeing every room:
Clean and empty, save three flies amid that plat:
And in the top (without reche of the maids broom)
Corners of copwebs uneath seen, and to that:
All things in quiet case: so that I could not
Of any matter: be any further winner,
I went from the window, to the boorde to dinner.
FINIS. depiction of the author beholding flies
The conclusion with an exposission of the Auctor touching one piece of the
latter part of this parable.
I Have, (good readers) this parable here pende:
(After old beginning) newly brought to end.
The thing, years mo then twenty since it begoon.
To the thing: years mo then ninetene, nothing done.
The frewte was grene: I durst not gather it than,
For fear of rotting: before riping began.
The loss, (it on the frewterers hand lying:)
Had (in that mystery) mard his occupying.
This work (among my poor works) thus has it past:
Begone with the first, and ended with the last.
At end whereof (as at beginning) I pray.
All readers that read it (in all that we may.)
Each one reader: to scan this parable so,
As our most scanning: diligently may go:
(In speech of spiders and flies fautes: here shown:)
To considerate weying, of fautes of our own.
And them (by grace) tamend, for concord growing,
As spiders and flies: grow to, here in showing.
But, fauts and fauters: erst repented, and past,
Which fauts (I hope) none: on him self can now cast:
Figured here in the spiders cruelte:
Touching deeds and deaths of those: that so past be:
Let us rather (when memory them to mind calls,)
Lament their false facktes: then rejoice their foul falls,
And pray for them, as we hope they pray for us,
That they and we: by gods merciful discus,
May (after strife together in life carnal,)
Live and love together: in life eternal.
And for the chief spider and fly: understand:
Spider that did: and fly that scapte, at maids hand,
As in that figure: both: most charitablie:
The One in deed dieing: the other ready to die,
So should we: not only die, but also live.
As gods preseptes, (pain of endelesse death) do give.
Ye se also: that this figure here implies,
For strife in windows: between spiders and flies,
The plat of all the world, and people therein.
In which world: which people: if all now begin:
And hensforth: endeuer them deuring their lives:
By counsel of those two: to cut of all strives:
By cuting of: all cause of strife: in all parties:
As they both: (each in his last tale) did devise,
The first tale: in chapter four score and eight here:
The second: in four score and twelve; does a pere:
Thaduice in both turned to: it to here and hold:
Turning their persons to ours (in those tales told,)
Then shall we first se, and after feel: what frewte,
Our right doing (against wrong) shall execute.
Which: since ye may turn: and behold as a glass,
Tedius Iteracion thereof I let pass.
As I (for tediousness and other causes,)
Omit (to remit) the nombre of clauses.
To those: learnd and given (in enterpretacion,)
More them am I, unto moralisacion.
I leave to the learnd: the corpse of this matter:
How beete (as I can) I crave leave to smatter:
In vttring my fancy: under submission,
Touching the taking of one exposission:
In one piece hereof: one sense tenterpretate:
Of apt aplication to sense literate:
In this the last said part, of this said figure.
That maid I mean: putting her office in ure.
Sweping down copwebs in every border,
That she (in that window) saw set out of order.
Setting all flies at their lawful liberty,
And spiders also, tavoyde all ieobertie.
They bilding in windows: without her broms rech,
(Where bilding within it: brought much of this brech)
Keeping them selves within their bounds: as they ought,
Harm she none did them, none said, nor none thought.
But spiders: having past their bounds: as they had,)
And flies: having flowne more broad: then order bad,
The One: to nie her masters and maistres iye showing:
The Other: her masters and maistres meat blowing:
She thought it her duty: it being her charge,
To do sum execucion: for warning large:
Both to spiders and flies: the flocks euerichone,
By executing of spiders, only one.
And: save custom of justice: forced her thereto,
Both was she: execusion on him to do.
Her brom not sword of rigor, (doble edgid blade)
But the branche of mercy: that mild maiden made.
Finally: upon her benign behauer:
Appeasing all this fury: with all this fauer,
In spiders and flies: without stripes to stint strife,
All plaste in right place: to place prosperus life,
Each one in him self: in most joyful joy ioyde,
And each one to other, their joys they imploide.
All loying in her: as their redempsion,
Of rest, long erst had in exsempsion.
All bent (as all wear bound) in all that they may,
That maid (in her office) to love and obaie.
Wherewith: as this parable here takes end,
So I: (with a few words therein) an end intend.
Of this last piece: pleine interpretacion,
Lights in the lap of imaginacion.
Which: of force, in weying the sense literal,
Clerelie conueithe the sense alligoricall,
To our sufferaigne Lady, Queen Marie, and maid.
At gods bringing whom to her crown, may be laid:
Our like strife rissen: and more then like to rise,
Then showth here risen: between spiders and flies.
Whose sword like a brom: that swepth out filth clean:
Not a sword that fileth the house: by blodie mean,
This merciful maiden took in hand to sweep,
Her window: this realm. Not to kill, but to keep:
All in quiet. On her bringing us thereto,
As that maid (all spiders and flies) showth to do.
And as under that maid: spider did but one,
So under this maid: save one, (in effect) none.
And as that one: under that one maid did die:
Repentaunt, so this other repentauntlie:
Under this other maid: the death meeklie took.
All sin: with all sinful errors, he forsook,
Of god: craving forgiveness principally,
And then of the world. And most specially:
Of this maid his mastres. Who (clerlie) him forgave,
As that maid did that spider, when he did crave.
And as that maid: lothlie forced by just custum:
Was dreuin to bring that one: texcucion to cum,
So this maid: save like that maid: by force was dreuine,
Was with that maid: (for pity) more then euine.
And as that maidins most quarrel was addikt:
For that: spiders and flies: in that window kikt:
Against the will of her master and maistres,
So did this maid: her chief quarrel addres:
To us (or to such of us) as the presept:
Of her master and maistres: had not kept,
And as that maid took those fautes much more to heart:
In respect of her masters and maistres part:
Then for her own part, (her part being not small:
In that the redres: she was charged with all,)
So: under her master and maistres, this meyde:
Being their like instrument: to se things weyde,
She weyde that. With more grief to se them offendid,
Then for ought: that on her own part dependid.
Her master Christ, the head master principal.
Her maistres, mother hollie church catholicall.
And as that one maid: with that one stroke of her broom:
Cleansed her window clear in every room:
Setting flies at liberte: in their right rate:
Plasing spiders likewise in accustumd state:
Poynting both parts: path of direct direction:
To trace and tread in: as welthes protection,
So this one maid: with this one stroke of her sword:
From long thrall thraldom, has set us clear a board.
Poynting us our places (and paths) of old known:
Great gides, both to gostlie and worldly wealth grown.
Thus fer goth this figure: and this exposiscion:
Between that maid, and this maid. The condiscion,
On her part fulfild. Whereupon let us here
Play our parts in this part: all parts to apere:
To this maid, as spiders and flies to that maid.
Let our baners of obedience be displaide.
Of love, the bage. of rejoicing, the right root.
And of our own welthis, the right and full boot.
Love we her, and obey we her, as we ought:
And also our suffrayne Lord: Philip: to her brought:
By god: as god brought her to us. Which twain:
Conjoined one: in matrimonial train:
Both one also: in auctorite regal:
These two thus made one: both one here we call.
Which two thus one, rejoice we eueriechone.
And these two thus one, obey we all as one.
Effectually: as those spiders and flies,
Figuratiuelie, that one recongnies,
Beseching god that brought them, to keep them here:
In long prosperus reign. And of his mercy mere:
So to bliss us: that on this blessed stock,
He bring such impes: as over their faithful flock:
As their progenitors do raygne presently,
They (after them) may reign perpetually.
And for gift of these two thus one: to us geuine,
^o yield the three and one thanks: (as we are dreuine,
And also them, conclude we this even thus.
Thank we god for them, and god and them for us,
FINIS,
IMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETESTRETE, BY THO. POVVELL. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.


