A play of love, A new and a merry interlude concerning pleasure and pain in
love, made by Jhon^ Heywood.

,', The players names.,',
A man a lover not beloved. A woman beloved not loving. A man a lover and
beloved. The vyse another lover nor beloved.


SAM. PEPYS. CAR. ET. LAC. ANG^. REG^^. A. SECRETIS. ADMIRALIAE
Men's cujusque is est Quisque

The lover not beloved. LO sir, who so that looks here for curtesy
And seth me seem as one pretending none
But as unthought upon thus suddenly
Approaches the myddys among you every chone
And of you all seyth naught to any one.
May think me rewde perceyuyng of what sort
ye seem to be, and of what stately port.
But I beseech you in most humble wise
To omytte dyspleasure and pardon me
My manner is to muse and to deuyse
So that some time my self may carry me
My self knowyth not where, and I asure ye
So has my self done now, for our lord wot
where I am, or what ye be, I know not.
Or whence I came, or whyther I shall
All this in manner as unknown to me
But even as fortune guydeth my foot to fale
So wander I, yet where so ever I be
And whom o^ how many so ever I se
As one person to me is every chone
So every place to me but as one
And for that one person every place seek I
which one ones found I find of all the rest
Not one myssyng, and in the contrary
That one absent, though that there were here pressed
All the creatures living most and lest
yet lackyng her I should and ever shall
Be as alone syns she to me is all
And alone is she without comparyson
Consernyng the gyftys gyuyn by nature
In favor fayrnes and port as of person
No life beryth the like of that creature
Nor no tongue can attain to put in ure
Her to dyscryue, for how can words expres
That thing the full whereof no thought can ges.
And as it is thing inesty mable
To make report of her bewty fully
So is my love to ward her unable
To be reportyd as who seyth ryghtly
For my soole service and love to that lady
Is given under such haboundant fashyon
That no tongue thereof can make right relashyon.
wherein I suppose this well supposed
Unto you all, that syns she perceyuyng
As much of my love as can be dysclosed
Even of very right in recompensyng
She ought for my love again to be loving
For what more right to grant when love love requires
Then love for love, when love naught else desires
But even as far wurs as otherwise then so
Stand I in case in manner desperate
No time can time my sewt to ease my woe
Before none to erely and all times else to late
Thus time out of time mystymeth my rate
For time to bring time to hope of any grace
That time tymyth no time in any time or place.
whereby till time have time so far extyncte
That death may determyne my life thus dedly
No time can I rest alas I am so lyncte
To greues both so great and also many
That by the same I say and will veryfy
Of all pains the most incomparable pain
Is to be a lover not louyd again.

The woman beloved not loving enters. Beloved not loving. Sir as touching
those words of comparyson
which ye have said and would seem to veryfye
If it may please you to stand thereupon
Hearing and answeryng me pacyently
I doubt not by the same incontynently
your self to see by words that shall ensue
The contrary of your words veryfyed for true.

Lover not loved Fair lady pleasyth it you to repayrenere
And in this cause to show cause reasonable
whereby cause of reformacyon may appear
Of reason I must and wylbe reformable

Louyd not loving well syns ye pretend to be confyrmable
To reason, in auoydyng circumstaunce
Brefely by reason I shall the truth auaunce.
ye be a lover no whyt louyd again
And I am louyd of whom I love nothing
Then standyth our question between these twain
Of loving not louyd, or louyd not loving
which is the case most paynfull in sufferyng
whereto I say that the most pain does move
To those beloved of whom they can not love

Lover not louyd. Those words approved lo, might make a change
Of mine opinion / but verily
The case as ye put it I think more strange
Then true, for though the beloved party
Can not love again, yet possybly
Can I not think, nor I think never shall
That to be louyd can be any pain at all.

Beloved not loving. That reason perceived and receyuyd for troth
From proper comparyson should clear confound me
Between pain and no pain, no such comparyson growth
Then or I can on comparyson ground me
To prove my case paynefull ye have first bound me
To which syns ye drive me by your denial
Mark what ensues before ferther trial.
I say I am louyd of a certain man
whom for no sewt I can favor again
And that have I told him syns his sewt began
A thousand times but every time in vain
For never seaseth his tongue to complain
And ever one tale which I never can flee
For ever in manner where I am is he.
Now if you to here one thing every where
Contrary to your appetyte should be led
were it but a mouse lo should pepe in your ere
Or always to harp on a crust of bred
How could you like such harpyng at your head

Loving not louyd. Somewhat dyspleasaunt it were I not deny

Louyd not loving. Then somewhat payneful as well said say I
Dyspleasure and pain be things jointly anex^
For as it is dyspleasaunt in pain to be
So it is paynefull in dyspleasure to be vexed
Thus by dyspleasure in pain ye confess me
whereby syns ye part of my pain do see
In my ferther pain I shall now declare
That pain by which with your pain I compare.
Small were the quantyte of my paynfull smerte
if his iangelynge percyd no further then mine erys
But thorough mine erys dyrectly to mine heart
percyth his wordys even like as many sperys
By which I have spent so many and such terys
That were they all red as they be all white
The blood of my heart had be gone or this quyte
And almost in case as though it were gone
Am I except his sewt take end shortly
For it does like me even like as one
Should offer me service most humbly
with an axe in his hand, contynually
Besechynge me gentylly that this might be sped
To grant him my good will to stryke of my head
I allege for general this one symylytude
Auoydyng rehersale of pains partyculer
To abreueate the time and to exclude
Surplusage of words in this our matter
By which ensaumple if ye consydere
Ryghtly my case at lest wise ye may see
My pain as paynfull as your pain can be.
And yet for shorter end put case that your pain
were often times more sharp and sore in degree
Then mine is at any time yet will I prove plain
My pain at lenght suffycyent to match ye
which proof to be true your self shall agree
if your affection in that I shall resyght
May suffer your reason to understand right
you stand in pleasure having your love in sight
And in her absens hope of sight again
Kepyth most times possessyon of some delyght
Thus have you often times some way ease of pain
And I never no way for when I do remain
In his presens, in dedly pain I solorne
And absent, half ded in fear of his return
Syns presens nor absens absenteth my pain
But always the same to me is present
And that by presens and hope of presens again
There does appear myche of your time spente
Out of pain, me think this consequent
That my pain may well by mean of the length
Compare with your shorter pain of more strength

Lover not loved. Maystres if your long pain be no stronger
Then is your long reason against my short pain
ye lack no lycklyhod to live much longer
Then he that would stryke of your head so feign
yet lest ye would note me your words to dysdayne
I am content to agree for a season
To grant and enlarge your latter reason
Amytte by her presens half my time pleasant
And all your time as paynefull as in case can be
yet your pain to be most, reason will not grant
And for ensample I put case that ye
Stood in cold water all a day to the kne
And I half the same day to myd leg in the fire
would ye change places with me for the dryer

Loved not loving. Nay that would I not be ye assuered

Lover not loved. Forsooth and my pain above yours is as ill
As fire above water thus to be endewred
Came my pain but at times and yours continue still
yet should mine many weys to whom can skyll
Show yours, in comparysen between the twain
Skantly able for a shadow to my pain
Felt ye but one pang such as I feel many
One pang of dyspayre, or one pang of desire
One pang of one dyspleasaunt look of her eye
One pang of one word of her mouth as in ire
Or in restraynt of her love which I require
One pang of all these felt ones in all your life
Should quayle your opinyon and quench all our strife
which panges I say admytted short as ye list
And all my time beside pleasant as ye please
yet could not the shortness the sharpnes so resyst
The percyng of my heart in the lest of all these
Bur much it ouermatheth all your disease
For no whyt in effect is your case dyspleasaunt
But to deny a thing which ye list not to grant
Or to here a sewter by daily peticyon
In humble manner as wit can deuyse
Require a thing so standing in condyshyon
As no porcyon of all his enterprise
without your consent can speed in any wise
This sewt thus attempted never so long
Doubt ye no death till your pain be more strong
Now syns in this matter between us dysputed
Mine admyttance of your words notwithstanding
I have thus fully your part confuted
what can ye say now I come to denyeng
your pryncyple, granted in my foresayeng
which was this, by the presens of my lady
I granted you half my time spent pleasauntly
Although mine affection ledyth me to consent
That her selde presens is my relefe only
yet as in reason appears all my torment
Bred by her presens and mark this cause why
Before I saw her I felt no malydy
And syns I saw her I never was fre
From twain the greatest pains that in love be
Desire is the first upon my first sight
And despair the next upon my first sewt
For upon her first answer hope was put to flight
And never came syns in place to dyspewt
How brings then her presens to me any frewt
For hopeles and helpeles in flames of desire
And drops of despair I smolder in fire
These twain being endeles syns they began
And both by the presens of her wholly
Begone and continued, I wonder if ye can
Speak any word more, but yield ymmedyately
For had I no mo pains but these, yet clearly
A thousand times more is my grefe in these twain
Then yours in all the case by which ye complain

Loved not loving. That is as ye say but not as I suppose
Nor as the treuth is, which your self might se
By reasons that I could and would dysclose
Saving that I see such parcyalyte
On your part, that we shall never agree
Unless ye will admyt some man indyfferent
Indyfferently to hear us, and so give judgment.

Lover not loved. Agred, For though the knowledge of all my pain
Ease my pain no whyt yet shall it declare
Great cause of abashement in you to complain
In counterfeit pains with my pain to compare
But here is no judge mete, we must seek else where

Louyd not loving. I hold me content the same to condyscende
Please it you to set forth and I shall attend.

Here they go both out and the lover beloved enters with a song. Lover
beloved. By comen experyence who can deny
Inpossibylyte for man to show
His inward intent, but by signs outwardly
As writing, speech, or countenance, whereby does grow
Outward perceiving inwardly to know
Of every secrecy in man's breast wrought
Fro man unto man the effect of each thought
These things well weyd in many things show need
In our outward signs to show us so that plain
According to our thoughts / words and signs proceed
For in outward signs where men are seen to feign
what credence in man to man may remain
Man's inward mind with outward signs to fable
May sone be more comen than commendable.
Much are we lovers then to be commendyd
For love his appearance dyssembleth in no wise
But as the heart felyth like signs always pretended
who feign in appearance are loves mortal enmyes
As in dyspayr of speed who that can mirth deuyse
Or having grant of grace can show them as morners
Such be no lovers but even very skorners.
The true lovers heart that can not obtain
Is so tormentyd that all the body
Is evermore so compelde to complain
That sooner may the sufferer hyde the fury
Of a fervent fever, then of that malady
By any power humayne he possible may
Hyde the least pain of a thousand I dare say.
And he who in loving has lot to such luck.
That love for love of his love be found
Shall Be of power even as easily to pluck
The moon in a momet with a finger to ground
As of his joy to enclose the rebounde
But that the refleccion thereof from his heart
To his beholders shall shine in each part
Thus be a lover in joy or in care
All though will and wit his estate would hyde
yet shall his semblaunce as a dyale declare
How the clock goes which may be well applied
In abrygement of circumstau^ce for a guyed
To lead you in few words by my byhauour
To know me in grace of my ladies favor.
For being a lover as I am in deed
And thereto dysposyd thus pleasauntly
Is a plain appearance of my such speed
As I in love cowld wysh and undoubtedly
My love is requyted so louyngly
That in every thing that may delyght my mind.
My wit can not wyshe it so well as I find
which thing at full consydred, I suppose
That all the whole world must agree in one voice
I being beloved as I now dysclose
Of one being chief of all the hole choice
Must have incomparable cause to rejoice
For the highest pleasure that man may obtain
Is to be a lover beloved again

Another lover nor loved enters No lover nor loved. Now god you good even
master woodcock

Lover loved. Comes of rudeness or lewdenesse that mock

No lover nor loved. Come whereof it shall ye come of such stock
That god you good even master woodcock.

Lover loved. This losell by like has lost his wit

No lover nor loved. Nay nay master woodcock not a whyt
I have known you for a woodcock or this
Or else like a woodcock I take you a my*
But though for a woodcock ye deny the same
yet shall your wit wytnes you mete for that name.

Lover loved. How so?

No lover nor loved. Thus lo.
I do perceive by your formare process.
That ye be a lover whereto ye confess
your self beloved in as loving wise
As by wit and will ye can wyshe to deuyse
C^ncludyng therein determinately
That of all pleasures plesaunt to the body
The highest pleasure that man may obtain
Is to be a lover beloved again
In which conclusyon before all this flock
I shall prove you plain as wise as a woodcock

Lover loved. And me think this woodcock is tornd on thy side
Contrary to curtsy and reason to use
Thus rudely to rail or any word be tried
In proof of thy part, whereby I do refuse
To answer the same, thou can not excuse
Thy folly in this, but if thou wylt say ought
Assay to say better for this seeing is naught

No lover nor loved. well syns it is so that ye be dyscontent
To be called fool or further matter be spent
will ye give me leave to call ye fool anon
when your self perceyueth that I have proved you one.

Lover loved. ye by my soul and will take it in good worth

No lover nor loved. Now by my fathers soul then will we even forth
That part rehearsed of your seeing or this
Of all our debate the only cause is
For where ye before have fastly affirmed
That such as be lovers again beloved
Stand in most pleasure that to man may move
That tale to be false truth shall truly prove

Lover loved. what folk above those live more plesauntly

No lover nor loved. what folk mary even such folk as am I

Lover loved. Being no lover what man may ye be

No lover nor loved. No lover no by god I warraunt ye
I am no lover in such manner meant
As does appear in this purpose present
For as touchyug women go where I shall
I am at one point with women all.
The smothest the ^myrkest the smallest
Thetrewest / the trymest / the tallest /
The wysest / the wylyest / the wyldest /
The m^ryest / the manerlyest / the myldest /
The strangest / the strayghtest / the strongest /
The lustyest / the lest / or the longest /
The rashest / the ruddyest / the roundest /
The sagest / the salowest / the soundest /
The coyest / the curstest / the coldest /
The bysyest / the bryghtest / the boldest /
The thankfullest / the thynest / the thyckest /
The sayntlyest / the sewrest / the syckest /
Take these with all the rest and of euerychone
So god be my help I love never one.

Lover loved. Then I beseech the this one thing tell me
How many women thynkest thou does love the

No lover nor loved. Sir as I be saved by ought I can prove
I am beloved even like as I love

Lover loved. Then as appears by those words rehearsed
Thou art another lover nor beloved

No lover nor loved. Norther lover nor beloved that is even true

Lover loved. Syns that is true I merueyll what can ensue
For proof of thy part in that thou made auaunt
Of both our estates to prove thine most plesaunt

No lover nor loved. My part for most plesaunt may sone be gest
By my contynuall quyetyd rest

Lover loved. Being no lover who may quiet be*

No lover nor loved. Nay being a lover what man is he
That is quiet

Lover loved. Mary I

No lover nor loved. Mary ye lie

Lover loved. what pacyens my friend ye are to hasty
If ye will patiently mark what I shall say
your self shall perceive me in quiet always

No lover nor loved. Say what thou will and I therein protest
To believe no word thou say most nor lest

Lover loved. Than we twain shall talk both in vain I see
Except our matter awarded may be
By judgment of some indifferent herer

No lover nor loved. Mary go thou and be an inquerer
And if thou can bring one any thing lyckly
He shall be admytted for my part quyckly

Lover loved. Now by the good god I grant to agree
For be thou assewred it scorneth me
That thou should compare in pleasure to be
Like me, and surely I promise the
One way or other I will find redres

No lover nor loved. Find the best and next way thy wit can ges
And except your nobs for malous do need ye
Make brefe return a felyshyp speed ye.

The lover loved goth out. No lover nor loved. My merueyll is no more then my
care is small
what knave this fool shall bring being not perciall
And yet be he false and afolyshe knave to
So that it be not to much a do
To bring a daw to here and speak right
I forse for no man the worth of a myte
And syns my doubt is so small in good speed
what should my study be more then my need
Till time I perceive this woodcock coming
My part hereof should pas even in mummyng
Saving for pastyme syns I consider
He being a lover and all his matter
To depend on love and contrary I
No lover, by which all such standing by
As favor my part, may fear me to weyke
Against the loving of this lover to speyke
I shall for your confort declare such a story
As shall perfetly plant in your memory
That I have knowledge in lovers laws
As deep as some dosyn of those dotyng daws
which told all ye whose fansyes styck nere me
Shall know it causeles in this case to fear me
For though as I show I am no lover now
Nor never have been yet shall I show you
Now that I ones chanced to take in hand
To feign my self a lover ye shall understand
Toward such a swetyng as by sweet sent savor
I know not the like in fashyon and favor
And to begin
At setting in
First was her skyn
Whyt smoth and thyn
And every vain
So blewe seen plain
Her golden hear
To see her wear
Her weryng gere
Alas I fere
To tell all to you
I shall undo you
Her eye so rollyng
Each heart co^trollyng
Her nose not long
Nor stood not wrong
Her finger typs
So clean she clyps
Her rosy lyps
Her chekes gossyps
So fair so ruddy
It axeth studdy
The hole to tell
It did excel
It was so made
That even the shade
At every glade
would hearts invade
The paps so small
And round with all
The wast not myckyll
But it was tyckyll
The thygh the kne
As they should be
But such a leg
A lover would beg
To set eye on
But it is gone
Then sight of the foot
Ryft hearts to the rote
And last of all sent katheryns whele
was never so round, as was her hele
Asawt her heart and who could win it
As for her hele no hold in it
yet over that her beawty was so much
In pleasant qualytes her graces were such
For dalyaunt pastaunce pas where she should
No greater dyfference between led and gold
Then between the rest and her, and such a wit
That no wight I wene might match her in it
If she had not wit to set wise men to scole
Then shall my tale prove me a stark fool
But in this matter to make you mete to ges
ye shall understand that I with this maystres
Fill late acquaynted and for love no whyt
But for my pleasure to approve my wit
Now I could love to this trycker dyssymble
who in dyssymelyng was perfyt and nymble
For where or when she list to give a mock
She could and would do it beyond the nock
wherein I thought that if I trysed her
I should thereby like my wit the better
And if she chaunsed to tryp or tryse me
It should to learn wit a good lesson be
Thus for my past time I did determyn
To mock or be mocked of this mockyng vermyn
For which her presens I did first obtain
And that obtained forth with fell we twain
In great acquayntaunce and made as good chere
As we had been acquaynted twenty year
And I through fair flatteryng behauour
Seemed anon so deep in her favor
That though the time then so far passed was
That time required us asonder to pas
yet could I no pasport get of my swettynge
Till I was full woed for the next days metynge
For sewrauns whereof I must as she bad
Give her in gage best iuell I there had
And after much mirth as our wits could deuyse
we parted and I the next morn did arise
In time not to tymely such time as I could
I allow no love where sleep is not alowde
I was or I entered this journey vowed
Decked very clenly but not very proud
But trym must I be, for slouenly lobers
Have ye wot well no place among lovers
But I thus decked at all points point deuyce
At door were this trull was I was at a tryce
whereat I knocked her presens to win
wherewith it was opened and I was let in
And at my first coming my mynyon seemed
Very merry, but anon she mysdemed
That I was not meryly dysposed
And so might she think, for I disclosed
No word nor look, but such as showed as sadly
As I in deed inwardly thought madly
And so must I show for lovers be in rate
Somtymes merry but most times passyonate
In geuyng thanks to her of over night
we set us down an heavy couple in sight
And therwithall I fet a sygh such one
As made the form shake which we both sat on
whereupon she without more words spoken
Fell in weeping as her heart should have broken
And I in secret laughyng so heartily
That from mine eyes came water plenteously
Anon I turned with look sadly that she
My weeping as watery as hers might se
which done these words anon to me she spoke
Alas dear heart what wight might undertake
To she we one so sad as you this morning
Being so merry as you last euenyng
I so far then the meryer for you
And without desert thus far the sadder now.
The self thing quoth I which made me then glad
The self same is thing that makes me now sad
The love that I owe you is origynale
Ground of my late toy and present pain all
And by this mean, love is evermore lad
Between two angels one good and one bad
Hope and dread which two be always at strife
which one of them both with love shall rewle most ryfe
And hope that good angel first part of last night
Draw dread that bad angel out of place quyght
Hope swear I should straight have your love at ones
And dread this bad angel swear blood and bones
That if I wan your love all in one hour
I should lose it all again in three or four
wherein this good angel has lost the mastry
And I by this bad angel won this agony
And be ye sewer I stand now in such case
That if I lack your continued grace
In heuyn / hell / or yerth / there is not that he
Save only god that knows what shall come on me
I love not in rate all the common flock
I am no fayner nor I can not mock
wherefore I beseech you that your reward
May witness that ye do my truth regard
Sir as touching mockyng quoth she I am sewer
ye be to wise to put that here in ure
For another give I cause why ye so should do
Nor naught could ye win that way wurth an old sho
For who so that mocketh shall surely stur
This old proverb mockum moccabitur
But as for you I think my self assewred
That very love has you hither alewred
For which quoth she let hope hop up again
And vaynquysh dred so that it be in vain
To dred or to doubt but I in every thing
As cause gives cause wylbe your own derlyng
Sweet heart quoth I after stormy cold smertes
warm words i warm lovers bring lovers warm hearts
And so have your words warmed my heart even now
That dredles and doubtless now must I love you
Anon there was I love you and I love you
Lovely we lovers love each other
I love you and I for love love you
My lovely loving loved brother
Love me, love the, love we, love he, love she,
Depper love apparent in no twain can be
Duyte over the ears in love and felt no ground
Had not swimming help in love I had been dround
But I swam by the shore the bauntage to keep
To mock her in love se^yng to swym more deep
Thus contynull we day by day
Till tym that (...) was passed away
In all the which tya^^ (...) she took
That by ^^ mean (...) ^^ set one look
Upon any (...)^
But straight way she set the ^y^^er in the eye
And by that same apt^es in ielousy
I thought sewer she loved me perfetly
And I to show my self in like loving
Dyssimyled like chere in all herlyke lokyng
By this and other like things then in hand
I gane her ^^^kes me thought above a thousand
whereby I thought her own tale like a bur
Stack to her own back mockum moccabitur
And upon this I felt in deuysyng
To bring to end this ydell dysgysyng
whereupon suddenly I stale away
And when I had ^en absent half a day
My heart mysgaue me by god that bought me
That if she mist me where I thought she sought me
She (...) be (...) by love that she ought me
wherein not love, (...)ught me
That to (...) a^one I bethought me
And so returned to ^^th (...) brought me
To (...) and ^^^ I knocked
kn^ck sofrequ^th ^n^ ^^o ^h^ fame unlocked
An (...) who was never
From ^^is say^ (...) out about her ever
Mothes ^^ ^^th I (...) oth^^ydere darlyng
D^de ^^^tch (...) by thine absentyng
And without ^^ (...) ^^re to her she shyt
I (...) without (...) of my wit
In that this woman (...) dye in my fault
But ^^^^ I could ^^ t^^^^ ^y^^ne assawte
To he (...) I gat about
To see at the lest way (...) laid out
And there (...) in (...) blessed mother
I saw the (...) another
In (...) me to scorn
As (...) as (...) beforne
The which when I (...) then rememb^yd
The (...) worde^ that another B rendryd
And also he (...) thing
^^ he^ed in this to (...) love betokenyng
My self to see served thus ^^^tely
To my self I laughed even heartily
with my self consyderyng to have had like speed
If my self had been a lover in deed.
But now to make some matter whereby
I may take my leave of my love honestly
Sweet heart quoth I ye take to much upon ye
No more then becomes me know thou well quoth she
But thou have takyn to much upon the
In taking that thou took in hand to mock me
wherein from beginning I have seen the iet
Like as a fool might have iettyd in a net
Beleuyng himself save of him self only
To be perceived of no living body
But well saw I thine intent at beginning
was to bestow a mock on me at endyng
when thou laughedest dyssymulyng a weeping hare
Then I with weeping eyes played even the like part
wherewith I brought in moccum moccabitur
And yet thou being a long snowted cur
Could no whyt smell that all my meaning was
To give mock for mock as now is come to pas
which now thus passed if thy wit be handsome
May defend the from mockes in time to come
By clappyng fast to thy snowt every day
Mo^rum moccabitur for a nosegay
whetwith shestart up and shyt her wyndowe to
which done I had no more to say nor do
But think my self or any man else a fool
In mockes or wyles to set women to scoole
But now to purpose wherefore I began
All though I were made a fool by this woman
Concerning mockyng yet does this tale approve
That I am well seen in the art of love
For I entendyng no love but to mock
yet could no lover of all the hole flock
Ctrcumstaunce of love dysclose more nor better
Then did I the substance being no greater
And by this tale before ye all may see
All though a lover as well loved be
As love can deuyse him for pleasant speed
yet two dyspleasures telousy and dread
Is myxt with love whereby love is a drynk mete
To give babes for worms for it drynkth bitter sweet
And as for this babe our lover in whose head
By a frantyk worm his opinion is bred
After one draught of this medsyn mynystryd
In to his brain by my brain apoyntyd
Reason shall so temper his opinion
That he shall see it not worth an onyon
And if he have any other thing to ley
I have to conuynse him every way
And syns my part now does thus well appear
Be ye my parteners now all of good chere
But silence every man upon a pain
For master woodcock is now come again.

The lover loved enters Lover loved. The old seeing seyth he that seeks shall
find
which after long sekyng true have I found
But for such a fyndyng my self to bind
To such a sekyng as I was now bound
I would rather seek to less twenty punde
How be it I have sought so far to my pain
That at the last I have found and brought twain

The lover not loved, and loved not loving enters. No lover nor loved. Come
they a horse back

Lover loved. Nay they come a foot
which thou might see here, but for this great mist

No lover nor loved. By iys and yet see I thou blind balde cote
That one of those twain might ride if he list

Lover loved. How?

No lover nor loved. Mary for he ledyth a nag on his his fyst
Maystres ye are welcome, and welcome ye be

Loved not loving. Nay welcome be ye, for we were here before ye

No lover nor loved. ye have been here before me before now
And now I am here before you
And now I am here behind ye
And no we ye be here behind me
And now we be here even both to gether
And now be we welcome even both hither
Syns now ye find me here with curtsy I may
Bid you welcome hither as I may say
But setting this aside, let us set a broche
The matter wherefore ye hither approach
wherein I have hope that ye both will be
Good unto me, and especyally ye
For I have a mind that every good face
Has ever some pity of a pore man's case
Being as mine is a matter so right
That a fool may judge it right at first sight

Lover not loved. Sir ye may well doubt how my wit will serve
But my will from right shall never swerve

Loved not loving. Nor mine, and as ye sew for help to me
Like sewt have I to sewe for help to ye
For as much need have I of help as you

No lover nor loved. I think well that dear heart but tell me how

Loved not loving. The case is this, ye twayn seem in pleasure
And we twayn in pain which pain does procure
By comparyson between him and me
As great a conflyct which of us twayn be
In greatest pain, as is between ye twain
which of you twain in most pleasure does remain
wherein we somewhat have here debated
And both to tell truth so gredyly grated
Upon affeccion each to our own side
That in conclusion we must needs provide
Some such as would and could be indyfferent
And we both to stand unto that judgment
whereupon for lack of a judge in this place
we sought many places and yet in this case
No man could we mete that medyll will or can
Till time that we met with this gentylman
whom in like errand for like lack of aid
was driven to desire our judgment he said

Lover loved Forsooth it is so I promysyng plain
They twayn between us twayn geuyng judgment plain
we twayn between them twayn should judge right again

No lover nor loved. That promysse to perform I not dysdayne
For touching right as I am a ryghteous man
I will give you as much right as I can

Loved not loving. Nothing but right desire I you among
I wyllyngly will another give nor take wrong

No lover nor loved. Nay in my conscyens I think by this book
your conscyens will take nothing that comes a croke
For as in conscyens what ever ye do
ye nothing do but as ye would be done to
O hope of good end, o Mary mother
Maystres one of us may now help a another
But sir I pray you some matter declare
whereby I may know in what grefe ye arre

Lover not loved. I am a lover not loved which plain
Is daily not doleful but my dedly pain

No lover nor loved. A lover not loved have ye knyt that knot

Lover not loved. ye forsooth

No lover nor loved. Forsooth ye be the more sot
Now maystres I heartily beseech ye
Tell me what manner case your case may be

Loved not loving. I am beloved not loving whereby
I am not in pain but in tormentry

No lover nor loved. Is this your tormentour god turn him to good

Loved not loving. Nay there is another man one me as wood
As this man on a another woman is

No lover nor loved. ye think them both mad and so do I by iys
So mot I thryue but who that list to mark
shall perceive here a praty peyce of warke
Let us fall somewhat in these parts to ska^nyng
Loving not loved, loved not loving
Loved and loving, not loving nor loved
will ye see these four parts well joined
Loving not loved, and loved not loving
Those parts can join in no manner rekenyng
Loving and loved, loved nor lover
These parts in ioynyng in likewise dyffer
But in that ye love ye twain joined be
And being not loved ye join with me
And being no lover with me joins she
And being beloved with her join ye
Had I a ioyner with me joined jointly
we ioyners should join joint to joint quyckly
For first I would part these parts in fleses
And ones departed these parted peses
Part and part with part I would so partlyke part
That each part should part with quiet heart

Lover not loved. Sir syns it passes your power that part to play
Let pass, and let us partly now assay
To bring some part of that purpose to end
For which all parties yet in vain attend

Loved not loving. I do desire the same and that we twain
May first be hard that I may know my pain

Lover loved. I grant for my part by faith of my body
why where the devil is this horeson nody

No lover nor loved. I never sit in justice but ever more
I use to be shryuen a little before
And now syns that my confession is done
I will depart and come take penance sone
when co^scyens prycketh conscyens must be sercht by god
In dyschargyng of conscyens or else gods forbod
which makes me mete when conscye^s must come in place
To be a judge in every comen case
But who may like me his auaunsement auaunt
Now am I a judge and never was seriaunt
which ye regard not much by ought that I see
By any reverence that ye do to me
Nay yet I praise women when great men go by
They crowch to the ground look here how they ly
They shall have a beck by saint Antony
But alas good maystres I cry you mercy
That you are unanswered but ye may see
Though two tales at ones by two ears hard may be
yet can not one mouth two tales at ones answer
which makes you tarry but in your matter
Syns ye by have in having ferdest home
would first be sped of that for which ye come
I grant as he granted your will to fulfill
you twain to be hard first, begin when you will

Lover not loved. As these twain us tweyn now grant first to break
Syns twayn to be hard, at ones can not speak
I now desire your grant, that I may open
First tale which now is at point to be spoken
which I crave no whyt my part to auaunce
But with the pyth to avoid circumstaunce

Loved not loving. Speak what and when so ever it please you
Till reason will me, I will not disease you

Lover not loved. Syrs other here is a very weyke brain
Or she has if any a very weyke pain
For I put case that my love I her gave
And that for my love, her love I did crave
For which though I daily sew day by day
what loss or pain to her if she say nay

No lover nor loved. yes by saint Mary so the case may stand
That some woman had lever take in hand
To ride on your errand on hundredth mile
Then to say nay one Pater noster while

Lover not loved. If ye on her part any pain defyne
which is the more paynefull her pain or mine

No lover nor loved. your pain is most if she say nay and take it
But if that she say nay and forsake it
Then is her pain a great way the greater

Loved not loving. Sir ye allege this nay in this matter
As though my denial my sewter to love
where all or the most pain that to me does move
wherein the treuth is a contrary plain
For though to often spekyng one thing be a pain
yet is that one word the full of my hopyng
To bring his hopyng to dyspayre at endyng
Thus is this nay which ye take my most grefe
Though it be paynefull yet my most relefe
But my most pain is all an other thing
which though ye forget or hyde by dyssymylyng
I partly showed you, but all I could nor can
But masters to you with pain of this man
That pain that I compare is partly this
I am loved of one whom the treuth is
I can not love, and so it is with me
That from him in manner I never can ^l^^
And every one word in sewt of his part
Nyps through mine ears and rons through my heart
His gastfull look so pale that uneath I
Dare for mine ears cast toward him an eye
And when I do that eye my thought presentyth
Straight to my heart and thus my pain augmentyth
One tale so often alas and so importune
His exclamacions sometime on fortune
Some time on himself some time upon me
And for that thing that if my death should be
Brought straight in place except I were content
To grant the same, yet could I not assent
And he seeing this yet seasyth not to crave
what death could be worse then this life that I have

Lover not loved. This tale to purpose purporteth no more
But sight and hearing complaynt of his sore
Is only the grefe that ye do sustain
Alas tender heart syns ye dye in pain
This payue to perceive by sight and hearing
How could you live to know our pain by felyng
Mark well this question and answer as ye can
A man that is hanged or that man's hangman
which man of those twain suffers most pain

Loved not loving. He that is hanged

No lover nor loved. By the mass it is so plain

Lover not loved. well said for me, for I am the sufferer
And ye the hangman understand as it were
These cases vary in no manner a thing
Saving this serves in this man's hangyng
Comenly is done against the hangmans will
And ye of delyghtfull will, your lover kill

Loved not loving. Of delyghtfull will, nay that is not so
As ye shall perfetly perceive or we go
But of those at whose hangyng have hangmen by
How many have ye known hang wyllyngly

No lover nor loved. Nay ueuer one in his life byr lady

Loved not loving. In this lo your case from our case does vary
For ye that love where love will take no place
your own will is your own leder a plain case
And not only uncompelled without alewre
But fore against her will your sewt ye endewre
Now syns your will to love did you procure
And with that will, ye put that love in v^e
And now that will, by wit seth love such pain
As wytty will would will love to refrain
And ye by will that love in each condition
To extynct, may be your own phesicion
Except ye be a fool or would make me one
what seeing cowd set a good ground to sit on
To make any man think your pain thus strong
Making your own salve your own sore thus long

Lover not louyd. Maystres much part of this process purposed
Is matter of truth truly dysclosed
My will without her will brought me in love
which will without her will does make me houe
Upon her grace to see what grace will prove
But where ye say my will may me remove
As well from her love, as will brought me to it
That is false my will can not will to do it
My will as far therein out weyth my power
As a sow of led out weyth a saforne flower

Loved not loving. your will out weyth your power the^ where is your wit
I merueyll that ever ye will speak it

Lover loved. Nay merueyll ye maystres thereat no whyt
For as far as this point may stretch in verdyt
I am clearly of this man's opinion

No lover nor loved. And I contrary with this mynion

Lover loved. Then be we come to a demurrer in law

No lover nor loved. Then be ye come from a woodcock to a daw
And by god it is no small connyng brother
For me to turn one wild fool to a another

Lover not loved. Nay masters I heartily pray you both
Banyshe contencyon till ye see how this goth
I will repet and answer her tale forth with
The pyth for your part whereof pretendyth
A proof for your pain to be more then mine
In that my will not only did me enclyne
To the same, but in the same by the same will
I wyllyngly will to continue still
And as will brought me and keeps in this bey
when I will ye say, will will bring me awey
Concludyng thereby that if my pain were
As great as yours that I should suerly bear
As great and good will to flee my love thus meant
As do ye your sewters presens to absent

Loved not loving. This tale shows my tale perseyued every dell

Lover not loved. Then for enter to answer it as well
Answer this put case ye as depely now*
Did love your lover as he does love you
Should not that loving suppose ye redres
That pain which lack of loving does posses

Loved not loving. yes

Lover not loved. Syns love gyuyn to hyme gives your self ease, than
Except ye love pain, why love ye not this man

Loved not loving. Love him nay as I said must I straight chose
To love him or else my head here to lose
I know well I could not my life to save
with loving will grant him my love to have

Lover not loved. I think ye speak truly for will will not be
Forced in love wherefore the same to ye
Syns this is to you such dyffyculte
why not a thing as dyffycult to me
To will the let of love where will my love has set
As you to will to set love where will is your let

Loved not loving. well said and put case it as hard now be
For you to will to leave her, as for me
To love him, yet have ye above me a mean
To learn you at length to will to leave love clean
which mean many thousands of lovers has brought
From right fervent loving to love right naught
which long and often approved mean is absens
whereto when ye will ye may have lycens
which I crave and wyshe and can not obtain
For he will never my presens refrain

Lover not loved. This is a medsyn like as ye would will me
For thing to kewre me the thing that would kill me
For presens of her, though I selde when may have
Is fool the medsyn that my life does save
Her absens can I with as ill will will
As I can will to let to love her still
Thus is this will brought in insydently
No aid in your purpose worth tail of a fly
And as concerning our pryncypall matter
All that ye lay may be laid even a water
I wonder that shame suffers you to compare
with my pain, syns ye are driven to declare
That all your pain is but sight and hearing
Of him that as I do dies in pain felyng
O pain upon pain what pains I sustain
No craft of the devil can express all my pain
In this body no lym / joint / senow / nor vein /
But martreth each other, and this brain
Chief enmy of all by the inuentyng
Mine unsavory sewte to her dyscontentyng
My speaking, my hearing, my lokyng, my thynkyng
In syttyng, in standing, in wakyng, or wynkyng,
what ever I do, or where ever I go
My brain and myshap in all these do me woe
As for my senses each one of all five
wondreth as it can to feel it self a live
And than has love gotten all in one bed
Him self and his servants to lodge in this head
Vain hope, dyspayre, dread, and audacite,
Have, wast, lust without lykyng or lyberte
Dilygence, humilyte, trust, and ielousy,
Desire, pacyent sufferaunce, and constansy,
These with other in this head like swarms of bees
Styng in debatyng their contraryetees
The venym whereof from this head dystylleth
Down to this breast and this heart it kylleth
All times in all places of this body
By this dystemperaunce thus dystempored am I
Sheueryng in cold and yet in hete I dye
Drowned in moisture parched perchment dry

No lover nor loved. Cold hot most dry all in all places at ones
Mary sir this is an agew for the nones
But or we give judgment I must search to view
whether this euydens be false or true
Nay stand still your part shall prove never the wars
Fo by saint savor here is a whot ars
Let me feel your nose, nay fere not man be bold
well though this ars be warm and this nose cold
yet these twain by attorney brought in one place
Are as he seyth cold and whot both in like case
O what pain drought is see how his dry lyps
Smake for more moyster of his warm moist hyps
Breath out. these eyes are dull but this nose is quycker
Here is most moyster, your breath smells of lycker

Loved not loving. well syns ye have opened in this tale tellyng
The full of your pain for speed to endyng
I shall in few words such one question dysclose
As if your answer give cause to suppose
The hole of the same to be answered at full
we need no judgment for yield my self I wu^^
Put case this man loved a woman such one
who were in his lykyng the thing alone
And that his love to her were not so myckyll
But her fancy toward him were as lyttyll
And that she hyd her self so day and night
That selde time when he might come in her sight
And then put case that one to you love did bear
A woman that other so ugly were
That each kys of her mouth called you to gybbes fest
Or that your fancy abhorred her so at lest
That her presens were as sweet to suppose
As one should present

No lover nor loved. A torde to his nose

Loved not loving. ye in good faith, whereto the case is this
That her spytfull presens absent never is
Of these two cases if chance should drive you
To chose one, which would ye choose tell troth now
what ye study

No lover nor loved. Tarry ye be to gredy
Men be not like women always ready

Lover not loved. In good soth to tell treuth of these cases twain
which case is the wurst is to me uncertain

Loved not loving. First case of these twain I put for your part
And by the last case apereth mine own smarte
If they proced with this first case of ours
Then is our matter undoubtedly yours
And if judgment pass with this last case in fine
Then is the matter asewredly mine
Syns by these cases our parts so do seem
That which is most paynefull your self can not deem.
If ye now will all circumstaunce eschew
Make this question in these cases our yssew
And the pain of these men to abreuyate
Set all our other matter as frustrate

Lover not loved. Agreed

Loved not loving. Then further to abredge your pain
Syns this our yssew apereth thus plain
As folk not doubtyng your conscience nor connyng
we shall in the same let pass all resonyng
yeldyng to your judgment the hole of my part

Lover not loved. And I likewise mine with will and good heart

No lover nor loved So lo make you low curtsy to me now
And straight I will make as low curtsy to you
Nay stand ye nere the upper end I pray ye
For the neither end is good enough for me
your cases which enclude your grefe each whyt
Shall dwell in this head

Lover loved. And in mine but yet
Or that we herein our judgment publysh
I shall desire you that we twain may fynysh
As far in our matter toward judgment
As ye have done in yours to the intent
That we our parts brought together thither
May come to judgment fro thens to gythes

No lover nor loved Byr lady sir and I desire the same

Loved not loving. I would ye began

Lover not loved. Begin then in gods name

Lover loved. Shall I begin

No lover nor loved. Syns I look but for wynnyng
Give me the end and take you the beginning

Lover loved. who shall win the end, the end at end shall try
For my part whereof now thus begin I
I am as I said a beloved lover
And he no lover nor beloved another
In which two cases he makes his auaunt
Of both our parts to prove his most pleasant
But be ye assuered by ought I yet se
In his estate no manner pleasure can be

No lover nor loved. yes two manner pleasures ye must needs confe^
First I have the pleasure of quyetnes
And the secounde is I am contented

Lover loved. That second pleasure now secondly invented
To compare with pleasure by contentashyon
Is a very second ymagynashyon

No lover nor loved. Then show your wit for proof of this in hand

Lover loved. Pleasure without contentacyon can not be
But contentacyon without pleasure we se
In things innumerable every day
Of all which mark these which I shall now ley
Put case that I for pleasure of some friend
Or some thing which I longed to se at end
would be content to ride three score mile this night
And never would bayte nor never alyght
I might be right well content to do this
And yet in this doing no pleasure there is
Moreover ye by pacyent sufferaunce
May be contented with any myschaunce
The loss of your child friend or any thing
That in this world to you can be longyng
wherein ye contented never so well
yet is your contentacyon pleasure no dell

No lover nor loved. These two exsamples by ought that I se
Be no thing the things that any thing touch me
with death of my child my being contented
Or pain with my friend wyllyngly assented
Is not contentacyon voluntary
For that contentacyon comes forceably
But my contentacion stands in such thing
As I would first wyshe if it went by wyshyng

Lover loved. Sir be ye contented even as ye tell
yet your contentacyon can another excel
Nor be compared egall to mine estate
For touching contentacyon I am in rate
As hyely contented to love as ye se
As ye to forbere love can wyshe to be
Had I no more to say in this argument
But that I am as well as you content
yet has my part now good approbacyon
To match with yours even by contentacyon
But contentacion is not all the thing
That I for my love have in recompencyng
Above contentacyon pleasures felyng
Have I so many, that no wight living
Can by any wit or tongue the same report
O the pleasant pleasures in our resort
After my being from her any whyther
what pleasures have we in coming to gyther
Each tap on the ground toward me with her foot
Does bathe in delyght my very heart rote
Every twynke of her aluryng eye
Reuyueth my spirits even thorowoutly
Each word of her mouth not a preparatyue
But the right medicyne of preseruatyue
we be so ioconde and joyfully joined
Her love for my love so currantly coined
That all pleasures yerthly the treuth to declare
Are pleasures not able with ours to compare
This mouth in manner receives no food
Love is the fedyng that does this body good
And this head dyspyseth all these eyes wynkyng
Longer then love does keep this heart thynkyng
To dream on my sweet heart, love is my feader
Love is my lord, and love is my leader
Of all mine affairs in thought, word, and deed,
Love is the Christ's cross that must be my speed

No lover nor loved. By this I perceive well ye make rekenyng
That love is a goodly and a good thing

Lover loved. Love good what ill in love can thou make apere

No lover nor loved. yes I shall prove this love at this time meant here
In this man's case as ill as is the devil
And in your case I shall prove love more evil
what tormentry could all the deuylles in hell
Deuyse to his pain that he does not tell
what pain brings that body those deuyls in that head
which myny sters always by love are led
He frysyth in fire he drowneth in drought
Each part of his body love has brought abought
where each to help other should be dylygent
They marter each other the man to torment
without stynt of rage his pains be so sore
That no fend may torment man in hell more
And as in your case to prove that love is
wurs than the devil my meaning is this
Love dystempereth him by torment in pain
And love dystempereth you as far in joy plain
your own confession declares that ye
Eat, drink, or sleep even as little as he
And he that lacks any one of those three
Be it by joy or by pain clear ye see
Death must be sequel how ever it be
And thus are ye both brought by loves induccyon
By pain or by joy to like point of dystruccyon
which point aproueth love in this case past
Beyond the devil in turmentry to have a cast
For I trow ye find not that the devil can find
To turment man in hell by any pleasant mind
whereby as I said I say of love still
Of the deayll and love, love is the more ill
And at beginning I may say to you
If god had seen as much as I say now
Love had been Lucyfer and doubt ye no whyt
But experyens now has taught god such wit
That if ought come at Lucyfer other then good
To whyp souls on the brech love shall be the blood
And sewer he is one that can not live long
For aged folk ye wot well can not be strong
And an other thing his phisicyou does ges
That he is infecte with the blak iawndes

Lover loved. No ferther then ye be enfecte with folly
For in all these words no word can I espy
Such as for your part any proof avouches

No lover nor loved. For proof of my part, no but it touches
The dysprofe of yours for where you alleged
your part above mine to be compared
By pleasures in which your dyspleasures are such
That ye eat, drink, nor sleep, or at most not much
In lack whereof my tale proves plainly
Each part of your pleasure a turmentry
whereby your good love I have proved so evil
That love is apparauntly wors then the devil
And as touching my part there can arise
No manner dyspleasures nor tormentryes
In that I love not, nor am not loved
I move no dyspleasures nor none to me moved
But all dyspleasures of love fro me absent
By absens whereof I quyetly content

Lover loved. Sir where ye said and think ye have said well
That my ioy^ by love shall bring death in sequel
In that by the same in manner I dysdayne
Fode and sleep, this proverb answers you plain
Look not on the meat, but look on the man
Now look ye on me and say what ye can

No lover nor loved Nay for a time love may puff up a thing
But lackyng fode and sleep death is the endyng

Lover loved well sir till such time as death approve it
This part of your tale may sleep every whyt
And where ye by absent dyspleasure would
Match with my present pleasure ye seem more bold
Then wise, for those twain be far dyfferent sewer

No lover nor loved. Is not absens of dyspleasure a pleasure

Lover loved. yes in like rate as a post is pleased
which as by no mean it can be dyseased
By dyspleasure present so is it true
That no pleasure present in it can ensew
Pleasures or dyspleasures felyng sensybly
A post ye know well can not feel possybly
And as a post in this case I take you
Concerning the effect of pleasure in hand now
For any felyng ye in pleasu^e endure
More then ye say ye feel in dyspleasure

No lover nor loved. Sir though the effect of your pleasure present
Be more pleasant then dyspleasure absent
yet how compare ye with mine absent pain
By present dyspleasures in which ye remain

Lover loved. My present dyspleasures I know none such

No lover nor loved. Know ye no pain by love little nor much

Lover loved. No.

No lover nor loved. Then shall I show such a thing in this purs
As shortly shall show herein your part the wurs
Now I pray god the devil in hell blind me
By the mass I have left my book behind me
I beseech our lord I never go hens
If I would not rather have spent forty pens
But syns it is thus I must go fetch it
I will not tarry, a sir the devil stretch it

Lover loved. Farewell dawcock

No lover nor loved. Farewell woodcock

Lover loved. He is gone

Loved not loving. Gone ye but he will come again anon

Lover loved. Nay this night he will no more dyssease you
Give judgment hardely even when it please you
which done sith he is gone my self straight shall
Ryghtously between you give judgment fynall
But lord what a face this fool has set here
Till shame defaced his folly so clear
That shame has shamfully in sight of you all
with shame driven him hens to his shameful fall
wherein all though I naught gain by wynnyng
That ought may augment my pleasure in loving
yet shall I wyn thereby a pleasure to see
That ye all shall see the matter pas with me
what though the profit may lightly be lodyn
It greueth a man to be over trodyn
Nay when I saw that his wynnyng must grow
By pain pretending in my part to show
Then wist I well the nody must cum
To do as he did or stand and play mum
No man / no woman / no child in this place
But I durst for judgment trust in this case
All doubt of my pain by his proof by any mean
His ronnyng away has now scrapt out clean
werfore give judgment and I shall return
In place hereby where my dear heart does soiurne
And after salutacion between us had
Such as is mete to make lovers hearts glade
I shall to rejoice her in merry tidings
Declare the hole rabble of this fools lesynges

Here the vyse comes in ro^nyng suddenly about the place among the audyens
with a hye copyn tank on his head full of squybs fyred cryeng water*water / fire
fire / fire / water / water / fire / till the fire in the squybs be spent.
Lover loved. water and fire

No lover nor loved. Nay water for fire I mean

Lover loved. well thanked be god it is out now clean
How came it there

No lover nor loved. Sir as I was going
To fet my book for which was my departing
There chanced in my way a house hereby
To fire which is burned pyteously
But meruelously the people do moan
For a woman they say a goodly one
A ^^ioner who^e in this house burned is
And sho^tyng of the people for help in this
Made me ^^^^^ thither to have done some good
And at a wyndowe thereof as I stood
I thrust in my head and even at a flush
Fire ^lasht in my face and so took my bush

Lover loved. what house?

No lover nor loved. A house painted with red oker
The owner whereof they say is a broker

Lover loved. Then brek heart alas why live I this day
My dear heart is dystroyd life and wealth away

No lover nor loved. what man sit down and be of good chere
Gods body master* woodcock is gone clear
O master woodcock fair mot be fall ye
Of right master woodcock I must now call ye
Maystres stand you here before and rub him
And I will stand here behind and dubbe him
Nay the child is a stepe ye need not rock
Master woodcock master wood wood woodcock
where folk be far within a man must knock
Is not this a pang trow ye beyond the nock
Speak master woodcock, speak parot I pray ye
My leman your lady ey will ye see
My lady your leman one vntertakes
To be safe from fyreby styppyng through a takes

Lover loved. That word I hard but yet I see her not

No lover nor loved. No more do I master woodcock our lord wot

Lover loved. Unto that house where I did see her last
I will seek to see her and if she be past
So that to apere there I can not make her
Then will I burn after and overtake her

The lover loved goes out. No lover nor loved. well ye may burn to gyther for
all this
And do well enough for ought that is yet amys
For gods fake one run after and bast him
It were great pity the fire should wast him
For being fat your knowledge must record
A woodcock well roast is a dyshe for a lord
And for a woodcock ye all must now know him
By matter of record that so does show him
And breuely to bring you all out of dowt
All this have I feyned to bring about
^ym self to conuynce him self even by act
Is he has done here in doing this fact
He takes more thought for this one woman now
Then could I for all in the world I ma^^ ^^^we
which has so shamefully defaced his part
That to return another has he face nor heart
which fene, whiles he and she lose time in kyssyng
Give ye with me judgment a gods blessyng

Lover loved. The proof of my saying at my first enter
That wretch brings now in place in that I leyde
Dyssimblyng man's mind by appearance to be
Thing meanuenyent, which thing as I said
Is proved now true, how was I dysmeyd
By his false facyng the death of my darlyng
whom I thank god is in health and eyleth nothing

No lover nor loved Syn I beseech you of all your dysmaying
what other cause can ye ley then your loving

Lover loved. My loving nay all the cause was your lyeng

No lover nor loved. what had my lie done if ye had not loved

Lover loved. what did my love till your lie was moved

No lover nor loved. By these two questions it seems we may make
your love and my lie to part euenly the stake
Loving and lyeng have we brought now hither
Lovers and liars to ley both to gyther
But put case my lie of her death were true
what excuse for your love could then ensue

Lover loved. If fortune god save her did bring her to it
The fault were in fortune and in love no whyt

No lover nor loved. The hole fault in fortune by my sheth well yt
God send your fortune better then your wit

Lover loved. well sir at extremyte I can prove
The fault in fortune as much as in love

No lover nor loved. Then fortune in like case with love now join you
As I with loving joined lyeng even now
And well they may join all by ought that I se
For each of all three I take like vanyte
But syns ye confess that your part of such pain
Comes half by love, and that it is certain
That certain pains to loved lovers do move
In which the fault in nothing save only love
As dred and ielousy each of which with mo
To your estate of love is a daily fo
And I clear out of love declaryng such show
As in my case no pain to me can grow
I say this consydred has pyth suffycyent
In proof of my part to drive you to judgment

Lover loved. Nay first a few words, sy^ though I confess
That love brings some payue and your case paynses
By mean of your contented ^^yetnes
Yet rha^t^ail pleasures that I posses
Are as far above the case that ye profes
As is my pain in your (...)
Under the pleasures of (...)
Thus wade how ye will one way or other
If ye win one way ye shall lefe another
But if ye mi^nde for end to be brefe
Ieine with me herein for indifferent prefe
A tree ye know well is a thing that has life
And such a thing as never feseth pain or strife
But ever quiet and always contented
And as there can no way be muented
To bring a tree dyspleasure by felinge pain
So no fe^^nge pleasure in it can remain
A h^^s is a thing that has life also
And he ^y felinge felith both wealth and woe
By dryuinge or drawinge al day in the m^^er
Many paynefull journeys has be in hier
But after al those he has always at night
These pleasures following to his great delyght
First fair washed at a river or a weyre
And straight br^ught to a ^^abel warm and fair
Dry rubbyd and chafed from head to he^e
And toryd till he be flyke as an ele
Then he is litt^^d in manner no^^ ^^^
And hey as much as well in his belie
Then prouender has he o^^s pese benes or bread
which feding infelinge as pleasant to his head
As to a covetous man to behold
Of his owue westminster hall full of gold
After which feding he flepeth in quiet rest
Dewring such time as his meat may degest
All this considred a horse or a tree
If ye must those the toue which would ye be

No lover nor loved. when the horse must to labor by our lady

Lever loved. I had lever be a tree then a horse I.

No lover nor loved. But ho^e when he refreth and fylleth his gorge

Lover loved. Then would I be a horse and no tree by saint George

No lover nor loved. But what if he must needs ^^^ke to the tone
which were then best by the mass I can name none

Lover Loved The first case is yours and the next is for me
In case like a tree I may liken ye
For as a tree has life within feling
whereby it felith pleasing not displeasing
And can not be but contented quietly
Even the like case is yours now presently
And as the horse feleth pain and not the tree
Like wise I have pain and no pain have ye
And as a horse above a tree felyth pleasure
So feel I pleasure above you in rate sure
And as the tree felith another and the horse both
Even so pleasure and pain between us twain goes
Sins these two cases so indifferently fall
That your self can judge another for perciall
For indifferent end I think this way best
Of all our reasoning to debar the rest
And in these two cases this one question
To be the issue that we shall join on

No lover nor loved. Be it so

Lover loved. Now are these issues cowched so nie
That both sides I trust shall take end shortly

Lover not loved. I hope and desire the same and syns we
were first hard, we both humbly beseech ye
That we in like wise may have judgment furs^

Lover loved. I grant

No lover nor loved. By the mass and I come best or wurst

Lover loved. Though nature force man styf^y to incline
To his own part in each particular thing!
yet reason would man when man shall determine
Other men's parts by indifferent awarding
Indifferent to be in all his reasoning
wherefore in this part cut out of affec^ion
So that indifferency be direc^ion

No lover nor loved. Contented with that and by ought I espy
we may in this matter take end quickly
Stan we their cases as she did apply them
That we may perceive what is meant by them
He loves vnloued a goodly one
She is loved not louinge of an ugly one
Or in his eye his lover seems goodly
And in her eye her lober seems as ugly
Her most desired angels face he can not see
His most lothely hell hounds face she can not flee
He loves, she abhors whereby presens is
His life, her death* whereby I say even this
Be his feling pains in every degree
As great and as many as he says they be
yet in my judgment by these cases has she
As great and as many feling pains as he

Lover loved. When matter at full is indifferently leyd
As ye in this judgment have leyd this now
what reason the time by me should be deleyd
ye have spoken my thought wherefore to you
In peysing your pains my conscience does allow
A just counterpa^se and thus your pains be
A judged by us twain one pain in degree

Lover not loved. Well sins your conscyens drives you thus to judge
I receive this judgment without grefe or grudge

Loved not loving. And I in like rate, yelding unto you twain
Hearty thanks for this your vndeseruid pain

Lover not loved. Now masters may it please you to declare
As touching their parts of what mind ye are

Loved not louinge. With right good will sir, and sure I suppose
Their parts in few words mate come to point well
The two examples which he did disclose
All errors or doubts do clerly expel
The estate of a tree his estate does tell
And of the horse his tale well understand
Declares as well his case now in hand
For as nothing can please or displease a tree
By any pleasure or displeasue feling
Nor never bring a tree discontent to be
So like case to him not loved nor loving
Love can no way bring pleasing or displeasing
Live women, die women, ^inke women, or swim,
In all he content, for all is one to him
And as a horse has mani painful ^orneis
A lover best loved has pains in like wise
As here has apered by sundry weys
which shows his case in wurst part to rise
But then as the horse feleth pleasure in sise
At night in the stable above the tree
So feleth he some pleasure as far above ye
In some case he feleth much more pleasure then he
And in some case he feleth even as muchelesse
Between the more and the less it seems to me
That between their pleasures no choice is to guess
Wherefore I give judgment in short process
Set the tone pleasure euiu to the the other

No lover nor loved. Womanly spoken maistres by the roodes mother

Lover not loved. Who hears this tale with in different mind
And sees of these twain each one so full bent
To his own part that another in heart can find
To change pleasures with other must needs assent
That she in these words has given right judgment
In affirmance whereof I judge and awarde
Both these pleasures of yours as one in regard

Lover loved. well syns I think ye both without corrupcion
I shall move no matter of interrupcion

No lover nor loved. Nor I but masters though I say naught in this
May I not think my pleasure more than his

Loved not loving. Affeccion unbridled may make us al think
That each of us has done other wrong
But where reason takes place it can not sink
Syns cause to be percial here is none us among
That one head that would think his own wit so strong
That on his judges he might judgment devise
what judge in so judging could judge him wise

Lover loved. well mine estate right well contenteth me

No lover nor loved. And I with mine as well content as ye

Lover not loved. So should ye both likewise be contented
Each other to see content in such degree
As on your parts our judgment has awarded
your neighbor in pleasure like your self to be
Gladly to wish Christ's precept does byndeye
Thus contentacion should always prefer
One man to joy the pleasure of an other

Lover loved. True and contencion may be in like case
All though no health yet help and great relefe
In both your pains for ye having such grace
To be contented in sufferaunce of grefe
Shall by contentacion avoid much myschiefe
Such as the contra^y shall suerly bring you
Pain to pain as paineful as your pain is now
Thus not we four but all the world beside
Knowledge them self or other in joy or pain
Has need of contentacion for a gyde
Having joy or pain content let us remain
In joy or pain of other flee we disdain
Be we content wealth or woo, and each for other
Rejoice in the tone and pity the the other

Lover not loved. Syns such contencion may hardly acorde
In such kind of love as here has been meant
Let us seek the love of that loving lord
who to suffer passion for love was content
whereby his lovers that love for love assent
Shall have in fine above contentacyon
The felyng pleasure of eternal salvation
which lord of lords whose joyful and blessed birth
Is now remembered by time presentyng
This accustomyd time of honest mirth
That lord we beseech in most humble meaning
That it may please him by merciful hearing
Thestate of this audyens long to endure
In mirth, health, and wealth, to grant his pleasure

AMEN.
Prynted by. w. Rastell M. ccccc. xxxiiii.

Cum priuilegio Regali.


