A fourth hundred of Epygrams, Newly invented and made by John Heywood.

LONDINI. Anno Christi. 1560.

To the reader.
WEre it as parellous to deal cards at play,
As it is quarellous to deal books this day,
One and forty men, among one and fyfty,
Would flee one and thirty, to flee one unthrifty*
And yet cards so dealt should have, in reuealyng,
Foredeale of books in this hard time of dealyng.
Cards be tooted on but on the tone side:
Books on both sides: in all places porde and pride.
Not to content, but to contend, upon spyall
Of least tyttle, that can come in trial.
If the best writer to write be much afraid,
More may I (the woorst) by fearful fear be stayde.
And were not this one thing, fear should stay me so,
That book or ballet, I never durst write mo.
In all my simple writing never meant I,
To touch any pryuate person displeasantly.
Nor none do and touch here: by name, but only one,
Which is my self: whom I may be bold upon.
This meant in my making, syns proof does declare,
I pray you readers to scan this, by this square.
As I, for mirth, myryly did make it,
So you, in mirth, myryly will take it.
FINIS.
The table.
OF weenyng and wottyng. 1. Of a man of law and his clyentes. 2. An aduyce
against mockyng. 3. Of Itchyng and smartyng. 4. Of a sharp tunge. 5. Of a
horse. 6. Of a butler and a horse. 7. Of Brass. 8. Of a louces dwelling place.
9. Of a strange glass. 10 Of a dryuyng and drawyng. 11. Of long suits. 12.
Of lightness. 13. Of a disagreement. 14* Of cheapyng of contes. 15. Of a wife
having child. 16. Of a bachiler and a maid. 17. Of short payment. 18. Whence
certain things came first. 19 Of furred and lyned gowns. 20. Of a wine
drawer. 21. Short checkes between a man and his wife. 22 Of a woman dekte in
two colors. 23. Of unsweet breath. 24 Of clyppyng and clensyng. 25. Of a man
and his wives departing. 26. ^n accounte of a man's children. 27. Of a woman of
Huntington. 28. Of a laundres. 29. Of a cutter of purslane. 30. Of one that
stands in his own conceit. 31. Of one that hard without ears, 32, Of an
archers rouyng, 33. Of peril to one by the number of three. 34. Of Gloria
patri. 35. Of a Diar. 36. Of a Judge. 37. Of the three cups. 38. Of Brass
and Iron. 39. Of Jack and John. 40. Of wrestlyng. 41. Of pride. 42. Of one
hanged. 43. Of a dettar. 44. Of ^ouyng of a goose. 45. Of harp strings. 46.
Of Fortune. 47. Of choice. 48. Of a false brag. 49. Of lying and true saying.
50. Of a dawe pate. 51. Of water and wine. 52. Between dogs and a dear. 53.
Of twelve and one. 54. Of verdingales. 55. Precepts of a man to his wife. 56.
Of a man expert. 57. Of deliverance from ill. 58. Of cuttyng of the herb time.
59. Of one fearyng the swette. 60. Of one thynkyng on an other. 61. Of one
being at a point. 62. Of Testons. 63. Of red Testons. 64. Of stampyng. 65. Of
John long the carier. 66. Of turnyng. 67. Of master Carter. 68. Of going
far. 69. How money is made lame. 70. Of an old wooer. 71. Of a young wooer.
72. Of weakness and strength. 73. Warnyng of pride. 74. Of patience. 75. Of
pleasyng. 76. Of a handgoon and a hand. 77. Of Brass and Silver. 78. A
difference between wise men and fools. 79. Of a pythye wit. 80. Of choice to
be a wise man or a fool. 81. Of a knights carterly collar. 82. Of males and
male horses. 83. A man discommended. 84 Of runnyng. 85. Of pollyng. 86. Of
plate lent forth. 87. Of a man of law and his wife. 88. Of pens and pence.
89. Of a woman's thin tunge, 90. Of drynkyng to a man. 91. Of runnyng at
Tylte. 92. Of expense. 93. Of fraiyng of babes: 94. Of reeds and oaks. 95. Of
biyng a mortar. 96. Of a stepmother. 97. Of a liar. 98. Of tunges and pynsons.
99. Of Heywood. 100.
FINIS.
Epigrammes.
Of weenynge and wottinge. 1.
Wise men in old time, would ween the^ selves fools.
Fools now in new time, will ween the^ selves wise.
Ween wise, and wot wise differ in wise schools:
To ween them selves wise, when fools so deuyse,
As foolyshe as frutelesse, is thenterpryse.
This case is thus adiudgde, in wisdoms school:
who weenth him self wise, wisoome wotth him a fool.
Made by John Heywood to these fools euerychone,
And made of John Heywood, when he weenth him self none.
Of a man of saw and his clientes. 2.
Twenty clientes to one man of law,
For counsel in twenty matters did draw.
Ethe one praiyng at one instant to speed,
As all at once would have speed to proceed.
Friends all (quod the learned man) i will speak with none,
Till one barber have shaven all, one by one.
To a barber they went all together:
And being shaven, they returnde again thither.
Ye have (quoth the lawyer) taryde long hence.
Sir (quoth one) twenty could not be shaven sense*
Of one barber, for ye well understand,
One barber can have but one shauyng hand.
Nor one lawier (quoth he) but one talkyng tung
Learn clientes this lesson of this lawier sprung.
Like as the barber, one after one must shave,
So clyentes of counsailours, counsel must have.
An advise against mockyng. 3.
Use to thy true freende no derision.
If thy freende spy it, he takth it poison.
Though thy friend dissemble thespyall clearly,
Yet spyde in a freende, it touches him nearly.
Tellyng thy freende his fault, mockyng him not,
If he thank the not, then is he a sot.
Of itchynge and smartynge. 4.
Ytchyng and smartyng, both towch us at quick.
When we ytche, we scratch: when we smart, we kick.
But in our kyckyng at our present smarte,
Let us consider our former desarte.
Of a sharp tunge. 5.
Wife, I perceive thy tunge was made at Egeware.
Ye sir, and yours made at Raylye, hard by their.
Of a horse. 6.
A Tylte horse, alias a beer horse to be,
Which woludst thou be? a beer horse I say to thee.
When the horse is seen cheerely to draw the beer,
He is so praysde, that he may be proud to here.
At Tylte when the horse runthe as fast as he can,
All cry well run, not to the horse, to the man.
And if the horse fall with the man ouerlade,
Then cry they all, a vengeance on that lame jade.
Of a butler and a horse. 7.
The butler and the beer horse both be like one.
They draw beer both: that is a truth to bide one.
Both draw beer in deed, but yet they dyffer Ione:
ye butler drawth and drinkth beer, the horse drinkth none.
Of brass. 8.
I perceive well now that brass is waxen proud,
Because brass so much with silver is aloude.
And being both toynde, sins they most by brass stand,
That makth brass bold, to stand on the upper hand.
Of a louces dwellinge place. 9.
Were thou a louce and should chose one dwelling place,
Whether woldst thou dwell, having choice in this case,
In men's bygge breeches, or in women's thick ru^^es?
I would be, both for the places and stuffes,
In summer with women, in winter with men.
In summer the woman's neck pleasant then,
In winter the man's breeche is close and warm.
Large walks for lyse to walk warm without harm.
Galeries, gable ends, chambers, parlers, halles,
Cold froste to defend, a dosen double walls.
some seeld, some hanged, some did, some painted, some staind,
Rents of all syse, great and small rentes retaind.
And when by louce bytyng, the leg is itchyng,
The bars of men's breeches have such strong stitching,
Such bolstring, such broydryng, let men stare and stamp,
The louce is as safe there, as he were in a camp.
In winter I say these breeches are alone.
But then in summer let the louce thens be gone,
For fear of a plague: if he then thither get,
A thousand to one, he shall dye of the swette.
Of a strange glass. 10.
Good god what a glass to vewe is this?
See what an unsightly sight here is.
Great promise, small performance.
Great countenance, small continuance.
Great wynnyng, small saving.
Great hopyng, small having.
Great hyues, small honey.
Great purses, small money.
Great gappes, small bushes.
Great spears, small pushes.
Great wine, small water.
Great words, small matter.
Great botome, small brinke.
Great brewyng, small drink.
Great rent, small place.
Great space, small grace.
Great dryfte, small shyfte.
Great gift, small thryfte,
Great watchyng, small catchyng.
Great patchyng, small matchyng.
Great blood, small brute.
Great flowers, small fruit.
Great wooddes, small oaks.
Great staves, small strokes.
Great hens, small eggs.
Great hose, small legs.
Great study, small art.
Great dysyre, small desarte.
Great geuyng, small taking.
Great marryng, small making.
Great ships, small saylyng.
Great loss, small auaylyng.
Great markyng, small myndyng.
Great seeking, small fyndyng.
Great lawyng, small loving.
Great sturryng, small mouyng.
Great sowyng, small growyng.
Great trowyng, small knowing.
I trow so great ill, and so small good,
In one glass together, never stood.
Of driuyng and drawing. 11.
If thou must be forste forth to take journey quick,
whether woldst you be driven forth, or drawn forth dicke?
I would be driven forth Jack: for as does appear,
Drawyng and hangyng draw vengeable near.
I think it less ill Jack, having choice in scope,
To be driven with the whyp, then drawn to the rope.
Of long suits. 12.
Suits hang half a year in Westminster hall,
At Tyburne, half an hours hangyng ends all.
Of lightness. 13.
Nothing is lighter then a feather, Kytte,
Yes climme: what light thing is that? thy light wit.
Of a disagreement. 14.
Each one man welnie falth out with another,
And likewise each thing disagreeth with other.
Namely malte and water, these two things are
So far fallen a sunder, by scornful square,
That no bruer, be he lusty or lyther,
Dare cou^h malte and water, in house together.
But chiefly sour water now bears such sway,
That, sweet malt from brewhouse, water driuth away.
Of cheapnyng of Conies. 15.
Jane thou sellst sweet conies in this pultry shop:
But none so sweet as thy self, sweet conye moppe.
What is the price of thee? forsooth she told,
At what price so ever my self shall be sold,
Strange is the hearing, for ware or for monye,
To hear a woodcocke cheapen a conye.
Of a wife having child. 16.
My wife has a child now at four score and ten.
At four score and ten years? nay friend, nay: what then?
At four score and ten quarters of a year I meant.
Meant ye so? and I meant years. by which extent
Your wife might seem your mother: but now I smell,
You may seem your wives father wonderfoole well.
Of a bachiler and a maid. 17.
Is that bachiler a woer to that maid?
The commons common so: tys commonly said,
Where dwelth that bachiler? wide a bow of brydewel.
Where dwelth that maid? at broken wharfe: very well.
Of short payment. 18.
Thy dettar will pay the shortly: shortly?
He will make that short lie, a long lie, dread I.
whence certain things came first. 19.
Whens come great breeches? from little wittam.
Whens come great ruffes? from small brainfoorth they came.
Whens come these round verdingales? from square thrift
Whens come deep copped hattes? from shallow shift.
Whens come brawdred gardes? from the town of evil.
Whens come vncomde staryng heads? from the devil.
Whens come these women's scarfs? from folly John.
Whens come their glittering spangs? from much wa^ton.
Whens come perfumde gloves? from Curiositee.
Whens come fine trapt moyles? from superfluitee.
Whe^s come cornde crooked toes? from short shape^ shoone.
Whens come wild hie lookers? from mid somer moon.
Whens come fair painted fares? from painters tools.
Whens come all these? from the vicar of sainet fools.
Of furred and lyned gowns. 20.
Thick furd gowns worn in so^mer, show bare worn threedes.
Thin linde gowns worn in winter, com from S. needs.
Of a wine drawer. 21.
Drawer, thy wine is even with thee now I see:
Thou persyste the wine, and the wine persith thee.
Short checkes between a man and his wife. 22.
I am careful to see thee carlesse, Iyll:
I am woeful to see the wytles, Will.
I am anguishte to see the an ape, Iyll:
I am angry to see the an ass Will.
I am frettyng to see the fly from me, Iyll:
I am sorry to see the seek to me, Will.
I am mad to see the mate thy husband, Iyll:
I am sad to see the sklaunder thy wife, Will.
I am dumpyshe to see the play the drabbe, Iyll:
I am knappyshe to see the play the knave, Will.
Of a woman deckte in two colors, 23.
My honny bes, black and white does set the out net.
Thy here white as perle, thy teeth black as iette.
Of unsweet breath. 24.
Thine unsavory breath lackth salt, beale belsabubbe:
It has taken to much wind in the poudryng tubbe.
Thy breath, hodge, with salt is so sauery to smell,
That no seasonyng lyckour, can season it well.
Of clyppynge and clensynge. 25.
Not clyppyng your beards, why clyp you your nails?
Not kombyng your heads, why wype you your tails?
These being superfluous things every chone,
Kombe, clip, or cleanse all: or clip or cleanse none.
Of a man and his wives departing. 26.
Wife I will go abroad. will ye take the pain?
Beete: but when the devil will ye come in again?
Makst thou me a devil? nay then be out of dout,
The devil will come in, when the devils da^me goth out.
An accounte of a man's children. 27.
Wife, of ten babes between us by increase grown,
Thou say I have but nine. no mo of y^our own.
Of all things encresyng, as my conscience lythe,
The parson must needs have the tenth for the tithe.
Of a woman of Huntington. 28.
Where dwelst thou Sys? I dwell at huntington now.
Like so, for thou lookst like a new hunted sow.
Where dwelst thou Sym? at hammer smith dwell I.
A meet soil for thee? for hammer head is hard by.
Of a laundres. 29.
A like laundres to the, never saw I.
Thy clothes washte but once a week commonly,
Thy self washte once in an hour usually.
And yet each weeks end does this thus try,
Thy clothes ever wette, thy self ever dry.
Of a cutter of purslane. 30.
This herb purslane thou cutst pretily I see:
But to cut a purse in a lane, none like thee.
Of one standing of his own conceit. 31.
He stands well in his own conceyte each man tells.
So had he need, for he standth in no man's else.
Of one that hard without ears. 32.
I see men hear, though they ears have none.
Thou doste hear me speak, thine ears being gone.
Of an archers rouyng. 33.
What a shot shootes he with a rouyng arrowe?
Still he hyttes the mark, be it wide or narrow.
Where shoots this sharp shooting archer most, will?
He shoots most at rouers on shooters hill.
Of peril to one by the number of three. 34.
In thy hand I see, thy fortune shall be such,
That the number of three shall danger the much.
Three bedfelowes in thy bed shall displease thee,
Three lie in thy bumme breeche shall often disease thee:
Three cups full at once shall often dysguyse thee,
Three bearers of thee home shall often dispyse thee:
Three drynkes, wine, ale, and beer, shall ouerflowe thee,
Three wrestlers in one sign shall overthrow thee:
Three wives in three years shall wondersly wear thee,
Three she bears those three years, shall al to tear thee:
But in things numbered by three, above all these,
B^^s thee three thousand times, from frame of three treese.
Of Gloria patri. 35.
Dicke, I marvel much, why in every plat,
Gloria patri standth before Sicut erat.
Tom, Gloria patri is a gentylman:
In pleasant speech, speak so sweetly no tunge can.
Sicut erat is a churl so rude and plain,
That to hear him speak, all degrees do disdain.
Of a dyar. 36.
Is thy husband a diar woman? alack,
Had he no color to die the on but black?
Dies he often? ye, to often when customers call,
But I would have him one day, die once for all.
Were he gone, diar would I never mo wed.
Diars be ever diyng, but never ded.
Of a Jugge. 37.
Pot him Jack: pot him Jack? nay pot him Judge.
To pot the drunkarde, the Judge is the dugge.
Of the three cups. 38.
Whers thine In John? at the three cups in bredstrete Ihone.
At three cups in breadstrete? well let bread alone.
At those three cups when ever thou dines or suppes,
Ere thou go to bed, thou have in all thy cups.
Of brass and Jron. 39.
Brass and old Iron who brought those two together?
Brass thinks storne to see them brought so hither.
Old Iron is rousty and rotten to vewe,
Brass with silver fair blauncht and polyshte new:
Otherwise.
Brass said to old Iron with brass perkyng late,
Back ye kancred karle, ye be not my mate.
(...) brass (quoth Iron) plainnes is most talowe.
I show as I am: and so do not thou.
Of Jacke and John. 40.
Jack and John in degree dyffer far brother.
Jack dawe is one, master John dawes is another.
Of wrestlinge. 41.
Where we wrestled by couples, we wrestle alone:
And shall, till time our shakeled breeches be gone.
In steppyng and strydyng it is a wunder,
How we wrestle to get our legs a sunder.
Of pride. 42.
If thou wylt needs be proud, mark this friend mine:
Of good deeds be not proud: they are not thine.
But when thou plaist the knave in ill deeds grown,
Be proud of those ill deeds: they are thine own.
Of one hanged. 43.
What fault had he done that was hangde yesterday?
Of any fault done by him I can naught say.
Two or three two penny tryfles were laid to him,
But, his fair gay hangde house, man, did undo him.
Here is tyt for tat measure met very trym:
First he ha^gd his house, now his house has hanged him.
Of a dettar. 44.
Does your mastershippe remember your debt to me?
Remember my debt? ye freende, I warrant thee:
I remember it so, that though I say, it,
I Will never forget it, nor never pay it.
Of louinge of a goose. 45.
A goose, green or gray which love thou better?
A green goose: for it is far the swetter.
Love both as thy self, for as proof shewth ryfe,
Thou art and have been a goose, all thy life.
Otherwise.
Thou love a goose to much: ware surfeit elfe.
I never saw goose yet, like thee, love him self.
Of harp stringes. 46.
Which string in all the harp wolost thou still harp on.
Not the base, I will be none vnderlyng, John.
Nor the standing tennor: for styffe standing.
Nor the treble: for fear of to hye hangyng.
Nor the counter tennor: for countryng to long.
Upon what harp string then woldst you harp thy song?
Above all stryngs, when we shall fall to harpyngs,
The harp stryng to harp on, is the mean harp stryng.
Of Forrune. 47.
Take thy fortune as it faith, some advises:
But I would feign take fortune as it rises.
Of choice. 48.
Choice is good in most things folk say, in which choice,
For choice of one of two things, thou may rejoice:
No man alive like thee frank choice can have,
To play the knauyshe fool, or the foolyshe knave.
Of a false brag. 49.
I was never but an honest man.
Put out that but, and thou say truth than.
Of liyng and true saying. 50.
Wife, the people are disposed all to lie:
For thou art commended, universally.
Nay sir: the people to tell truth, are all bold,
For you are discommended of young and old.
Of a dawe pate. 51.
Thou art a very dawe pate, as ever I saw.
Sir, in deed the pate is chief part of a dawe:
For when dawes shall appear in any cost,
Of al those dawes parts, their dawe pates be most.
Of water and wine. 52.
Thou makst curtsy to wash hands with water of mine.
Making no curtsy to wash thy mouth with my wine.
But I pray the make this change in this matter:
More curtsy at my wine, and less at my water.
Between dogs and a dear. 53.
Set malles aside: said a bucke to a greyhounde.
Beware of pride: said that dog to that dear.
Be pacient in trouble: a hounde said round,
Loving advise to this dear this did appear.
In which counsel given, to kill him they run near.
Which counsel amounth to this every man sees,
Comfort him with their tunges, kill him with their teeth.
Of twelve and one. 54.
It is twelve a clock: sir tys more, well ny one.
Is one more then twelve? that's a reason alone.
Sir when the day to after noone does amounte,
One is more then twelve, by our sextens accounte.
Of verdingales. 55.
Alas poor verdingales must lie in the street:
To house them, no door in the city made meet.
^yns at our narow doors they in can not wyn,
^end them to Oxforde, at Brddegates to get in.
Precepts of a man to his wife. 56.
Stand still wife, I will:
Be still wife, I nyll.
Now bark wife, I will.
To warke wife, I nyll.
Prove me wife, I will:
Love me wife, I nyll.
Now chat wife, I will:
Leave that wife, I nyll.
Keep chair wife, I will:
Speak fair wife, I nyll.
Of a man expert. 57.
Is he such an expert man? an expert man?
Put out that ex, and no man more expert than.
Of deliverance from ill. 58.
Wife, from al evil, when shall thou delivered be?
Sir, when I (said she) shall be delivered from thee.
Of cuttyng of the herb time. 59.
All times of the day to night from the pryme,
Thou gardner will not leave cuttyng of time.
Thou wylt never leave cuttyng of time, I see,
Tyall such time, as time, shall in time cut of thee,
Of one fearing the swette. 60.
Sweatyng sickness so fearst thou beyond the mark,
That winter or summer thou never sweatst at warke.
Of one thinkinge on an other. 61.
When does your mastershyppe think on me? ever.
When do you think upon my matter? never.
Me ye remember, my matter ye forget:
Remembrance and forgetfulness, is wrong set.
For I would wyshe you rather, if it might be,
To remember my matter, and forget me.
Of one being at a point. 62.
Is he at a point with his creditors? ye.
For he is not worth a point they all see.
Of Testons. 93.
Testones be gone to Oxforde, god be their speed:
To study in Brasennose there to proceed.
Of read Testons. 64.
These Testons look read: how like you the same?
Tys a token of grace: they blushe for shame.
Of stampyng. 65.
We sta^pe crabs, we stamp testo^s: which sta^ping done,
We stare upon Testons now beyond the moon.
Which stampyng of Testons brought it not some skyll,
Our staryng on Testons could judge them but ill.
But as the whot sun melts snow away,
So shall whotte fire melt cold Testons, as folk say.
We, for Testyons leauyng scoldyng and squaryng.
And on Testons leauyng stampyng and staryng.
Of John long the carier. 66.
Of what length is John long the caryer prat?
A quarter of a year long. how prouest thou that?
Thertene wekes past he should have brought me a wat:
But yet long John, John long: with that wat comth not.
Whereby I John Short, am as short to compare,
As John long by this length is long to declare.
For as John long lurkth to long this wat to fet,
So I John short leap to short this wat to get.
Of turninge. 67.
Will thou use turners craft still? ye by my trowth.
Much thrift and most surety in turners craft growth.
Half turn or whole turn, where turners be turning,
Turnyng keeps turners from hangyng and burning.
Of master Carter. 68.
Is that gentleman's name master earter? ye.
How his name and conditions differ now se.
So cunnyng, so cumly, so curteise, so kind,
So gentle a gentleman in each man's mind:
That all men are stryken in pytyfull wunder,
To see master carter and the carte asunder.
Of going far. 69.
As he gothe far that never does turn him back,
So ghost thou far wide: thou never turnst again.
Where you go, or what thou doste, come luck come lack,
Thy self or thy matters forth they go amayne.
To turn again no counsel can the restrain.
Except thy will shall show thy wit in the wane,
Find means to take a house in turn again lane.
How money is made lame. 70.
Money, with covetousness thou do rest so,
That lack of use does lame thee: thou can not go.
With prodigalitee thou trudgest so fast,
That excess of to much exercise, does lame the at last.
These two being lame letts of extremitees,
Where woldst thou be lotted to be from both thees?
With lyberalitee would I be the mean.
With lyberalitee? nay he is gone clean.
Of an old wooer. 71.
Lady I love you, in way you to wed:
But mine age with your youth disagreeth so,
That if I speak: I think not to be sped.
Your age in your suit, is no whyt your fo,
To your years many, had ye many mo.
We would wed the sooner by years, showyng plain,
That I should the sooner be vnwed again.
Of a young wooer. 72.
I brought the late an old rich wydowe to woo:
who^ you might have had, but naught woldst thou the^ do:
Nor naught can thou do now: thrift and thou art od.
For now lies she speechles at mercy of god.
For the mercy of god bring me now to her:
I never saw meet time: till now, to woo her.
Of weakness and strength. 73.
Weakness and strength, here showst thou both in preefe,
Thou art a weak man, and yet a strong thief.
Warninge of pride. 74.
Beware of pride, say thou to me.
Let pride, say I, beware of thee.
In every place thou do so watch him,
That if pride stir, thou wylt sure catch him.
Of patience. 75.
Be pacient in trouble. how can that be?
Sins out of trouble nothing pleases thee.
Of pleasynge. 76.
Be glad to please, yea be glad to please brother.
But whom? please thy self, see thou please none other.
Of a hand goonne and a hand. 77.
Thou have a good handgoonne: but what is thy hand?
When thou shootst of, out of danger to stand,
No standing more sure in any place or plat,
Then to stand close to the mark thou shootst at.
Of brass and silver. 78.
Brass has been alofte, with silver set up.
Come down brass and drink on an ashen cup.
Of difference between wise men and fools. 79.
Between wise men and fools, among things many
This one differth. when both sorts get things any,
Which to their pleasures are pleasantly alloud,
Of those things wun, wise me^ are glad, fools be proud.
Of a pithie wit. 80.
Good god, what a pythy wit have thou dicke?
The pyth of thy words so deep and so trick,
Thy words so pythyly pearse to the quick,
Pyth of no woodrs against thy words may kycke,
No more then the pyth of a goonstone may prycke,
Against the pythy pyth of an elder stycke.
Of choice to be a wise man or a fool. 81.
A wise man or a fool: if thou must be one,
Which woldst thou be in winter, John? a fool Ihone.
Where best men in winter sit next fire from cold,
^here sta^des the fool warm while all his tales be told.
Which woldst thou be in summer, when winter is gone?
A fool. a fool, why? that why showth hereupon.
In summer when states sit from fire in the cool,
At that boordes end in cool air there stands the fool.
Winter and summer what time men must to wurke,
Which woldst thou be? a fool to look on and lurk.
All times of the year for one thing or other,
Better be a fool then a wise man brother.
Of a knights carterly collar. 82.
I had this carter bring my collar of gold:
And he bryngth me my horse collar, hold knave hold.
Sir if I may speak my thought without fearyng,
This collar of both showthe best for your wearyng.
of males and male horses. 83.
Of all horse, a male horse would I not be.
Where he erst bare one male, now berth he three.
Those are one behind and one on each side,
The man, who on the male horse does ride,
Werth on each leg, one male. for his sloppes are:
Each one sloppe one male (kyndely to declare.)
Long, round, wide, weighty as a male each one.
But all horse are now male horses euerychone.
For every one horse, bearth two males at least.
Of male horse and male men, friends hearse a feast.
A man discommended. 84.
Not once a year ought seen in the to allow.
Not once a year thy knee to god do thou bow.
Not once a year openest thou thy lyppes to pray.
Not once a year showste thou goodness any way.
Not once a year geuste thou alms to the pore,
Not once a year do thou repent thee therefore.
But all times a year thou woldst all understood,
Thou never do repent, but when thou do good.
Of runnynge. 85.
In pooste haste run hooreson run. art thou here yet?
Shall I run out of breath? nay run out of thy wit.
Of pollinge. 86.
Our heads grow to long, god give our barbers curses.
Our barbers polle no heads, our barbers polle purses.
Of plate sent forth. 87.
Where is thy plate? lent out to a marriage.
Whither? to saint needs. to whom? to master gage.
Of a man of low and his wife. 88.
You being a pleader at law exelente,
Yet has your wife brought you to an exigente.
Pray her to let fall thaction at law now,
Or else, so god help me, she will outlawe you.
Of pens and pence. 89.
Pens and pence, differ far in proporcion.
The penny flat and round, the pen straight and long.
And yet for aids, in case of extorcion,
Pens and pence are like in woorkyng of wrong.
Of a woman's thin tung. 90.
I never saw wife like thine for this thing: dicke,
Her tung wondrous thin, and her speech wondrous thick.
Tom, I have spent much in vain since she was young,
To have her thick speech as thinhe as her tongue.
It is the tunge of tunges: dicke, for runnyng round:
I take the tyype for silver: by the shryll sound.
It has, Tom, a shaking sharp sound in the ear,
But it is no silver, would god it wear.
Of drinkyng to a man. 91.
I drink to the John, nay thou drinkst from me Ihone.
When you drinkst to me, drink for me thou leuest none.
Of runninge at Tylte. 92.
We apply the spygot, till tubbe stand a tylte.
Ye, ren at the spygot tylt, leave the spear tilte you will.
Of expense. 93.
What may he spend? ten pound a year he might spe^de.
Is It morgagde? nay: no man will one penny lend
Upon it. is it sold? nay, no man will bye it.
Then he holdth it: nay, he can not come nigh it.
Why fool? how may he spend ten pound by year than?
I said not he may, but he might spend it man.
Meaning he might spend it, if he had it.
O, if he had it: a sir the devil mad it.
Of fraying of babes. 94.
When do mothers fray their babes most from duggs.
When they put on black scarfs, and go like bear buggs.
of reeds and oaks. 95.
Will you reeds at the winds will still make low beckes?
will you oaks stand stiff still while wind break your necks?
Will you reeds, like apes, still tucke and bow each joint?
Will you oaks, like asses, still stiff at one point?
Will you reeds be still bendyng bowyng bodies?
Will you oaks be still stout stiff necked nod^es?
Will you reeds be staggeryng still for vain auailes?
Will you oaks be stern still til your tops kiss your tails?
Will you reeds shrink still to all wyndes towardly?
Will you oaks swell still at all wyndes frowardly?
Will you reeds crouch still to be the winds footestooles?
Will you oaks crake still to be the winds head fools?
Oaks will do as we have done. so will we reeds.
Wherein for our purpose mark what end proceeds.
In each one storm a thousand oaks down are blown,
In a thousand storms not one reed overthrown.
Of biyng a mortar. 96.
That spyce mortar to sell it be you wyllyng?
Yea mistres: what is the price? ten shyllyng.
Ten shyllyng? freende: I am hither entysed
To bye a spyce mortar, not a mortar spysed.
Of a stepmother. 97.
Thy fathers second wife, thy step mother,
For a step mother there is not such an other.
At three steps I saw her step, syns she was wed,
From a stayre foot, straight up to thy fathers head.
Of a liar. 98.
Where does Frances fabler now lie, Jane?
At sign of the whetstone in double tunge lane.
He lies by night: and by day daily he
Lies down right, in what place so ever he be.
That he lies still day and night, this thing does try,
He never speaks word but it is a lie,
Of tunges and pynsons. 99.
One difference this is, on which our tunges may carpe,
Between pinching pynsons, and tauntyng tunges sharp.
Where these two nyppers nyp any whyere or when,
Those pinsons nyp dead things, those tunges nyp quick men.
Of Heywood. 100.
Art thou Heywood with the mad merry wit?
Ye forsooth master, that same is even hit.
Art thou Heywood that applies mirth more the^ thrift?
Ye sir, I take merry mirth a golden gift.
Art thou Heywood that has made many mad plays?
Ye many plays, few good works in all my days.
Art thou Heywood that has made men merry long?
Ye: and will, if I be made merry among.
Art thou Heywood that would be made merry now?
Ye sir: help me to it now I beseech you.
FINIS.
IMPRINTED AT London in Fleetestrete in the house late Thomas Berthelettes.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.


