THE MIRROR OF pure Devotion: OR, THE DISCOVERY of Hypocrisy. Delivered in
six several Sermons, in the Cathedral Church of Chichester, by way of an
exposition of the parable of the Pharisee and the Publican.

By R. B. Preacher of the Word, at Chidham in the County of Sussex,

1 Corinthians. 2. 14. The natural man perceives not the things of the Spirit of
God: for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they
are spiritually discerned. Verse 15. But he that is spiritual discerns all
things: yet he himself is judged of no man. Aut appare quodes, aut esto quod
appares.

LONDON, Printed by John Legatt, for Richard Thrale, dwelling at the
Cross^-^eyes by Paul's gate. 16^5.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL, RIGHT worthy, and his much honored Mecaenas William Drury
Esquire, one of the Gentlemen of His Majesty's most honorable Privy Chamber,
all increase of temporal, with endless succession of eternal happiness.
Iamque opus exegi.
AS Ovid concludes his Poetry, so may I begin my Divinity. I am at length
delivered of that birth, which mine unfeigned zeal to Gods glory, mine humble
service to his Church, and my respective observance unto your worship, have
been this many years conceiving in me; and whereof neither the barrenness
of the womb, nor the hardness of the travel, nor the unskilfulnesse of the
midwife, nor the rough handling of some ill disposed Gossips, could (being so
graciously assisted by the Almighty) make me miscarry. How timely and comely
the fruit may be, the predominant End I aim at (the glory of God) gives me
sufficient boldness; and the two subordinates (my service in general to the
Church, in particular to your worship) give me sufficient encouragement to
present it to the eye of the world: wherein if it shall find but churlish
entertainment, I shall not marvel. I know sufficiently the world cannot brook
its nature: the discovery of an hypocrite or a Pharisee deserves no less then
a Crucifige at the worlds hands, that is so full fraught with both. But I know
again there be some in the world, that are called out of the world, because
they are not of the world, that will bid my child good welcome; such as lean
neither to the right hand of Schism, nor the left of heresy, but worship the
Father in spirit and in truth: amongst which small number your worship is well
noted and approoved, for sincere and eminent. To these therefore under your
worships protection, I desire to commend my first fruit with Saint John's
blessing, in his 1. Epist. 4. 4. Little babe, thou art of God, and therefore
thou shall overcome the world, for greater is he that is in thee, then he that
is in the world. So he, that is in thee, keep thee in him; and he, that has
overcome the world for thee, defend thee from the world, and from the men of
the world, whose teeth are spears and arrows, and their tongue a sharp
sword. And the God of peace tread Satan under thy feet shortly. Amen.

Your Worships, in all humble and true-hearted observance, always to be
commanded in the Lord Jesus. TO: BALL.

THE MIRROR OF PVRE DEVOTION: OR, THE DISCOVERY OF HYPOCRISY.
Luke 18. ^. Also he spoke this parable unto certain, which trusted in
themselves that they were just (or righteous) and despised others.
OUR Blessed Savior, (having in the former part of this Chapter, most
powerfully exhorted, and persuaded his disciples to the undeniable and
never-ceasing importunity of Faith, by a resemblance traduced from an
importunate widow and almost inexorable Judge,) begins now to draw them to
humility of heart in confession of sin by a parable of two men, a Publican
become the son of God, and a Pharisee the servant of Mammon. Better is a
penitent offender, then a presumptuous justiciarie: for, in that the one
humbles himself, he is no longer an offender, Every valley shall be
exalted; and in that the other swells with an imaginary opinion of
selfe-conceited purity he is no longer righteous; Every mountain and hill
shall be brought low. Esa 40. 4.


It was long since rung in the ears of curiosity, presuming to Eras. Ap.
out-reach humane capacity, (...). That God every day pluckes down high
things and life's up base things. Our God is in heaven (says David) and does
whatsoever pleases him. As God judges not after the outward appearance like
unto man, so his proceedings are quite contrary to the course of the world;
they grow from a little to more, from a base mean there amounts a mighty
matter. The world it self was made of nothing: The eternal Word it self was
compared to a slender grain of mustard seed: Christ himself came out of
Galile a contemptible city: and here a penitent Publican is justified rather
then a presumptuous Pharisee. But the course of the world is altogether
retrograde; like Ahaz his dial, it runs backward, from greater to less, from
ostentation to confusion. Balshazar in his princely royalty at supper; but in
the handwriting upon the wall, he and his Monarchy numbered, weighed, and
divided to others. So here, a fullswollen Pharisee, all glorious in the sight
of his own eyes, but most odious and abominable in the sight of God. The
Saints preferment (it seems) comes neither from the East, nor from the West;
It is the Lord that judges, whose eyes are purity, whose ears jealousy,
Bern.
whose word verity, whose hand equity, and whose days eternity. Invocat
pauper, et exaudit Dominus; flet miserabilis, et flectitur misericors; agnoscit
Publicanus, ignoscit et Christus. The poor man calls upon, and the Lord listens
unto; the miserable man mournes, and the merciful God is moved; the sinner
confesses, and the Savior forgives. Confessio salus animarum, Amb.
dissipatrix vitiorum, restauratrix virtutum. oppugnatrix Daemonum; quid plura?
obstruit os inferni, aperis portas Paradisi. The confession of sins is the
saving health of souls, the dispersing of vice, the repair of virtue, the
overture of the Devil: What shall I say more (says S. Augustine)? it stops
Aug.
the very gulf of hell, and opens unto us the everlasting doors of Heaven.

The whole Parable depends upon these four Generals. The Preface: The Parable
it self: The Event: And the Application.

The Preface is set down, in this ninth verse:

9. Also he spoke this parable to certain that trusted in themselves that they
were just, (or righteous) and despised others.

The Parable it self, in the 10, 11, 12, and 13. verses.

10. Two men went up into the Temple to pray: the one a Pharisee. and the other
a Publican.

11. The Pharisee stood, and prayed with himself thus, God I thank thee, that
I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or even as that
publican.

12. I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all that I possess.

13. But the Publican standing afar off, would not lift up so much as his
eyes to heaven: but smote his breast saying; O God, be merciful to me a sinner.

The event, in the former part of the 14. verse.

14. I tell you this man departed to his house justified rather then ^^^ the
other.

The Application in the latter part of the same verse:

For every one that exalts himself shall be brought low, and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

The Preface admits of a threefold Quaere. The first is, what may be the
meaning or signification of the word Parable? The second is, what may be the
reason, why our Savior so often in the Gospel spoke unto the people by
parables? The third and last is, what may be the occasion, why he spoke and
delivered this parable? which appears by the Text, to be a discovery of three
gross corruptions in certain of his auditors. The first was a presumptuous
selfconfidence by reason of a fond conceit of merit in their own works; They
trusted in themselves. That presumptuous selfeconfidence begat an arrogant
conceit of inherent righteousness; that they were just. And that arrogant
conceit of inherent righteousness hatched the third generation of the viper,
That they vilified and despised others.

Also he spoke a parable to certain that trusted in themselves, that they
were just (or Righteous) and despised others.

The first, Quaene leads us to the Etymology, or signification of the word
Parable; which is taken either in the worser, or in the better part.

When it is taken in the worser part, it signifies a byword, a word of
reproach, or a fable. As the Israelites Psalm. 44. 14.
in the Psalm, Posuisti nos (Domine) in parabolam. Thou have ^^ade us, O Lord,
a parable, or a proverb, or a byword amongst the heathen. So the Lord by his
servant Moses threatens a rebellious Deuteronomy 28.
people, that They shall become a wonder, a proverb, and a byword amongst all
nations. So that holy man Ioh, complains in Job 17. 6.
the heat of his misery, that God had made him a proverb, or a byword of the
people. And so not only David the type, but the Psalm. 69. 12.
son of David the substance complains, that he became a parable, or a
proverb unto the people, and that the very drunkards made songs upon him.

When it is taken in the better part, it signifies, either some grave and
weighty matter, such as David uttered upon his Harp. Or else Psalm. 49. 4.
some short and sweet sentence, such as Solomon delivers in his Proverbes. Or
else some dark, obscure, or figurative speech, when the truth is wrapped up in
a similitude or a comparison as in a riddle. Thus the Lord commanded the
Prophet Ezechiel to speak a parable Ezekiel. 24. 3.
unto the rebellious house, and say; Prepare a pot, and put water in it, etc.
Ezechiel 24. 3. Under which shadow, is represented both the sin and the
punishment of impenitent Jerusalem. And in this sense our Savior tells his
Disciples. Matthew. 13.
Matthew. 13. That he spoke unto the people by parables, that seeing they might
not see, and hearing they might not hear, neither understand, that the
Prophecy of Isaiah might be fulfilled upon them. And this must needs be the
most genuine and proper signification of the word parable, from the Greek
(...) assimulare: being nothing else (as Thomas Aquinas notes) but Sermo
similitudinarius, qui aliud dicit, aliud significat; A comparative or an
Enigmaticall kind of speech, speaking one thing; and signifying another: as it
plainly appears, not only in this, but in all the parables of the Gospel.

The second Quaere leads us to the reason, why our Savior so often in the
Gospel spoke unto the people by parables? which I find to be threefold.

First, for the accomplishment of Scripture-prophecies. This was our Saviors
own reason. Matthew. 13. before mentioned, therefore do I speak to them in
parables, that the prophecy of Isaiah might be fulfilled upon them.

Secondly, for the confirmation of other Scripture-prophecies; to give us to
understand, that Christ spoke not only by the same spirit, but with the very
mouth, and phrase, and language of all the holy Prophets, that ever were since
the world began; whose writings are full of comparisons, similitudes, and
parables.

Thirstly, and lastly: That the mysteries of the Kingdom might be hidden from
the wise and prudent of this world, and only revealed unto babes in Christ:
that to them only might be given to know the secrets of the Kingdom, but to
others in parables. And therefore the holy Scripture is aptly compared by Saint
Gregory unto ^o flumen in que agnus ambukt, and Elepha^ na tet Ep. ad Leand.
a flood, wherein the Lamb may wade, and the Elephant swim. Though parables
are dark mysteries unto the proud and skornefull, yet they are made ^pert and
plain unto the humble and meek. Our blessed Savior in his infinite wisdom
conceived it to be the quaintest, and most profitable kind of teaching, to
instruct the simple people by similies and parables: which being once truly
understood, do mightily delight the understanding, help the memory, move the
will, captivate the affections, cast down the imaginations, and every high
thing, that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity
every thought to the obedience of Christ.

How strangely did Nathans parable wind it self secretly into the heart of
David, convincing him so modestly, and so strongly too, that his own mouth
condemned him to be that man of blood the parable intimated? Our Savior 2 Samuel
12.
caught the Jews in the very same trap by putting a question unto them in the
parable of the Vineyard, and ungracious husbandmen. When the Lord of the Matthew.
21. 20.
Vineyard shall come (says he) what shall he do to these husbandmen. They
themselves replye, and plead themselves guilty in the very answer following.
He will cruelly destroy those wicked men, and let out his Vineyard to others.
Whereupon our Savior inferres most bitterly, but most justly: Therefore I say
unto you, the kingdom of God shall be taken from you.

If Seneca held the use of parables Epist 59.
so necessary to wade through the shallow study of humanity, that he calls
them, Imbecillitatis nostrae adminicula, props and supporters of our
weakness; how much more needful are these bladders to bear us up in the
maine Ocean of Divinity; they may be something windy, but exceeding
profitable: Discentem et audientem in rem praesentem adducunt, (says Seneca):
Plain similitudes, familiar examples, and homely comparisons do force more
doctrine into vulgar apprehensions, then subtle reasons, solid arguments, or
accurate discourses. When every Mechanicke is argued withal in his own
language, every Tradesman in his own occupation, and every country Swain in
the natural dialect of his own barbarism; it must needs inform the
understanding, reform the will, and so mightily edify the whole man, that it
will even pierce through to the dividing asunder of the soul and of the spirit,
of the joints and of the marrow; nay it will dive into the very secret thoughts
and intentions of the heart.

For say, I beseech you; Is not the parable of the hidden treasure abundantly
able, to convince the Usurer in particular? The parable of the fruitless
fig tree, to inform the Gardener? The house built upon the sand, the Mason?
The strong man armed, the Soldier? The lost groat, the Widow? And the lost
sheep, the Shepherd? and each, or all of these abundantly able to instruct
all? What plough-man is there in the world so stupid, but, when he reads the
parable of the Sower, Luke 8. both propounded, and expounded unto him by our
blessed Savior, is able to read unto himself a Lecture of sound Divinity,
and medi^^te with himself thus:

That as himself goes forth into the field to sow his seed; so the Son of
man came once personally into the world to sow the immortal seed of his sacred
Word, in the hearts of believers; and to this very day has left behind him
Ministerial Seeds-men (the Preachers of the Gospel) to dress, and dung, and
to manure his field, and sow his seed. As he himself cannot possibly scatter
his seed so choicely, but some will of necessity fall by the hie-way side,
and so either be trodden under foot of men, or devoured of the fowls of the
Air: some will fall amongst the stones, and then no sooner it springs up, but
withers away again for want of moisture: some will fall amongst thorns, and
so the thorns spring up with it and choke it: It is but the fourth part that
falls upon good ground, that springs up, and bears fruit; some thirty, some
sixty, some an hundred fold.

So the Preachers of the Gospel cannot possibly scatter the good seed of the
Word so choicely, but do what they can, some will fall by the hie-way side
that is, amongst careless, drousie, and negligent hearers, and then it is
either trodden under foot of men, contemned and vilified, or else devoured of
the fowls of the air; that is, the Devil and his instruments steal it out
of the hearts of the hearers, lest they should believe and be saved: some will
fall amongst stones, hard and flinty hearts, where the Word for a time may be
received with joy, but for want of root the people believe for a time, and in
the time of temptation they fall away: some will fall amongst thorns; worldly
and licentious hearers, in whom the cares of the world, and the deceitfulness
of riches, and the lusts of other things do so choke the Word, that it
becomes unfruitful: It is but the fourth part, or scarce that, which falls upon
good ground, that with an honest and good heart, hear the Word, and keep it,
and bring forth fruit with patience. Upon which due, and serious meditation,
he cannot choose but bring the Application of the parable home to himself,
himself then being in the very act of sowing. When he sees three parts of
every handful of temporal seed he sowes, in danger of miscarrying, some
falling by the hieway-side, some amongst stones, and some amongst thorns, he
cannot choose but grieve, and much lament it: oh, how ought it then to perplexe
his soul, and yearne his very bowels to consider the most lamentable
hardness, and intolerable barrenness of his own heart, that receives not the
most precious seed of the Word of God, with any reasonable cheerfulness,
muchlesse returns it with any tolerable fruitfulness. See what lumpes of
divinity lie hid and buried under the very clods of the earth; what profound
Lectures of Divine literature may be read in the very field at plough; so
profitable are those doctrines in Scripture, that are couched by our blessed
Savior under Similies and Parables.

In what a lamentable and dangerous condition then is the stupid Papist in
forbidding, and the negligent carnal Gospeller in forbearing to read the
sacred Scriptures, both building their Babel upon this sandy foundation, That
they are dark mysteries, and obscure parables. Whereupon the Papists some of
them forbid the reading of the Scriptures to the Laytie, as a thing most
dangerous and pernicious for them; being (as they affirm) the root and
seminary of all strife and controversy, the mother and the nurse of all
heresy and faction. Christ commands us to search the Scriptures (...) 19.
for eternal happiness; they countermand it with a Noli me tangere for fear
of heresy. The Spirit of Christ exhorts us to try the spirits whether they be
of God; because many false prophets are come into the world: these spirits
forbid the common people the very touchstone of trial. The spirit of truth
advises Colos. 3. 16.
us to give the Word of God all possible entertainment; not to lodge with us
as a stranger for a night, but to dwell in us plenteously as a continual
In-mate: because it is profitable to teach, to improove, to correct, and to
instruct in righteousness. The spirit of error counsels to bannish it quite
out of our coasts, and in stead thereof to bring in ignorance for the mother of
devotion. The one tells us, it is the peoples instruction; the other tells us, it
is the peoples destruction. The one tells us, it makes the man of God perfect
and absolute; the other tells us, it makes him heretical and dissolute. And so
we may safely conclude with Reverend Wickeliffe and that Jewel of England: To
condemn the Word of God of heresy, is no better then to make God himself an
heretic.

But the very truth is (beloved) the Scriptures make men heretics, no
otherwise then the Sun makes men blind. As nothing is cleerer then the Sun,
and yet nothing harder to be looked into for the weakness of our sight: So
nothing more manifest then the Scriptures in themselves, and yet nothing more
obscure then mysteries therein contained, for that the natural man perceives
not the things of God. Say then, (I beseech you) Is light darkness, because
darkness comprehends it not? Is sweet sour, because some men taste it not?
no more certainly are the Scriptures obscure because some men understand them
not. We deny not then a kind of obscurity to be in the Scriptures, both in
regard of the profunditie of the particular points, and of our disabilitie to
conceive them: but the manner of the deliverie is not obscure in it self, but
familiar and easy to them that have their senses prepared by the holy Ghost to
understand them, and use the means that God has ordained for that end.

Let the wary Protestant then, that would carefully avoid the Papists ginne,
soundly distinguish of these three. The mysteries delivered: the manner of the
deliverie: and the indisposition of the receiver. The things themselves are
mysteries: therefore secret, and involved in diverse difficulties. The
indisposition of our understanding not only dark, but darkness it Ephesians. 5. 8.
self (therefore were they never so clear we could not possibly understand
them, till we were enlightened. But for the manner of the delivery, in it self
it is apert and patent: if any where dark, it is accidentally and from
without. And therefore S. Chrysostom excludes In Ep: ad Coloss.
none from the comfortable use of the Scriptures, but makes general
Proclamation to all sorts of people: Audite quotquot est is mundani, etc.
Hearken all ye men of the world that have wives and children, how S. Paul the
Apostle of Christ, commandes you to read the Scriptures, and that not slightly,
or perfunctorily, but with great diligence. Yea, the same Father is so eager
upon the point, that he does, as it were, force and thrust the Bible into the
peoples hands. Take the Bible into your hands (says he) in your houses at
home. So likewise S. Jerome, most Jerome.
gravely and divinely, urges upon the same place of Scripture, that Laymen
ought to have the Word of God, not only sufficiently, but abundantly; whereby
they may be able to teach, and to counsel others.

But be it granted, that some places of Scripture are obscure and dark: it
were but a fallacy a secundum quid ad simpliciter (as the Logicians call it) to
argue from thence, that the Scriptures are full of darkness: because some are
difficult to some, therefore all are dangerous to all sorts of vulgars? The
Prophet David reads a contrary Lecture to us, and tells us, That the Word of
God is a Lantern unto our feet, and a light unto our paths. And therefore
Saint Chrysostom buildes upon a sure foundation. Omnia clara and plana In Genesis
Hom. 29.
sunt in Scripturis Divinis (says he) quaecunque necessaria sunt,
manifestasunt. All things are clear and plain in the Holy Scriptures,
whatsoever things are necessary for us, are also manifested unto us. Whereupon
Clemens Alexandrinus makes an other Proclamation, as he is quoted by the same
Chrysostom. Audite qui est is In 2 These. Hom. 3.
long, audite qui prope; nullis caelatum est verbum. Hearken ye that be far
off, hearken ye that be near, the Word of God is hid from no man. As Moses
to the Israelites. It is neither in heaven, Deuteronomy. 30.
that we need hire any to climb for it; nor yet beyond the Seas, that we need
get any travel for it; but the Word of God is in our own mouths, and in our
own hearts to do it. Lu^ est communis, omnibus Clem Ale^. orat. a^hort ad
gentes.
illuces^it, nullis in verbo Cymm^rius. As God, so his Word, is that common
Light, that inlightneth every man that comes into this world, in it there is no
darkness at all. So Irenaeus: Scripturae in aperto Lib. 1. cap. 45.
sunt, etc. The Scriptures are plain^, and without doubtfulnesse, and may be
read indifferently of any. So Saint Jerome: The Lord has spoken by his
Gospel, not that a few should understand him, but that all. For certainly
(beloved) the Spirit of God is a free Spirit, bound neither to the sharpness
of our wit, nor to the deepenesse of our learning: for many times the simple
and illiterate man, being illuminated sees more then the Scribe, or the great
disputer of this world. According to that clause of our Saviors prayer. Matthew.
11. I thank thee O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, for that thou have hidden
these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto Babes.
Whereupon Epiphanius divinely: Solis Spiritus Lib. 2.
Sancti filiis facilis est Scriptura. The Scriptures are plain and clear
only to the children of the holy Ghost. The Spirit breaths where it lists,
without which we can neither live, nor move, nor have any spiritual being; we
are mere dead men, and therefore must needs be blind men. But to those that
are illuminated, whether learned or unlearned, there arises up light in
darkness. There is food of all sorts, for all sorts of people; So Fulgentius:
In Scripturis Divinis Sermon. de con.
abundat, and quod robustus comedat, and quod parvulus sugat. In the Word of
God there is plenty sufficient, strong meat for men, milk for Babes. It is
the Bridegroomes Wine-cellar, wherein he feasteth and comfort his beloved
Spouse, with Flagons, and Apples, and delicates of all sorts; whereof she has
free welcome and liberty, bibere and inebriari, to drink and to be satisfied,
and to drink, and to be more then satisfied.

So far are the reverend Fathers (you see) from fathering the abortives of
heresy, and schism upon the sacred Scriptures; that they rather indeed
proclaim them to be the severe stepmother, or murderesse of such Cockatrices
in the egg. Irenaeus confesses ingenuously, that the only cause of the
Valentinian heresy was, Scripturarum Dei ignorantia, the peoples blindness
and ignorance of the Scriptures. So Saint Chrysostom concerning the error of
the Manichees in his time, Manichaei and Ad Heb. hom. 8.
omnes haereses decipiunt simplices. The Manichees and all heres^es deceive the
simple. But if our minds be illuminated by often reading and hearing of the
Scriptures, we may be able to discern both good and evil. So likewise
Theophylact: Illis, qui scrutantur Divinas Scripturas, nihil potest illudere:
nothing can deceive them that diligently search the Holy Scriptures, it is the
candle whereby the theife is discovered. So the ancient of days himself unto
the Sadduces. Ye err (not because Math. 2^.
ye know, but) because ye know not the Scriptures. For heresies, or schisms
arise not from the Scriptures themselves, or any darkness in them; but from
the ignorance and pravity that is in man's understanding; they are rather
discovered and suppressed by Scripture. Should I tell you, that a blind man may
better avoid dangers then he that sees: Or that a naked man in the midst of
his enemies may better acquit himself then he that is compleately armed: Or
that the full fed I picure is nearer starving, then the miserable captive, that
is debarred all kind of sustenance; you might well think I were mad: So
(certainly) it argues no less frenzy and in compossibilitie of mind, to
broach such unreasonable, and unlikely doctrines.

But to wind up this controversy in one word. It were an easy matter (me
thinks) to catch the adversary in his own gin, if we did urge him to
nominate, what manner of persons he thinks meet in his own conscience, to
be exempted from the reading of the Scriptures? He cannot say, old men, for
shame; they are the very staff and comfort of their age. It was the sweet
amabaeum, and burden to David's song when he was aged. In Gods Word will Psalm
58. 10.
I rejoice; in the Lords Word will I comfort me. Not young men for pity: they
are the only curb to restrain the heat and fury of their tamelesse youth:
for wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his ways, but by ruling Psalm 119. 9.
himself according to Gods word? Surely the Apostle S. Paul thought it the
best breeding he could possibly bestow upon his son Timothy, 2 Timothy 3. 15.
to bring him up in the knowledge of the Scriptures from a child. Not women or
maidens, for the frailty of their sex sake: for how then should such weak and
brittle vessels, become strong in Ephesians. 6. 10.
the Lord, and in the power of his might, as they are commanded? It is enough
for that Apostate Julian to quarrel with the Christians, for that their women
were skillful in the Scriptures: But sure I am, good old Nazsanzen will revive
the never-dying fame of his sister Gorgonia, by a funeral Oration; for that
she was skillful both in the Old and New Testament: and reverend Jerome, of
Lady Paula by an Epitaph, for that all the maidens about her, were forced daily
to learn the Scriptures. Not poor men, for Gods sake: the chiefest alms they
can ask, or receive, is the free passage of the Gospel. Whereupon our Savior
speaks Matt. 11.
it, not only for their warrant, but their commendation: That the poor receive
the Gospel, with all alacrity and cheerfulness. So it has pleased our
gracious God, in all ages, by his infinite wisdom and mercy, to make choice
of the poor of this world (as S. James speaks) that they should be rich in
faith; and that by often hearing and reading of the Scriptures. Not infidels or
heretics, for charity sake; It is the only ordinary means of their
conversion: And therefore it was permitted that Queen Candaces Chamberlain,
being an infidel, might read the Act. 8.
Scriptures without controlment. And S. Augustine confesses, that himself,
being inclined to the error Conf. lib. 8. c. 12.
of the Manichees, by reading the Scriptures was converted. If then neither old
nor young; parents nor children; men nor boys; women nor maidens; learned nor
unlearned; rich nor poor; heretics nor infidells, may lawfully be exempted
from the reading of the Scriptures; we may easily discover those hypocrites,
that our Saviors woe directly points at: That take away the key of knowledge,
Matt. 23.
that shut up the kingdom of heaven before men; and neither enter themselves,
nor suffer others to enter in. Alas, (says Irenaeus) Hoc non est sanantium and
vivificantium, Lib. 3. c. 5.
sed magis gravantium and augentium ignorantiam: This is not the part of them
that would heal and give life; but rather of them that augment the burden, and
increase ignorance.

The third and last Quaere yet behind, most proper and pertinent to the text of
all, is, What might be the occasion, why our blessed Savior spoke and
delivered this Parable?

The occasion we must needs conceive could not be slight, that induced the
wisdom of the Father to propound a special parable. It was the discovery of
a whole neast of sectaries, as appears by the (...) in the Text. Certain (it
seems) there were, that would be singular above the rest, the common gap to
all kind of hypocrisy, and confusion in devotion: for mark (I beseech you)
the growth of their faction; The maine root of all, was the root of all
mischief, pride. From thence sprang up the rank blade of selfeconfidence; out
of an arrogant proud spirit, attributing every good thing in themselves, to
themselves: they trusted in themselves. From thence shot forth the full care of
presumption; an arrogant conceit of inherent righteousness, that they were
just. And then their harvest grew on so fast, that their too forward fruit were
not only, albae ad messem, but even siccae ad ignem, ripe for the hook, but
dry for the fire; their arrogant singularity pearched them up, upon so high a
strain of boasting of their own eminency, that they ^^fied, and despised
others. All which Circumstances being duly considered, the truly zealous, and
rig^^ humble auditor, (...) ^ee is confess, that there was too just occasion
for our Savior to propound, and us to expound this Parable.

Self confidence? what a wooden head of folly, a broken staff, and a rotten
post of presumption is it? which has not only sought to make Angels, but men
equal to God himself. But whom she has so proudly lifted up; she has
likewise most miserably cast down: What mischiefs indeed has she not done?
She has cast Lucifer out of Heaven; Adam out of Paradise; overthrown the
tower of Babell, and brought in the first confusion of languages; prostrated
Goliath with dishonor, and slew Nicanor with reproach; finished Antiochus his
Empire, and drowned Pharaoh in the red Sea; caused Senacherib to be slain by
the hands of his own sons in the temple, and Herod by an Angel in his
Parliament; Absalom to perish by his own locks, and Haman to totter upon his
own gallows. Broken reeds are not so dangerous to him that leans, nor
slippery Ice to him that runs, nor the beauty of an harlot to him that
lusts, as selfe-confidence is pernicious to him that imbraceth it. Broken
reeds may wound the flesh, slippery Ice procure desperate fallings, the beauty
of an harlot bring shame before, and beggary behind: but selfe-confidence
takes away God from the soul, the soul from the body, the body from
immortality; It fades when it flourishes, it is not when it seems to be, it
falls and never rises again. Man, trusting to himself, (says Gregory) is
fallen like Gregor.
a dead leaf from the Cedar in Paradise, and is blown away with the tempest
of temptation, and wind of vanity. As Saul's coat of armor was an hinderance
to David, that his hands could not war, nor his fingers fight; as Peter
walking upon the Sea, was in hazard of drowning: so miserable is man being left
unto himself, nothing but desolation; His birth corruption, his life
transgression, his death confusion: In his birth miserable, in his life
culpable, in his death of himself damnable: His knowledge imperfect, his life
uncertain, his mind changable, and he himself nothing but fragilitie. And
therefore I conclude the point with Saint Augustine: Confidentia in scipso est
lubrica spes, incerta victoria, impossibilis liberatio: It is a flattering and
fickel hope for a man to think he is safe and inviolable amongst the infinite
increasings, and daily nourishings of sin; It must needs be a doubtful and
uncertain victory for a man to fight amidst his enemies ambushment; and an
impossible delivery to be environed on every side with fire, and not to be
scorched. And such was the desperate condition of these Sectaries in the first
step or degree of their affected singularity, selfeconfidence: they trusted in
themselves.

To this wooden head of theirs, selfe-confidence, they must needs annexe the
brazen face of impudency, a whorish forehead that cannot blush, presumption of
righteousness. They are absolutely perfect in their own eyes, justifiable
with God, equal with Angels, superior to their brethren. Whereas alas, man's
righteousness (says Gregory) being weighed Gregor.
in the balance with Gods Justice is found to be nothing but
unrighteousness: and that the more vile in the examination of the upright
Judge, by how much the more glorious it seemed in the partial estimation of
the owner thereof. A candle that burns bright in the dark, is dimmed at noone
day. Agesilaus, his maskers coats were thought all gold over night, in the
Chamber of presence by torch light, but found nothing but Wheat-straw the next
morning in the wardrobe. Leah, Jacobs elder daughter, was said to be brown and
bleare-eyed in regard of beautiful Rachell the younger. When we have done all
that we can, the very Prince of Prophets tells us, we are but unprofitable
servants; And if we will be tried by a brace of inferiors, that spoke by the
same spirit with him; the one tells us, that all our righteousness is as filthy
as a menstrous ragge; the other, that we our selves are altogether lighter
then vanity it self. Without all question the merit of finnefull man can be
nothing but misery, his knowledge error, his work wickedness, his invention
deceiveable, his profession colorable, his will abominable: And as the Moon
is ecclipsed being removed from the irradiation of the Sun: As Rivers dry up,
not watered from their fountains: As Trees wither, not moystened from the
earth: so the sons of Adam putrify in the old and rotten root of nature, if
they be not transplanted and implanted into the stock of grace. If in that we
live, it is not of our selves, how can that be ours that we do possess? A
most gross kind of folly, I blush not to call it mere stupidity, for a man
to acknowledge the benefit of his life from another, and yet to ascribe the
ornament of his virtues to himself. In God we live, and moove, and have our
being: what then can any man have, that he has not received? And why then
should any man boast as if he had not received it? Goodness (says Bernard) is
the Vineyard of Bernard.
the just Man; or rather a just Man is a good Vineyard; whose Vine is his
virtue; whose branch, action; whose Wine, the testimony of a good conscience;
whose Winepresse, is the tongue of praise; whose godly tears of humility, are
the Grapes of true repentance; whose pruner, is the Preacher; and the Lord of
this Vineyard, is the God of Heaven. Such then was the desperate condition of
these sectaries in the second step, or degree of their affected singularity, an
arrogant and presumptuous conceit of inherent righteousness: That they were
just.

To their wooden head of selconfidence, and brazen face of impudence, to make
up a perfect monster of imperfection, they affixe the iron heart of cruelty,
harder then the nether millstone; and far more apt to sting then the biting
nettle, Contempt of others. I am not like that Publican, (says the foreman of
their Jury in this Parable, that brings in the verdict for all the rest) spying
a mote of infirmity in his brothers eye, but not discerning the beam of
impiety in his own; straining at every Gnat he meets in the street, but
leaping over every Camel that lies at his own threshold; nothing is sweet that
fits not his taste, but all things unsavory that seed not his humor; barking
at the Stars like a Dog in the n^ght, and hissing in a corner like a Serpent;
consuming the next member like a Canker, and gnawing an issue in the womb of
his mother like a Viper: viscera impiorum crudelia. Contempt of our brethren?
It is the unkind dissolution of the whole frame of nature, which delights
chiefly in society. It is a rottenness in the marrow, a fire in the body, a
fury in the soul, the rust of a good conscience, the poison of charity, the
enemy of peace, the breach of unity, the mother of mischief, the nurse of
contention, the daughter of pride that is never barren; It is a frenzy
infecting the head, vexing the spirit, molesting the heart; It filles the head
with wicked inventions, they sleep not (says David) till they have done
mischief; The mind with perplexed thought, Iuaas sought opportunity to
betray Christ; The heart with bloody revenge, Cains countenance was cast down,
he rose up and massacred his brother. Contempt of our brethren? It is the seed
of sedition, the brand of a reprobate, a Locust of the bottomless pit, the
son of those Giants Anach, and Anakim, a murdering spirit, and a spiritual
murderer; so Saint John expressly: He that hates his brother is a manslayer.
And such likewise was the lamentable condition of these sectaries in the third
and last step or degree of their affected singularity Advancement of their
own eminency, and contempt of others.

As therefore our blessed Savior has upon these grounds propounded; so
proceed we in his name, and by the assistance of his spirit, to expound this
parable. Wherein we may observe as in a glass representative the perfect
character of an hypocrite; whose genealogy has many generations. Suggestion
of the Serpent, begat concupiscence; concupiscence, sin; sin, ill custom;
ill custom, blind devotion; blind devotion, wilful ignorance; wilful
ignorance, hypocrisy; hypocrisy, vainglory; vainglory, self-love;
self-love, selfe-confidence; selfe-confidence, presumption of righteousness;
presumption of righteousness, contempt of others; contempt of others, a
Pharisee: And a Pharisee begat two twins, hypocrites both: the one a dissembler
with his God, the other a deceiver of his brother: and both of them either
bearing private grudges in their hearts as Cain to Abel, or else open
reproaches in their mouths as Ishmael to Isaac, till they both fall into the
pit that they dig for others.

I have now brought you to the threshold of the parable, where for this time I
must needs leave you: the text I named, and the time I am bound to obey, have
granted commission to proceed no further.

THE SECOND SERMON.
Luke 18. 10. Two men went up into the Temple to pray: the one a Pharisee, and
the other a Publican.
WE have already dispatched the Preface in the former Verse, which lead our
meditations to a threefold Quaere. The first, to the Etymology, or
signification of the word Parable. The second, to the reason, why our Savior
so often in the Gospel spoke unto the people by parables? The third and last,
to the special occasion, that induced him to propound this parable.

Proceed we now (...), by Gods assistance and your christian patience, to
enter upon the Parable it self. Which being a glass representative, of the
perfect character of an Hypocrite: I shall be so far from personal
invectives in the prosecution thereof, that I shall desire all in general, to
behold their faces in it. Not (as the common course of the world is) for a man
to glance over the shoulder upon his brother, as if the doctrine delivered
concerned not himself: Or, like S. James his Natural, to take so slight a
notice, that presently he forgets it at the turning of the back: but with a
serious and particular application to the conscience, and with a full purpose
and resolution of amendment. For (though I confess) the drift of the parable
aims most punctually at the Heretic and Schismaticke, in whom the ocean of
hypocrisy swells to a full Sea: yet, before we have done with it, we shall
find it will reach us all, and spare none: for as much as he that is soundest
at the heart, may at one time or other (if he flatter not himself too much)
discover in himself some dregs of hypocrisy, some spice of the Pharisee. Let
every one then in the fear of God, apply the parable only to himself, as
ingenuously taxing his own conscience, as Nathan did David, and say, Tu es
homo, Thou art the man our Savior now taxes, and the Preacher now speaks to.
That so every one resolving to mend one, God in his mercy may mend all. And
upon this good resolution, by the blessing of the Author, we may venture upon
the Parable.

Two men went up into the Temple to pray: the one was a Pharisce, and the other
a Publican.

That great Devil incarnate, Hypocrisy in devotion, is here discovered unto
us by our blessed Savior, by a parable of two men, as like in outward show,
that it is very hard to discern the one from the other; but as different in
inward substance, as light and darkness. Their behavior is expressed in the
words of this Text, jointly together; then severally and apart, in the verses
following. At first sight a man would think all were well. Here are first, Duo
homines, two men; good company. Here is secondly, ascensus in Templum, they
walk, and they talk, and they converse together, and they go up into the
Temple together; a good posture. Here is thirdly, Devotio, a seeming strong
devotion; They go up into the Temple to pray; a good exercise. But alas, here
is the leaven that sowres all, and swells all, the leaven of Pharisees: The one
was a Pharisee, and the other a Publican.

Duo homines, two men? why good company, and once a rarity to be found upon
the face of the earth. Without all question, society is both commendable and
comfortable, by the principles of nature and grace to: for though unum and
bonum cov^rtuntur, by our mecaphysicall discipline; yet he that soars but one
degree higher shall find, that the most perfect unity is best pleased to
admit of a Trinity: No doubt, to signify, that as there can be no true
society without an unity; so there can be no perfect unity without a
Society.

David undertook with great alacrity and cheerfulness, especially when he
went up into the Temple with company; the more the merrier. I was glad (says
h^) when they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord. It is a
good sight to see men go by twoes into the Temple; but a far more blessed, to
see them flock by tens, and hundreds, and thousands: As (blessed be God) in
this, and diverse other Congregations in this Kingdom.

Went these two men up into the Temple to pray? they could not have gone with a
better resolution, nor performed a better exercise. Had they gone but singly up
into a private chamber, or a closet to pray, and been still; it had been (no
question) an acceptable sacrifice of righteousness: Devotion, be it never so
private, if it be hearty, shall never return empty without a blessing. It is
like David's Tree planted by the Psalm. 1.
waters side, whose leaf never withers, but still brings forth fruit in due
season; whatsoever it does it shall prosper. It is a fruitful Vine,
continually bearing clusters of ripe grapes; whose root, is charity; whose
stock, faith; whose top, hope; whose spreading twigges are laden with fruit,
the works of mercy; and whose flourishing blossoms, are the wholesome words
of wisdom.

As the morning Star in the midst of a cloud; As the Moon Eccle. 50.
when it is at full; As the Sun shining upon the Temple of the most high; As a
bright rainbow in fair clouds; As the flower of Roses in the spring; As
Lillies by the rivers of water; As fire and incense in the Censer; As a vessel
of massy gold, beset with all manner of precious stones; As a fair Olive tree
that is fruitful; As a Cipresse tree that grows up to the clouds; And as the
fat that is taken from the Peace Offering; so is the I am. 5. 16.
prayer of the righteous man if it be fervent. It is paled in like the garden
of Eden with everlasting mercies, when the best of our sacrifices are laid
waste and common; It floates like Noah's Arc upon the waters of affliction,
when the best of our thoughts are overwhelmed and perish; It buds and bloomes
like Aarons rod, and brings forth ripe Almonds, when the best of our works
remain dry and wither; This one sheafe stands upright, and this one star
sparkles, when the rest of the hile fall flat upon the ground, and all
wandering Comets are quite obscured.

Abigals bottles of Wine, and frayles of Raisons were never so welcome to
hungry David in the wilderness of Parran; Nor the shadie Juniper tree so
delectable to the Prophet in the parching Sun; Nor Jacobs fat Kid, so
acceptable to his father Isaac in his sickness; Nor the sight of young
Benjamin so precious to his brother Joseph, when he was the chief Governor of
Pharaohs Court in Egypt; Nor the Walls of Jerusalem so dear unto the Jews,
that kissed them at their return from captivity: as zealous and hearty prayer
is unspeakeably comfortable to the soul of a distresled sinner. It fills the
mouth with laughter, and the heart with gladness: It gives light to them that
sit in darkness, and life to them that sit in the shadow of death: it is
Damonibus flagellum, animae subsidium, Deo sacrificium. Aug.
A scourge to the Devil, a prop to the Soul, a Sacrifice to God, which God
cannot despise: It is the continual feast of a pined conscience; the only
solace in a Sea of sorrows: (Call upon me in the time of trouble, says the
Lord, so will I hear thee and thou shall praise me.) It is the very Lodovicus
Grana^eus.
station of the soul in the presence of God, and the station of God in the
presence of the soul; God looks upon her with the Eye of mercy, and she
glances upon God with the eye of humility. What shall I say more? It is the
food of the Soul; the quintescence of all spiritual comfort; the obtaining of
all the graces and favors of the great King of Heaven; the ravishing seal of
that interchangable kiss of peace, betwixt the Bridegroom and the Bride; that
spiritual Sabbath, wherein the Creator himself desires to rest; that Lodge in
the forest of Libanus, wherein the true Solomon solaces himself, and enjoyes
his delights with the sons of men. It is milk for Babes, strong meat for
men, provision for the traveller, an haven to the mariner, victory to the
militant, and glory to the triumphant. It is physic to the sick, joy to the
afflicted, strength to the weak. It amends the bad, it confirms the good, it
comforts all. It is the Gate of Heaven, the first fruits of future glory, the
heavenly Manna of all ravishing sweetness, and the Jacobs Ladder that reaches
from* Earth to Heaven, whereby the Angels ascend and descend, to carry up our
petitions, and to bring down Gods blessings.

If such then be the power and efficacy of private devotion, how much more
powerful is the strength of public prayer? If the bubling of one single
Conduit-pipe be so harmonious in the ears of God, how acceptable is the noise
of many waters? If the one be so potent, the other must needs be omnipotent;
(If we may be so bold to use the phrase of Alstedius) Est quaedam
omnipotentia System. theol.
precum, (says he) There is such a kind of majesty and omnipotency in public
prayer, that it raises the dead, it overcomes Angels, it casts out devils, and
(which is more wonderful then all the rest) it seems to master and
over-master God himself; inabling the feeble Christian, to wrestle with his
Maker, as Jacob with the Angel, with a non dimittam, I will not let thee go^
without a blessing.

Thus far then the Parable succeeds well: that there were two men, it was
good company; that they went up into the Temple, it was a better posture; that
they went up into the Temple to pray, it, was the best exercise, That house
shall be called the house of prayer. But here is that which turns Jordan
quite backewards, makes the company uncomfortable, the posture preposterous,
and the exercise most execrable, the one was a Pharisee, and the other a
Publican. That two men should be of two minds; the same in show, but different
in substance; come up into the Temple, and to pray too, and not with one accord
in one place; this turns our honey into gall, the waters of Meribah into the
waters of Marah: The one was a Pharisee, and the other a Publican.

Mention is often made in the Gospel of Pharisees, to the shameful reproach of
their life, and severe reprehension of their unbeleefe; who either with the
faithless traditions of men, or the fruitless objections of the Law, ever
went about to entangle our Savior in his speech. But in vain is the net laid
(says Solomon) before the eyes of the winged. A busy Prove.
sect it seems they were: for either, when they went with him into the Temple,
they lift up their heels against him, like deceiveable hypocrites; or else in
the judgement-hall they spend their mouths against him with a Crucifige,
crucify him, like murderous homicides. Their lips preserve much knowledge of
the Law, and yet the poison of aspes is under their throat. The moral
precepts are written in their Phylacteries with a thorn to prick their
Anckles, and yet their feet most swift to shed blood. They sit in the Chair
of Moses, and yet resist the Lords anointed with Corah. They bind heavy burdens
upon the shoulders of other men, and yet they touch them not with their own
fingers.

Greater enemies to the Cross of Christ, which is his glory and our Salvation,
were there none than Pharisees. Not Pilate the judge with his halting opinion,
and lukewarm religion. Not Caiaphas the high Priest with his inward malice,
and outward holiness. Not Judas the traitor with his kissing lip, and killing
heart. Not the vulgar route and rabble of the Jews clamorously acquitting
Barrabas the malefactor, and despightfully condemning Jesus the innocent. And
yet forsooth none so pure, none so holy in outward profession as a Pharisee.

Hujusmodi venandi fallacias sectatur Orig. in Math.
Satanas, sub titulo sanctitatis agere insidias. It is Satan's usual sleight of
hunting, by a show of holmesse to entrap the simple. Pharisees in the eye of
the world reputed for mirrors, shrined for Saints, canonized for half gods:
and yet for all this glittering pretended piety, in the judgment of Christ and
his witnesses, true Reeds shaken with the Wind, painted Sepulchers, Wolves in
sheep cloathings, Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, woe be unto them.

Thus has Satan juggled from the beginning, and continually changed himself
into an Angel of light. Ciceroes Rhetorician, Plat^es Politician, and Homers
Traveller are not so lively painted in their colors, as here a Pharisee, in
his due and true conditions, his counterfeit conscience being discovered, and
the vizard of hypocrisy, semblable to religious sanctimony, plucked from his
face of impudency. For though he be a Proteus of many shapes, and variable
changes; (and never a change from worse to better; (for desinit esse melior,
qui desinit esse bonus,) he that ceases to be good in the positive, is far
from proceeding to better in the Comparative:) Yet here like the Moon, he
may be seen at full: he is totally Ecclipsed with his God; he is waxing and
waining with the world; He is almost at last quarter, darkened and obscured in
soul to himself. In that, an hypocrite, drawing near unto God with his lips,
but far from him in his heart; In the other, a heretic, saying, Lo here is
Christ, and there is Christ, we know not where; And in this an Atheist, neither
hot nor cold, having a name to be alive, but indeed is dead. And as the Master
took the first draught of this hypocrite for former; so the Scholar continues
it for latter times, 2 Timothy 3. 2. Where he tells us, that men shall be lovers
of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud, cursed speakers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, intemperate, fierce, despisers of them that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure, more then lovers of God. This for the
Pharisee, now for the Publican.

Of whom (yopu may well suppose) that much cannot be said, having so little to
say for himself, only he craves the benefit of his book: Miserere mei
Domine, so far he reads Clarke-like, O God be merciful to me a sinner.
And therefore for charity sake, we may plead thus much for him: As the
Pharisee said of himself, that he was not as this Publican; so may we justly
say of this Publican, that he was not as the Pharisee; whatsoever the Pharisee
was, he was not; and whatsoever the Pharisee was not, that was he; in the
sight of God, in the sight of man, and in the sight of his own eyes. A man of
no public fame, but public infamy; His very name discovers both his nature
and office too; a poor Publican, a tribute gatherer, an under-customer, an
officer of the basest account amongst the Jews; both by reason they were
servants to the Romans, whose yoke they could not endure, and also grinding
exacters of more then their due for their own advantage. This public contempt
of others made him at length seem odious in his own eyes: for peccat and
publicat (though not in Senecaes sense) he sins, and he publishes his sin,
not to Sen.
his glory, but to his shame; not to the erection of his head, but to the
confusion of his face; and when he was smallest and vilest in his own eyes, he
was then in greatest repute and estimation in the sight of God; as it shall
appear (God willing) more at large hereafter. In the mean time we see the
parable turns upon these two hinges; A proud boaster, and an humble
confessor; A presumptuous justiciary, and a penitent offender; An arrogant
hypocrite, and a dejected sinner. These two men went up into the Temple to
pray; the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican.

Such a general resemblance is there betwixt hollow hypocrisy, and truly
religious sanctity, that the Church may too justly lament and complain, that
her children are black like unto coals, no man Lam. 4.
is able to discern them when he meets them in the streets; and that the
great City of God is become like an harlot. This general resemblance is set
down in the forehead of this Parable, by four special representations; wherein
painted hypocrisy, and naked simplicity may seem at first both alike, or
rather hypocrisy, to carry the fairer show. The first is, the number of the
persons, duo homines, two men, the Pharisee and the Publican, one for one; and
most commonly greater, is the multitude of hypocrites.

Noah with his two faces, the one looking to the world perishing, the other to
the posterity coming, but eight persons were reserved Gen 8. 1 King. 22. 6.
in the Arc. But one Michaiah against four hundred false Prophets. Elias
complains that he is left alone, and not five good men to be found in those
great and famous Cities of Pentapolis. But only three brethren in that mighty
flow of idolatry, and Empire of Nebuchadnezzar. Only Caleb and Ioshuah of
innumerable thousands of Israelites entered into the Land of Canaan. Our Savior
cured ten Leapers, and but one returned thankful. And therefore he foretold,
that in these last days many false Prophets should arise and deceive many; For
straight is the Gate, and narrow is the way, that leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. The Church of God is a little flock: a small ship for
Simon to launch out into the deep. Paphnutius stood against the whole Council
of Nice; John Husse against the Council of Constance; Luther alone forsook
his Clo^ster; and these three men, (by the help of their God,) in their times
prevailed. Generality then, and the greater number, can be no certainty o^ the
true Church. Auxensius made a proud challenge to the Emperor Constantine: Nos
habemus consensum and concentum sexcentorum Episcoporum; We have the consent
and harmony of six hundred Bishops: and yet he was an Arrian.

Dan and Bethel, to worship Ieroboams calves, as the true Israelite to
Jerusalem, to worship the living Job 2.
God: Upon a certain day, the children of God came and stood before him, and
Satan came amongst them too: They like Priests clothed with righteousness,
and Saints singing with joyfulnesse; but he, either like a subtle Serpent
seeking whom he may deceive; as he did Eve, in the Garden; Peter, in the High
Priests hall; and Judas at the Passover: Or else, as a roaring Lion into the
conscience; an accuser of his brethren; as he entered into Cain the fratricide;
and Julian the Apostate: Or else a red Dragon, for the trial of their faith
and patience; as unto Job, and Paul, when the messenger of Satan was sent to
buffet him. Thus Cain goes to the Altar to sacrifice, as well as Abel. Judas
will have a finger in Christ's dish, as well as John. The Pharisee carries a
countenance of holiness, a grace of godliness, and a show of sanctimony, more
then does the Publican, and yet they both go up; here is yet small difference.

The third resemblance is, One place, the Temple receives them both. Where God
will have his Church, the devil will be sure to have his chapel. As in the
world there is heat and cold; night and day; hill and valley. As in humane
Arts there is opposition of Sciences, Sophistry and probability, rage and
reason, affirmation and negation, pro and con: So in Gods Church militant,
superstitious faction will be sure to couch under the same roof, with true
devotion; disguised hypocrisy, with naked piety; and shameless vanity, with
simple verity. Where the painful husbandman sowes pure seed; there the
envious man will scatter tares. Where Paul plants the grafts of grace and
unity; there Alexander the Coppersmith, inserts his imps of contention and
impiety. Where Simon Peter preaches conversion unto God; there Simon Magus
practices conjuration by the Devil. Dagon, the Idol and folly of the
Philistims; and the Ark of God, the glory and felicity of the Israelites,
were sometime both in one house. Noah's Arc harbored as well ravenous wolves,
as tame and simple creatures; The Lamb, and the Woolfe; the Raven, and the
Dove; the Adder, and the Coney.

Vt lilium inter spinas, sic Ecclesia Bern. in Cant.
Dei bonis atque malis permista est. As a lilly grows up between two thorns;
so the outward visible Church is a mixed Congregation of good and bad. As in all
gardens, grow as well weeds as herbs: As upon all trees, as well blasse as
blos^ome: As in all rivers, as well frogs as fish: So Isaac and Ishmael;
Magus and Philip; Publican and Pharisee, go up into the Temple together.

The fourth and last resemblance to them both, is, One end and purpose, in
general to pray. Some worship the host of heaven, calling the Sun Isis, and
the Moon Osiris; as the Ethnicke and Pagan. Some an Idol, turning the glory
of the Creator, into the similitude of the creature; a calfe that eats hay;
as the Sodomite and Gentile: But in vain are these men, and their hope is
amongst them that go down into the pit. Some trust in their own merits, not
Gods mercy; in their own works, not Christ's worthiness: In the invocation
of the Mother a sinner, and not the intercession of the Son the only
Savior; robbing him of that honor, whereof he is so justly jealous, that he
will not impart it to another.

But the humble Publican, and truly penitent, lays his prayer a steep in a
flood of tears; thoroughly spiced with a broken and contrite heart, ground to
powder betwixt the two millstones of faith and hope; trusting in God as in a
merciful Father, lest he should despair; and fearing to dread him as a most
just Judge, lest he should presume, as did this Pharisee.

It is observed by S. Chrys^ upon the 1. of Matt: That as Christ made four
wonderful followers of himself: Of a simple fisherman, a learned Pastor of the
Church, Peter: Of a Persecutor in Iewry, a Teacher and Doctor of the Gentiles,
Paul: Of a Publican, sitting at the receipt of Custom, a chief Evangelist;
Matthew: And of an ignominious theife upon the Cross, a glorious Saint in
Paradise. So likewise, the false Prophets would make themselves wonderful
followers of Christ too; creeping upon the flock in sheeps clothing of
innocence, when inwardly they are ravening wolves full of hypocrisy.

Thus is the Church of God become like Joseph's Cribbe, a cradle for Christ, and
a manger for the Ass. Mendacium imitatur veritatem. Jerome.
Hypocrisy will have Jacobs small voice, though the rough hands of Esau;
heresy, Judas his kiss in the lip like a disciple, but a curse in the heart
like a Devil: And a Pharisee will be puffed up like a bladder, both in words
and countenance. The flies Cantharides breed (they say) in the sweetest roses.
The Palmer worm neasteth in the fairest Cedar. The flatterer crouches to a man
of the best nature. And hollow hypocrisy will be an inseparable companion, to
religious sanctity. Lucifer is fallen like a star, and has gotten him a new
kind of policy, under the name of Christ to deceive the simple. Some things
are, and yet not seen, as the spirit of a man: Some things both are, and
se^ne, as the body of a man; Some things neither are, nor seen, as the
thoughts of a man: And some things seem, and are not, as the shadow of a man;
a perfect emblem of pharisaicall simulation. Rachel was never so cunning for
her father Laban, in sitting upon his idols hid in the litter: Nor Mic^ll so
crafty for Saul, in the conveyance of David: Nor (...) so pregnant an ^^yning
an e^o^^e to (...): A^^ Pharisee is to halt with his God, and to gloze with his
brother; he seem^s to go up neighbourly into the Temple with the one, and to
pray devoutly to the Other.

The last work then, that we have to do for the Conclusion of this exercise,
is to settle, and quiet the conscience in so turbulent a Sex of distracted
devotion. That two men went sociably in company together, thou likest it well.
That their society led them so fair a way, to go up into the Temple together,
thou likest it better. That their journey tended to so good an end, to go up
into the Temple to pray, it ravishes thy contemplation. But that the one should
be a Pharisee, and the other a Publican; that there should he such Heresy and
Schism in the Church, such fractions and factions in the public body; and
such deceiveable hypocrisy in the private members; this (I dare say) troubles
the conscience much, and cooles thy devotion more.

And why so? Know thou not that Rebecka had two twins, Iacoh and Esau; the
one a vessel ordained to honor, the other to dishonor? why these were the du^
homines, we now treat of: and therefore she a lively type and Emblem of the
Church militant. Semen unum, diversi concepti; uterus Aug.
unus, diversi nati; The seed one, the conception diverse; the womb one, the
birth diverse: And why should not the Church then take as patiently, as Rebecka
did, the struggling of her twins?

Know thou not again? that our blessed Savior, Matthew. 13. compares the
Kingdom of Heaven, which is his Church militant, unto an husbandman that sowed
good seed in his field; but while men slept, the envious man came and sowed
tares: which, when the servants perceived, they by all means counsel their
Master to weed them up. But the Master in his wisdom would not grant it,
lest they should pluck up the good corn, with the cares; and therefore he
resolves upon a sinite utrosque croscere; let both grow together until the
harvest. To prevent such weeders amongst the C^rinthians; the Apostle was feign
to propoun^ an op^rt^t hareses esse; and tell them plainly, that there was;
and must be divisions, and he^^sies, even amongst them, the true Church of
God; that they which are approoved might ^ee known. There must be heresy to
try thy faith; there must be schism to try thy judgment; there must be fury
to try thy patience; there must be frenzy to try thy wisdom; there must be
hypocrisy to try thy soundness. Should thou fall from thy God to an Idol
with the heretic; where is thy faith? Should thou rend thy self from his
Congregation with the Schismaticke; where is thy judgment? Should thou play
fast and loose with both, like an Hypocrite; where i^ thy sincerity?

Quid si totus mundus adora^^ Tertullians.
Saranam? It is Tertullians case: what though the whole world should forsake
God, and serve the Devil, shall God therefore loose his service of thee? Si
Episcopus, si diaconus, si vidus, si virgo* si doctor, si etiam Martyr lapsus ^
regula fuerit, numid^^ hareses ^^ritatem videbuntur obtinere to says the same
father. What if a Bishop; a Deacon, a Widow, a Virgin, a Doctor or master in
Israel; nay, what if a Martyr of Christ Jesus shall f^ll from the rule and
proportion of faith, shall heresie^ therefore seem to obtain the approbation
of the truth? or shall the truth shrink from the proud face of heresy? what
if two men go up into the Temple together; the one a Pharisee and the other a
Publican? Non ex personis probamus fidem, sed ex fide personas: we do not
approove of the faith of Christ by the persons of men, but the persons of men
by the faith of Christ. Or what if two men go up into the Temple by
succession? Non habet haereditatem Potri, qui fidem Petri non habet: He cannot
inherit Peter's chair, that does not inherit Peter's faith. The Jews could
boast themselves to be of the seed of faithful Abraham: but our Savior tells
them they are no better then the seminary of their father the Devil. After St.
Paul's departure grievous Wolves were to enter in, not sparing the flock. The
desolation of abomination wa to sit in the holy places; and Antichrist
himself, that man of sin in the Temple of God. Manasses succeeded Ezeckias,
Jeroboam David, and now the Turk is crept into the four Patriarchall seats;
Alexandri^, Jerusalem, Constantinople, and Antioch. Et in Romana ecclesia
s^dent Scribae and Pharisei. The Scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses his chair
at Rome too. They are not all Jews (it seems) that dwell at Jerusalem, nor
all Israel that are of Israel, nor all of the Church that are in the Church;
nor all of the Temple that go into the Temple to pray. The hedge-sparrow many
times hatches the young Cuckooe; and the Hen sits upon the egg of the young
Cockatrice; and frogs come into Pharaohs Privy Chamber; Scribes and Pharisees,
Nullifidians and Atheists, Anabaptists, and Adiaphorists, and all come up into
the Temple to pray.

And what of all this? Esto tu rectus, only be thou upright and all shall
work together for the best to thee that love God, and art effectually called
according to his purpose. Mali tecum esse possunt in area, in horreo nunquam
erunt. Well may evil men be with thee in the seed-furrow, but they shall never
be with thee in the barn. They are yet in the furrow and tillage, as those
that to day are bad, but to morrow may be good, as was this Publican; and they
which presume to day that they are perfect, to morrow may be found agraine too
light, as was this Pharisee. And therefore, sine utrosque crescere, let them
both grow together until the harvest. Then the great husbandman shall come
with his fan in his hand, to purge his floor thoroughly; the Wheat he shall
carry into his barn, but burn up the chafe with unquenchable fire.

In the mean time, let no sublunary distraction, slacken thy happy progress
to the Temple; but ascend in body, and ascend in spirit. For this purpose,
Temples were anciently situated upon hills; as that at Jerusalem upon mount
Sion, a fair place, and the joy of the whole earth. Our fathers worshipped in
this mountain, (said the woman of Samaria) And many of our Temples are so
situated at this day. And most of them have certain steps or ascents to
Quires and Chancels, to teach thee to ascend in spirit, as well as in body: to
ascend from the blindness of nature to the light of grace* from the old Adam
of sin to the new man of righteousness; from affection to perfection;
forsaking thy self and following thy Savior.

And when thou art come up into the Temple, stand not up proudly to justify
thy self, as did this Pharisee; neither squot down unmannerly in thy seat to
sleep, as too many in this drowzy age; but fall low on thy knees with this
Publican to pray. The Temple was not made to prate in, or to sleep in, but to
pray in. Pray then, and be sure to pray as thou ought to pray. Pray humbly,
pray heartily, pray devoutly, pray faithfully, and waver not. Fear not the two
men that are about thee, or without thee, they can neither help nor hinder thy
devotion; but let all thy care be when thou come into the Temple to pray,
that there be not duo homines as and homine, two men in one man within thee.
Consider where thou art, in the Temple. Consider wherefore thou come
thither, to pray. Consider to whom thou speak by prayer, to to him that is
(...), a searcher of thy very heart and reins, and a discerner of thy secret
thoughts long before thy self, and therefore will not be doubled or dissembled
with all. O consider all this, thou that forgettest God and thy self too much,
when thou go up into the Temple to pray. First, take Salonion for thy
counsel: Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let thine heart be hasty to utter a
thing before God. Then take Moses and David for thy Presidents. Put off the
unclean shoes of thy polluted affections, for the ground whereon thou treadest
is holy ground. First be able to say, Paratum est cor meum Domine, My heart is
ready, O God, my heart is ready: and then wash thine hands in innocence and so
compass Gods altar.

THE THIRD SERMON.
Luke 18. 11. The Pharisee stood and prayed with himself thus, etc.
WE are past the Preface, and have made an entrance into the Parable it self
so far, as the behavior of the two men, whom it principally concerns, the
Pharisee and the Publican, is expressed jointly in the Temple; where for a time
we left them at their devotion together, and now have found them at it again
severally, and apart, and first the Pharisee, for still he will be first.

Who though he came into the Temple with the Publican, yet being come, he
prays by himself apart. Whose devotion proclaims him a presumptuous
hypocrite both in the manner, and in the matter. In the manner, by standing up
so pert, and by standing apart. In the matter, which was nothing but mere
braggery, bumbasting his petitions, first with odious commendations of
himself, privative, and positive; God I thank thee I am no extortioner, no
unjust man, no adulterer; but I fast twice in the week, and I give tithe of
all that I possess. Secondly, by a malicious contempt of others, general and
special; I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican.

The very manner of his devotion, plucks away the vale from his face, and fets
him apparently up to the view of the whole world, that folly may blush, and
wisdom be nothing ashamed. And first it discovers the wooden head of
selfe-confidence, which has three parts.

Phares and Phareth, to divide 80 signifies the name of King Pharaoh, whose
regiment consisted of two forts of people, Hebrews, and Egyptians. So Thamars
^^btwins, the younger ^^^eth, but the elder called Pharez, beon use he first
opened the womb. So in that handwriting against: Balthazar, MEN^ TEKEL PHARES
or PEERS, Thon and thy kingdom are humbred, weighed, and divided to others.



The third part of selfe-confidence, is either heresy or any other
imperfection of doctrine, employed in these words, praying with himself. Three
notable notes, and manifest marks of a complete Pharisee.

John's virge. They went out from us, because they were not of us; for if they
had been of us, they would have continued with us: But this comes to pass,
that it might appear they are not all of us.

These two vipers and pestilent brood of their mother Confusion, have from the
very beginning, either snatched at the heels, or flowne into the face of the
true Church of God. The one, like those men of Iabes Gilead will conclude no
peace with Israel, except they may pluck out; their right eyes. The other,
like the young prince Ammon, shave away half the beard, and cut off by the
buttocks the garments of David's Ambassadors. So unmercifully is the Church
crucified betwixt these two malefactors: The one do disrumpere charitatis
vincula; D. Boys.
untie the bonds of peace; the other do corrumpere fidei dogmata, undo the
unity of the spirit. The first are different, in things indifferent; the
second almost indifferent, in matters different; and both spurn at the poor
Church, as at a common football. Of all the world like Sampsons Foxes, severed
in their head, but tied together by the tails, with firebrarnds betwixt them,
able to set a whole State in an uproare and a combustion.

The Church is called in Scripture a pillar, from whence they are fallen like a
tottering roof. A Ship, out of which they have wilfully leaped to be drowned,
making shipwreck of their faith. The hill of Sion, from whence they have
tumbled, and broken the neck of a good conscience. And the Spouse of Christ,
whose love they have forsaken, like vowbreakers and adulterers.

They can be content to acknowledge this to be the true Church; and yet in a
pharisaicall humor, they will not stick to cut themselves from it. Some for
filthy lucre, teaching such things as they ought not; as the Priest of Bell,
and Hyminaeus, and Philetus, and Demas, departing for the love of this present
world. And as Paulus Samosatenus, gaping for preserment from Zenobia Queen of
Arabia. Some for ambition, as Donatus, because he could not get a Bishoprickei
^n Carthage: And Novati^ missing the cushion for another in Italy: And Arrius
greatly stomacking the matter, because his schoole-fellow Eustathius was Jerome
in 13. Zach:
consecrated Bishop of Pontus, and not he. Some as sick as ever they can hold,
of self-love; their very conceit is their Idol. The covetous man worships his
money; and the Heretic his opinion; both like to the Athenians, worshipping
an unknown God. Simon Magus said, he was the great power of God the Father to
the Samaritans, the Son to the Jews, and the Holy Ghost to the Gentiles.
Some amongst us like the Manichees, Tertul.
who take their name from Manna; all that they say is Angels food. Some like
Montanus, who said he was the Comforter; none edify but they. Some like
Novatus, calling himself Moses, and his brother Aaron their Pastor and Elder.
Some like Donatus; there is no Clem. Alex.
Church but in their Africa, causing our charity to wither like grass on the
house top; and truth to be disguised like Ieroboams muffled wife, hardly to be
known, and our concord to fall in pieces like sand, and to be cut in the head
like the greek letter (...).

There was an harlot (you know) would not suffer Solomon to cut in pieces her
living child; yet these miscreants can endure to divide their ever-living
Savior. Some hold of Paul, some of Apollos, some of Cephas; who (if they had
any grace) might at length hear their Savior to complain: I was torn with
spears, rent with nails, shed my blood, and laid down my life; ut te mihi
conjungerem, Aug. con. Ar.
and tu dividis me, to join thee to my self, and thou dividest me.

Christ is the head of the Church, and the Church is the fullness of his body;
as they are not to be divorced, so they should not be divided. The Olive Tree
must be left with her fatness; the Judge 9. 9.
Fig Tree with her sweetness; the Vine with her wine, that cheereth the heart
of man; and the bramble bush (forsooth) must be anointed King, that men may
trust under the shadow of her branches: As if we could gather grapes of
thorns, or figs of thistles. It is impossible to gather wholesome grapes
(sound doctrine, good life, true worship, dutiful subjection) of thorns
(mutinous minds, turbulent spirits, throats full of adders poison, feet swift
to shed blood;) Or figs of thistles, (bread for hungry souls, certain for
doubting spirits, comfort for pined consciences:) they are both full of
stinging pricks; malice and melancholy, humors and rumors, conceit and
deceit, disorder and discord, madness and badnesse, Thistles indeed, that have
in their tops flowers like wool, but are tossed to and fro of every wind.
Their libels are more then standerous, their scoffs more then histrionicall,
and their calumniations more then Sycophanticall, They would be petty Popes in
their parishes, Princes in their privileges, and Neroes after their five and
few years government. Vtinam abscindantur (say I with the Apostle) I would to
God they were even cut off that thus disquiet you. They pretend that the zeal
of Gods house has even eaton them up; when indeed the zeal of their own
houses would eat up Gods house. Zealous Peter would feign build three
tabernacles; one for Christ, one for Moses, and one for Elias: In that, he wot
not what he said; he was wrapped. Zealous Boanerges, James and John, those
Sons of thunder, at one time would feign have commanded lightning from
heaven, to destroy the unbeleeving Samaritans: at another time they desired to
sit, the one at the right hand, the other at the left hand of Christ in his
Kingdom. In neither of which, knew they of what spirit they were, or what they
asked: Christ grants his Disciples, no such busy warrants, as Antichrist. Et
ad quid perditio isthaec (said Judas in his thriftie zeal) This ointment might
have been sold, and given to the poor: But we all know he was a purse-bearer.

Zealous Jews crucify the Lord of light as a blasphemer making himself the
Son of God: And zealous Pharisees will part his Garment amongst them; even
that tunicam inconsutilem, that seamelesse coat, the Unity of the faith, and
pretend all conscience without science; they will loose life and living, and
yet not for righteousness sake. These are the strongest bolts they shoot upon
the sudden, and the choicest arrows in all their quiver: All things they
Romans 11.
say are lawful for them, but all things are not expedient. Which being spoken
by the Apostle of things indifferent, nothing at all concern matters of
necessity. Fides docet quid debet, charitas quid decet: Our faith shows us
what is lawful; our charity, what is expedient: And therefore the ordinances
of the Church are necessary, quoad been esse, being the fosterers of faith, and
cherishers of charity.

The second arrow which is feathered with folly, shafted with error, and armed
with blindness, is this, Stand fast in the liberty which Gal. 5.
ye have received in Christ Jesus, and be brought no more into the bondage of
beggarly rudiments. Let them prove that they are the traditions of men,
unwashed hands, the bondage of the world, and not the wholesome discipline of
the true Church of God, inspired by the Holy Ghost, warranted by Scriptures,
admitted by Councels, and approoved by presidents, and we shall quickly yield.
Otherwise it will be told them, their colorable insinuations, and
metaphorical shadows, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter. The
ceremonies Leviticall of the Law are abolished, Ergo our Injunctions are
abominable? Such men such matter. It is well known, the Aple speaks there of
justification by works and faith, and not of the ceremonies of the Gospel.
And yet (forsooth) these men in substance of religion can come and build with
us, as did the men of Samaria by Zerubbabel; But to steal away the hearts of
the people as Absolon did; Proclaiming fasts, as did Iezabel, but to massacre
Naboth; Devouring Widows houses in pretense of long prayer; they kiss like
Iscariot, but they kill like Judas.

If reasonable and judicious men, would not wilfully suffer themselves to be
hood-winked and flattered in their folly, they might easily discern these
Gibeonites, for all their rent sackes, old shoes, dried and molded bread. I
bear them record they have a zeal indeed, but not according to knowledge; I
could rather wish they would have an inoffensive conscience both toward God
and Man; then would they be sure to give God his true fear, and Caesar his
due honor. And so I conclude this case of conscience with Saint Jerome: Si de
veritate scandalum oriatur, J^ Matt.
utilius scandalum nasci permittitur, quam veritas relinquatur. If some small
offense should arise from the profession of the truth, surely that offense must
needs be more tolerable, then gross ignorance. But when there is strife, and
1 Cor. 3. 3.
envy, and division amongst you, (says the Apostle) are you not carnal? When
one says, I am Paul's; another, I am Apolloes; hearing one and hating another,
are ye not carnal? I beseech you brethren (in the Apostles heart and tongue)
Mark them which cause contention amongst you, and avoyde them.

The second part of Pharisaicall selfe-confidence, is a wilful resolution of
opinion, or obfirmation of judgment intimated by the word, Standing. A
flattering and confident arrogance in it self, but uncharitably contemptuous
unto others, begetting two grand-follies, an erroneous falsehood in the speaker,
and a doubtful dubitation in the hearer, and making both miserable, when there
are so many faiths, as there are wills in men; so many Doctors and doctrines, as
manners in the world; and so many occasions of blasphemies admitted, as there
are vices committed, till at length our faith and religion must be written as
we list, and as we list, it must be understood; when our Preachers like
Spiders, weave Webs out of their own bowels, and like deceitful Vintners
turn Wine into Water by falsifying texts, but never like Christ turn Water
into Wine, by broaching sound doctrines, dividing the Word of God aright. When
the hearers again have itching ears, that cannot endure wholesome doctrines,
and commendable constitutions; their will being, like unto a sick man's taste,
nothing is savoury; and their judgment like the lightning that will be seen
before the thunder be heard. Tertullian complains much of their Preachers in
his time: Caedem Scripturarum faciunt (says he) ad suam materiam, They make a
slaughter of the Scriptures for their own purpose. And Thomas Aquinas, as much
of the hearers in his time. They run like mad men into the wilderness to see,
and what do they see? nothing but reeds shaken with the wind.

Vainglory, is both the mother and the nurse of obstinacy. All that a
Pharisee does (says our Math. 23.
Savior) is to be seen of men. He makes his Phylactery broad, and the fringes
of his garment long. He loves (...), the chief rooms at feasts, the chief
seats at Synagogues, solemn greetings in the Markets, and to be called of men
Rabbi, that his Science may be manifested, and himself magnified; and that
either directly, or indirectly. Directly; if in words, it is called
ostentation; if in deeds, that have a face of truth, it is called invocation;
but if the deeds be but apparent only, it deserves no better a name then
painted hypocrisy. Indirectly; if in understanding, it is called pertinacy,
and stubbornness of opinion; if in will, dissension; if in plausible speech,
and vociferation of words, contention; if in action, it is called obstinacy: So
Julian answering the christian Epistles of the Bishops: (...). Sozom. l. 50. c.
18.
I read, I understood, and I despised. This is the pharisaicall practice (I
fear) of too many amongst us, that being convicted by reason before prudent
authori^y, triumph at home amongst their populous rusticity, as if they had
gotten great spoils; like S. Augustines, Donatists, Disputare nolumus,
baptizare volumus; being more wordy then worthy, they speak what they list,
who should control them? Stat pro ratione voluntas; their will is their
reason, and shall be, though there be no reason in their will, nor can be:
thou shall not persuade them though thou do persuade them: like Salomons
fool, the more they are brayed in the mortar of discipline, the less they
seem to understand; and, like the milk of a Tygre, the more they are salted,
the fresher they are. A Pharisee sits chief in Synods, speaks first in
Councels, runs not sent, intrudes not called, records things ordered, undoes
things done, censures them that have judged, prejudicates them that are to
judge; and if he be not preferred when he would, and as he would; either he
presently condemns the superior as envious, himself being malevolent, or
else taxes his equal of Symony, himself being full fraught with Sodomy.

The Papist stands stiffely in his privilege of provincial Councels,
uncanonicall verity, Church above Scripture, and Pope above both, making him in
the plea, both party, and Judge too. The Turk, in his Mahomets Alcaron, a
golden book of a leaden Saint. The Enthusiastae, in their forced inspiration,
and superilluminated brotherhood, being but new peeped out of the Shell, and
scrambled into the Pulpit with the reproachful contumely of the learned, and
such peremptory boldness in themselves, will speak of Pythagoras his numbers,
Platoes Idea, the complots of a new heaven, and a new earth, ripping up all
secrets, as though they had been wrapped up into the third heavens, had the
tongues of Angels, and the wisdom of Cherubimes. On the other side the
hearers with unbridled tongues, and itching ears, kick against the pricks,
and bear them up in their hands, as Rachell did her fathers Idols. Some like
Montanus his Disciples tremble not to affirm, that their Teacher knows as
much or more then Christ himself: Some like Carpocrates his Disciples, that
he understands more then Paul or Peter, with all hail unto their Seraphicall
Rabbis; and Hosanna, Hosanna to their irrefragable Doctors, magnifying them,
as Pythagoras his Scholars did their Tutor, with an (...), he said it; and
therefore it must be so. Or as dunce Carolus argued, it is so, because it is so.

Woe worth this multiplicitie of opinions, this wracking of Scriptures, and
this squeezing and wire-drawing of texts, and this Pharisaicall pertinacy and
standing upon it too, which is worse then all the rest. Humanum est errare, non
retrahere belluinum, perseverare diabolicum. It is the part of humane frailty
to fall into error, of swinish beastliness not to retract, but divellish
pertinacy to persist or to maintain an error. It is told in Gath, and it is
reported in Askalon, that our kingdom is divided, and cannot long stand. It
were to be wished indeed, that Peter and Andrew, would both Steer one course
in this our British Haven; that were the only way to keep the net whole, and
to catch most store of fish. But howsoever I doubt not but I may safely answer
the malignant spirit, that has most evil will at our Sion, as Simon Peter
said unto Simon Magus; Vive, and regnum Dci crescere videas, vel invitus: Long
may thou live, and to thy sorrow see, the kingdom of God to increase
mightily, even in this kingdom.

Ioh. 3.
hates the light, neither comes he to it, lest his deeds should be
reprooved. But he that does truth, comes to the light, that his deeds might
be made manifest, that they are wrought according to God. Pharisaicall
hypocrisy is as naked as Adam after his fall, so miserably ashamed of
himself, that he runs into the bushes at the voice of God. The truth is as
naked too, but as Adam in the estate of innocence; and therefore the bolder to
appear at the first call with Samuel, Speak Lord, for thy servant hears:
Or, to join in that grand challenge with Jesus his author and finisher: Quis
ex vobis arguet, Which of you can rebuke me of sin? If I speak the truth,
why do ye not believe me? veritas non quaerit angulos, truth seeks no
corners, I have spoken openly in the world, and in secret have I said nothing.

O Pharisee, pharisee, do not thou know that our Savior commands thee,
Matthew 10. to Mate. 10.
preach that upon the house top, which thou hear in the ear? Why do thou
then detract from the doctrine of the truth in corners, and carpe at the good
life of thy brother in conventicles? without all question, Magna est veritas
and praevalet, Great is the truth and will prevail: though some as Seminaries
amongst their Massemongers brag against us, and say, that we have a slight
Apology for our faith. But as the King of Israel to Benhadad, so may I say to
these braggards: Let not him that 1 Kin 20.
girds on his harness boast like him that puts it off; it must needs be a
silly triumph that is proclaimed before victory. Some as Marcionites, a
generation that has not set their heart aright, and whose spirit cleaves not
steadfastly unto God. Like as the children of Ephraim, which being harnessed;
and carrying bows, turned themselves Psalm. 7. 8.
back in the day of battle: Crowing in their Pulpits a far off like cocks
(as Theodoret makes the comparison) and busling their feathers like Turkies in
their parlours: That would feign bind our Kings in chains, and our Nobles in
linckes of iron, and make Our Priests believe that God has not spoken by them.

As Numa Pompilius wrote his Laws in Closets and fathered them upon Vesta; so
they paint opprobrious libels, and contentious books in corners with Venus*
Mahomets Alcaron was published in the night; and Prodicus his mystical
communion, men and women together, was celebrated when the candle was put out.
When every man must have a private Ephod with Gedeon; or a whispering Levite
with Micaiah; Religion must needs fall to Idolatry with Jeroboam. In such a
case it is high time for Sampson, a famous Judge and Worthy of Israel to tie
his Foxes not only by the tails, but also by the heads together, in unity
and verity of doctrine (as one of the Rabbis Ben-sira.
divinely advises) that they may burn up the weedy corn of the Philistims
with the firebrarnds of faith and truth, lest they take both life and strength
from Sampson himself.

Correct a wise man with a nod (says Solomon) but a fool with a club. Cave ne
circulus in sylvam, gutta in mare, scintilla in slammam excreseat: It is
wholesome counsel from a Father; to beware that a small waste increase not to a
vast wilderness; a drop to a Sea; a spark to a flame. One jarring string
marres a whole consort of music; one rift hazzards a whole building; and a
little leaven sowres the whole lump: for if severitie of discipline turn once
into liberty, edification will presently run into destruction; costome into
corruption; law into contempt; mercy into derision; godliness into hypocrisy;
preaching into silence; the savor of life into the savor of death, an^
everlasting destruction.

Thus far (you see) we have traced the Pharisee by his inward profession in
matter of Church doctrine, in a metaphorical sense; now the Text leads us to
follow him a step or two by his outward gesture in matter of Church discipline
in a literal sense: for certainly they are both the true meaning of the Holy
Ghost, and ought to be urged both; as most profitable, and natural to the
analogy and proportion of faith.

Where still we shall be sure to find him a true Pharisee, a man divided; for
he divides himself from his brethren, even in the Congregation too. He is too
well acquainted with discord, and yet many times he runs and out-runs himself
upon a point of division. At a Feast he will be sure to take the upper room,
till he be bidden with shame to sit; lower. In the market he mightily
affect^ respective greetings. And in the T^^ple he stands up by himself like
a Noune Substantive, amongst the Eight parts of Speech; or an I per se I,
amongst the five vowells; as if his neighbors adjective devotion could not
stand by i^ self without his Substantive; bu^ were altogether inarticulate, as
a sentence wholly composed of consonants, without his vocal assistance, or
assistant vocalitie: and why? because he thanke^s his God, he is not as other
men are?

This arrogant presumption, and presumptuous arrogance, se^^ him upon his
tip-toes; and makes him as stiff in the joints as an Elephant, that has no
joints at all. He stands, when he should kneel, at prayer; he sits, when he
should stand, at the Creed; and either he sits or stands, when he should
kneel, at the Sacrament. To be sure to avoid artolatry, he will not stick
to commit autolatry; he is mightily afraid, where no fear is, to worship the
bread; but he fears not his own proud insolent carriage, whereby; in-stead
of God, he worships himself. In all the parts of Divine worship, both inward
and outward, he is all upon contraries. The Church by her leave shall prescribe
him no form, he will have a will worship by himself; and why? because he
thanks his God, he is not as other men are.

Indeed he is not; nor as himself should be, neither by Scripture precept, nor
Scripture president, which plead both for kneeling in Divine worship. A
Scripture precept we gather, 1 King. 19. 18. Where God expects from all true
Israelites the bending of the knee only to himself. Will the Pharisee believe
God (think you) if he bind it with an oath? I refer him then to Esaias 25.
23. I have sworn by my self (says the Lord there) that unto me every knee
shall how. If the Pharisee dare attempt, in vain, to make God forsworn; God
shall swear once more, and he shall not repent: This many forty years, have
I been grieved with the stubborn generation of this Pharisee, and therefore
now will I swear in my wrath, that neither he, nor any of his, shall ever
enter into my rest.

Should I muster up the whole army Royal of Scripture presidents for this
religious duty of kneeling in Divine worship, I might be infinite. I shall
therefore, to avoid prolixitie, draw out but some of the principal
commanders, no less then Kings and Prophets, that have expressed the inward
true humility of the heart, by the outward humiliation of the body; that the
Pharisee may blush for shame, if there be any shame in him, when we shall
object unto him the quot Reges and Propheta, how many Kings, and Prophets, and
dear Saints of God, and some after his own heart too, have humbly desired to
embrace this reverent gesture, which he out of an hautie spirit most proudly
and scornefully refuses.

Let him look first upon Solomon, the wisest, and wealthiest, the most
gracious and glorious prince (one only excepted) that ever the Jews had, or
the earth bare. Observe his graceful gesture at the dedication of the Temple.
2. Chron. 6. 13. He made a brazen scaffold, he set it in the midst of the
Court, first he stood upon it, then 2 Chronicles. 6. 13.
he kneeled down upon his knees before all the Congregation of Israel, and
spread forth his hands toward heaven, and prayed. Let him look upon Daniel in
the ninth Dan. 9.
of his Prophecy, and he shall find him at his devotion, humbling himself by
fasting, and sackeloth, and ashes. Let him look upon Moses, Numb. 16. And
there he Number. 16.
shall find him lower then his knees, even flat upon his face before his
Maker. Let him look upon the King of Niniveh, Io^. 3. and behold the heathen
Monarch, what strange gestures of hearty humiliation, he expresses in the very
instant act of his conversion. For no sooner had he heard that thundering
Sermon from the Prophet, (yet forty days and Niniveh shall be destroyed,) but
presently he arose, and starts up, as if he had been raised by an earthquake
from his seat of honor and principality, his royal, his regal, magnificent,
Monarchical throne; He casts his robe from him, with fury and indignation, as
if his kingly attire of gold and purple had been a burden to his back, and as
unseemely to be worn as the Egyptian scab. He covers himself with sackcloth,
it is all the apparel now, that his highness desires to wear; the Diadem to
his head, the mantle to his back, the sandals to his feet; the King winds up
his body in sackcloth, as a corpse made ready for the burial, humbling his dust
and earth to sit in ashes, that he might read the Son of Sirachs Lecture of
sound humiliation effectually to himself: Quare superbis terra and cinis? why
art thou proud, oh earth and ashes? humble thy spirit, see thy mortality,
tremble before the presence of that God, that strikes terror into the hearts,
and confusion into the faces of all earthly Potentates.

Let him look upon the very King of Kings, and Prince of Prophets, the Author
and finisher of our faith, even Jesus the Mediator of the New Testament; who
might justly say indeed, Non sum sicut cateri, I am not as other men are;
neither proud, as thou Pharisee; nor sinful, as thou Publican: yet he, when
he was in the form of God, and thought it no robbery, to be equal with God,
humbled himself to become man; and in the former part of his passive obedience
for the sin of man, fell down upon his knees to prayer on the mount. As in
the 22. chapter of this Gospel.

And to conclude all in a word; let him look into the 26 of Job. and Revel. 7.
And he shall find that the very Pillars of heaven do tremble, and are
astonished at the Majesty of God; and the very Angels of Heaven do fall upon
their faces before the throne to worship God. Shall Kings, and Prophets, and
the very Prince of Prophets; shall men and Angels, Saints and sinners, Heaven
and earth, and all the powers in both, quake and tremble, and fall low upon
their knees, and flat upon their faces before the throne to worship their
Maker; and only the Pharisee stand up to justify himself, and in the Temple
too, and at prayer too and so devoutly by himself too?

There let him stand by himself still, as immovable as his heart of stone
that he stands upon, or the pillar of stone that he stands by. If either he
thinks he may outface his Maker, or challenge him upon a true debt, or tax
him upon his own worthiness, or as a choice piece of clay dispute with his
potter, and convince him by dint of argument; he may do well to stand up by
himself still, to boast, and brag, and dispute, and challenge: what need he
pray? If otherwise, I must needs tell him, that one day there will come a
miserable humiliation for this proud exaltation: when he that taxes him in
this parable here (and yet he stands up proudly by himself) shall come to
tax him the second time with an innumerable company of Saints and Angels in
the clouds, he shall never be able to stand there. The man that stood up so
pertly upon his terms of righteousness here, shall never be able to stand up
in judgment amongst the righteous there. Then he shall fall down, when it is
too late, desiring the hills to cover him, and the mountains to fall upon him:
then he shall be glad to humble himself so low, as to annihilate himself
(if it were possible) to a mere nothing.

And thus ends the first part of pharisaicall devotion, which is so corrupt
(you see) in the very manner: The second part, which is the matter, we shall
find as corrupt in the next exercise.

THE FOVRTH SERMON.
Luke 18. 11. God I thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners,
unjust, adulterers, or even as this Publican. Verse. 12. I fast twice in the
week, and I give tithe of all that I possess.
YOU have heard the corrupt manner of the Pharisees devotion, now follows the
matter as corrupt as it, being neither formal, nor effectual, nor
substantial. Because it is not formal, it cannot be substantial, by the
principles of nature and grace too: For forma dat esse rei; without which
devotion it self, is but a rude lump of indigested confusion. And because it
is neither formal, nor substantial, it cannot be effectual, but as a
founding brass, and as a tinckling cymball.

First, his devotion is corrupt in form; He begins with an Ago gratias, God I
thank thee, whereas me thinks a miserere, would have became him better: Oh
God, be merciful to me a sinner. A good Priest always begins his devotion
with a confession of sin, and ends with a thanksgiving or grace; as the Church
Liturgy directs him, and as all approoved examples in Scripture warrant him.
Abraham, Genesis 18. petitioning for Genesis 18.
the Sodomites, prostrated himself before the Lord by an humble confession of
his own weakness: Behold, now I have begun to speak unto my Lord that am but
dust and ashes. As if he should have said; Oh let it not displease my Lord;
that I petition so earnestly for sinners, being a sinner my self. So Iacoh
Genesis 32. Minor sum omnibus Genesis 32.
miserationibus tuis, O Lord I am not worthy the least of all thy mercies. So
David, 2 Samuel 7. 2 Samuel 7.
Quis ego, and quae domus mea? who am I, O Lord, and what is my house, that
thou have brought me hitherto? So Daniel 9. We have sinned, Dan. 9.
and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly; O Lord, righteousness
belongs unto thee, but unto us open shame. But this Map of irregularitie
begins at the wrong end with an Ago gratias, and in stead of accusing himself
condemns his brother: In general, Non sum sicut caeteri, I am not as other
men are; In special, non sicut ist^ Publicanus, I am not as this Publican; for
I fast twice in the week, and I give tithe of all that I possess.

And this makes his devotion as corrupt in substance as in form, puffed up with
nothing but battologies, and tautologies, and idle repetitions. He might
as well have expressed all his perfections by that one word just, as did the
Publican his imperfections by that one word sinner: for if he were just he
could be no extortioner; and if no extortioner, without question he paid his
tithes; and if he fasted often, it argues that he was continent; and if more
righteous then all men, it must needs be granted, that he was more just then
the Publican. But it seems this vain babbler loves to hear himself talk; as
if he came not to pray unto his God, but to prate unto his own sweet-selfe. As
Thomas Aquinas upon the place, and as the words of the text expressly
insinuate: The Pharise^ stood, and prayed with himself thus.

His devotion then, being so void of form, and void of substance, cannot
choose but be altogether ineffectuall: for mark first how arrogantly he
pleades, Non sum sicut cateri; I am not as other men are. It had been an
extreme point of arrogancy, to have advanced himself above some men, or above
most men; but to vilify and contemn all men, and especially the penitent
Publican, it must needs be the part of an incarnate Lucifer, and more then
the spice of Ero similis altissimo; I will be like unto the most high, and
place my neast above amongst the stars of God. For upon earth (you see) he
acknowledges no man equal to himself. Whereby he seems mightily to disparage
both the wisdom, and the goodness of God; as if God were bound only to
bless, and to enrich him.

And therefore the sin of pride is most aptly compared to a whirlewind, that
turns up whole Cedars by the roots; and to its power will endure nothing to
subsist before it. There is no sin else but will be sociable, and admit of
too many companions: only this divellish pride is of so stern, and austere a
nature, that it brooks no equal: it exalts itself not only against all that
is called man, but all that is called God.

Again, mark how ridiculously he pleades: I fast twice in the week, and I
give tithe of all that I possess. As if a beggar should come to the door and
ask an alms, and show his Rings and Robes, and costly ornaments; a man would
think that rags and wounds would sooner speed his suite: So this proud beggar,
or bragger rather, shows not his rags, but his robes; not his wounds, but his
worth; not his misery, but his braverie: Ergojam plenus es Pharisaee Aug.
(says S. Augustine upon the place) He is full, and needs not alms; he is
whole, and needs Reu. 3. 17
no physician: He thanks his God, with the Church of Laodicea, That he is rich
in grace, and increased in goods, and wants nothing; and Knows not that he is
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked.

The case of such a man must needs be as desperate as that sick patients, that
having a vein opened by a Surgeon, lets out his best blood that maintains
life, and only retains the worst that hastens death: So this Pharisee here,
lets out all his goodness at once, that should maintain his spiritual
health; and keeps his wickedness close to himself; the only speedy way to
hasten his everlasting death. Yet such are the sacrifices, that these fools
offer continually to the Almighty. It is the language of Balaam, Number. 23.
Numb. ^5
when his Maker met him; septem altaria ordinavi, I have prepared seven altars,
and offered upon every altar a Bullock and a Ram: As if God were so
respectlesse that he would not, or so blind that he could not see the best of
our actions. We need not fear the omnisciencie of God, who sees not only the
deed but the will, and duly weighs and considers every circumstance of both.
Let Abraham testify, Genes. 22. He was ready there to offer up the sacrifice
enjoined him by the Angel, with an Ecce ego twice, Behold here I am. At the
first call to receive the fiat, Here: At the second call to act the fiat,
Here. And God was as ready to consider, and to commend, and to reward every
circumstance of his obedience, so wracked and tortured upon such a
multiplicitie of difficulties, with a quia fecisti hanc rem. By my self I have
sworn (says the Lord) Because thou have done this thing, and have not spared
thine only son: Therefore I will surely bless thee, and greatly multiply
thy seed. As if God should have said unto Abraham thus. Abraham, I see thy
will, and I see thy deed, and I accept thy will for thy deed; and I weigh and
consider every circumstance of both to be full of difficulty. I see thou art
ready for my sake to sacrifice, not a beast, but a man; not a servant, but a
son; not one amongst many, but an only Son; and he not an ordinary, or a
disrespected Son, but a beloved Isaac, upon whose life depends the whole
burden of the promised blessing. All these circumstances I weigh, as weighty
and ponderous indeed; and by my self I swear, quia fecisti hanc rem, Because
thou have done this thing, this great thing, this thing beyond a name;
Therefore I will surely bless thee, and greatly multiply thy seed.

Mary Magdalen, Luke 7. can testify the like; who received such strange
approbation from our Savior, for that poor entertainment she gave him, for
anointing his feet; that he weighed and considered every circumstance, to the
great disparagement of Simon the housekeeper. For, turning to the woman, and
speaking unto Simon, he said: See thou this woman? I entered into thine house,
and thou gave me no water to my feet; but she has washed my feet with
tears, and wiped them with the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no kiss;
but she, since the time that I came in, has not ceased to kiss my f^ete. Mine
head with oil did thou not anoint; but she has anointed my f^ete with
ointment. Mark how he observes every circumstance of his entertainment, and
accordingly rewards it with a boon, no less then a peccata remittuntur: Thy
sins are forgiven thee.

It is bootlesse then for any man to play the Pharisee so deeply, as to
divulge his goodness, and to conceal his wickedness, and to, and from Him
too, that is an equal and an impartial discerner of both. To proclaim that
to him, that knows it long before our selves, it is extreme tolly; to hide
that from him, to whom all things are open, it is extreme frenzy. He cannot
possibly be the better by the one, but he must needs be a great deal the
worse by the other; and indeed to say the truth, a great loser by both.

That the Pharisee went up into the Temple to pray; that he was not an
extortioner, unjust, adulterer; that he fasted, and paid his tithes, were
things (no doubt) both exceeding commendable, and absolutely commandable: for
these things he ought to have done. But his proud boasting, like the herb
Coloquintida, or wild gourd mentioned, 2 Kings 4. spoiled 2 King 4.
the whole pot of pottage. Mill virtutibus affluens propter arrogantiam
falicitatem amisit: The wonderful virtuous man, is now become wonderful
vicious; He, that before was happly none, is now unhappily become an
extortioner in the highest degree, robbing God of his due honor, and relying
wholly upon his own merits. He that before might be comparatively just, is
now most unjust beyond comparison, taking the wall of his betters, and
condemning the Publican rashly without proof or reason, or any due form of
Law; playing the part of an accuser and a Judge too. He, that before might be
little or none, is now become an adulterer in the highest degree, being so
wedded unto the world, and wholly enamoured with popular applause, not knowing
(like an adulterer as he is,) that the amity of the world, is but enmity
with God. So that in fine (you see) like a foolish Hen he lost all his eggs by
cackling; he did verbis praeferre virtutem indeed, but he did factis
destruere veritatem too. Like Cypr.
an empty mill, the more the clacke goes, the less the mill grindes.

Such is the dangerous nature and condition of secret pride; It can make
nothing more, but it does make all things less; and yet even then seeming
greatest in show, when they are lest in substance: Like the painting of an
harlot, it cozens all, and yet it draws most men after it. It is the devils
own darling, and therefore must needs be most acurate to seduce. All other
sins are but his bastards, this is his own brat, and like the father; his
express character, as Bernard calls it. All other sins (as Thomas Aquinas
observes) Bern. Aquin.
are said to be in the Devil secundum reatum, by guilt only, as being the
tempter to every sin: only pride and envy is in him secundum effectum; as
being the first actor of this sin in his own person.

This makes the politic Jesuit abroad, and the crafty Iebusite at home such
mighty mount-bankes of their own perfections, and roaring trumpets of their
own vainglory; thanking their God, that they are not as other men are, nor
as we, cast-awayes; but selectioris farinae men of a purer note, and cleerer
conversation; thinking nothing but truth, saying nothing but truth, doing
nothing but truth. Especially the Jesuit will not be persuaded, but that the
feesimple of all men's actions, words, and thoughts, are in his free gift, to
raise, and set the price at his devotion. His entia be transcendentia; in all
things an absolute Superlative, sans peer. His very sots are Salomons, his
blacke-birds Swans, and his silents politickes. He is the very spawne and fry
of the old Pharisee; of whom I may too justly say, as Saint Augustine against
Faustus the Manichee: Aug.
Si hoc esset justum esse, justificare seipsum; if this were to be just for a
man to justify himself, certainly this generation of Vipers had long since
flowen up into heaven in the whirlewind of their own imaginations: but examine
their actions, and you shall find David's clogge at their heels, that weighs
them down. They travel with mischief, they conceive sorrow, and they bring
forth ungodliness. Their throat is an open sepulcher, Psalm. 5. 9.
they flatter with their tongue, there is no faithfulness in their mouth,
their inward parts are very wickedness.

And indeed to say the truth, this makes every man, almost without exception,
so familiar with this Non sum sicut caeteri, (I am not as other men are, or as
that Publican) that I fear I might too justly invert our Saviors question to
the Jews, and say, Quis ex vobis non argueretur de peccato hoc? which of you
may not in some sort be taxed of this sin? Quis non Pharisaeus? who has not
in one degree or other, some dreg, some spice of a Pharisee; some more, some
less?

The glutton, and the Drunkard, he thanks his God too, that he is not as
other men are: Extortioner, unjust (adulterer perhaps) but not as that usurer,
He fasts little, he confesses; but he pays his tithes as freely as he
drinks, and that is commonly more then his share for quietness sake. And
indeed well may he thank the god he serves for it, his belly; which makes
him draw so large a patrimony through his throa^e, that eases him of all care,
either for use or principal.

The Usurer, and Extortioner, he thanks his god too, that he is not as other
men are. A little unjust perhaps? but sure he is no adulterer, no glutton, nor
as that drunkard; he fasts enough in conscience, all the week long, both he
and his family to save charges: and he pays tithe for as much of his
possession as the Law can sqeeze out of him. But he too may thank the god he
serves for all this, his gold; to whom he is so prostrate by a certain kind
of superstition, that upon pain of sacrilege, he dares scarce lay finger Auri
Sacra fames Virg
on it, even for pinching necessity, much less for superfluity.

The riotous, and voluptuous swaggerer, he thanks his god too, that he is
not as other men are; wracking extortioners, griping Usurers, unjust
oppressors, or as that plodding worldling. He scorns to be so base to lade
himself with thick clay; or that the stone should cry out of the wall to him,
or the beam out of the timber answer it. For adultery, tush, it is but a
trick of youth: fasting Je^unium coactum.
he is content to embrace when he can get no victuals: He neither sowes, nor
reapes; and therefore neither cares for tithes, nor any thing else: for his
part he will ^e sure to make much of one so long as it holds; Eat, drink,
and be merry, and let the world wagge. But alas little does this ^ad-man
dream, how soon this god he thanks, and this master he serves, his body of
sin, will turn him out of doors with slender wages, but (...) at most, the
perishing pleasures of sin for a short reason; like Iona^ his gourd, soon
Worme-eaten, and soon withered.

But why spend we time about these vicious men? This leaven of the Pharisee, a
secret conceit of the Non sum sicut caeteri, has both sowred and swelled the
greatest professors in the school of virtue and godliness too. In so much
that it is observed by some, that this devilish pride has not only raised
all vices, either publicly or privately, but all virtues against humility too.
For,

Concute, tecum habita, te consule, dic tibi quis sis.

Let every man plumbe deep into his own conscience, and tell me, whether he
be not secretly proud of his giving of alms, proud of his fasting, proud of
his praying; and, if he pay his tithes duly, whether he be not secretly proud
of that too? It is likewise observed further, that this infernal haggard has
set humility at variance with her self, lift up her hand to offer violence to
her own person, and by a monstrous, unnatural, prodigious kind of birth to
bring forth pride: In so much that the humble man is too often as proud of his
humility as Diogenes of his rags. It is high time then for that great Actor
and Teacher of humility it self, to deliver unto us that wholesome caveat in
the Gospel: Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees; for it soures all, and it
swells all: when the heart is once secretly infected with it, it sends up such a
bitterness out of the stomach in^o the mouth, that men sorbeare not to speak
evil of such as are in authority; much less to vilify their equals or
inferiors, with a Non sum sicut caeteri, I am not as other men are, or as that
Publican.

Oh that men would once purge out this old leaven, that they might be a new
lump, and celebrate a perpetuate feast of sweet bread unto the Lord their God
with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth: which with hearty prayer, and
honest Christian endeavor they might in time accomplish, if they would but
observe and practice this our rule. When a man looks upon his neighbor, let
him observe his virtues, and not his vices; when he looks upon himself, let
him take notice of his own vices, but not his virtues. An excellent pill to
purge out the old leaven, if it be truly observed and duly kept; the breach of
either clause whereof opens a large gap unto the Non sum sicut caeteri, I am
not as other men are, or as that Publican.

For example sake: when a man undertakes the burden of his own actions, he
put his vices into the hinder part of the Wallet, and casts them behind his
back; but his virtues he will be sure to carry before him in the former part
of the Wallet. His vices are no sooner acted but forgotten; but his virtues are
many times proclaimed before they are acted. Let him be taxed for vice, and
presently he pleades. Either Dr. King in Ion.
non feci; Or, si feci, non male feci; Or si male, non multum male; Or si
multum male, non mala intention; Or si mala intention, aliena tamen
perswasione: Either he did it not; Or if that be prooved, then he did not ill
in so doing; Or if that be made manifest, then it was not very ill done: a
small fault God knows. Is it not a little one and my soul shall live? Or if
it be prooved to be a great one, horrendum facinus, then God forgive him for
it, it was done against his will, he had no intention in the world to do it:
or if his ill intent be discovered, then, true it is indeed, it was a great
weakness of his to be so foolishly lead and drawn to it by the persuasion and
instigation of others, Thus are most men too familiar in begetting, but too
strange in fathering their bastard vices; they will be sure to have one trick
or an other to slip them (if it may be possible) into the hinder part of the
Wallet, and carry them unto their graves, as if they had never been. But let
him be commended for virtue, and he presently answers like a pert Trojan --
Coram quem quaeritis adsum: and if no man take notice of his goodness, he
commonly proclaims it himself, he carries it in the former part of the
Wallet, and for a need he can be the trumpeter of his own praises.

But when a man bears the burden of another man's actions, he puts his vices
into the former part of the wallet, and his virtues into the hinder part, to
verify that old proverbiall distichon:

Do a man ill, he hears of that ever:

Do a man well, he hears of that never.

As it was affirmed of Peter, after he denied his Master; Pe^cata vides,
lachrymas non vides, And as the accusers of the Adultresse behaved themselves.
Ioh. 8. Good God, how Ioh. 8.
skillful, and busy they were in detecting the poor woman's folly. First, they
took her (says the text.) Secondly, In the act. Thirdly, they set her in the
midst. Fourthly, they urge the Law of. Moses, and needs they must have her
stoned to death forsooth. Peccata vident, they see her sin, it is plain and
evident, and they aggravate every circumstance to the full: Lachrymas non
vident, her tears of true repentance they see not, they cast them into the
hinder part of the wallet: And therefore our blessed Savior, that knew all
secrets both hers and theirs, gives the wallet but the right turn, bids him,
that was without sin, cast the first stone; And presently (says the text)
they went out one by one, and Jesus and the woman were left alone. So the
woman's accusers became their own accusers: they found that writing, which our
Savior drew in the dust, so deeply engraven in their own hearts with a pen
of iron, it could not be dissembled.

So that you see, if that every man would but do as he ought, bear one
another burden in love, and give the wallet but the right turn; this leaven
of the Pharisee, which is no better then secret pride, and divellish
hypocrisy, would quickly be converted into the unleavened bread of truth and
sincerity. If every man, when he carries his own burden, would but turn his
vice before him, and his virtue behind him; it would both mightily further his
humiliation, and slacken his ostentation. If when he carries an other man's
burden, he would but turn the virtue before him, and the vice behind him; it
would mightily further his own edification, and slacken the contempt, and
vilification of his brother. Then would he judge no man rashly before the
time, but pass the verdit of guiltiness only upon himself here, that he may
escape the severe censure of the Lord hereafter. Then would the ugly shape of
his own vice mortify him, and the exemplary virtue of his neighbor quicken
him. And then would he turn the stream of the Non sum sicut caeteri, quite
an other way; And when he comes up into the Temple to pray, after an humble
confession of sin upon his bended knees, he would power out an hearty
thanksgiving for his first fruits of grace, after this, or the like manner.

I confess, (a fit prayer for those Doctor Featly H^ndmaide to private Devotio.
to make, that have fallen since their Baptism into gross sins,) O Lord, the
time was not long since, that I walked in darkness, and in the shadow of
death; in the error of mine understanding, the depravation of my will, the
disorder of mine affections, the impuritie of my thoughts, the vanity of my
desires, the dec^itfulnesse of mine heart, and the wickedness of of all my
ways. The God of this world had so blinded mine eyes that I thought my self
most happy, when indeed I was most miserable; and the leaven of the Pharisee
had so sowred and swelled mine heart, that I only advanced my self, and
vilified my brother. But now, God I thank thee, thou have given me the grace
to begin to see my wretchedness. Non sum sicut caeteri; indeed, it is true, I
am not as other men are, nor as this Publican. They are just, I unjust: they
none extortioners, nor adulterers; I both in the highest degree, I have robbed
thee of thine honor, wedded my self wholly to the world, and been puffed up
with the vain blast of popularitie: They have been temperate in the
comfortable use of thy good creatures, I have been often suffocated and
crop-sicke with the swinish abuse of them; and with my fellow glutton in the
Gospel, have fared deliciously every day: They have paid their tithes justly
and willingly, without grutching or grumbling, not for fear of the Law, but
for the maintenance of the Gospel; I have pinched and purloined sometimes
half, sometimes all thy portion for the maintenance of mine own divellish
pride and sensuality. Vae misero, oh miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death? God I thank Romans 7.
thee through Jesus Christ my Lord, that thou have given me this singular
grace, at length to see this great wretchedness of mine: The consideration
whereof must needs humble me in my self, that Christ may raise me; wound me
in my self, that Christ may heal me; burden me in my self, that Christ may
ease me; kill me in mine own conceit, that Christ may quicken me; and make
me most vile and despectible in mine own eyes, that I may be most precious
in his sight: For now, God I thank thee, I see most clearly, Non sum sicut
caeteri. I am not as other men are, nor as this Publican.

THE FIFTH SERMON.
Luke 18. 13. But the Publican standing a far off, would not lift up so much
as his eyes to heaven, but smote his breast, saying, O God be merciful to me
a sinner.
WE have sufficiently scanned every part and particle of Pharisaicall
devotion, occasioned by the precedent passages of this parable; which we found
to be altogether corrupt, both in the manner, and in the matter. But now this
Text presents unto us a matchless mirror of pure devotion with a (But)
indeed; which puts a Diametricall opposition betwixt the two Supplyants, and
their several devotions. The Pharisee and the Publican stand (both) at first;
The Pharisee in the most eminent and perspicuous place of the Temple, as if he
had been the only professor of piety; But the Publican a far off in some
obscure or dark corner, as a mere castaway in his own conceit. The Pharisee
prays by himself in the midst of the Congregation, as judging himself the
best of the Congregation: But the Publican by himself in the very skirts of
the Congregation, as judging himself not worthy the communion of Saints. The
Pharisee stood up to justify himself, and to dispute with his maker; to
advance himself, and to vilify his brother: But the Publican would not lift
up so much as his eyes to heaven, but vilify and debase himself below the
greatest Sinner: The Pharisees devotion was sour and tedious; containing as
many lines as the Publicans, words; But the Publicans was short and sweet,
every word a sentence, coutching much matter in a little room, Oravit paucis,
Bucer.
sed affectu multo, (as Bucer upon the place) Expressing by three postures, and
four words, the four capital virtues of a true penitent; Contrition,
Confession, Faith, and Amendment. His contrition was abundantly manifested by
the humble distance of place he kept, Standing a far off; by his dejected
countenance, not presuming so much as to lift up his eyes to heaven; and by
smiting his hand upon his breast. His confession, by acknowledging himself to
be a sinner. His faith by calling upon God in the midst of his fear, and
knocking his breast to rouse up his heart; and by applying the mercies of God in
Christ unto himself by a timely Miserere. O God, be merciful to me a sinner.
And for the amendment of his life, that likewise followed in its order: For he
went home (says our Savior) unto his house j^stified: nor are we to doubt
but that he, after this, brought forth fruit worthy of amendment of life.

Behold then in this humble Publican an incomparable pattern of pure devotion,
right worthy the note and imitation, both for the matter, and for the manner.
For the manner (me thinks) he performs the office of a skillful Organist,
who commonly keeps the remotest place of distance from the Altar, standing a
far off: And though his fantasy be inwardly wrapped with a conception of an
heavenly air, yet his countenance is outwardly dejected and cast down, not so
much as lifting up his eyes to heaven: But for his hand, it is agill and nimble
for want of an assistant to blow the bellows, by smiting the breast; the
bellows being full to send it into the trunk of the heart; the keys of the
heart being touched to let it into the pipes, and so to begin his service.

For the matter (me thinks) he makes up a complete Quire, of himself, and
sings a solemn Service of four parts. A Jove principium: He begins upon a
treble, and an high one too, no lower then the highest; happy is he that can
reach him, sure I am there isnone can overreach him, O God. The Diapason to
that is a Base, and a deep one too, De profundis clamat. Out of the deepes he
cries with that sweet Singer of Israel, because a Sinner. And the two closing
parts, that give the relish, and make the music full, are a true Tenor, that
always sings me in Ela me, upon a sharp strain of misery; and a sweet
Mean, that closes up all upon a flat strain of mercy: And the same heart and
hand, that give breath unto the pipes, beat time unto the Song, O God, be
merciful to me a sinner.

I suppose I need not call for your ears to hearken to his Service, being so
musically divine, and divinely musical, and so proper and pertinent to the
Text and time. Wherein first the manner of his devotion directs us to his
humble postures, and first to his Stat a long: The Publican standing a far
off.

The strength of his devotion brought him into the Temple to pray; but when he
came thither, the guilt of his own sin, the tenderness of his own
conscience, the fearfulness of the place, it self being the house of God,
the habitation of the most High, the place where his honor dwells; All these
meeting together in his perplexed thoughts, with the Prophets peccata
diviserunt, Your sins have made a separation betwixt your God and you; laid
such a block at the feet of his forward zeal; that, standing a far off, he
durst not approach nearer, till he had obtained a plenarie and comfortable
absolution, by the means of an humble and hearty confession: Propitius esto
Deus mihi peccatori. O God, be merciful to me a Sinner.

And to assure you that this is the right posture of true humility in divine
Service, for a sinner to acknowledge and bewail his long distance from God,
before he can draw near unto him; we have a Prodigal in another Parable in
this Gospel to parallel the Publican. Who when he had spent Luke 15.
all his goods by ryotous living in a far Country, in so much that he would
feign, if he had been suffered, have eaten husks amongst the Swine for
hunger, no sooner came to himself, but presently he found and bewailed his
far distance from his Fathers house, where the very hired servants had bread
enough, and he ready to die for hunger. Whereupon he presently resolves to
arise, and to go to his Father, and say; Father, I have sinned against heaven,
and against thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son; make me but
as one of thine hired Servants. But before he found himself to be a stranger,
there was no thought of home.

Surely (beloved) it was not only that Prodigals, or this Publicans, but it is
every sinners case; if men would but rightly understand themselves. Too many
there are (I fear) that think they are stayed children at home in their
Fathers house, when indeed, they are no better then unthriftie prodigals,
wasting and consuming their portions in a far Country. Too many that are too
audacious to press into the House of God, without either fear or wit to keep
their true distance: For le^ every man be assured and resolved of this;
whosoever shall presume to draw near unto God with his lips only, and close
in with him upon a sudden, by an arrogant advancement of his own worthiness,
God shall stand off as far from him as from this Pharisee: But whosoever
shall stand trembling a far off, by an hearty confession of sin, and an
humble acknowledgement of his own unworthiness, God shall draw as near unto
that man, as unto this Publican.

The second posture of true humility, expressed by this humble Publican, was
the dejection of his countenance: Nolebat oculos ad coelum levare, He would
not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, or to his Father, which was in
heaven: He knew and acknowledged with the aforesaid Prodigal, that he had
sinned against heaven, and against his heavenly Father, and that he was no more
worthy to be called his Son. This was Esdras Esd. 8. Luke 7.
his posture, Who confessed unto the Lord, That he was ashamed, and confounded
before His face. It was likewise Mary Magdalons in the seventh of this Gospel;
Who thought her self unworthy by reason of her manifold transgressions to
appear before the face of her blessed Savior; and therefore when He sat at
Table in the Pharisees house, she stood trembling behind him, brought a box of
ointment, prostrated her self at His feet, washed them with her tears, and
wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed them, and anointed them with
ointment, and never presumed to show her face either to him or others, before
she had received those blessed words of absolution, Peccata remittuntur, thy
sins are forgiven thee.

Certainly (beloved) such is the ugly shape and disguise of sin; that if but
every ones Rimmon were written in his forehead, we should not meet one
another in the streets with that boldness that we do, much less croude into
the Temple to justify our selves with such impudence, and erection of
countenance. Many a man (says Tacitus) carries a smooth face outwardly,
Tacitus.
Quonum si mentes recludantur, possint adspici laniatus and ictus; if a man
could but turn their inside outward, he might soon discover strange stripes,
and rents, and galls of conscience. The reason is, because the grief is
inward, gnawing and feeding upon an heart as hard as brawne, and therefore
insensible. This makes most men as insensible of their spiritual, as Senecaes
fool Harpastes Senecats.
of her natural blindness: She knew (says he) that she was blind, and yet
she often entreated her guide to lead her out of doors, because the house was
dark. It is even so with most men; I may too justly make Seneca's Application;
Rem incredibilem narro, sed veram; I tell you a very strange, but a true tale:
Men are such strangers to themselves, and sins; if you charge them with any,
They will say, and swear, and bind it with a curse, They know it not; In the
very same terms that Peter denied his Master, Non novi hominem, I know not the
man. But when Christ looks back once, then Peter weeps bitterly. When men
find themselves narrowly eyed and observed by him, that continually looks
down from heaven Psalm. 14.
upon the children of men, to see if there be any, that will understand and
seek after God; then they come crouching into the Temple with all humility as
did this Publican. Who first, stood a far off. Secondly, presumed not so much
as to lift up his eyes to heaven Thirdly, smote his hand upon his breast, which
was the last posture.

This smiting his hand upon his breast, as it argued abundance of humility,
so it expressed abundance of significancie. He smote his breast, sometime the
cave and dungeon of a wilful, slavish, and a rebellious heart; from whence, as
from an impure fountain, issued evil thoughts, adulteries, murders,
fornications, thefts, slanders, and all the noisome lusts that defile the man:
but now the Sanctuary of a broken heart, and contrite spirit, groaning under
the former burden of bondage and captivity, and desiring to break up prison
with all the violence the hand can assist it with. Such are the passions and
distractions of troubled and perplexed consciences, that as when a tree is
torn up by the roots, it leaves the ground all rent and mangled where it
stood; so when sin is newly rooted out of the heart with much violence, it
leaves it much troubled and perplexed; commanding the hand as strickt a service
as Theseus did Hercules, that committed Sen. Trag.
an unnatural murder upon his wife and children; Percute, percute ictu valido;
non enim debent mollite^r tractari ea pectora, quae tanti sceleris conscia
extiterunt. Strike, and strike valiantly; for such corrupt hearts, or breasts
as these, ought not to be favored, that are guilty of such outrageous, and
abominable wickedness.

But to draw toward a conclusion of the first part, which is the manner of the
Publicans devotion. Without question these three postures of his; a mannerly
distance in the Temple, standing a far off; dejection of the countenance, not
prefuming so much as to lift up his eyes to heaven; and smiting his hand upon
his breast, must needs be true signs of hearty humiliation, if heartily
performed. But let me give you this Caveat by the way: whosoever he be, that
shall so eagerly affect the outward Ceremony, as not principally to intend the
inward sincerity, the non sum sicut caeteri will quickly steal upon that man,
and an arrogant conceit of proud humility (as was formerly premised) even in
these commendable gestures will spoil all the service.

For example sake: The Ninivites. Ion. 3. Proclaimed a fast, and Ion. 3.
put on Sackecloth, from the greatest even to the least of them; and God was so
well pleased with it, that he repented him of the evil, that he said, he
would do unto them, and he did it not. The Israelites again, Isai. 58. they
fared Isal. 58.
as hardly, and went as coursely as ever the Ninivites did; and yet God was so
infinitely displeased with them, that he slighted, and altogether neglected
their service; whereupon they exclaim, and cry out hand-smoothe upon him:
Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? And punished our selves, and
thou regardest it not? The Holy Ghost gives a reason of both, in both places.
God saw the Ninevites works, but he saw nothing but shows in the Israelites:
The one turned from their evil ways, the other followed their own
inventions: The one fasted from sin as well as from food, Every man turned
from his evil way (says the text) and from the wickedness that was in his
hands: the other, when they fasted from food, feasted on sin, whereupon the
Lord by his Prophet most justly against them: Is this the fast that I have have
chosen, that a man should afflict his soul for a day, or hang down his head
like a Bullrush, or lie down in Sackecloth and ashes? Will thou call this an
acceptable fast unto the Lord? Is not this rather the fast that I have chosen,
to loose the bands of wickedness, to take off the heavy burdens, and to let
the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread unto the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that wander, into thine
house; when thou see the naked that thou clothe him, and lude not thy self
from thine own flesh? It seems it is not the emptiness of the craw, nor the
roughness of the garment, nor the tumbling in ashes, which are but outward
signs of an inward Maro^ is ^. signia. Te^t.
cause, rather passiones quam opera (as one truly terms them) passions then
actions, not sought, or affected, or studdied for, but such as in sorrow, or
fear, or some such like perturbations, offer themselves, and are consequent of
their own accords, as helps to express unto the world, our inward
dispositions. I say none of all these simply considered in themselves can give
any pleasure or contentment to the Almighty, but the unfeigned sorrow of the
heart, and the true humility of the mind, which these outward humiliations of
the body give some assurance and testimony of.

So likewise stood the case with the Sacrifices of the old Law: Nunquam in
odoribus Sacrificiorum August.
delectatus est dominus, nisi in side and desiderio offerentis. The sensible
and ceremonial handling of these sacrifices, without the inward oblation of
the heart, with the other did but signify, was never accepted or approoved of
God. Without this, how abominable was the outward countenance, or lineaments
of the Israelites sacrifices, Isai. 1. Their Rams, their ^ai. 1.
fed Beasts, their Bullockes, their Lambs, their Goats, their incense, their
Sabbaths, their new Moons, their Festivals. Alas the Searcher of all hearts
knew, this was but the dead carcass of Religion without the quickening spirit,
and therefore he protests that he will have nothing to do with them; he is
full, and over-full; they are loathsome, and burdensome, and abominable unto
him.

How much more boldly then may I assirme of our sacrifices of Christianity
under the Gospel, or indeed but the very husks of them, without a faithful
and humble heart, which is their Ioshuah, and Captain to go in and out before
them, I may either speak mildly with Origin, they Origin.
are but nutus tantum and opus mutum, bare ceremony and dumb show, they have
neither speech nor language: For certainly the crouching of the body, or the
dejection of the countenance, or the knocking of the breast, or any other bodily
exercise, either within or without the Temple, of itself profits nothing,
unless the inward operation of the spirit give life to quicken it. Or to
speak some thing more tartly with Lactantius; They are not sacrifices Lact.
but sacriledges, robbing God of the better part, and as Jeremy styles the idle
repetitions of the Jews, The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord, this
is the Temple of the Lord, Verba mendaci^, Lying words; so may I these, Opera
mendacil, Lying works: or of less substance yet; Vmbrae mendacii, Lying
shadows, so fraudulently handled, and so hypocritically dissembled, as if men
went about to lie unto the Holy Ghost, and to cheat (if it were possible) the
Searcher of all hearts.

Would you know then how the Publicans postures may safely be performed in the
Temple, with a good conscience to the Servitor, and a commendable grace unto
service, that all things may be done decently, and in order; then briefly thus.
The Philosopher compares the heart of man seated in the midst of the body to
a Princely Monarch, in the midst of his kingdom sitting in his chair of
State, commanding as his subjects every faculty of the mind, and every member
of the body to do him service; saying, to the foot go, and it goes; to the
tongue speak this, and it speaks it; to the hand do this, and it does it. Now
you know it is lawful and just, that the King should command the subject, but
no reason or conscience, that the subject should command the King. Whatsoever
commendable postures then are performed by the privitie of the heart, they are
lawfully warranted by the King, and they are thankeworthy: But if either the
body shall bow, or the head droope, or the hand smite, and not the heart
consent; such postures as these must needs be preposterous, altogether
irregular, and hypocritical, and whosoever shall look for thanks or
recompense for such fancies as these, he does but delude himself as the
Prophets dreamer did, who ate by imagination at midnight, and when he awoke
from sleep, his soul had nothing.

Let every member of the body then, and every faculty of the mind be so
subject to the higher powers of the heart, that as the Ninivites presumed not
to venture upon their General humiliation, without lawful authority from the
King and the Council; so let neither the body bow, nor the head droope, nor
the hand smite, without a lawful Fiat from the heart and affections; So be
it. Then shall I be sure both to seem as I am, and to be as I seem; Not to be
intus Nero, foris Cato, totus ambiguus, Monstrum; A Saint without, and a Devil
within, an hypocrite in both, a mere monster: But like unto Nathauael a true
Israelite, in whose heart, and hand, and tongue there is no guile. So then (to
conclude the point in the Apostles language) When I come into the Temple to do
my humble service, I will bow my heart to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and I will bow my body also, for he is the Creator of that too: My heart shall
droope first, and my head shall droope next: first my heart shall bleed, and
then my hand shall smite, and so shall I be sure mine Organs are in tune, and I
may begin my service when I please. And so I pass from the Organ, to the
Quire; from the pipe, to the voice; from the instrument, to the Song: Deus
propitius esto mihi peccatori. O God, be merciful to me a sinner.

We are now come unto the song it self, you see; ready pricked unto our hands,
by the hand and heart of humility it self, an excellent artist in his kind,
the humble Publican. The first note he reaches is a note above Ela, no lower
then the highest, Oh God.

God then (it seems) is the first note he reaches, and higher he cannot
reach, neither for name, nor purity, nor glory. He is a transcendent note
above all notes for name: They shall know (says David) that thou, whose name
is Jehovah, art the most high God over all the earth. He is such a
transcendent note of purity, that the Moon shines not, and the Stars are
impure in his sight, and the Cherubims clap their wings Esa. 6. 3.
upon their faces, and cry continually; Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts.
And he is such a tran^cendent note of glory, that he is Psalm. 104. Psalm. 68.
13. Psa. 50. 1.
become exceeding glorious (says David) he is clothed with Majesty and
honor. He decks himself with light as with a garment, and spreads out the
heavens like a curtain. The Chari^ots of this God are twenty thousands even
thousands of Angels. This is the Lord even the most mighty God, that has
spoken and called the world, from the ri^ing of the Sun unto the going down
thereof. The glorious Majesty of this God shall endure for ever. Blessed be
his glorious name for ever, and let all the earth be filled with his Majesty,
Amen, Amen.

Now the Diapason, that answers to this high trebble, is a deep base. Deep
indeed, he reaches a note below Gam ut, baser then the basest, a sinner. This
Base was once a Mean, if he could have kept himself there. Minuisti eum
paulo ab Angelis (says David) thou made him a little inferior to the
Angels, an innocent and a spotless man in his estate of integrity; but his
voice being cracked by overreaching himself, this homo became homulus, and so
fell a note lower; and by multiplication of error, this homulus became mulus,
a note lower yet, a beast and no man; a worm or vermin, and no beast; the
basest of all bases, a Sinner. Now then for a judicious Artist to tell me
justly, how many Eights there may be betwixt this high treble, and this deep
base; this mighty Jehovah, and this silly worm; this fountain of purity and
this sink of impiety; this glorious Majesty, and this despectible misery;
this great God and this wretched sinner. There had need (you see) to be two
good closing parts to make the Music sweet and full betwixt these two
extreme Extremes the trebble and the base, and so behold there is: A true
Tenor to close with the Base, that always sings Me in E la, Me to make the
Music full, by an humble and hearty confession of sin, or else it could
never be; And a sweet Mean to close with the Trebble, to make the Music
harmonious; by an humble and hearty apprecation of mercy. Deus, propitius esto
mihi peccatori, O God be merciful to me a Sinner.

This for the Diapasons, now for the closing parts: And first I beseech you
mark, how truly the Tenor closes with the Base. To be a sinner, and not to
know it is the part of a bungler, Qui peccare Epicuru^. ^
se nescit, non vult corrigi, It was the best doctrine that ever Epicure
preached. To be a Sinner, and to know it, and not to acknowledge it, is the
part of a fumbler; to slubber and shift a sin from the man to the woman, and
from the woman to the Serpent, this is but muffling the conscience, and
juggling with God. But the skillful and ingenuous Artist, will both know, and
acknowledge, and rather aggravate then mince a sin: He will both produce, and
accuse, and condemn himself, as Jonas to the Mariners, Novi Quia propter me
(there is his me in Ela me) Take Ion. 1.
me, and cast me into the Sea; for I know that for my sake this mighty
storm is come upon you. Deus, propitius esto mihi peccatori: O God, be
merciful to me a Sinner. When the Tenor closes thus truly with the base, that
makes the Music full.

So full indeed, that it even ravished all the Saints of God, they were never
in quiet till they had learned this part. It was the part of David to Nathan;
Peccavi, I 2 Samuel 12 2 Samuel 24
have sinned. And again to God himself, both with a restriction to the
person, and aggravation to the sin, Valde peccavi, I have exceedingly sinned.
And, Ego sum qui peccavi. And, Ego sum qui inique egi; It is I, and only I that
have done wickedly. The part of Job 7. 1 sim. 1. 15.
Job, Peccavi, I have sinned. And the part of the very chiefest Apostle to
proclaim himself the very chiefest Sinner; Ego peccatorum primus, I am the
chiefest sinner. Let presumptuous Pharisees then harp upon an harsher sti^ine,
and say, God be merciful to this, or that man, most odious, and abominable
sinners: God I thank thee, I am not as these men are: But oh may it be my
part, and oh may it be all their parts, at the very last close of our service,
and at the last blast that shall give breath unto the Organ; That breath, and
pipe, and voice, and all may humbly conclude with this Publican: Deus,
propitius esto mihi peccatori: O God, be merciful to me a sinner. This is
the first closing part, a ^enor to the Base, and a true one too.

In the next place I beseech you, mark how sweetly the Mean closes with the
Treble. Mercy is the only Mean to reach so high a Treble as God himself is:
If we reach at any other of his attributes we overreach our selves. If at his
wisdom, it confounds us; If at his glory it dazel^ us; if at his Majesty, it
beats us down; if at his justice, it strikes us dead; but if we reach at
mercy, he presently closes with us; Misericordiam vult, non sacrificium, in
this sense too; He had rather save us by his mercy, then sacrifice us by his
justice. We can no sooner look homewards, and resolve to return to this
Father of all mercies; but presently like that over-joyed one in the Gospel, he
runs half way to meet his Prodigals, hugges us in the arms of his mercy,
falls upon our neekes and kisses us with the kisses of his mouth, brings us
home to his house the Church, changes our garments of iniquity, puts upon us
the robe of our elder brothers righteousness, gives all possible
entertainment, and causes his family to rejoice with us; for that the dead are
revived, and the lost are found. This is the second closing part, the Mean to
the Treble, and a sweet one too.

Now we have sufficiently prooved the notes, let us for a Conclusion of all
admire the singular skill of this Artist in setting and composing the Chords,
that we may the better relish the harmony. He gives not the least touch upon
the merits of Saints or intercessions of Angels; that Clift is too low to begin
his Treble upon: so sweet a mean as mercy, would never close with the harsh, a
Treble as Saints or Angels. Neither presumes he to touch upon the strain of
his own merits; that Clift is too high to begin his base upon. Neither thinks
he it safe to touch upon a strain of selfeconfidence; that Clift is too false
to begin his Tenor upon: so deep a base as a sinner, and so false a Tenor as a
merit-monger, would never close. Neither dares he touch upon the strain of
Gods justice: that Clift is too harsh to begin his Mean upon: there would
be such a jarring discord betwixt justice and misery, they would never close,
but mar all the harmony. But when he begins his service upon the highest
Treble, God; and misery like a sweet Mean closes with him. And concludes with
the deepest base, a Sinner; and humble confession like a true Tenor closes with
him; then is the Music sweet and full, no matter how curious the ear be that
hears it. Oration humiliantis se, penetrat nubes; The prayer of him that
humbles himself thus, goes through the clouds, and cease not till it come
near, and will not depart till the highest of all have respect unto it.
Ascendit miseria, descendit misericordia; Humble misery creeps up, melting
mercy drops down. God, and man, and Artist, and hearers, and all are pleased.
Heaven and earth, Men and Angels, Saints and Sinners, stand all amazed, as
ravished at this harmony. Deus propitius esto mihi peccatori: O God be
merciful to me a sinner. And thus ends the Publicans service with the time,
and mine.

THE SIXTH SERMON.
Luke 18. 14. I tell you this man went down to his house justified rather then
the other: for every one that exalts himself shall be abased; and he that
humbles himself shall be exalted.
THIS one verse closes up the series of the whole Parable, and comprehends the
two last generals we observed in it, when we first ventured on it: The Event,
and the Application. You have already heard the occasion, that induced our
blessed Savior to propound it, which was a discovery of three gross
corruptions in certain of his auditors. The first was a presumptuous
selfe-confidence, by reason of a fond conceit of merit in their own works:
They trusted in themselves. The second was an arrogant conceit of inherent
righteousness, that they were just. The third was a most proud and
uncharitable contempt and vilification of others.

You have likewise heard of the particular passages of the Parable it self,
and the several devotions of the two men, whom it principally concerned; the
Pharisee, and the Publican. The Pharisee standing Eras. par.
next unto the propitiatory, as most worthy in his own eyes to stand Iig by
Ioll, and discourse familiarly with his Maker, prayed by himself thus: God I
thank th^^. I am not as other men are, that altogether live by wrong and
robbery, by riot and luxury, by odious defiling their neighbors bed, or by
any scandalous or unlawful course of living, as does this Publican; I pamper
not my genius as other men do, but I fast twice in the week; and I rm so far
from doing the least wrong to any, that I defraud not the Minister of his least
dues: for I give tithes of all that I possess. This was the swelling Oration
of the Pharisee, froathing and foaming like the Sea at full; which happily in
it self might be true, and seemingly thanke-worthy, because he thanked his God
for it: but his God thanks not him for it, because he only praised himself,
and condemned his brother. But the Publican, as a most wretched and dejected
caitife, only displeased with himself, by reason of the guilt of sin and
gall of conseience, stood trembling a far off, so miserably ashamed and
confounded in himself, that he would not so much as lift up his eyes to
heaven, but smote his breast, saying; O God, be merciful to me a sinner. The
Pharisee came only to give thanks for his goodness, without either inward
feeling of the want of grace, or outward confession of sin; though the very
heart of his devotion was most miserably tainted and infected with it, by an
arrogant advancement of his own worthiness, and a rash accusation of his
brothers weakness. But the Publican puts all the good that ever he did into
the hinder part of the wallet, and only lays before him, close unto his
conscience, the evil he had done; smites his breast as the only fountain of
his impure thoughts, but impurer actions; and though he presumes not so much
as to lift up his eyes to heaven, yet he only calls unto the God of heaven for
mercy for both. Deus, propitius esto mihi peccatori. O God, be merciful to me
a Sinner.

And would you now know the Event of all this? then read the former part of
this Text, and you shall find, that iste remotus and cum contemptu, that
respued contemptible Publican, in the Pharisees eye, to become Hic vir, and Deo
proximus, the only man of account in Gods eye. That poor crippled Sinner, that
came crawling into the Temple, even bowed quite double by his infirmity, is
sent home to his house justified for a straight and an upright man, singing,
and leaping, and praising God. But the Pharisee, the I, per se I, or the Ipse
Ego in his own eyes, is quite cast out of the sight of God, excommunicated the
congregation of Saints, and sent home to his own pesthouse an infectious
leaper as white as snow. This man went home to his house justified rather then
(or, and not) the other.

Again, would you know the Application of all this? then read the latter part
of the Text, and you shall find, that these things were written for our
learning and instruction; that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures might have hope. For this Parable was propounded not only in
terrorem populi (as was promised in the Preface) for the terror and confusion
of hollow hypocrites, (as places of execution are set up on hills, or hie
ways, to terrify the like offenders) but also in consolationem sanctorum, for
the comfort and consolation of true Saints. And therefore legehistoriam, ne
fias historia; Read this Parable, lest thou be made a parable. Read the effect
of it to thy profit, lest thou feel the Event of it to thy punishment: For He
that first propounded it to some, applies it now to all: yet so, that as he
would have all in general to note it; so he would have every one in
particular to apply it. For this purpose, like that good Shepherd, he shows us
both virgam and baculum, both, to comfort us; he has a rod to beat down our
pride, he has a staff to raise up our humility. For every that exalts
himself shall be abased; but he that humbles himself shall be exalted.

And lastly, would you know how to believe all this? why here is more then
Pythagoras his (...), or dixit Aristotel^s: Christ himself averres it; the
Truth it self speaks it; the eternal Word himself has given the word, and
his testimony must needs be true: I say unto you. He that justified the
ungodly, justified the Publican, and filled his hungry soul with good things;
and he that always resists the proud, sent home the rich Pharisee empty
away. He that did it spoke it, and he that spoke it did it; the Event then
must needs be true.

And for the Application we may well demand with the Apostle, (...), who so
able to apply the doctrine as the great Doctor himself, who is both Doctor and
doctrine too? who so able to confect and administer the potion, as the great
Physician himself, that is both Physician and Physic too? He that is the
Subject of all Text, read unto his auditors this Text; He that spoke as never
man spoke, preached and delivered unto them this Parable: And He that is the
eternal High Priest, and Bishop of all our souls, has framed both for them
and us, this useful application. That every one that exalts himself shall
be abased, but he that humbles himself shall be exalted. Rest we then
fully satisfied, Rev. 19.
and say with that beloved Disciple, Revel. 19. These words of God are true,
upon the authenticke warrant of an Ipse dixit, It was Christ himself that
spoke it, it was Christ himself that did it.

So that now (we see) the two last generals of the whole Parable are become
the two considerable particulars of this Text: the former, presents unto us the
Event; the latter, the Application. The Event is this: The humble Publican,
that stood trembling a far off, not presuming so much as to lift up his eyes
to heaven, but smiting his breast and crying, O God, be merciful to me a
Sinner, is justified by our blessed Savior; and not the arrogant and
presumptuous Pharisee, that was perched up to the highest place in the Temple,
not praying to his God, but prating to himself, advancing himself, and
vilifying his brother. The Pharisee that justified himself is condemned, and
the Publican that condemned himself is justified. This man, etc.

Videte fratres; magis placuit humilitas Aug.
in malis factis, quam superbia in honis fact is. And indeed it is right worthy
our note and observation; that of the twain, the Publican, that was humbled
for his weakness, was justified rather then the Pharisee, that boasted of his
worthiness. The ways of God (it seems) are not as man's ways, nor his
thoughts as man's thoughts; He neither judges according to the outward
appearance, nor yet iustifies according to the (...) ^olinesse:

Non vox, sed votum, non musica chordula, sed cor;
Non clamans, sed amans cantat in aure Dei.
It is neither our great words, nor good works, nor high conceit of either,
that strike any stroke at all in the act of justification before God. Not great
words; for how many shall meet our Savior in the clouds at the last day with
these swelling words: Lord, Matthew. 7. 22.
Lord, have we not in thy Name prophesied, and by thy Name cast out Devils,
and by thy Name done many great miracles? but He shall shall shake them off
with a Non novi vos, I never knew you. Not good works: for righteous Abraham
was justified by faith only. The Apostle Saint Paul testifies that his faith
was only accounted unto him for righteousness: only we are bold to enter
into his secret chamber; where he desires to enjoy the company of his Spouse
by faith alone. It is not fit that any of the family of servants should rush
in, to interrupt their privacie. But afterward, when the door is opened, and
the Bridegroom come forth with his Bride into the waiting room, to present
her unto men and Angels all fair, and without spot; then (in the name of God)
let all the servants and hand-maides attend. Then may we give all diligence to
add unto our Faith Virtue; and to Virtue Knowledge; and to Knowledge
Temperance; and to Temperance Patience; and to Patience Godliness; and to
Godliness Brotherly kindness; and to Brotherly kindness Love. For, if these
things be in us and abound, they will make us that we shall neither be barren
nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Though Faith 2 Pet.
1. 5.
then be Sola, alone; yet she is not solitaria, but gloriously attended by a
whole guard of g^aces. As the eye in regard of its being, is not alone from
the head; but in respect of seeing, it is alone: it is the eye only in the
head that sees: So a true and lively Faith cannot possibly subsist without a
whole train of graces.

What shall we say then to this controversy (to speak in the Apostles
language.) Do we therefore make void the Law through Faith? God forbid; yea,
we establish the Law. Do we therefore make void good works through Faith?
God forbid; yea, we establish good works. Only we say, it were no way of
preferment for the handmaid either to take the wall of her Mistress; or to go
equal with her. If Bilhah supply the defects of Rachel, and bear children
unto Jacob, let her remember notwithstanding that Rachel is above her, and
singular in some respect. If Joseph be mounted into the second Chariot of
Egypt, and become the next man unto the King; let him then especially remember
that the King has reserved the Throne unto himself. We conceive (and we know
we stand upon a sure ground) that we can do good works no better right,
then to to assign them locum proprium, their own place; to advance them
higher, is but to bring them lower. The principal aim and intention of our
blessed Savior in the proposition of this parable, was the conviction of
certain arrogant and hypocritical meritmongers, trusting in the
righteousness of their own works, that they were just, and despised others.
And after a plain demonstration of the controversy, in the several passages
of the parable expressed in the Temple by the several devotions of the two
men, the Pharisee and the Publican; the Event of all proclaims the
controversy ended in the Consistory; where the impartial Judge, that cannot
lie, neither for fear nor favor, is pleased to pronounce this irrevocable
sentence. I say unto you, this man (that is, the humble Publican, that
renounced his own merits and laid hold by faith only on Gods mercies) was
justisied rather the^ the other (that is the proud Pharisee) boasting, and
trusting to the broken staff of selfe-confidence.

From whence I briefly gather thus much to conclude the point. That if such
dejected, and rejected humility, so over-clogged and pressed down with a
mass of iniquity, did, in the estimation of the Almighty, so triumph and
insult over pharisaicall sanctity; how much more shall the same humility,
supported by true piety, become more then a conqueresse through him that so
infinitely loves her? And if pride and arrogancy be so mischievous to destroy
a whole brood of virtues; oh, what a generation of Vipers is she able to
hatch in a neast of vices? If our blessed Savior condemn those, that boast of
the good works they havedone, whereof they may seem to have some small share,
because both by Gods preventing, accompanying, and consummating grace, they do
in some Gratia praeveniens, concomitans, and consummans.
sort cooperate with God; (such as are fasting, praying, giving of alms,
paying of tithes, and the like) and give not God all the glory in them, and for
the^; how much more shall he condemn those that boast of their good qualities,
and comely features, wherein they have no share at all, and yet rob God of all
his glory for them; (such as are health, beauty, comelines, strength and
agilitie of body, and the like:) certainly most abominable must these fools
needs be in the sight of God. It is a sufficient warning given us by the
Prophet. Let not the rich man glory in his riches, nor the Ier. 9.
strong man glory in his strenth, nor the wise man glory in his wisdom; but
let him that glories glory in this, that (...) knows, and understands me,
sai(...) Lord. Whereupon the Ap(...) Paul most humbly resolves upon an, Absit
gloriari. God forbid that I should glory in any thing, but in the Cross of
Christ, whereby the world is crucified to me, and I unto the world. All other
glory is but vain, and will end in shame. The Event of this Parable has
already prooved it fatal to others; and (if we take not the more heed) the
ensuing application will prove it fearful to our selves. For every one that
exalts himself shall be abased; but he that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

I am securis ad radicem: Now is the axe laid unto the root of the tree by
the best Worke-man that ever stroke stroke: Every tree therefore, that brings
not forth good fruit now, is hewn down, and cast into the fire. The use and
Application of the doctrine is framed by the best Preacher that ever was, or
shall be; He therefore that has ears to hear, let him now hear hearing
believe, and believing practice the things that belong unto his peace, lest
hereafter they b^ kept for ever from his ears: At first indeed the Parable was
propounded but to some, but the doctrine and application was intended unto all.
And indeed no more then needs; for every man by nature is like Simon the
Sorcerer, conceiting himself to be some great man. We have all by nature a
kind of an inbred Pope, a fantastical opinion of our own works:
Narcissus-like we dote upon our own shadows, though we find no real virtue,
or true substance in us. And this is no better then the very head of the
Serpent, as Luther terms it: Omnium in justitiarum Tit: de prasump.
fere sola causa est justitia. An arrogant presumption of our own
righteousness, is the only cause almost, of all unrighteousness. But so
great a thing is it for a man to seem small in his own eyes, that no man is
able to learn that lesson of any man, but of him only, who being in the form
of God, and thought it no robbery to be equal with God, took upon him the
form of a Servan^, and became man; yea the very scorn of men, and the
contempt of the people. It is high time then for the seed of the woman to
break this Serpents head; and for that great Actor and teacher of humility to
read unto us a large Lecture of humility in his own person: not only by
propounding a special Parable to some, but by framing a general doctrine to
all, and a particular application to every individual. So that now the case
stands not only between the Pharisee and the Publican; but Every one that
exalts himself shall be abased; and every one that humbles himself shall be
exalted.

You see then the finger of the Application directly points at the fall of
pride, and the resurrection of humility. Every mountain and hill shall be
brought low, but every valley shall be exalted. Pride and humility be the two
common Roades, that are most tracked and beaten in this mortal pilgrimage; the
one leads to misery, the other to glory. The former of these is chalked outby
Solomon, Prove. Prove. 16.
16. Pride goes before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall. The
first that found out this road was Lucifer, that rode post from heaven to
hell. The second was Adam, that posted from Paradise to misery. The third was
Pharaoh and his Host, that posted from the pomp and pleasures of Egypt to a
fearful ruin in the red Sea. And presently that road grew so common, one
passenger could not pass for another; for not only Dathan and Abiram, Saul,
Absolon, Adonias, Rehoboam, Senacherib, Nebuchadnezzar, Antiochus, and diverse
others have made the sacred Story black with fearful presidents of ruin;
but daily examples do continually prove it a fatal thorow-faire to
destruction.

The latter of these was chalked out by Solomon too. Proverbs 15. Prove. 15.
Where he tells us, That humility is the highway to glory. But (I must
needs say) this road was first found out by a greater then Solomon, even the
propounder and applyer of this Parable, the blessed Author and finisher of
humility it self; who posted so fast from heaven to earth, leaping upon the
mountains, and skipping upon the hills, to make plain this untrodden path of
humility; whereby he opened unto us the gate of glory, by his own first
entrance with the Apostles Propter quod, Phil 2.
wherefore God has highly exalted him. The next that posted in this road
after him, was the blessed Virgin Mary his Mother; who by reason of her
extraordinary lowliness, was so extraordinarily magnified, that all succeeding
generations shall call her blessed. The next after her was John the Baptist; in
whom because our Savior found Omnia vocalia, (as one divinely notes) his
words, his thoughts, his deeds, his garments, his diet, his life, his death, to
be so many preaching voices, and vocal Preachers to humble penance: therefore
our Savior dignifies him, Matthew 11. with Math. 11.
the name of a Prophet, and more then a Prophet; for amongst them that are
begotten of women, there arose not a greater then John the Baptist. Yea even
hollow-hearted Achab, lost not a sufficient reward for his hypocritical
humiliation: wherefore the Lord promised, 1 King. 21 25.
That he would not bring the evil upon him in his days. Much more the poor
widow, that drops in but duo minuta, two mites into Gods treasury, out of her
truehearted humility, and humble penury, shall be more accepted with God,
then a whole world of vainglorious hypocrites, that cast in never so many
thousand talents, out of their proud arrogancy, and arrogant superfluity.

So that this may stand for the maine pillar of the Application: That according
to our proportion of humility, God will be sure to prepare us a portion of
glory: And according to our proportion of pride, he will be as sure to
prepare us a portion of vengeance. Our blessed Savior tells us, That in his
Fathers house there are many Mansions. Speaking of that Kingdom, that cannot
be shaken: that habitation that is everlasting: that inheritance that is
immortal, and undefiled, and fades not away: that house not made with hands,
but eternal in the heavens. And why so many Mansions in this house? but only
to assure us of diverse degrees of glory there, for diverse degrees of humility
here. As there is one glory of the Sun, 1 Cor. 15.
and another glory of the Moon, and another glory of the Stars, one Star
differing from another in glory; so shall it likewise be in the resurrection
of the dead. That Comet that appears most dull, as over-clouded by true
humility in this Sublunary firmament, shall shine the brightest Star in that
Empyreall and Imperial Orb. And that vainglorious Meteor, that gives the
greatest flash in this lower Region, shall sink yet lower to that infernal
Legion. For look how much that glittering Whore. Rev. 18. has glorified Rev.
18.
her self, and lived in pleasure here; so much shall be added to her torment
and sorrow hereafter.

So that now (me thinks) our blessed Savior by the application of this
Parable, speaks the same in effect to us, that Moses to the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
30. I call heaven Deuteronomy. 30.
and earth to record, that I have set before you this day life and death, good
and evil, the broad way and common road that leads unto destruction; and the
narrow way that leads unto life, though few there be that find it. If you
post on the road of pride without either fear or wit, you run headlong
down into hell, and without a speedy retentive there can be no hope of you.
But if you pace never so gently in the road of humility, you are in the
highway to heaven, and there is great joy of you, even amongst the Angels of
heaven. Every one that exalts himself shall be abased: but every one that
humbles himself shall be exalted.

Not he that is exalted by an other, either immediately by the God of heaven,
or mediately by the King and his Magistrates, which are gods on earth; such
exaltations as these, being humbly used, prognosticate no ruins. Nor he that
is humbled by an other; either immediately by God for a time, and presently to
return to his former obstinacy, as Pharaoh, Julian, Herod, and the like;
against whom the Prophet Jeremy most justly, Percussisti eos (Domine) and non
doluerunt, Thou have smitten them (O Lord) and they have not grieved; Ier. 5. 3.
thou have consumed them, but they have refused to receive correction: they
have made their faces harder then a rock: they have refused to return. Or
mediately by the Magistrare, that Romans 13.
bears not the sword in vain, for he is the Minister of God to execute
vengeance on them that do evil. And therefore such humiliations as these
prognosticate no risings. But he that humbles himself; not in outward
hypocrisy, but inward sincerity: for as in Platoes school, every man's soul
is himself; so in Christ's School, every man's heart is himself. It is not
then the humble tongue, or the humble knee, or the humble habit, but the humble
heart, that is next unto advancement. Lord, (says David) I am not puffed in
mind, I do not exercise Psalm. 131.
my self in great matters, that are too high for me. But I refrain my soul,
and keep it low, like as a child that is weaned from his mother; yea my soul
is even as a weaned child. A man that humbles himself thus, when he falls,
he rises; and when he is raised, he stands, as immooveable as Mount Sion,
that stands fast for ever. But he that exaltes himself, hardens his heart,
stiffens his neck, lifts up his countenance, and overlookes his equals, many
times his betters, as if he would over-looke Cedars; Little (alas) does this
wretch dream how near his fall is; and that such a fearful one too, that
will admit no rising. When this man falls, mole ruit sua, he falls with such
a powder, that he is even ground to powder; he sinkes from one misery into
another, from a flood of temporal, to a maine Ocean of eternal torment.

Blame me not then, if I lift up my voice like a trumpet, and close up both
Parable, Event, and Application, and all pathetically with the Prophet. O
earth, earth, Ier. 22.
earth, hear the word of the Lord. Earth by creation, Earth by continuance,
Earth by resolution, look but into thy first principles, thou came earth,
thou remainest earth, and thou returnest earth. O earth, earth, earth, hear
the word of the Lord. Look but into thy best thoughts, they perish with thine
earth; look but upon thy freshest beauty, it fades before thine earth; look
but into thy soundest wisdom, it savours of thine earth. O earth, earth,
earth, etc. Look but above thee, and behold an angry God of vengeance, that
always resists proud earth; Look but beneath thee, and behold an ever-burning
Tophet prepared of old to torment proud earth; Look but within thee, and
behold a puddle and sink of sin that corrupts proud earth; Look but against
thee, and behold thine adversary the devil, like a roaring Lion, always ready
at hand to accuse and condemn proud earth; Look but round about thee, and
behold many thousands far more deserving, and yet far more humble vessels
then thy self, of earth. And lastly, look but right before thee, and so look
once for all, and behold the Author and finisher of thine earth; mark, and
learn, what a singular precept and president he reads unto thee, even in
terra tua in thine own earth. He, that was an eternal and everblessed spirit,
humbled himself so low, as to stoop to a mortal and miserable lump of thine
earth; And in that earth he did infimum sapere in altissimo clothe the highest
majesty with lowest misery; And in that misery, he was liberrimus agens
though miserrimus patiens; he was not humbled by an other, but quia ipse
voluit, he humbled himself; Neither was he superficially, but substantially
humble, and obediently humble, and legally obedient, and singularly legal,
Bishop Andrews sermon in Pasch.
even to a threefold usque, the nature of man, the form of a servant, and the
death of the cross: for these be his steps of descent noted by the Apostle.
Phil. 2. Phil. 2.
Humiliavit ipse; and Ipse se; and Ipse obediens; and obediens factus; and
factus usque. He was humbled; not by an other, but himself; and his humility
was obedient, and his obedience legal, and his legalitie singular.

Oh Earth, earth, earth, can thou behold humble God-man, clothed in the
ragged humility of thine earth, and thy self not clothed so much as with one
ragge of the glorious humility of that God? can thou for shame endure so
miserable a Solecisme as humilem Deum and superbum hominem, an humble God of
heaven, and a proud man of earth? were thou any thing else but earth, thou
would never spread it so proudly upon the face of the earth, terra oalcans
terram, as if the earth should never set her foot upon thy face. Cannot the
bitter passion of thy Savior, that split the very stones, pierce thine earth?
or his powerful resurrection that raised so many dead, quicken thy This Sermon
was preached the Sunday after Easter.
living earth? Consider, oh consider, what a Trophee it were to procure
solemnity to the instant season; for that ugly and infernal feind pride, to
be conjured down to the devil in hell that first sent her, never to rise
again within this circle; and that fair damsel humility to be raised (by
virtue of a Tabitha Cumi) with her blessed Savior, that first found her, never
to become a stranger more unto us; but that every Easter she may spring a
fresh, and bud out of the earth with that Prim-rose of Sharon, and Lilly of
the valleys; that no longer proud but humble earth may be our Epithet. That
being at this instant raised (with our blessed Savior) from pride to
humility, we may be hereafter raised with him from humility to glory. Which
he for his tender mercy grant us, who by his precious blood so dearly bought
us, Jesus Christ the righteous; to whom, with the Father, and the blessed
Spirit, be ascribed as is most meet, all possible honor, glory, power, praise,
might, majesty, and dominion, now and for ever, Amen.

Soli Deo tri-uni Gloria.
Recensui Librum hunc cui titulus (The mirror of pure Devotion, etc.) in quo
nihil reperio quo minus cum utilitate publica Imprimatur, modo intra quatuor
menses proxime sequentes typis mandetur.

Ex aedi: Londin: Nov. 3. 1634. Sa. Baker.


