THE GEORGICKS OF HESIOD, By GEORGE CHAPMAN; TRANSLATED ELABORATELY out of the
Greek: Containing Doctrine of Husbandry, Morality, and Piety; with a
perpetual Calendar of Good and Bad Days; Not superstitious, but necessary
(as far as natural Causes compel) for all Men to observe, and difference in
following their affairs.

Nec caret vmbra Deo. LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Miles Partrich, and are to
be sold at his Shop near Saint Dunstans Church in Fleetstreet. 1618.

TO THE MOST NOBLE COMBINER OF LEARNING, AND HONOR: Sr. FRANCIS BACON, Knight;
Lord High Chancellor of England, etc.
Ancient wisdom, being so worthily eternis'd; by the now-renew'd Instance of
it in your Lordship; And this ancient Author, one of the most Authentic, for
all wisdom, crowned with Justice and Piety: To what Sea owe these poor
Streams their Tribute, but to your Lordships Ocean? The rather, since others
of the like Antiquity, in my Translation of Homer, teach These their way, and
add comfort to their Courses; by having received right cheerful countenance
and approbation from your Lordships most grave and honored predecessor.

All Judgments of this Season (sauouring any thing the truth) preferring, to
the wisdom of all other Nations, these most wise, learned, and
circularly-spoken Grecians. According to that of the Poet: Graijs Ingenium;
Graijs dedit ore rotund^
Musa loqui.


And why may not this Roman Elogie of the Graians, extend in praisefull
Intention (by way of Prophetic Poesy) To Graies-Inne wits, and Orators? Or
if the allusion (or petition of the Principle) beg with too broad a License
in the General: yet serious Truth, for the Particular, may most worthily apply
it to your Lop^. truly- Greek Inspiration, and absolutely Attick Elocution.
Whose all-acknowledg'd faculty, has banished Flattery therein, even from the
Court; much more from my country, and more-then-vpland simplicity. Nor were
those Greeks so circular in their elegant utterance, but their inward
Judgments and learnings, were as round and solid. Their solidity proved in
their eternity; and their eternity propagated, by Love of all virtue, and
integrity: That Love being the only Parent, and argument, of all Truth, in
any wisdom or learning; without which, all is sophisticate, and adulterate;
howsoever painted and splinted with Degrees and Languages. Your Lordships
advancement of Learning, then, well showing your love to it; and in it, being
true, to all true Goodness; your Learning strengthening that love, must needs
be solid and eternal. This Vir vere (seu clare) sciens: aut illustris Iudex,
vel procul videns Arbiter; quia eos acutos visu, seu gnaros esse oporteat r^i
de qua agitur.
(...) therefore, expressed in this Author, is used here, as if prophesied by him
then, now to take life in your Lop. whose life is chief soul, and essence, to
all knowledge, and virtue: So few there are that live now, combining Honor and
Learning. This Time, resembling the terrible Time whereof this Poet prophesied;
to which he desired he might not live: since not a Grace would then smile, on
any pious, or worthy; All Greatness, much more gracing Impostors, then Men
truly desertfull; The worse deprauing the better; and that so frontlesly, that
Shame and Justice, should fly the earth for them. To shame which ignorant
Barbarism now emboldned; Let your Lordships learned humanity, prove nothing
the less gracious to Virtue, for the co^munity of Vices graces; but shine much
the more clear on her, for those clouds that eclipse her; no Luster being so
Sun like, as that which passes above al clouds unseen, over Fields, Turrets,
and Temples; and breaks out, in free beams, on some humblest Cotage. In whose
like, Jove him self has been feasted; And wherein your Lordship may find
more honor, than in the fretted Roofes of the Mighty. To which honor,
oftentimes, nothing more conduces, then Noble acceptance of most humble
Presentiments. On this Noblitie in your Lordshippe, my prostrate humility
relying; I rest ever submitted in all simple and hearty vows,

Your Honors most truly, and freely devoted, GEORGE CHAPMAN.

Of Hesiodus.
Hesiodus, surnamed Ascraeus, was one, as of the most ancient Greek Poets; so
one of the purest and pressest writers. He lived in the later time of Homer;
and was surnamed Ascraeus; of Ascra, a Town in Helicon; in which was built a
temple sacred to the Muses; whose Priest, Hesiodus was consecrate: whom Virg.
among so many writers of Georgicks, only imitated; professing it in this;

Ascraeumque cano Romana per oppida carmen, (...). Nor is there any doubt,
(says Mel:) quin ide^ Virg: initio Georgicoru^, hanc inscriptionem expresserit
hoc versu: Quid faciat laetas segetes; quo sidere terram etc. His authority was
such amongst the Ancients; that his verses were commonly learned, as Axioms or
Oracles; All teaching good life, and humanity: which though never so
profitable for men's now readings; yet had they rather (says Isocrates) consume
their times still in their own follies, than be any time conversant in these
precepts of wisdom; Of which (with Homer) he was first Father, whose
Interpreters were all the succeeding Philosophers; Not Aristotle himself
excepted: who before Thales, Solon, Pittacus, Socrates, Plato, etc. writ of
Life, of Manners, of God, of Nature, of the Stars, and general state of the
universe. Not are his writings the less worthy; that Poesy informde them, but
of so much the more Dignity, and Eternity: Not Thales, nor Anaxagoras, (as
Aristotle ingenuously confesses) having profited the world so much with all
their writings; as Homers one Ulysses, or Nestor. And sooner shall all the
Atoms of Epicurus sustain division; the fire of Heraclitus be utterly
quenched; the water that Thales extolls so much, be exhausted; the spirit of
Anaxamines vanish; the discord of Empedocles be reconciled; and all dissolved
to nothing; before by their most celebrated faculties, they do the world
so much profit for all humane instruction, as this one Work of Hesiodus: Here
being no dwelling on any one subject; but of all humane affairs instructiuely
concluded.

To my worthy friend Mr. George Chapman, and his translated Hesiod.
CHapman; We find by thy past-prized fraught,
What wealth thou do upon this Land confer;
The Old Grecian Prophets hither that have brought,
Of their full words the true Interpreter:
And by thy travel, strongly have expressed
The large dimensions of the English tongue;
Delivering them so well, the first and best,
That to the world in Numbers ever sung.
Thou have vnlock'd the treasury, wherein
All Art; and knowledge have so long been hidden:
Which, till the graceful Muses did begin
Here to inhabit, was to us forbidden.
In blessed Elysium, (in a place most fit)
Under that tree due to the Delphian God,
Musaeus, and that Iliad Singer sit,
And near to them that noble Hesiod,
Smoothing their rugged foreheads; and do smile,
After so many hundred years to see
Their Poems read in this far western I Will,
Translated from their ancient Greek, by thee;
Each his good Genius whispering in his ear,
That with so lucky, and a^spicious fate
Did still attend them, whilst they living were,
And gave their Verses such a lasting date.
Where slightly passing by the Thespian spring,
Many long after did but only sup;
Nature, then fruitful, forth these men did bring,
To fetch deep Rowses from Jove's plentious cup.
In thy free labors (friend) then rest content.
Fear not Detraction, neither fawn on Praise:
When idle Censure all her force has spent,
Knowledge can crown her self with her own Baies.
Their Lines, that have so many lives outworne,
Clearly expounded, shall base Envy scorn.
Michael Drayton.

To my worthy and honored Friend, Mr George Chapman, on his Translation of
Hesiods Works, and Days.
WHose work could this be* Chapman, to refine
Old Hesiods Ore, and give it us; but thine,
Who had before wrought in rich Homers Mine?
What treasure have thou brought us! and what store
Still, still, do thou arrive with, at our shore,
To make thy honor, and our wealth the more!
If all the vulgar Tongues, that speak this day,
Were asked of thy Discoueries; They must say,
To the Greek coast thine only knew the way.
Such Passage have thou found^ such Returns made,
As, now of all men, it is called thy Trade:
And who make thither else, rob, or invade.
Ben: Ionson.

THE GEORGICKS, Annotations. To approve my difference from the vulgar and
verbal exposition; and other amplifications, fit and necessary for the true
rendering, and Illustration of my Author; I am enforst to annexe some words of
the Original to my other Annotations:
OF HESIOD. By GEORGE CHAPMAN. The First Book.
Muses! That out of your Pierean state,
All worth, in sacred Numbers celebrate;
Use (...), huc agite.
here your faculties so much renownd,
To sing Jove.
your sire; And him in (...), Hy^nu decan. tanses.
hymns resou^d;
By whom, All humanes, that to death are bound,
Are bound together: Both the Great in (...), de quo magna famae est;
fame;
And Men, whose Poor Fates fit them, with no (...), non di^endus; incelebris.
Name;
(...), honoratus, Nobilis.
Noble, and (...); ignobilis; ad nullam ^unctionem seu dignitatem essum^tus.
Base; Great Jove's will, orders All;
For He with ease extolls; with ease, lets fall;
Easily diminishes the most in grace,
And lifts the most obscure to loftiest place:
Easily sets (...), r^ctus, er^ctu^; non tor^uosus. Metaph
straight the quite (...), tortuosus; incuru^s.
shrunk up together;
And makes the mostelated (...), superbum, seu florentem facit vt defloresc^t.
Beauty, wither:
And this is Jove, that breaks his voice so hie,
In horrid sounds; nd dwells above the sky:
Hear then, O Jove, that do both see and hear;
And, for thy Justice sake, Be Orderer,
To these just (...), Iudicia vel vera praecepta de moribus, seu pict^te.
Praecepts; that in (...), rati^inor.
Prophecy;
I use; to teach my Brother Piety:
Not one contention, on the Earth there Reigns,
To raise Men's fortunes, and peculiar gains;
But Two. The One; the knowing Man approues:
The Other, (...), reprehensione, et derisione dignu^,
Hate should force from humane loves;
Since it derides our reasonable kind;
In two (...). in duas parts.
parts, parting, Man's united Mind;
And is so harmefull: for pernicious War,
It feeds; and bites, at every Civil Jar:
Which no (...), He says no man loves this war per se, but per accidens;
because men cannot discern ^^o^ things truly worthy of their loves; Those that
falsely pretend worth, and retain none, which he ascribes to some secret
counsel of love; That for plague to their impieties strikes blind their
understandings.
man loves; But strong Necessity,
Does this Contention, as his plague implie,
By Heavens hid Counsels. The Other strife, Black Night,
Beg at before: which Jove, that in the light
Of all the stars dwells; And though Throned aloft;
Of each Man, weighs yet, both the work, and thought;
Put in the Roots of Earth; from whose womb, grow
Men's needful Means, to pay the debt they owe
To Life, and living: And this strife is far,
More fit for Men; And much the sprightlier:
For He, in whose (...), cuius manibus nulla Ars, nulla sedulitas inest.
hands, lives no love of Art,
Nor virtuous Industry; yet plucks up heart,
And falls to work for living. Any One,
Never so stupid, and so base a Drone;
Seeing a Rich Man haste, to sow, and plant,
And guide his House well; feels, with shame, his want,
And labors like him: And this strife is good.
When strife for riches, warmes, and fires the blood;
The (...), He shows Artizans aemulations for riches, and approues that kind
of contention. Notwithstanding Plato in Lysyas; Aristot. in the 5. of his Pol.
and 2. of his Rhetor. and Galen; refer this strife to the first harmefull
discord. yet Plutarch takes our Authors part; and ascribes it to the virtuous
Contention.
Neighbor, does the Neighbor, aemulate:
The Potter, does the Potters profit hate;
The Smith, the Smith, with spleen (...), aestu^ ira, quam diu press^ in
pectore.
inueterate:
Beggar, maligns the Beggar, for good done;
And the Musition, the Musition.
This strife, O Perses, see remembered still:
But fly Contention, that insults on (...), alieni^ insultans calamitatibus,
Contentio. which he calls their going to law.
the will
Of other Men; And from thy work does draw,
To be a well-seene Man, in works of Law.
Nor to those Courts, afford affected ear:
For he that has not, for the entire year,
Enough laid up before hand; little need,
Has to take Care, those factious Courts to feed,
With what Earth bears; And Ceres does bestow;
With which, when thou art satiate; Nor do know,
What to do with it: Then, to those wars go,
For others Goods: But see no more spent so
Of thine hereafter. Let our selves decide,
With Doomes direct; All diff'rences implide,
In our Affairs; And what is ratifide,
By Jove's will, to be ours; Account our own;
For that thriues ever best. Our discord grown;
For what did from our Fathers Bounty fall,
We ended lately; And shared freely All.
When Thou much more than thine had ravished home;
With which, (...), valde gloriosos reddens. (...). Reges doniuoros.
thou made proud* and did overcome
With partial affection to thy Cause;
Those gift-deuouring kings, that sway our laws.
Who would have still retaind us in their powers;
And given by their Doomes; what was freely ours.
O Fools, that all things into Judgment call;
Yet know not how much (...), dimidium plus Toto. He comme^ds the Mean And
reprooues those kings, or Judges, That are too indulgent, to their covetous,
and glorious appetites; from the frugall, and competent life declining; ad
(...), i. ad plus habendi auiditatem inexhaustam* Showing how ignorant they
are; that the virtue of Justice and Medioc^ity; is to be preferred, to
injustice, and insatiate Avarice. By (...), he understands Medium inter Lucru^
et Da^nu^; which Mean is more profitable, and Noble, than (...), i. Toto. quo
et sua pars retinetur, et alterius ad se pertrahitur.
Half is more than All.
Nor how the Mean life, is the firmest still.
Nor of the Mallow, and the Daffodill,
How great a Good the little Meals contain.
But God has hid from Men the healthful Mean;
For otherwise, A Man might heap (and play)
Enough to serve the whole year, in a Day;
And strait, his Draught-Tree hang up in the smoke,
Nor more, his laboring Mules, nor Oxen yoke.
But Jove; Man's knowledge of his Best, bereaved;
Conceiving Anger, since he was deceau'd,
By that same (...), he calls Prometheus; i. qui obliqua agitat consilia; who
wrests that wisdom which God has given him to use to his glory; To his own
ends: which is cause to all the miseries Men suffer, and of all their impious
actions that deserve them. Jove's fire, signifies truth; which Prometheus
stealing; figures learned Men's ouer-subtile abuse of divine knowledge; wresting
it in false expositions to their own objects. Thereby to inspire, and puff up
their own profane earth. Intending, their corporeal Parts; And the
Irreligious delights of them. But for the Muthologie of this; read my Lord
Chauncelours Book de sapientia veterum Cap. 26. being infinitely better.
wisdome-wresting, Iaphets son;
For which, All ill All earth did ouer-run.
For Jove, close keeping in a hollow Cane,
His holy fire: To serve the use of Man,
Prometheus stole it, by his humane slight
From him that has of all heavens wit, the height.
For which, He angry; Thus to him began
The Cloud-Assembler: Thou most crafty Man,
That ioy'st to steal my fire, deceiving Me;
Shall feel that Joy, the greater grief to thee;
And therein plague thy universal Race:
To whom, I Will give a pleasing ill, in place
Of that good fire: And all shall be so vain,
To place their pleasure in embracing pain.
Thus spoke, and laughed, of Gods and Men the sire:
And straight enioynd the famous God of Fire,
To mingle instantly, with Water, Earth;
The voice, and vigor, of a Jove's creation of a woman.
humane Birth,
Imposing in it; And so fair a face,
As matched The Immortal Goddesses, in grace.
Her form presenting a most lovely Maid;
Then on Minerua, his Command he laid,
To make her work, and wield the witty loome:
And (for her Beauty) such as might become
The Golden Venus; He commanded Her,
Upon her Brows, and Countenance to confer
Her own Bewitchings; stuffing all her Breast,
With wild (...) An unwearied, and wanton desire to exceed others; or an
insatiate longing to be loved of all.

(...) membra ad sati^tatem vsque depascens. (...) cares, or meditations of
voluptuous satisfactions.


Desires, incapable of Rest;
And Cares, that feed to all satiety,
All humane Lineaments. The Crafty spy,
And Messenger of Godheads, Mercury,
He charged to inform her, with a (...), ^an^nam ment^, vel impudentem. (...),
furaces m^res.
dogged Mind,
And theeuish Manners. All as he designed,
Was put in act. A Creature straight had frame,
Like to a Virgin; Mild and full of shame;
Which Jove's suggestion, made the both-foot lame,
Form so deceitfully; And all of Earth,
To forge the living Matter of her Birth.
Gray-eyd Minerua, Put her Girdle on;
And showed how loose parts, wel-composed, shone
The deified Graces; And the (...) o^ Suada, Goddess of persuasion, or
eloquence.
Dame that sets
Sweet words, in chief form; Golden Carquenets,
Embraced her Neck withal; The faire-haird Hours,
Her gracious Temples crowned, with fresh-spring flowers;
But, of all these, imployd in several place;
Pallas gave (...), impetu inspirabat; gave special force, to al her
attractions, which he says Pallas did. To, show that to all Beauty; wisdom,
and discreet behavior, gives the chief excitement.
Order, the impulsive grace.
Her bosom, Hermes, the great God of spies,
Which subtle fashions filled, fair words and lies;
Jove prompting still. But all the (...) Her voice. The vocal, or high-spoken
Herald of the Gods imposde; All fair women, affecting, to be furthest heard,
as well as most seen.
voice she used,
The vocal Herald of the Gods infused;
And called her Name, Pandora; since on Her,
The Gods did all their several gifts confer:
Who made her such, in every moving strain,
To be the Bane of curious Minded Men.
Her harmefull, and inevitable Frame,
At all parts perfect; Jove dismissed the Dame
To Epimetheus, In his Heralds guide;
With all the Gods plagues, in a Box, beside.
Nor Epimetheus, kept one word in store
Of what Prometheus, had advised before;
Which was; That Jove should fasten on his hand,
No gift at all; But he, his wile withstand,
And back return it; Lest with instant ill,
To mortal Men; He all the world did fill.
But he first took the gift; and after (...) when he had received and tried
the ills he knew it was ill, and grieved: But then was so infected with affection
to it, that He could not reform, nor refine it. For Man's corporeal part;
which i^ figured in Epimetheus; signifying the inconsiderate and headlong force
of affection; not obeying his reasonable part, or soul; nor using foresight
fit for the prevention of ills which is figured in Prometheus; He is deceived
with a false shadow of pleasure; for the substantial, and true delight, he to
be embraced. Which found by Event (the Schoolmaster of fools.) He repents too
late. And therefore, Horace truly; nocet empta dolor voluptas.
grieved.
For first, the Families of Mortals, lived
Without, and free from Ill; Harsh Labor, then,
Nor sickness, hasting timelesse Age on Men;
Their hard, and wretched Tasks imposed on them,
For many years; But now, a violent stream,
Of all Afflictions; In an instant came,
And quenched Life's light; that shined before in flame.
For when the (...), of this came the proverb, (...), The plague of women. And
by the woman is understood, Appetite, or effeminate affection; and customarie,
or fashionable Indulgence to the blood; not only in womanish ^ffectations; but
in the general fashions of Men's Judgments and action^; Both (...), id est,
popularitor; or gratia and authoritate, quo quisvalet apud populom. And (...),
id est, viducendi and floctendi animum. Intending illusiuely; by this same
docta ignorantia; of which, many learned leaders of the Mind, are guilty: And
(...)^ id est, The common source or sink of the vulgar; prevailing past the
Nobility, and piety, of humanity and Religion. By which, All sincere
discipline, is dissolved, or corrupted; And so, that Discipline taken away (
tanquam operculo Pandor^) both the humane bodies, and Minds dissolution;
instantly, (as out of the Cave of A^olu^) ^et the winds or forces of
corruption, violently break: qua data porta, t^unt, and terra^ turbine
po^stant. All which notwithstanding; no course or custom is so desperate in
infection; but some hope is left to escape their punishment in every Man;
according to Ovid; viuere spe vidi, qui moriturus erat.
women; The unwieldy lid,
Had once discouerd: All the miseries hid,
In that cursed Cabinet; dispersed, and flew
About the world; Joys pined; And Sorrows grew.
Hope only rested, in the Boxes Brim;
And took not wing from thence: Jove prompted him,
That owed the Cabinet; to clap it close,
Before she parted; But unnumbered woes,
Besides, encountered Men, in all their ways.
Full were all shores of them; And full all seas.
Diseas^s; Day, and Night; with natural wings,
And silent Entries stole on men their stings;
The great in counsels, Jove, Their voices re^t;
That not the truest, might avoid their Theft;
Nor any escape the Ill, in any kind,
Resolved at first, in his almighty Mind.
And, were thou willing; I would add to this,
A second Cause of men's calamities:
Sing all before; And since; Nor will be long,
But short, and knowing; And t'obserue my song,
By thy conceit, And Mind's retention strong.
When first, Both Gods, and Men, had one Times Birth;
The Gods, of diverse languag'd Men, on Earth;
A golden (...), Not only this description of Ages (as the Critiques observe)
is imitated by all the Latin Poets, but all the rest of this Author; And
chiefly by Virgil himself. His sentence and invention; made so common; that
their Community will darken the raritie of them in their Original. And this
was called the golden Age; (according to Plato) for the virtuous excellency, of
Men's natural dispositions, and manners.
world produced; That did sustain,
Old Saturnes Rule; when He in heaven did reign;
And then lived Men, like Gods, in pleasure here;
Indu'd with Minds secure; from Toils, Griefs, clear;
Nor noysom Age, made any crooked, There.
Their feet went ever naked as their hands;
Their Cates were blessed, serving their Commands,
With ceaselesse Plenties; All Days, sacred made
To Feasts, that surfets never could invade.
Thus lived they long; and died, as seisd with sleep;
All Good things served them; Fruits did ever keep,
Their free fields crowned; That all abundance bore;
All which; All, equal, shared; And none wished more.
And when the Earth had hid them; Jove's will was,
The Good should into heavenly Natures pass;
Yet still held state, on Earth; And (...), sed vt dij vtuebant homines. The
Poet (sales Melancthon) could not, but have some light of our Parents lives in
Paradise.
(...), cusiodes hominum: from hence the opinion springs, that every man has
his good Angel; which sort of spirits (howeuer discredited now to attend, and
direct men) Flutat^ in his Commentaries de oraculorum defectu, defends to
retain assured Being. In this sort: As if a Man should take away the
interiected Air; betwixt the Earth and the Moon: That Man must likewise
dissolve, all the coherence and actual unity of the universe; leaving vacuum
in Medio; and necessary Bond of it all; so they that admit no Genij; leave
betwixt God, and Men, no reasonable Mean for Commerce; The Interpretatiue, and
Administering faculty; (as Plato calls it) betwixt them; utterly destroying; And
withdrawing consequently; All their reciprocal, and necessary uses. As the
witches of Thessalie; are said to pluck the Moon out of her Sphere. But these
men being Good; turned only Good Genij; The next Age (Men being bad) turned in
their next Being; bad Genij. Of which, after was held; A man's good, and bad
Genius.
Guardians were,
Of all best Mortals, still suruiuing there;
Observed works just, and unjust; clad in Air;
And gliding vndiscouerd, every where;
Gave Riches where they pleased; And so were reft,
Nothing, of All the Royal Rule they left.
The second Age; That next succeeded This;
Was far the worse; which Heauen-hous'd Deities,
Of Silver, fashiond; Not like that of Gould,
In disposition; Nor so wisely Soul'd.
For Children then lived, in their mothers Cares,
(All that time growing still) A Hundred years:
And were such great fools, at that Age; That They,
Could not, themselves, dispose a Family.
And when they Youths grew; having reached the Date,
That reared their forces up, to Man's estate;
They lived small space; And spent it all in pain;
Caused by their follies: Not of power t'abstaine,
From doing one another Injury.
Nor would They worship any Deity;
Nor on the holy Altars of the Blessed,
Any appropriate sacrifice addressed,
As fits the fashion of all humane Birth.
For which, Jove angry; hid them straight in Earth;
Since to the blessed Deities of Heaven,
They gave not those Respects, They should have given.
But when the Earth had hid these, like the rest;
They then were called, the subterrestriall blessed;
And in Bliss second; having honors then;
Fit, for The Infernal spirits, of powrefull Men.
(...). Subterranei beati, mortales vocantur. Out of their long lives and
little knowledges; These Men are supposed by our Poet; to survive dull and
earthly spirits; For their impieties, in neglect of Religion, subject to
painful, and bitter Death; where the former good Men, sweetly slept him out.
But for the the Powers of their bodies; being fashioned of the worlds yet
fresh, and vigorous matter; Their spirits that informed their bodies; are
supposed secondly powerful. And that is intended; in their recourse to earthly
men; such as themselves were; furthering their affections and ambitions to ill;
for which they had honor of those Men: And, of them, were accounted blessed; As
the former Good Genij, wereso, indeed; for Exciting Men to goodness.
Then formd, our Father Jove, a third Descent;
Whose Age was brazen; clearly different
From that of Silver. All the Mortals there,
Of wild Ash fashiond; stubborn and austere;
Whose Minds, the harmefull facts of Mars affected;
And Petulant Injury. All Meats rejected,
Of Natural fruits, and Herbs. And these were They,
That first began, that Table Cruelty,
Of slaughtering Beasts; And therefore grew they fierce;
And not to be endured, in their Commerce.
Their ruthlesse Minds, in Adamant were cut;
Their strengths were dismal; And their shoulders put,
In accessible hands out; over all
Their brawny limbs, armd with a brazen wall.
Their Houses all were brazen; All of Brass,
Their working Instruments; for black Iron was
As yet unknown: And, these (their own lives ending;
The vast, and cold-sad house of hell-descending)
No (...), These he ^otendes were such rude, and powrefull men, as not only
refused, (like the second sort) to do honor to the Deities; But directly
rebeld against them: And affected here in Earth, celestial Emperit. For which
the Celestials let them see, that they needed none but them selves to take
down their affectations; And for their so huge conceit of themselves* had
never any least honor of others, which many great men of this Iron Age, need
not be ignorant therefore; is the event of such great ones. And howsoever they
laugh in their sleeves, at any other Being than this; they may take notice by
their wisers: That even according to reason, both, there are other Beings; And
differences of those Beings; Both in honors, and Miseries.
grace had in their ends: But though they were
Never so powrefull; and enforcing fear;
Black Death, reduced their Greatness in their spite,
T'a (...), in arctumcogo: s^u in a^gustum redig^.
little Room; And stopped their cheerful light.
When these left life; A fourth kind, Jove gave birth;
Upon the many-a-creature, nourishing Earth;
More just, and better than this Race before;
Divine Her^es; That the surnames bore,
Of (...)* semidei, Intending Hercules, lason and others of the Argonants;
whose ship was (...) naula omnibus cura* because it held the care of all men,
in those that were in her. Intending of all the virtuous Men, that were then of
Name, who were called semigods, for their god-like virtues*
Semigods; yet These; Impetuous Fight,
And bloody War, bereft of life, and light.
Some, in Cadmaean Earth; contentious;
To prise the infinite wealth of Oedipus;
Before (...) He calls this seauen-ported Thebes; to distinguish it from that of
Egypt, that had a 100 Ports; besides that Hyppoplace in Cilicia.
seauen-ported Theb's; some shipped upon,
The ruthles waves; and led to Ilion,
For faire-hair'd Hellens love; where, likewise They;
In bounds of Death; confind the beams of Day.
To these yet; love gave second life, and seat,
At ends, of all the Earth; In a Retreat,
From humane feet; where souls secure they bear
(...). In beatrum Insulis. Of which fortunate Islands, Vide Hom: Odys: 8.
Amids the blessed Islands; situate nere,
The gulfie-whirle-pit-eating Ocean flood.
Happy Her^es living; For whose food,
The plentie-bearing Tellus; thrice a year,
Delicious fruits, and fragrant Herbs does bear.
O that, I might not live now; To partake,
The Age, that must, the fifth succession make;
But either Die before; Or else were borne,
When all that Age, is into ashes worn.
For, that which next springs, in supply of this,
(...).

Cuius Genus est ferraum. This fifth Age he only prophesied of: almost three
thousand years since; which falling out in this age especially true, shows how
divine a Truth inspired him: And whether it be lawful or not, with Plato and
all the formerly learned; to give these worthiest Poets the commendation of
divine.


Will all of Iron, produce his families;
Whose bloods, shall be so banefully Corrupt,
They shall not let them sleep; But interrupt,
With Toiles, and Miseries, All their Rests, And fares.
The Gods, such grave, and soule-dissecting cares,
Shall steep their Bosoms in; And yet, some Good,
Will God mix with their bad; for when the blood,
Faints in their nourishment; And leaves their hair,
A little gray; Jove's hand, will stop the Air,
Twixt them, and life; And take them straight away.
Twixt Men, and women, shall be such foul play,
In their begetting pleasures; And their Race,
Spring from such false seed; That the sons stolen face;
Shall naught be like the sires; The sire, no more,
Seen in his Issue. No friend as before
Shall like his friend be: Nor no Brother, rest
Kind, like his Brother: No Guest, like a Guest
Of former times; No Child, use like a Child,
His aged Parents; But with manners wild,
Revile, and shame them; Their Impiety,
Shall never fear, that Gods all-seeing eye,
Is fixed upon them; But shall quite despise,
Repaiment of their educations prise;
(...) quibus ius est in manibus. All this Ovid translates; Nec hospes ^b
hospite tutus, Non socer a genero; fratru^ quoque gratia ^ara est.
Bear their law, in their hands; And when they get,
Their fathers free-giuen goods; Account them debt.
City shall City ransack; Not a Grace,
To any pious Man shall show her face;
Nor to a just, or good Man. All, much more,
Shall grace a Beastly, and injurious Bore;
No Right shall seize on any hand of theirs;
Nor any shame make blush, their black affairs;
The worse shall worse the better, with bad words;
And swear him out, of all his Right affords.
Ill-lung'd; (...), male seu grauiter so^ans; (...), Ma^^ gaudens; vel quo mali
gaudent, and delectantur. Vel alienis insultans calamitatibus.

(...), inuiso aspectu; and t^ruis oculis cernens: All Epithets of (...).


Ill-liuerd, Ill-complexion'd Spite,
Shall consort all the Miserable plight,
Of Men then living. Justice then, and Shame,
Clad in pure white (as if they never came,
In touch of those societies) shall fly,
Up to the Gods Immortal family,
From broad-way'd Earth: And leave grave griefs to Men;
That (desperate of Amends) must bear all Then.
But now to Kings, A Fable I Will obtrude,
Though clear, they savor all it can include.
The (...), Accipiter, The manners of the Mighty toward the Mean, are figured
in this fiction.

By the Nightingale; understanding, learned, and virtuous Men.

The following verse; (...), imprudens etc. follows the most sacred letter,
no^esse reluctandum potentioribus.


Hawk once, having trust up in his Seres,
The sweet-tun'd Nightingale; and to the Spheres,
His prey transferring: with his Tallons, she
Pincht too extremely; and incessantly,
Crying, for Anguish; This imperious speech,
He gave the poor Bird; Why complainst thou wretch?
One holds thee now, that is thy Mightier far;
Go, as he guides; Though never so singular
Thou art a Singer; It lies now in me,
To make thee sup me; Or to set thee free.
Fool that thou art; who ever will contend,
With one, whose faculties, his own transcend;
Both fails of Conquest; And is likewise sure,
Besides his wrong, He shall bad words endure.
Thus spoke the swift, and broad-wing'd Bird of Prey;
But hear O (...), He speaks to his brother, and returns to his first
Proposition; of the fit contention, to which he persuaded him before. And
though shame and justice are fled in others; yet he wishes him to love and
embrace them. The elegant description immediately before; being truly
Philosophical, and is handled at large, by Plato, in Protagoras.
thou Justice; And hate Injury.
Wrong touches near a miserable Man;
For (though most patient) yet he hardly can
Forbear just words; and feel injurious deeds;
Unjust loads, vex; He hardly bears that bleeds.
And yet has Wrong, to Right; a better way:
For, in the end, will Justice win the Day.
Till which, who bears, sees then, Amends arise:
The (...). Passus vero stultus sapit, which was since usurped prouerbially:
signifying that wisdom to be folly, that we learn but of our own first
suffered afflictions: which yet, I think far exceeds any wisdom that was
never taught, nor confirmed by first feeling infortunes, and calamities.
fool first suffers, and is after wise.
But (...), properly signifies Curuis, v^l tortuosis indicijs; which (he says)
ravish together with them, Preiurie;

Alluding to crooked things; or things wrapped together like brambles; that catch
and keep with them whatsoever touches them. Our proverb; to overtake with a
crooked Measure; not ridiculously applied to this grave Metaphor; (...), not
signifying, in this place, what our Critics teach; vid. lites iniquas; but
Iudicia iniqua seutortuosa.


crooked Justice; jointly hooks with it,
Injurious Perjury; And that unfit
Outrage, bribed Judges use; that makes them draw,
The way their gifts go; ever cuts out Law,
By crooked Measures. Equal justice then,
All clad in Air; the will Minds of bribed Men,
Comes after mourning: Mourns the Cities ill;
Which where she is expelled, she brings in still.
But those that with impartial Doomes extend,
As well to strangers, as their household friend
The Law's pure Truth; And will in no point stray,
From forth the straight Tract, of the equal way:
With such, the City; all things Noble nourish:
With such, the People, in their Profits flourish.
Sweet Peace, along the Land goes; Nor to them
All seeing Jove, will destinate the extreme
Of banefull War. No Hunger ever comes;
No ill, where Judges use impartial Doomes.
But Goods well got maintain still neighbor feasts;
The Fields flow there, with lawful Interests.
On Hills, the high Oak, Acorns bears; In Dales,
The Industrious Be her Honey sweet exhales:
And ful-feld Sheep, are shorn with Festiuales;
There, women bring forth children like their Sire;
And all, in all kinds, find their own entire.
Nor ever plow they up the barren Seas,
Their own fat Fields yield store enough to please.
But whom rude Injury delights, and Acts
That Misery, and Tyranny contracts;
Sharp-sighted Jove, for such predestines pain;
And (...), oftentimes, for one ill Man a whole City suffers; which sentence,
in near the same words, is used in Ecclesiastes. Saepe vniuersa Ciuitas, mali
viri paenam luit. And as before he recounts the blessings that accompany good
Kings or Judges; ^o here he remembers the plagues, that pursue the bad;
enforcing in both (as I may say) the ebbing, or flowing of every Commonwealth
by them. For Law being soul to every such politic Body; And Judges; as if
Essence to that soul, in giving it form and Being, according to their
sentences and expositions of it; The body politic, of force must fare well or
ill, as it is governed, well or ill. No otherwise then, as the body of ^ Man,
suffers good or ill; by his souls good or bad information, and discipline.
These threats used here (says Melancthon) as in diverse other places of this
divine Poet; He questionless gathered out of the doctrine of Moses and the
Prophets, with whom the like comminations are every where frequent.
oftentimes; The whole Land does sustain
For one Man's wickedness; that thriuing in
Inequall Doomes; still makes his sentence him.
For where such Men bear priuileg'd office still;
There Jove poures down whole deluges of ill.
Famine and Pestilence together go;
The people perish; women baraine grow;
Whole Houses vanish there, sometimes in peace;
And sometimes Armies raised to shield the increase,
The Gods late gave them: even those Gods destroy
Their Rampires ruin; and let Rapine joy
The Goods Injustice gatherd: Or, elsewhere
Jove sinks their ships, and leaves their ventures there.
(...), He would have Judges enter into consideration themselves, of the
dangers in injustice; which presently after, he reduces into three arguments.
The first, (...), sibi ipsi, which sentence, to admiration agrees to that of
the Script. Incidit in fo^^a^ quante fecit. The second for feire of further
punishment from God. The third, he makes out of the natural indignity, and
absurdity of the thing.
Weigh then your selves, this Justice Oye Kings;
For howsoever often, unequal things
Obtatine their pass; they pass not so the eyes,
Of all the all-discerning Deities;
For close and conversant their virtues be
With Men; and how they grate each other, see,
With wrested Judgments; yielding no cares due,
To those sure wreakes, with which the Gods pursue
Unequal Judges; Though on Earth there are,
Innumerable Gods that minister,
Beneath great Jove; That keep Men clad in Air;
Corrupt Doomes noting, and each false affair;
And gliding through the Earth, are every where;
Justice is seed to Jove; in all fame dear,
And reverend to the Gods, inhabiting Heaven;
And still a Virgin; whom when Men ill given,
Hurt, and abhorring from the right, shall wrong;
She for redress; to Jove her sire complains,
Of the unjust mind, every man sustaines;
And prays the people may repay the pains
Their Kings have forfaited, in their offenses;
Deprauing Justice, and the genuine senses,
Of laws corrupted, in their sentences.
Observing this, ye Gift-deuouring Kings;
Correct your sentences; and to their springs,
Remember ever to reduce those streams,
Whose crooked courses every Man condemns.
Whoeuer forgeth, for another, ill;
With it, himself is overtaken still;
In ill, Men run on that they most abhor;
Ill counsel, worst is to the Councelor.
For Jove's eye, all things seeing, and knowing all;
Even these things, if he will; of force must fall
Within his sight, and knowledge; Nor to him:
Can these bribed Domes, in Cities shine so dim,
But he discernes them; and will pay them pain:
Else would not I live justly amongst Men;
Nor to my Justice frame my children;
If to be just, is ever to be ill;
And that the unjust finds most justice still;
And Jove gave each Man in the end his will.
But he that loves the lightning (I conceive)
To these things thus, will no conclusion give.
(...), He persuades his brother to the love of Justice, by argument taken from
the true nature of Man. That by virtue of his divine soul, naturally loves it.
Because God infused into that divine Beam of his, being immortal; a love to
that, that preserved immortalities; without that immortal destruction affected
in ini^stice. Fishes, Beasts, and Fowls, endued naturally with no such love to
Justice; but allowed by God, to do like themselves and deuo^re one another,
which that men should do, as well as they; is most inhumane, and full of
confusion; as well in their deformed mixture, as in the Ruin that inseparably
follows it. But his confidence here, that whosoever will do Justice freely,
and without respect of riches; God will enrich him; And that the worse
inclined, will feel it in the Hell of his conscience; The others ^eed
prospering beyond himself; Is truly, religious and right Christian,
Howeuer Perses, put these in thy heart;
And to the equity of things convert
Thy Minds whole forces; all thought striking dead;
To that foul Rapine, that has now such head.
For in our Manhoods, Jove has Justice closed;
And as a law, upon our souls imposed:
Fish, Foul, and savage Beasts; whose (Law is power)
Jove lets each other mutually devour;
Because they lack the equity he gives
To govern Men; as, far best for their lives;
And therefore Men should follow it with strives.
For he that knows the justice of a Cause;
And will in public Ministry of Laws,
Give sentence to his knowledge; Be he sure,
God will enrich him. But who dares abjure
His conscious knowledge; and belie the law;
Past cure, will that wound in his Conscience draw.
And for his radiance now, his Race shall be
The deeper plunged in all obscurity.
The just man's state, shall in his seed exceed;
And, after him, breed honors as they breed.
But, why men's ills prevail so much with them;
I, that the Good know, will vnclowd the Beam,
In whose light lies the reason; with much ease,
To vice, and her love, Men may make access;
Such crewes in Rout, Herd to her, and her Court
So passing near lies; Their way sweet and short;
(...), Ante virtutem. His argument to persuade to virtue, here is taken both
from her own natural Fate; and the divine disposition of God. For as she has
a body (being supposed the virtue of Man) and through the worthily exercised
and instructed organes of that body; Her soul receives her excitation to all
her expressible knowledge; (for dati sunt sensus, ad excitandum intellectum) so
to the love and habit of knowledge, and virtue, there is first necessarily
required, a laborious and painful conflict; fought through the knowledge, and
have of the miseries and beastliness of vice. And this paineful passage to
Virtue Virgil imitated in his translation of the Pythagorean letter, Y. (...),
or sud^r, is to be understood of sweat, ex labor and fatigatione ^rt^.
But before Virtue, do the Gods rain sweat,
Through which, with Toil, and halfe-dissolued feet,
You must wade to her; her path long and steep;
And at your entry, it is so sharp and deep.
But scaling once her height, the joy is more,
Than all the pain she put you to before.
The pain at first then, both to love and know
Justice and Virtue; and those few that go
Their rugged way; is cause it is followed lest.
(...). He tells he^e. who is at all parts the best and happiest Man; which
Virgil. even to a word almost recites; and therefore more than imitates, in
this; Felix qui potuit verum cognoscere cansas etc. wherein our divine and
all-teaching Poet, since, describes three sorts of Men; One that loves virtue
out of knowledge acquired and elaborate; which the Philosopher calls scientiam
acquisitam; The second, th^^ loves her out of admonition; which he calls
infu^am scientiam; The third, is he, that has neither of those two
knowledges; no^ is capable of either; having both these ignorances in him; viz.
Ignorantiam pranae disposition^, and purae negationis. Li^ie, as well as
Virgil, recites this place almost ad verbum, in Fabio and Minuti^; In these
words, Saepe ego audini, milites, eum primum ess^ virum, qui ipse consulat,
quid in remsit: secundum eum, qui been mone^^i obediat: Qui nec ipse consolere,
nec alt riparere scit, eum extromi ingenij esse.
Of all Men therefore, he is always best,
That not depending on the mightiest,
Nor on the most; has of him self descried,
All things becoming; and goes fortified,
In his own knowledge, so far, as to intend
What now is best; and will be best at the end.
Yet he is good too, and enough does know,
That only follows, being admonisht how:
But he that neither of himself can tell,
What fits a man; nor being admonisht well,
Will give his mind to learn; but flat refuse;
That man, cast out from every humane use.
Do thou then, ever in thy Memory place
My precepts Perses, sprung of sacred Race;
And work out what thou know not: that with hate
Famine may prosecute thy full estate;
And rich-wreath'd Ceres (reuerenc't of all,)
Love thee as much; and make her festival,
Amids thy Granaries: Famine evermore
Is natural consort of the idle Boore.
Whoeuer idly lives, both Gods, and Men
Pursue with hateful and still-punishing spleen.
The slothful man is like the sting-lesse Drone,
That all his power, and disposition,
Emploies to rob the labors of the Be;
And with his sloth, devour her Industry.
Do thou repose thy special pleasure then,
In still being conversant, with temperate pain;
That to thee still, the Seasons may send home
Their utmost store. With Labor Men become
Herd-full, and rich; with labor thou shall prove
Great, both in humane, and the Deities love.
One, with another, all combined in one,
Hate with infernal horror, th'idle Drone.
Labor* and thrive; and the idle 'twill inflame.
No shame to labor; sloth is yok't with shame.
Glory and virtue into consort fall
With wealth; wealth God-like winnes the grace of all.
Since which, yet, springs out of the root of pain;
(...), laborare aut^m melius.

Notwithstanding he has no other way to persuade his unwise brother to follow
his business, and leave his strife in law for other Men's goods* but to propose
wealth, and honor for the fruits of it: yet he prefers labor alone, ioind with
love of virtue and Justice, and the good expense of a man's time; before wealth,
and honor with Covetousness and Contention.


Pain has praecedence; so thou do maintain
The temper fitting; and that foolish vain
Of striving for the wealth of other Men,
Thou give no vent; but on thine own affairs
Conuert'st thy Mind; and thereon laiest thy cares.
And then put on, with all the spirit, you can.
Shame is not good in any needy Man.
Shame much obscures, and makes as much to fame.
Wealth loves Audacity; Want favors Shame.
Riches, not ravished, but divinely sent
For virtuous labor, are most permanent.
If any stand on force, and get wealth so;
Or with the tongue, spoil, as a number do;
When Gain, or Craft does ouergoe the soul;
And Impudence does honest shame contoule;
God easily can the so-made-great disgrace;
And his House, raisd so, can as easily race.
Riches bear Date, but of a little space.
(...), Par est delictu^. He ia^e^ it is as great a sin; to wrong a poor
suppliant, as to wrong a man: best friend or Guest. Which was then held one of
the greatest impieties. And to deceive an Orphane of his dead parents gift, he
affirms to be nothing less an offense than to ascend to the bed of his
brother. Not that he makes all sins alike; but shows how horrible those sins
are, with which we are most familiar.
Who wrongs an humble suppliant, does offend*
As much as he, that wrongs a Guest, or friend.
Who, for his brothers wifes love, does ascend
His brothers bed; and has his vicious end;
Offends no more than he, that does deceive
An Orphane, of the goods his Parents leave;
Or he that in the wretched bounds of Age,
Reuiles his Father. All these Jove enrage;
And shall receive of Him revenge at last,
Inflicting all pains, that till then they past.
From all these therefore, turn thy striving Mind,
And to thy utmost, see the Gods assigned
Chastely, and purely; all their holy dues.
Burn fattest thighs to them; and sometimes use
Offerings of wine. Sometimes, serve their delights,
With burning incense: both, when bedtime cites;
And when from bed, the sacred Morning calls.
That thou may render the Celestialls,
All ways propitious: And so, none else gather,
Thy fortunes strow'd; but thou reap others rather.
Suffer thy foe thy table; call thy friend.
In chief, one near; for if Occasion send
Thy householde use of Neighbors; they undressed
Will have to thee; where thy Allies will rest,
Till they be ready. An ill Neighbor is
A curse: a good one is as great a bliss.
He has a treasure, by his fortune signed;
That has a Neighbor of an honest mind.
No loss of Ox, or Horse, a Man shall bear;
Unless a wicked Neighbor dwell too near.
Just Measure take of Neighbors, just repay;
The same received and more; If more thou may.
That after, needing; thou may after, find
Thy wants supplier, of as free a mind.
(...), mala lucra aequaliai^ damnis. According to this of the Scripture; Male
portum male disperit; Et, de male quesitis non gaudit tertius haeres.
Take no ill gain, ill gain brings loss as ill.
Aid quit with aid: goodwill pay with goodwill;
Give him that has given; him that has not, give not*
Giuers, Men give; Gifts to no giuers thrive not.
Giving is good: Rapine is deadly ill.
Who freely gives, though much, rejoices still;
Who rauines, is so wretched, that though small
His forced gift be; he grieves, as if twere all.
Little to little added, it often done,
In small time makes a great possession.
Who adds to what is got; needs never fear,
(...) ^tram famem. Black or swar^h he calls Famine, or Hung^r; ab effectu, quod
nigrum, aut lucidum colorem inducat.
That swarth-che^k't Hunger will devour his cheer.
Nor will it hurt a Man; though something more,
(...) He la^^s it will not hurt a man, to have a little more than needs
merely, laid up at home; A^ we say; it will eat a man no mea^. And prefers
keeping a man's store at home; to putting it forth; for it may go less so, as
often it does.
Than serves mere need; he lays at home in store.
And, best at home: it may go less abroad.
If cause call forth; at home provide thy Rode,
Enough for all needs, for free spirits die,
To want, being absent from their own supply.
(...) incipiente dolio. At the beginning, or height of a man's store, he
advises liberality; And at the bottom. In the midst frugality. Admonishing
therein not to be prodigal nor sordid; or wretched: But as at the top of the
Cask, wi^e is the weakest, and thinnest; because it is most near the air; and
therefore may there be best spent; at the bottom full of lees; and so may
there be best spared; In the midst nearest and briskest, and should be then
most made of, or busb^nded; so in the midst of a Man's purse, he advises
parsimo^y.
Which note, I charge thee. At thy purses height,
And when it fights low; give thy use his freight;
When in the midst thou art, then check the blood;
Frugalitie at bottom is not good.
(...) testem adhil^to. The Critics expound it; as if a man talking privately
and liberally with his brother, should confess so securely; that he must ever
bring a witness with him, of what words past him, and the Critics intend it
personally; where the word (...) signifies here only, sup^uta, cogita,
hypothetically, or by way of supposition; (...) coming of (...), i (...), et
(...), faci^, esto vt ita sit, suppose there were a witness by; and be as
circumspect in speeches with your brother, even in your most private and free
discourse, as if you supposed a third Man heard you. The other exposition is to
be exploded.
Even with thy brother, think a witness by;
When thou would laugh, or converse liberally;
Despair hurts none, beyond Credulity.
(...), qui vel quae (...) ex^rnat.
Let never neate-girt Dame, that all her wealth
Lays on her waste; make profit of her stealth,
On thy true judgment; nor be heard to feign
With her forkt tongue; so far forth as to gain
Thy candle rent (she calls it). He that gives
A woman trust, does trust a Den of thieves.
One only son preserues a family;
As feeding it with only fit supply.
And that house to all height his riches reares,
Whose sire dies old, and leaves a son of years.
To many children too, God easily spares
Wealth store; but still, more children the more cares.
And to the house, the more access is made.
If then, the hearty love of wealth invade
(...), vnigenitus. He says one only Son, preserues his Fathers house; and
adds most ingeniously, (...), i. pascendo, se^ nutriendo. Intending, that he
adds only necessary vital fuel (as 'twere) to his fathers decaying fire.
Where many sons oftentimes, rather famish, or extinguish a family, than
nourish, or fuel it. And yet he adds most gravely and piously, that God can
easiely give store of Goods, fit for the greatest store of children; but yet,
the more children the more care; and speaking to the happiest state of a
family; he prefers one supplier to many. (...), sic facito. A general
Conclusion, and Transition to his doctrine of the next book.
Thy thrifty Mind; perform what follows here;
And, one work done; with others serve the year.
The end of the First Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF GEORGICKS.
WHen Atlas Birth, He begins his works, to which, immediately before, he
prepares his Brother. This whole Book, containing Precepts of Husbandry; both
for field and family. By the Ascent and Set of the Pleiades; is shown the
Harvest, and seed season; as well for ground near the Seas, as the far
distant. The Pleiades (called the Daughters of A^las) are the seven Stars, in the
back of the Bull, which the Latins called Vergilias; when which are seen,
near the Sun ^ising; which is in June; He appoints entry on Harvest
affairs; when, in the Morning they leave this Hemispheere (which is in
November) he designs seed Time.
the Pleiades, arise;
Harvest begin; Plow when they leave the Skies.
Twice twenty days, and nights, these hide their heads;
The year then turning, leave again their Beds;
And show when first to whet the Harvest steel.
This likewise is the Law, the fields must feel;
Both with Sea-dwellers; near, and high, and those,
(...) P^lustrem Terram significat.
Whose winding Valleys, Neptune ouerflowes:
That Fenny grounds, and Marshes dwell upon,
Along the fat, and fruitful Region.
But wheresouer thou inhabit'st; ply
The Fields, before fierce winters cruelty
Oppress thy pains; when thou may naked Plow;
Naked cast in thy seed, and naked Mow;
If timely thou will bear into thy Barn,
The works of Ceres; and to that end learn,
As timely to prepare thy whole increase;
Lest, in the mean time, thy Necessities
Importune thee at others Doors to stand,
And beg supplies to thy vnthriftle hand:
As now thou come to me, But I, no more
Will give, or lend thee, what thou may restore,
By equal measure; Nor will trust thee so;
Labor (vain Perses) and those labors do,
(...). per signum demonstr^, ita vt coniectare sit facile.
That by the certain sign of Beggerie,
Demonstrated in Idle Drones, thine eye
May learn the work, that equal Deity,
Imposes, of Necessity, on Men:
Lest, with thy wife, and wanting childeren;
(Thy Mind much grieved) Thou seek'st of Neighbors food;
Thine own means failing. Men grow cold in Good.
Some twice, or thrice perhaps, thy Neighbor will
Supply thy wants; whom if thou troubl'st still;
Thou come off empty; and to air do strain
A world of words; words store, make wanting Men.
I charge thee therefore, see thy thoughts imploid
To pay thy Debts; and how thou may avoid,
Deserved Famine. To which end, first see,
Thy Wife well orderd; and thy Family*
(...), famula^ considerat^ acq^isitam. He would have her likewise unmarried*
(...), ^on nuptam, his reason he shows after.
Thy Plough-drawne Ox; thy Maid, without her spouse,
And wisely hired; that business in thy house,
May first work off; and then to Tillage come:
To both which Offices; make fit at Home,
Every thing needful; lest abroad thou send
To ask another, and he will not lend;
Mean time thou want them; Time flies fast away,
Thy work undone; which not from Day to Day,
Thou should defer; the work Deferrer, never
(...), non assidum in opere.
Sees full his Barn; nor he that leaves work ever,
(...), cura cum industria, and exercitatione.
And still is gadding out. Care flying Ease,
Gives Labor ever, competent increase.
(...), Iui opus de die in diem dubitat, and procrastina^.
He that with doubt, his needful business crosses,
Is ever wrestling, with his certain Losses.
(...), Metaphori^e accipitur, pro ^cumine, and visus selevitate.
When therefore of the swift-sharp-sighted Sun,
(...), I^ dorificus: humidus calor, does not expres^e the word; being so
turned in the verbal translation.
The chief force faints; and sweating heat is done;
(...), qui extremi and senescentis A^tumniest.
Autumn grown old; and opening his last vein;
And great Jove steeping all things in his Rain;
Man's body changed, and made more lightsome far;
For then, but small time shines the Syrian star,
(...) qui (...) cum L^thifero fato a^itur, vel qui educatar inte^ multas dur^
fortis iriseri^^, The most fit Epithe^e of Man.
Above the heads of hard fate forsterd Man;
Rising near Day; and his beams Austrian,
Enjoyed in Night most: when (I say) all this
Prosylna.
Follows the Season; and the Forest is
Sound, being feld; his leaves upon the ground
Before, let fall; and leaving what they crowned:
Then constantly take time to fell thy wood;
Of Husbandry, the time kept, is the blood.
(...), A kind of Mortar to bray corn in, which the Ancient used for a little
Mill, or Que^n.
Cut then your three-foot Querne; whose Pestle, cut
Three Cubits long; your Axeltree seven foot.
If it be eight foot, cut your Mallet thence:
The Felfs, that make your Carts circumference,
Cut three spans long. Many crookt pieces more,
Ten Palms in length; fell for your Wagons store.
All which poor Rules, a rich conuenience yield.
If thou shall find a Culter in the Field,
Or on the Mountain: either Elm, or Oak;
Convey it home; since for thy Beasts of yoke,
To plow withal, twill most his strength maintain;
(...), Attic^ Cerecis ser^^^s A Periphrasis of a Plowman, she being called
Attick Ceres; quod ipsa Athenienses, adeoque omnes homines de frugibus d^cuerit.
And chiefly, If Athenian Ceres swain,
It fixing to the Draught-tree (lest it fails)
Shall fit it, to the handles s^aie with Nails.
Two Ploughs compose, to find thee work at home;
One with a Shar; that of it self does come
From forth the Ploughs whole Piece; and one set on:
Since so it is better much; for, either gone;
With the other, thou may instantly impose
Work on thy Oxen. On the Laurel grows,
And on the Elm. your best Plow-handles ever.
Of Oak, your Draught-tree: From the Maple, never
Go for your Culter: For your Oxen choose
Two males, of nine years old; for then, their use
Is most auailable; since their strengths are then,
Not of the weakest; and the youthful Mean,
Sticks in their Neru's still: Nor will these contend
With skittish tricks, when they their stitch should end,
To break their plough, and leave their work undone;
These, let a youth of forty wait upon;
(...)* Quadrisidum octo morsu^m, He commends a Man of forty for a most fit
servant. And therefore presc^^be^ allowance of bread to his meals, something
extraordinary: saying, he would have allowed four shiues of bread at a meal
to his meat; every shiue containing eight bits or morsels; Not that the whole
four shiues should contain but eight morsels, as the Criti^ks expound it. For
how absurd is it to imagine, a shiue of bread but two bits? And how pinching a
diet it were for an able Plowman?
Whose bread at Meals, in four good shiuers cut;
Eight bits in every shiue; for that Man, put
To his fit task; will see it done past talk,
With any fellow; Nor will ever Balke
In any stitch he makes; but give his Mind,
Whith care to his labor. And this Man, no Hind,
(Though much his younger) shall his better be,
At sowing Seed; and shunning skilfullie,
(...), Qui quidem opus curans, etc* aetatis quam in serus requirit (says
Melancthon) rations addit adm^dum graves, sentitque mu^tum situm esse, in
maturitate ^tatis. Forty years then, being but a youths a^e
Need to go over his whole work again.
Your younger Man, feeds still a flying vain,
From his set task; to hold his equals chat;
And trifles works, he should be serious at.
Take notice then, when thou the Crane shall hear
Aloft, out of the Clouds her changes rear;
That then he gives thee signal when to sow,
And winters wrathful Season does foreshowe.
And then the Man, that can no Oxen get;
Or wants the Seasons work; his heart does eat.
Then feed thy Oxen, in the house with Hay;
Which he that wants; with ease enough will say,
Let me, alike, thy Waine and Oxen use*
Which it is as easy for thee to refuse;
And say, thy Oxeworke then importunes much.
He that is rich in Brain, will answer such;
Work up thy self, a Wagon of thine own;
For to the foolish borrower, is not known,
That each Waine asks a hundred joints of wood;
These things ask forecast; and thou should make good
At home, before thy need so instant stood.
When therefore, first, fit plow time does disclose;
Put on with spirit; All, as one, dispose
Thy servants, and thy self: plow wet and dry;
And when Aurora first affords her eye,
In Springtime turn the earth up; which see done,
Again, past all fail, by the Summers Sun.
Hasten thy labors, that thy crowned fields,
May load themselves to thee; and rack their yields.
(...), No^alu impr^cationum expultrix. The Tilth-field, he c^l^es banisher of
execrations, and pleaser of sons and daughters; first, because rude ^usbandmen
use to curse, when their crops answer not their expectations; and next, it
pleases sons and daughters, since it helps add to their portions.
The Tilth-field sow, on Earths most light foundations;
The Tilth-field, banisher of execrations;
Pleaser of Sons, and Daughters: which t'improue,
With all wished profits; pray to earthly Jove,
And virtuous Ceres; that on all such suits,
Her sacred gift bestows, in blessing fruits.
When first thou enterst foot to plow thy land,
And on thy plow-staffes top have laid thy hand;
Thy Oxens backs, that next thee, by a Chain
Thy Oken-draught Tree draw; put to the pain
Thy Goad imposes. And thy Boy behind,
That with his Iron Rake thou have designed,
To hide thy seed; Let from his labor drive,
The Birds, that offer on thy sweat to live.
The best thing, that in humane Needs does fall,
Is Industry; and Sloth the worst of all.
With one, thy Corn ears, shall with fruit abound;
And bow their thankful forheads to the ground;
With the other; scarce thy seed again redound.
When Jove then gives this good end to thy pain;
Amids the Vessels that preserve thy Grain,
No Spiders then, shall need t'vsurp their room,
But thou (I think) rejoice, and rest at Home;
Provision Inn'd enough of every thing,
To give thee glad heart, till the neighbor Spring;
Not go to others to supply thy store,
But others, need to come to thee for more.
If at the suns conversion thou shall sow,
(...), Sedens. He disprooues sowing at the winter Solstice; and says, he that
does sow then, may sit and reap, for any labor his crop will require; a Reap,
they call as much, as at once the Reaper grasps in his hand.
The sacred Earth; Thou then, may sit and mow,
Or reap in Harvest; such a little pain
Will serve thy use, to sell thy thin-growne Grain;
And Reaps so scanty, will take up thy hand;
Thou hid in dust; Not comforted a sand,
But gather against the grain. Thou should be then,
Coop't in a Basket up; for worldly Men,
Admire no unthrifts: Honor goes by gain.
As times still change, so changes Jove his Mind,
Whose Seasons, mortal Men can hardly find.
But if thou should sow late, this well may be,
In all thy slacknesse, an excuse for thee.
When, in the Oaks green arms the Cuckoe sings,
And first delights Men in the lovely springs;
If much rain fall, it is fit then to defer
Thy sowing work. But how much rain to bear,
And let no labor to that Much, give ear,
Past intermission, let Jove steep the grass
Three days to gether, so he do not pass
An Oxes hoof in depth; and never stay,
To strowe thy seed in: but if deeper way
Jove, with his rain makes; then forbear the field:
For late sown then, will past the foremost yield.
Mind well all this, nor let it fly thy powrs,
To know what fits, the white springs early flowrs;
Nor when raines timely fall; Nor when sharp cold
In winters wrath, does men from work withholde
(...) By which he understands smiths forge^; where the poorer sor^ of Greece
used to sit, as they do still in the winter amongst us, and a^ amongst the
Romans in tensiriuis, or barbars shops.
Sit by smiths forges, nor warm (...), calidam taber^a^ These (...) were of
old said to bold the meetings of Philosophers. And after, because amongst
them mixed idle talkers over cups; they were called (...), nugae, (...), loq
^acitas, or garrulitas* (...), Ma^ileu^a verse crassum pedem manu pre^as
Aristo^le in his problems, as out of this place, ^ffirmes that da^ly and
continual hunger makes men's feet, and ankles swell. And by the same reason,
superiores parts exte^u^ ^^ur et macrescunt, for which He^^ uses this
ingenious a^^usion to his ^rother; aduising him to take heed ne pedem
tumefactum tenni mau^ demulcere oporteat, (...), signifying here demul^eo, not
stringend^ cr^cio, ^t premo, as it is usually rendered. But (for the pain)
stroke o^ ^ouch it softly; for some ease to it: though it does little good to
it, but only makes good the proverb. Vbidolor ibi digitus.
tauernes hant;
Nor let the bitterest of the season dant
Thy thrift-arm'd pains, like idle Poverty;
For then the time is when the industrious Thie
Vpholdes, with all increase, his Family.
With whose rich hardness spirited, do thou,
Poor Delicacie fly; lest frost and snow,
Fled for her love; Hunger sit both them out,
And make thee, with the beggars lazy gout,
Sit stooping to the pain, still pointing to it,
(...) Mala intra animum v^rsat. And therefore says Melancthon out of Columel:
homines ^^hil agendo male agere dis^u^t. But (...), signifies not only versat,
but iustar v^darum f^u^i^ (...) v^raginis versat.
And with a lean hand, stroke a foggie foot.
The slothful man, expecting many things,
With his vain hope, that cannot stretch her wings
Past need of necessaries for his kind,
Turns like a whirle-pit over, in his mind
All means that Rapine prompts to th'idle Hind;
Sits in the tavern; and finds means to spend
Ill got; and ever, does to worse contend.
When Summer therefore in her Tropicke sits;
Make thou thy servants wear their winter wits,
And tell them this, ere that warm season wast,
Make nests; for Summer will not ever last.
(...). Mensis in quo sestam in honorem Le^ei celebratur. Bacchus being called
(...), q^oniam torculaeribus et vini expressione praeest. And because his feast
used to be solemnised in January; (...) is called Ianu^rium.
The month of Ianuaries all-ill days,
For Oxens good; shun now by Iulies rays.
(...), flante borea. ^y^mis tempus, et mensem Boreali frigore grauissimum
copios^ et eleganter descripsit. says Melancthon.
When aires chill North his noisome frosts shall blow
All over earth, and all the wide sea throw
At Heaven in hills; from cold horse-breeding Thrace;
The beaten earth, and all her Syluane race
Roaring and bellowing with his bitter strokes;
Plumps of thick firre-trees, and high-crested Oaks;
Torn up in valleys, all Aires flood let fly
In him, at Earth; sad nurse of all that die*
Wild beasts abhor him; and run clapping close
Their stern's betwixt their thighs; and even all those,
Whose hides, their fleeces line, with highest proof;
Even Oxe-hides also want expulsive stuff;
And bristled goats, against his bitter gale:
He blows so cold, he beats quite through them all.
Only with silly sheep it fares not so;
For they, each Summer fleec't, their fells so grow,
They shield all winter, crushed into his wind.
He makes the old Man trudge for life, to find
Shelter against him, but he cannot blast
The tender, and the delicately-grac't
Flesh of the virgin; she is kept within,
Close by her mother, careful of her skin;
Since yet she never knew, how to enfolde
The force of Venus swimming all in gold.
Whose snowie bosom choicely washed and balm'd,
With wealthy oiles; she keeps the house becalmed,
All winters spite; when in his fire-lesse shed,
And miserable roof still hiding head;
(...). exof^^^, he intends the Polypus; that has no bones, but a gristle for
his backbone.
The bonelesse fish does eat his feet for cold.
To whom the sun does never food unfold;
But turns above the black Men's populous towrs,
On whom he more bestows his radiant hours,
(...), Hellen was son to Deucalion; of whom as being author of that Nation,
(...) ^icitur Graecus vt testatur Plinis, Lib. 4. cap. 7. The sun being in
Sagittar^iu^ is longer with the Aethiops, which are Meridionall: (...) with the
Graecians.
Then on the Hellenians; then all Beasts of horn;
And smooth brow'd, that in beds of wood are borne,
About the Oken dales; that North-winde fly,
Gnashing their teeth, with restless misery;
And every where, that Care solicits all,
That (out of shelter) to their Couerts fall,
And Cauerns eaten into Rocks; and then,
(...), Trip^di homini similes. He calls old Men helped with slaves in their
gate; three-footed.
Those wild Beasts shrink, like tame three footed Men,
Whose backs, are broke with Age, and forheads driven
To stoop to Earth; though borne to look on Heaven.
Even like to these; Those tough-bred rude ones, go,
Flying the white drifts of the Northern Snow.
Then put thy Bodies best munition on;
Soft wastecotes, weeds that th'Ankles traile upon;
And, with a little linen, vveaue much wull,
In fore-wouen webs; and make thy Garments full:
And these put on thee; lest thy harsh-growne hair
Tremble upon thee, and into the Air
Start, as affrighted; all that breast of thine,
(...), p^n ^arum in mere in altum erigere.
Pointed with Bristles like a Porcupine.
About thy feet, see fitted Shoes be tied,
Made of a strongly-dying Oxes Hide;
(...), not Pil^^, as it is usually translated, but soculis la^eis.
Lined with wool socks: Besides, when those winds blow,
Thy first fallen Kid-skinnes; sure together sow,
With Oxes sinews, and about thee throw,
To be thy refuge, against the soking Rain.
Upon thy head, a quilted Hat sustain,
(...), aer igniser, o^ frugifer, though fruits are the chief effects of it;
but Air that brings a comfortable fire with it; and he says, (...), a coelo
stoilifero.
That from thy ears, may all Aires spite expel.
When North-windes blow, the Air is sharp and fell;
30. But Morning Air, that brings a warmth withal,
Down from the Stars, and on the earth does fall;
Expires a breath, that (all things chearing then)
Is fit to crown the works of blessed Men.
Which drawing out of floods, that ever flow;
Winde-stormes are raised on Earth, that roughly blow;
And then, sometimes, a shower falls toward Even;
And sometime Air, in empty blasts is driven.
Which, from the North-winde rising out of Thrace,
And gloomy clouds raised; haste thee home apace;
Thy work for that day done; the event foreseen,
Lest, out of Heaven, a dark clowd hide thee clean,
Thy weeds wet through, and steep thee to the skin;
But shun it; for when this cold Month comes-in;
Extreme it is for sheep, extreme for men;
Take from thy Oxen half their Commons then,
(...), Tum etc Then sharpen thy Oxens stomachs, with taking away half their
allowance; but give more to thy servants; his reason is* because the Days
being shorter by half, then; then in Su^mer; and so take away half the work
of the Ox; therefore half their fother should be in equal husbandry abated.
But since servants must work in Night as well, and that the Nights are much
longer; he would have their commons encreast; Allowing even those bodily
laborers, in a kind of proportion, the same that is fit for Mental
painetakers* Studen^s etc. for the word (...), taken here for Nights; is usurped
for the eff^cts of Night. (...) signifying prudentia va'eus, and (...) is
called Night; quod putaretur multum confer, ad inuentionem eorum quae
quaruntur, intending in studies and labors of the soul, especially the
Epithete, (...), signifying auxilium, seu inspirationem serentes; magna cum
alacritate and contention^. All that since therefore, the words containing, a
man may observe, how verbal E^p^si^ors ^^ubber up these divine expressions;
with their contractions, and going the next way.
But mend thy servants; for ingenious Night,
Then, great in length, affects the Appetite,
With all contention, and alacrity,
To all Invention, and the scrutinie
Of all our objects; and must therefore feast,
To make the spirits run high in their Inquest.
These well observing, all the years Remain,
The Days and Nights grow equal; till, again,
Earth, that of all things is the Mother Queen;
All fruits, promiscuously, brings forth for Men.
When, after sixty turnings of the Sun,
By Jove's Decrees; all vvinters hours are run;
(...), Arcturus^ is a Star sub Zona ^oota; oritur vespere, initio veris
Then does the Euening-starre, Arcturus, rise,
And leave th'vnmeasur'd Ocean; all Men's eyes,
Frst, noting then his Beams; and, after him,
Before the clear Morns light, has chaste the Dim;
(...), ante-lucano tempore quiritam. The construction should be; not
Prorumpit, ad lucem; but ^ugens ad lucem; since it came not soon enough to
prevent the Nights Tyranny in Tereus. The fiction of which is too common to be
repeated.
Pandions Swallow, breaks out with her Moan;
Made to the Light; the Spring but new put on.
Preventing which; cut Vines, for then it is best.
But when the horned house-bearer leaves his rest,
And climes the Plants; the seven Stars then in flight;
No where dig Vines; but Sithes whet, and excite
Servants to work: fly shadie Tavern boures;
And Beds, as soon as light salutes the flowers.
In Harvest, when the Sun the body dries;
Then haste, and fetch the Fields home; early rise,
That Plenty may, thy House-hould wants suffice:
The Morn, the third part of thy work does gain;
The Morn, makes short thy way, makes short thy pain;
The Morn, being once up, fills the ways with all,
And yokes the Ox, her self up, in his stall.
When once the Thistle does his flower prefer;
And on the Tree, the garrulous Grasshopper,
Beneath her wings; all Day, and all Night long,
Sits pouring out, her derisorie song;
When Labor drinks, his boiling sweat to thrive:
Then Gotes grow fat; then best wine choose; then strive
Women for work most; and Men least can do;
For then, the Dog-starre, burns his drouth into,
Their brains, and knees, and all the Body dries;
But then, betake thee, to the shade that lies,
(...), Biblinum vi^u^* dicitur a Biblia R^gione T^r^ciae vbi nobilis^ima ^ina
sunt.
In shield of Rocks; drink Biblian wine, and eat,
The creamie wafer; Gotes milk that the Teate,
Gives newly free; and nurses Kids no more.
Flesh of Bow-browsing Beeues, that never bore;
And tender Kids. And to these, taste black wine,
(...), tertiam aquae pa^tem insunde* The Greeks never drunk Merum, but dilutum
vinum; wine alaid with water. Athenaeus says, that to two cups of wine,
sometime they put five cups of water; and sometimes, to ^oure of wine, but two
of water; which they order according to the strength, or weakness of their wine.
The third part water, of the Crystaline,
Still flowing fount, that feeds a stream beneath;
And sit in shades, where temperate gales may breath
On thy opposed cheeks; when Orions rays,
His influence, in first Ascent assaies.
Then to thy laboring servants give command,
To dight the sacred gift of Ceres hand;
In some place windy, on a well-plan'd floor;
Which, all by measure, into Vessels pour;
Make then, thy Man-swaine, one that has no House;
Thy handmaid, one, that has nor child, nor Spouse;
Handmaids, that children have, are ravenous.
(...)* den^es in^^rse pectinatim coeuntes habens.
A Mastiffe likewise, nourish still at home;
Whose teeth are sharp, and close as any Comb;
And meat him well, to keep with stronger guard,
(...), d^e dormi^ns, nocte vigilance vir, a Periphrasis of a Thief.
The Day-sleep-wake^ Night Man, from forth thy yard;
That else thy Goods into his Caves will bear.
Inn Hay, and Chafe enough, for all the year,
To serve thy Oxen, and thy Mules; and then,
Lose them; and ease the dear knees of thy Men.
When Syrius, and Orions aspire
To Heavens steep height; and bright Arcturus fire,
The rosie-fingerd Morning sees arise;
O Perses, then, thy Vineyard faculties
See gathered, and got home. Which twice five Days,
And Nights no less, expose to Phoebus Rays;
Then five Days, Inn them, and in Vessels close,
The gift, the gladnes-causing God bestows.
But after, that the Seuen-stars, and the Five,
That twixt the Bulls horns, at their set arrive;
Together with the great Orions force;
Then plie thy Plough, as fits the Seasons course.
(...), qui de sort sua quaeritur.
If, of a Chance-complaining Man, at Seas,
The humor take thee; when the Pleiades,
Hide head, and fly the fierce Orions, chase;
And the darke-deep Oceanus embrace;
Then diverse Gusts of violent winds arise;
And then attempt, no Nauall enterprise.
But ply thy Land affairs; and draw ashore,
Thy Ship; and fence her round, with stonage store,
To shield her Ribs, against the humorous Gales;
Her Pump exhausted, lest Jove's rainie falls,
Breed putrefaction. All tools fit for her;
And all her tacklings, to thy House confer;
Contracting orderly, all needful things,
That Imp a water-treading Vessels wings.
Her well-wrought Stern, hang in the smoke at home,
Attending time, till fit Sea Seasons come.
And then thy swift Sail lanch, conueying in,
Burden, that richly way that Trade begin;
As did our Father; who a voyage went,
For want of an Estate so competent,
As free life asked; and long since landed here;
When he had measured the vnmeasur'd Spheere,
Of all the Sea; Aeoliam Cumas leaving;
(...), non redditus, s^^ diuitias fugiens. He blames those that having richly
enough of their own; which they freely and safely possesse^ ashore; will yet
with insatiate desire of more, venture the loss of all; which his father (he
says) was not to be blamed for; in going to Sea; who only took that course
to avoid Poverty; his means by Land not enough, to live withal, freely.
Not flying wealth (Reuenews great receiving;
And Bliss it self possessed, in all fit store;
If wisely used; yet selling that t'explore
Strange Countries, madly covetous of more;
But only shunning loathsome Poverty;
Which yet Jove sends, and Men should never fly.
The seat that he was left to dwell upon,
Was set in Ascra, near to Helicon;
Amids a miserable Village there;
In winter vile, in summer noisomer;
And profitable never. Note thou then,
To do all works; the proper Season, when;
In Sea-workes chiefly. For whose use allow
A little Ship; but in her bulk bestow,
A great big Burden; the more Ships sustain,
The surer sail they; and heap Gain on Gain:
If Seas run smooth, and rugged Gusts abstain.
When thy vain Mind then, would Sea-ventures try;
In love, the Land-Rocks of loathed Debt to fly;
(...), famem auditu insua^em.
And Hunger's-euer harsh-to-heare of cry:
I Will set before thee all the Trim, and Dress,
Of those still-roaring-noise-resounding Seas;
(...), etsi neque nauigand peritus: Melancthon in this free confession of his
unskillfulness in what he intended to teach, gives this Note; Rem^net a se
reprehensionem ob imperitiam Hic videmu (...), Primo vsurpa tum fuisse, cum
laud, pro docere and tradere aliquid eruditius pre alij.
Though neither skild, in either Ship, or Sail,
Nor ever was at Sea; Or, lest I fail,
But for Euboea once; from Aulis where
The Greeks, with Tempest driven, for shore did stere
Their mighty Navy, gatherd to employ,
For sacred Greece; against faire-dame-breeding Troy;
To Chalcis there, I made by Sea my Pass;
(...), King of Euboea, was shine in Battle, against the Erythreans. At whose
Funerals, his soones instituted Games. And from hence Melancton gathers; by
that time in which the King died; Hesiod then living; that Homer lived a
hundred years before him: And so could not be the Man, from whom our Author is
affirmed by some Historians to win the prise, he now speaks of.
And to the Games of great Amphidamas;
Where many afore-studied Exercise,
Was instituted, with excitefull prise,
For great-and-good, and able-minded Men:
And where I won, at the Pierean Pen,
A three-ear'd Tripod, which I offered on,
The Altars of the Maids of Helicon.
Where first their loves initiated me,
In skill of their vnworldly Harmony.
But no more practice have my travails swet,
In many-a-naile-composed ships; and yet,
I Will sing what Jove's Mind will suggest in mine,
Whose daughters taught my verse the rage divine.
Fifty days after Heavens converted heat,
When Summers land-works are dissolved with sweat;
Then grows the nauigable season fit:
For then no storms rise, that thy sail may split,
Nor spoil thy sailers. If the God that swaies
Th'earth-shaking Trident, do not ouerpaise,
With any counsel, before hand decreed,
The seasons natural grace, to thy good speed;
Nor Jove consent with his reuengefull will;
In whom are fixed the bounds of good and ill.
But in the usual temper of the year,
Easy to judge of, and distinguish clear,
Are both the winds* and seas; none rude, none cross,
Nor mis-affected with the love of loss.
And therefore put to sea; trust even the wind
Then, with thy swift ship; but when thou shall find
Fit freight for her; as fitly stowe it strait;
And all haste home make. For no new wine wait,
Nor aged Autumnes showers; nor winters falls,
Then fast approaching; Nor the noisome gales,
The humorous South breathes, that incense the seas,
(...), Coelestem imbr^ secutus; intending a following of those things quae
serie quadam continuase sequuntur.
And raise together in one series
Jove's Autumn dashes, that come smoking down,
And with his roughest brows make The Ocean frown.
But there is another season for the seas,
That in the first spring others choices please;
When, look how much the Crow takes at a stride,
So much, put forth, the young leaf is descride
On Fig Tree tops. But then the gusts so fall,
That often the sea becomes imperviall.
And yet this vernall season many use,
For sea affairs; which yet, I would not choose;
Nor gives it my mind any grateful taste,
Since then steals out so many a ravenous blast;
Nor, but with much skath thou can escape thy bane,
Which yet, Men's greedy follies dare maintain;
Money is soul to miserable Men:
And to it many Men their souls bequeath.
To die in darke-seas is a dreadful death.
All this I charge thee, need to note no more;
Nor in one vessel venture all thy store;
But most part leave out, and impose the less;
For it is a wretched thing t'indure distress
Incurred at sea. And, it is as ill, ashore
To use adventures, covetous of more
Than safety warrants; As, upon thy Waine
To lay on more load than it can sustain.
For then, thy Axle breaks, thy goods diminish,
And Thrifts mean means in violent Au'rice vanish.
The Mean observed, makes an exceeding slare.
Occasion took at all times, equals Fate.
Thy self, if well in years; thy wife take home,
Not much past thirty; nor have much to come:
But being young thy self; Nuptials that sease,
The times best season in their acts are these.
(...), Pollux expounds this word, which is usually taken for four; fourteen.
Plato and Aristotle appoint the best time of women's marriages at eightteene.
At fourteen years a woman grows mature,
At fifteen, wed her; and best means inure,
To marry her a Maid; to teach her then,
Respect to thee, and chastnes the other men.
(...), qua prope (...) habitat. His counsel is, to marry a maid bred near a
man, whose breeding and behavior he has still taken into note. Counsel of
gold, but not respected in this borne age
In chief choose one, whose life is near thee bred,
That her condition circularly weighd,
(And that with care too) in thy neighbors eyes,
Thou wedd'st not, for a Maid, their mockeries.
No purchase passes a good wife, no loss
Is, than a bad wife, a more cursed cross,
45. That must a gossip be at every feast;
And private cates provide too for her guest;
And bear her husband never so bold a breast,
(...), Torres sine fac^ et cr^da senecta tradit. (...), senecta ante temp^s
adueniens, which place Boaetius imitates in his book de consolatione in this
distich: Intempestiui funduntur vertice cani, et dolor aetatemiussit-inesse
suam.
Without a fire, burns in him even to rage,
And in his youth poures grief on him in age.
The Gods forewarnings, (...), In God signifies insight, and government in all
things, and his just indignation against the impious; In man, respect to the
fear of God, and his reverence. Mel.
and pursuits of Men,
Of impious lives, with vnauoided pain;
Their sight, their rule of all, their love, their fear,
(...). vigilus et excubi^s positu.
Watching, and sitting up, give all thy care.
Give never to thy friend an even respect,
(...). This precept of preferring a man's own brother to his friend, is full
of humanity, and savors the true taste of a true-borne Man. The neglect of
which in these days, shows children either utterly mist ego^^e^, or got by
unnatural fathers; of who^ children must taste, in disposition, as a poison of
degeneracie, poured into the^ both, and a just plague for both.
With thy borne brother; for, in his neglect,
Thy self thou touchest first, with that defect.
If thou shall take thy friend with an offense,
By word, or deed; twice only, try what sense
He has of thy abuse, by making plain
The wrong he did thee: and if then again
He will turn friend, confess, and pay all pain
Due for his forfaite; take him into grace:
The shameless Man shifts friends still with his place.
But keep thou friends, forgive, and so convert,
That not thy look may reprehend thy heart.
Be not a common host for guests, nor one
That can abide the kind receipt of none.
Consort none ill, though raised to any state;
Nor leave one good; though n'ere so ruinate.
Abhor all taking pleasure to vpbraid
A forlorn Poverty, which God has laid
On any Man, in so severe a kind,
As quite disheartens, and dissolues his Mind.
Amongst Men on the earth there never sprung
An ampler treasure than a sparing tongue.
Which yet, most grace gains, when it sings the Mean.
Ill-speakers ever hear as ill again.
Make not thy self at any public feast,
A troublesome or ouercurious guest.
It Is common cheer, nor touches thee at all;
Besides, thy grace is much, thy cost is small.
Do not thy tongues grace the disgrace to lie,
Nor mend a true-spoke Mind with policy;
But all things use with first simplicity.
To Jove, nor no God pour out morning wine,
With unwashed hands: for, know, the powers divine
Auer^ their ears, and prayers impure reject.
Put not they urine out, with face erect
Against the sun, but sitting let it fall,
Or turn thee to some vndiscouering wall.
(...). utque contra solemn versus erectus m^ito. He would have no contempt
against the sun; either directly, or allegorically intending by the sun, great
and reverend men: against whom, nihil proterue, et irreuerenter agendum, If in
the plain sense; which he makes serious, he would not have a Man make water
turning purposely against the sun, nor standing, but sitting, as at this day
even amongst the rude Turks it is abhorred, Quibus religiosum est vt sedentes
mingant, et ingens flagitium designari credunt siquis in publico cacaret aut
mingeret.
And after the great Sun is in descent,
Remember, till he greet the Orient,
That, in way, or without, thou still forbear.
Nor open thy nakedness while thou art there.
The nights the Gods are, and the Godly Man,
And wise will shun by all means to profane
(...), Melancthon expounds this place a congressu vxoris ne sacra accedas*
whom I have followed* (...), signifies here inf^^stut, and (...) funebre epulum.
The Gods appropriates. Make no access
(Thy wife new left) to sacred mysteries;
Or coming from an ominous funeral feast;
But from a banquet that the Gods have blessed
In Men whose spirits are frolikely inclinde;
Perform those rights that propagate thy kind.
Never, the fair waves of eternal floods,
Pass with thy feet, but first inuoke the Gods;
Thine eyes cast on their streams; Which those that wade,
(Their hands unwashed) those Deities invade
With future plagues: and even then angry are.
(...), he says a man must not pare his nails at the Table, in which our
reverend Author is so respectfull and moral in his setting down, that he
names not nails, but calls what is to be pared away (...) siccum, or aridum,
and the nail it self (...) because it is still growing, he calls likewise the
hand (...) or quae in quinos ramo^ dispergitur, because it puts out five
fingers, like branches.
Of thy five branches, see thou never pare
The dry from off the green, at solemn feasts:
Nor on the quaffing Mazers of thy guests
Bestow the boawle vowed, to the powers divine;
For harmefull fate is swallowed with the wine.
When thou have once begun to build a house,
Leau't not vnfinisht, lest the Ominous,
Ill-spoken Crow, encounter thee abroad,
And from her bow, thy means outgone, explode.
From three-foot pots of meat, set on the fire
To serve thy house; serve not thy tastes desire
With rauine of the Meat, till on the board
Thou see it set and sacrifice afforde.
Not if thou wash first, and the Gods would please
With that respect to them: for even for these,
Pains are imposde, being all Impieties.
On tombe-stones, or fixed seats no boy permit,
(That Is grown to twelve years old) to idly sit;
For it is not good, but makes a slothful man.
In bath's whose waters women first began
To wash their bodies in, should bathe no Men.
For, in their time, even these parts have their pain
Grievous enough. If any homely place,
Syluane, or other, thou see vowed to grace
Of any God, by fire made for the weal
Of any poor soul, moved with simplest zeal;
Mock not the mysteries: for God disdaines
Those impious parts, and paies them certain pains.
Never in channels of those streams that pay
The Ocean tribute, give thy urine way;
Nor into Hirecte in fon^es immingere dicuntnr qui sacram doctr. na^
commaculant.
fountains: but past all neglect,
See thou avoid it: for the grave respect
Given to these secrets, meets with blessed effect.
(...), grauem or terribilem famam he advises a man to avoid. Intending with
deserving a good and honest fame amongst men, which known to himself
impartially, and betwixt God and him; every worthy man should despise the
contrary conceit of the world. According to that of Qu^ntilian writing to
Seneca affirming he cared no more what the misiudging world vented against him,
qua^ de vent^^ redditi crepitus.
Do this, and fly the peoples bitter fame,
For Fame is ill: it is light and raised like flame;
The burden heavy yet, and hard to cast.
No fame does wholly perish, when her blast
Echo resounds in all the peoples cries,
For she her self, is of the Deities.
The end of the second Book of works.
HESIODS BOOK OF DAYS.
THe Days, that for thy works, are Good, or Ill,
According to the Influence, they instill;
Of Jove with all care, learn, and give them then,
(For their discharge) in precept to thy Men.
The thirtith Day of every Month, is best
(...), diligeti inspectione digero, seu seceru^ and ^ligo. He begins with
the last day of the Month, which he names not a day of any good, or bad
influence; but being (as twere) their Term Day; in which their business in
Law was attended: And that, not lasting all the Day; He advises to spend the
rest of it, in disposing the next Months labors. Of the rest, he makes
difference; showing which are unfortunate, and which auspicious; and are so
far to be observed, as natural cause is to be given for them; for it were
madness, not to ascribe Reason to Nature; or to make that Reason so far
above us, that we cannot know by it, what is daily in use with us; all being
for our cause created of God: And therefore the differences of D^ies, arise in
some part from the Aspects; quibus Luna intuetur solemn Nam quadrati asp^ctus
cient pugnam Naturae cum morb^.
With diligent inspection, to digest
The next Months works; and part thy house-hould foods:
That being the Day, when all litigious Goods,
Are justly sentenc't, by the peoples voices.
And till that Day, next Month, give these Days choyces;
For they are marked out, by most-knowing Jove.
(...), primum Nouilunium; which he calls sacred; nam omnia initia sacra. The
fourth likewise, he calls sacred, quia eo die prodit a cui^^ Luna, primumque
tum conspicitur.
First, the first Day, in which the Moon does move,
With radiance renu'd. And then, the fourth,
The seventh Day, next; being first in sacred worth:
For that Day, did Latona bring to light,
(...), The second, and fifth day, let p^sse, and sixth; vt medijs; he comes to
the eighth, and ninth, which in their increasing he terms truly profitable;
Nam humores alit crescentia Luna.
The gould-sword-wearing Sun. Next then the eightth,
And ninth, are Good; being both, Days that retain
The Moons prime strength, t'instruct the works of Men.
(...), The tenth let pass; the eleventh, and twelfth, he praises diuersely;
because the Moon beholdes the Sun then in a triangulare aspect; which is
ever called beneuolent.
The leauenth, and twelfth, are likewise both Good Days;
The twelfth yet, far exceeds, the 'leuenths repair;
For that Day hangs the Spinner in the Air;
And weaues her web up. So the Spinster, all
Her Rock then ends, exposing it to sale.
So Earth's third Huswife, the ingenious Ant,
On that Day ends her Mole-hils cure of want.
The Day her self, in their example then,
Tasking her fire, and bounds her length to Men.
The thirteenth Day, take care thou sow no seed;
To plant yet, it is a Day of special speed.
The sixteenth Day, Plants set, prove fruitless still;
To get a Son it is good, a Daughter ill.
(...), ^eque ^uptijs trudendis The sixteenth Day, he says, is neither good to
get a Daughter, nor to wed her; quia a plenilunio coepit iam humor deficere. He
says, it is good to get a Son in, nam ex humido semine s^^ nellae: (...)
sictiore, puelli na^cuntur.
Nor good to get, nor give in Nuptials;
Nor in the sixth Day, any Influence falls,
To fashion her begetting Confluence.
But to geld Kids, and Lambs, and Sheep-coats fence;
It is a Day of much benevolence:
To get a Son, it good effects affords;
(...), eor al^cui scindeus.
And loves to cut ones heart, with bitter words.
And yet it likes fair speeches too, and lies;
And whispering out detractiue obloquies.
The eight, the bellowing Bullock lib, and Got;
The twelfth, the laboring Mule; but if of note,
(...), prudentem ver^ ^ud cem, seu Arbitr^m quod eoigna^os esse oporteat rei
de qua agitur; He calls ^t the great ^ w^^^^th, because it is the last, (...),
which is of the middle De^^d of the Month; diebus (...), or days of the dying
moon immediately following.
For wisdom, and to make a Judge of Laws;
To estimate, and arbitrate a Cause,
Thou would a Son get, the great twentieth Day,
Consort thy wife, when full the Morns broad Ray,
Shines through thy windows: for that Day is fit,
To form a great, and honorable wit.
The tenth is likewise good, to get a Son;
(...). The fourteenth is good to get a Daughter; because the Moon then
abounds in humors; and her light is more gel^d and cold; her heat more
temperate. And therefore he says, it is good likewise, to tame Beast^ in, since
then, by the abundance of humous, they are made more gentle, and consequently,
easier tamed.
Fourteenth a Daughter; then lay hand upon
The Colt, the Mule, and horne-retorted Stere;
And sore-bit Mastiffe; and their forces rere,
To useful services. Be careful then,
(...), He calls this day so banefull; because of the opposition of Sun and
the Moon; and the time then being, that is, between the old and new Moon; are
hurtful for bodies, such as labor with choleric diseases; most languish
then: Those with Phlegmatic contrary.
The four and twentieth Day, (the bane of Men,
Hurling amongst them) to make safe thy State;
For it is a Day, of Death insatiate.
The fourth Day, celebrate thy Nuptial feast,
All Birds observed, that fit a Bridal best.
(...), He warnes Men to fly all fif^ Days; that is, the fifth, the the
fifteenth, and the five and twentieth; because all vengefull spirits he affirms
then to be most busy with Men.
All fifth Days, to effect affairs in, fly;
Being all of harsh and horrid quality.
For then, all vengefull spirits walk their Round,
And haunt Men like their handmaids; to confound
Their faithles peace; whose plague Contention got.
The seventeenth Day, what Ceres did allot
Thy Barnes in Harvest (since then viewed with care)
The seventeenth day, he thinks best to vi^now, or dight Corn a pleniluni^*
because about that time, winds are stirred up, and the Air is drier.
Upon a smooth floor; let the vinnoware,
Dight, and expose, to the opposed Gale.
Then, let thy Forrest-feller, cut thee all
Thy Chamber fuel; and the numerous parts
Of Nauall timber, apt for Ship-wrights Arts.
The four and twentieth Day, begin to close
(...), prima no^a. That is, from the beginning of the Month; he calls
harmless; proptergeminum aspectum, cum sol abest a signis.
Thy Ships of leake. The ninth Day never blows
Least ill at all on Men. The ninteenth Day,
Yields (after Noone yet) a more gentle Ray;
Auspicious, both to plant, and generate
Proverb n^ll^^ dies omni^ mal^^^.
Both Sons and Daughters; ill to no estate.
But the thrice ninth Days Goodness, few Men know*
Being best Day of the whole Month, to make flow
Both wine, and Corne-tuns; and to curb the force
Of Mules and Oxen and the swift-hoou'd Horse.
(...), He says, few observe these differences of days; and as few know, or
make any difference betwixt one day and another.
And then, the well built Ship lanch. But few men,
Know truth in any thing. Or where, or when
To do, or order, what they must do, needs:
Days differencing, with no more care than deeds.
The twice seventh Day (for sacred worth) exceeds.
But few Men, when the twentieth Day is past,
Which is the best Day (while the Morn does last
In her increasing power; though after Noone,
He says, few approve those days, because these cause most change of
tempests, and Men's bodies, in the beginning of the last quarter.
Her grace grows faint) approve, or end that Moon,
All this, and the lives of Fowls, is cited out of this Author by Plutarch;
not being extant in the common Copy.
With any Care; Man's life, most pris'd, is least:
Though lengthlesse; spent as endless. Foul and Beast
Far passing it, for Date. For all the store
Of years, Man boasts; the prating Crow has more,
By thrice three lives. The long-liu'd Stagge, four parts,
Exceeds the Crows Time; the Ravens Age; the Hearts,
Triples in durance; all the Ravens long Date,
The Phoenix, ninefolde does reduplicate.
Yet Nymphs (the blessed seed of the Thunderer)
Ten lives out-last the Phoenix. But prefer
Good life, to long life; and observe these Days,
That must direct it; being to all Men's ways
(...), Et hae quidem d^es hominibus sunt magno commodo.

The Epilogue of the Teacher; in all Days is to be considerd what Religion
commands, and then what rises out of natural Causes.


Of excellent conduct. All the rest but sound's,
That follow falls; mere vain and have no grounds:
But, one does one Day praise; another, other;
Few knowing the truth. This Day becomes a Mother;
The next, a Step-dame. But, be Man still one;
That Man a happy Angel waits upon;
Makes rich, and blessed, that through all these Days
Is knowingly emploid. In all his ways,
(Betwixt him and the Gods) goes still vnblam'd.
All their forewarnings, and suggestions framed,
To their obedience; being directly viewed:
All Good endeavored, and all Ill eschew'd.
The end of Hesiods Works, and Days.

