A IOVRNALL, Of the taking in of Venlo, Roermont, Strale, the memorable Seige
of Mastricht, the Town and Castle of Limburch under the able, and wise Conduct
of his Excie: the Prince of Orange, Anno 1632. WITH An exact Card drawn first
by Charles Floyd (now Ensign) and since lessened and cut by Henricus and
Willihelmus Hondius dwelling by the Gevangen Port in the Hagh.

Compiled together by Capt. Henry Hexham Quartermaster to the Regiment of the
Lord General Vere.

As also a List of the Officers, Volunteers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers slain,
and hurt in this seige. With the Articles of Composition.



AT DELPH, Printed by John Pietersz VValpote, for Nathaniell Butter, and are to
be sold at Henrij Hondius, his house in the Hagh, Anno 1633.

With the Privilege thereunto of the high and mighty Lords, the States
General of the united Provinces.

TO His honored Kinsman, Master Frauncis Morris Clarcke of his Maties:
Ordnance.
Sir, you having married the widdowe of my deceased uncle, Mr: Jerome Heydon
merchant of London: I am tied by an obligation of love, to show you al
dutiful respect, and for yours, and my Aunts many favors J have made choice
to dedicate unto your self, these particulars, touching the seige of
Mastricht, and some remarkable things happened this last years service in the
Low Countries. And though they be not so well done, as I could wish they
were, because some things may be forgotten, and others which came not to my
knowledge; yet so far, as my intelligence served, and being an eyewitness
in the most of them: J hope they will carrye more truth along with them, then
Eloquence: for truth, and bluntness becomes a Soldier best. Here then (worthy
Sr:) you shall see every Nation (as so many rivers running into the main)
endeavoring, and striving to do the State, and Land service, whom we serve.
One principal motive, which persuaded me to undertake this labor, and to
putt it out to the view of the world was this. Harmon Hugo a Jesuit wrote
well in the praise, and Conduct of the deceased Marquis Spinola (who deserved
well, and was one of the best Generals that ever the King of Spain had in his
Low Cuntrie wars) concerning the blocking up of Breda: It is as free for me,
being a protestant and a Soldier, to write some thing (without flattery) as a
remembrance to posterity, in the honor and co^mendations of our Generalissimo
the Prince of Orange. and if he pararells, these two great Generals of our
age together, indeed, I must tell the Jesuit this, in a Soldiers account a
town, or a city gained by the sword, and Approches is more honorable (witness
the seige of the Bosch, and Mastricht) then to block it up, and to starve yt
out, which is a languishing death. On the contrary side, because he spoke
well of our nation, and gives them their due: I will likewise speak the truth,
that we met with a brave Gouvernour, the Baron of Leyde, and a daring
Ennemie, which disputed every patch of ground with us, and yielded not, till
the foundation, and Bowels of the wall of Mastricht were rent assunder. To
concludel, that which I have collected, the several services acted, the
passages, and remarkable things to be observed, I leave to your wise, and the
judicious Readers Consideration, which I hope will be acceptable unto you, and
rest.

Your ever loving Kinsman Henry Hexham.

AN EXACT CARD, Wherein is described, and delineated the famous Seige of
Mastricht, begun the 10. of June, and ended the 23. of Angust, following Anno
1632.
THe name of the city of Mastricht, is compounded of two words Maze, and
treckt, a dutch word, which signifies in English, a passage over the Maze,
called also in Latin Traiectum Mosae, or Traiectum Superius, to distinguish
between yt, and Traiectum inferius, which is Vtrecht. This city is very well
situated upon the river of Maze, having Brabant on the West and
Northwest-side, Luykland, and the Dukedom of Limburch on the South, and south
East Side, and Gulickland, and the County of Valckenberke on the East, and
North-side. It is divided into two Towns, the one called Mastricht, the other
Wieck, the Maze running between them, and have also betwixt them, a very fair
stone bridge of nine great arches to pass over.

This is an ancient Town, of a large Circuit and strong, lying four Germane
miles from Luyck, having in yt two Cathedral Churches, the one called St.
Servaes, whereof the King of Spain as Duke of Brabant is Canon, which
heretofore has bin a Bishopprick, and was founded in the year of our Lord
395. whereby the antiquitio thereof is Known, but the Bishops seat was
removed from thence to Luyck anno 1210. The other Cathedral Church is called
St. Mary's, having a Convent near yt called the Bissen, wherein a mightly
Prince and his train may lodge, and besides these Catheralls, it has many
other Churches, Cloisters and Monasteries of men and women in yt.

This city also has two Lords over yt, whereof the one is in the possession
of the Duke of Brabant, the other the Prince of Luyck by loan. And as they
have two Lords, so they have two seats of Justice two Maires, or Burgomasters,
Aldermen and Officers of Justice, which meet and keep good correspondence
together, without distinction of limits, nevertheless the Duke of Brabant was
the Sovereign Lord over them both, for he only stamps his picture upon the
Coin, and at his Entrance into these cities shows mercy, and gives pardon to
Malefactors.

These two towns prospered and flourished well a long time, till the
Netherlandish Troubles, and war brake forth, and till the Spaynard put a
garrison into yt, as being a chief Frontier town, the key of Brabant, and the
Magazin for all the King of Spaynes guarnisons over the Maze, and a ready
passage for the sending up of his forces into Germany to assist the Emperor.
In the time of some of her Gouvernours (especially when Duke d'Alva tyrannised
and Domineered) yt sustained great losses, and damages by the Spaynards: for
in the year 1576. they cunningly surprised yt did plunder, and pillage in yt.
The States having got yt in again Anno 1579. the Prince of Parma came before
yt, and beleagured yt straightly, for the time of 8 mounts playing continually
upon yt with 54 pieces of Ordnance. The inhabitants and Soldiers carried
themselves so well, that scarcly the like has bin parareld since the beginning
of the Low-Countrie wars: Notwithstanding the 29 of June 1579 being St: Ieames
his day, he took yt in with an assault the Spaynards murdring, and killing a
great many of men women, and children in yt, and cast over the stone Bridge
between Mastricht and Weyck some hundreds, and drowned them the River of the
Maze, some others got up into the steeples, and turrets of Churchers, and
Cloisters to save themselves, crying out at the holes for quarter to them, but
they instead of that, sent them volleys of Musket-bullets which yet stick in
the wall, and the holes of many of them are to be seen unto this day, and
some people yett living in yt, which by the mercy of God, escaped their
bloody hands can witness. What has happened unto yt the last year 1632. how
yt was beseiged again and taken, how the Prince of Orange his quarters lay,
how the line of Circumvallation was fortisyed with strong and impregnable works
how the lines in the Approches were run this Card deliniates, and the
Iournall hereunto annexed, will demonstrate and satisfy the impartial Reader.

The Demonstration of this Card by letter and Number.
The Capital Letters (...) the several quarters approches and Galleries. Note
that being doubled they signify so many divisions of a Regiment.

A Is the Prince of Orange his quarter. B The place for the Ordinance. C The
deputed States Lodging. D The Guards. E Colonel Belfords. The Scotch. F
Colonel Bacloughs. G Colonel Broughs. H General Morgan. The English. I The
4. division of General Vere. K Colonel Packenhams. L Colonel Herberts. M
Count Solmes duchess. N Colonel Hauterive. The French. O The Mareshall Mons*
Chastillon. P The Duke of Candales. R Count Maurice. VValloone. S Count Haynaws
high duchess. T The two first Corpse du Guarde. V The first breaking of ground,
or entrance into the Approches. X The French Gallerie. Y The English Gallerie.
The small Letters go the round, about the line off Circumvallation and is 15.
English mils in compass, pointing out the principal places of fortification
upon the Line.

Little a* is the line, which runs down from his Excie: quarter, a long by the
French Fort number 10. making 2 points, and closes at Kouvvenberck, noted y* a
likewise is the line, which was run from his Excie: quarter, to the English
Fort No. 6, to No. 11 with 2 redoubts upon yt, and runs a long to No. 12 to the
quarter 13, with one Redoubt, which taken in No. 14, served for a retreat for
our horse.

The Trench upon the line of Circumvallation was strengthened twice, and raised
to 8 and half foot high, and the ditch likewise. And besides the ditch of
Circumvallation, there was made an other out Ditch called the Forlorn Ditch
without his Excie: quarter, 8. foot wide, and 8. foot deep, marked a.

From the letter b b, to the Baron of Bredrodes quarter c, are two diches 6
foot wide. From the English side of his Excie: quarter d unto Count Henry's of
Nassaus quarter e* (...) a ditch 12 foot wide, and from the letter f, throw
the Meadows running over St. Peter's hill, by Colonel Pinsens quarter* down to
the Maze g, is a ditch 12 foot wide. h is the upper bridge, called Luycks
bridge, where our provisio^s lay.

From the bridg-For^ over the Man, marked i, ran an other ditch 8 foot wide,
passing along by the Mill-fort k* and so to the Freese quarter l. From thence
to Count Maurice his quarter m, with a ditch to the letter n, of 8 foot wide,
and so to the Church yard of Ammy noted ^ n, where Papenheym fell on, and then
ran along the ditch into the water o.

From the North-side of this water p, there begann again 2 forlorn ditches,
each six foot wide, going about the water fort, and passing by Count Williams
quarter q, and turned by the redoubt r, about the Hornwork s. And so forward by
Count Stirums quarter, t ending in the ditch of the fort v, which lay before
the Lower Bridge beneath the Town called Bredrodes Bridge noted w, x are the
shipping that came out of Holland with victuals and Munition* y. the small
village Kouwe^berke were his Excie: horse stood. ^. Papenheyms quarter behind
the Hills one redoubt appearing. Number 1. is the Chief quarter of the Spanish
Army commanded by Sancte Croce. No. 2. is a small fort, and an entrenchment
upon a piece of an old Dike for the safeguard of their bridge. No. 3. are the
Ennemies 4. batteries. No. 7. is the Ennemies bridge. No. 4. is the Trench,
which the Ennemy cut off, and made in the town for thiir retreat. No. 5. is
the stone bridge between Mastricht and VVieck.

The letter b, shows our principal batteries along the line. In St. Peter's
Hill are many Caves, called by the Legeois Cariot, which runns some miles
underground, out of which they fetch their free stone. And thus much for the
declaration of this Card.

A Iournall or brief Relation of the taking in of Venlo, Roermont, the
memorable Seige of Mastricht, and Limburch with some other towns and forts in
those quarters.
THe High and mighty Lords, the States General of the united Provinces, and
the Illustrious Prince of Orange, after some secret consultations held at the
Hage, haueing had also intelligence, that the Enemy had weakened much his
Garrisons in Gelderland, and Mastricht, and sent them up into the Palatinate,
made great preparations, resolved for the field, and appointed our Rendevouz at
Nimwegen, the 22. of May 1632. New Style. But by reason the wind was
contrary, and the force of the wall-streame such, the Shipping and Companies
could not get up, at the day designed, which: hindered our expedition: where upon
his Excie: gave order, that the Companies which: were not come up, should be
vnshipt, and march along the Dijke from Thiell to Nimwegen, where the troops
coming together, and every Company joining with: his Regiment, the old Orders,
and military discipline, formely published by Edicts, were proclaimed in the
head of the Army: that every soldier upon pain of death, should strictly,
observe them: As also other orders concerning the watch, was given out to this
end. First that noe Captain having his health should absent himself from his
watch.

Secondly, that every night a Sergeant Maiour should go the Round through the
Gards, and watches of his own troops, taking care to se that all things were
in good order, and also that the centinells should be well and duly set out:
and if they should find any fault, or carelessness upon the Guards, they were
instantly to acquainte the Sargeant Maiour General therewith, that those
faults might be redressed.

Thirdly, a Company or troop of men, haueing the watch in the approches, or at
any auenue, should place their Arms, in this order following: first the Pikes
should be placed in order, a little behind the parapit in the field, and the
Musketteires should set their muskets at the Parapit, with: the officiers
thereunto belonging.

Fourthly, that in the night time, one of the chief Officers of a Company or
troop should be wakeing continually, and releiueing one another by turns, as
time and occation should serve, and that there should never be less then the
third part of the Company in Arms, and kept waking to be in readiness upon all
occasions.

Fifthly, when the Round came accompanied with: Musketeers, and that the word
was to be given or received, according to due order, the Officer of the guard
should speedylie come out, accompanied likewise with: Musket tiers, to give or
receive the word accordingly, the which: a Corporal taking or receiueing the
word, shall duly do, without causing the Round to stay to long: And that the
Officers should go diverse Pettroiles, or Rounds in the night time, to visit
their centinells, without letting any go of by day or by night, without leave,
and that upon spetial occasion.

Sixthly, and lastly, that those of the watch shall give the word to him that
comes the first Round, but afterward take it of any Officer whatsoever he
be, without any exception at all.

A List of the Colonels, and the Regiments, with the number of the Foot
Companies, which met at the Rende-vouz at Nimwegen in the Year 1632. before
they began to March from thence.
Colonel. Companies. Companies. The Gards. 7 Count Ernest. 11 Wijnebergen. 10
Vrieses. ^^ General Vere. 23 Count William. 12 General Morgan. 11 Ferens. 5
Harwood. 12 Erent Ruyter. 8 Packenham. 11 Rosencrans. 5 Count Solms. 7 Gent. 12
Lord of Brederod. 12 Chastillon. 11 Varick. 8 Hauterive. 11 Brogue. 7 The Duke
of Candale. 11 Bucklugh. 7 Maison-neufve. 11 Belford. 7 Count Maurice. 14
Beuerweert. 9 Pinson. 10 Loo. 8 Count Hannawe. 8 Regiments in all 28 Foot
Companies in all 381

These Regiments were divided into three Brigadoes. First the Duchess: 2 the
French, and 3 the English, Count Solms, the Lord of Bredrode, and Colonel
Varicke, marched with the English. Besides these 281 Foot companies, we
had 58 troops of horse, according to their several Regiments, which were
also divided into three Brigadoes.

The first was commanded by Monsieur Stackenburch Lieutenant General of the
Horse.

The second by count Stirum commissary, General of the horse.

And the third by the Duke of Bouillon now Governor of Mastricht.

We had with us 83 pieces of ordnance great and small, 14 or 15. hundred
vvagons, whereof one hundred of them was laden with chests Full of Biscuit,
each chest haueing in in it 1000 pound, which made in all a hundred thousand
pounds of Biscuit.

Besides many other wagons laden with chests of Amumtion bread*

Twelve Boats for to make a Bridge, laydvpon carriages, and drawn with some
20 horses, and had many wagon laden with great store of ammunition, and
diverse materials of war.

The Army being thus ordered, upon the 29 of May, we were commanded to
provide victuals for five days, and the first day to begin upon the Mu^day
following: likewise the Quarter masters had orders to receive wagon for
their Regiments, by three of the clock the next morning.

This day likewise the Soldiers had command to make clean their Arms, but
not to bring them a shore till further order.

The 30: being vvhit-Sunday, betimes in the morning came sudden orders, that
all should be drawn presently a shore, and march up to Moucker Heath, every
Regiment being divided into Divisions, and the three Briggadoes of the Army
standing in Battalia, his Excie: rode up and down to vewe the front and the
rear.

The Quartermaister General, and the quartermaisters of every Regiment, were
sent before to make their quarters in and about the village of Mouck. After his
Excie: had viewed the Army standing, they began to March about three of the
clock that afternoon.

Count Earnest haueing the Auant-guard, the Frenches the Battle, and the
English the Rear, and so that night came to Mouck, where the chief Officers,
were quartered in houses, and the other Officers and Soldiers under the
heavens canopie.

The 31: of May we marched again by the break of the day, and quarted that
night by the house of the Lord of We Will. The Frenches had the Auant-guard, the
English the Battle, and Count Earnest the Rear.

The first of June, the Army began to move again, at the creek of the day,
and about noone made a halt by the Maze side over against Stral, whilst some
of our firelocks took in the forte of Aersen, on the other side of the River.
One of the Enemies Sconces which lay upon their New-fare, discharged two or
three pieces of ordnance at us, but the bullets fell short. This night we
quartered upon a Heath, a little short of Venlo: the English haueing the
Vanguard, Count Earnest the Battle, and the Frenches the Rear. This night
his Excie: Commanded all the quarter-maisters to attend him at his lodging, to
receive materials from the commisse Martin, which was very late before they
got the^, by reason the amunitio^ waggo^s could not come up: how soever as soon
as they had them forty Soldiers of a Regiment, and 80: of the Lord General
Veres were sent down to break ground, and to begin the approches before
Venlo: and General Morgan commanded that night in the trenches, and Ensign
vvillowby had his leg shot in pieces with a Sling bullet, whereof he died
shortly after in Venlo.

The second of June the Baron of Brederode Commanded in the approches, and
seven men of a Company, and 14. of a double Company, were sent down into the
Trenches, that night to work, and the next morning two of a Company, were
sent to repair the works of that night, and in the French approches a
Battery was made, and two half Cannon planted upon it, which played into the
town.

The third of June Collonell Varick, commanded in the approches, and this day
we received the sadd and heavy news, that Count Earnest Lord Marshall of the
field, in veivving of the ground before Roermondt, was slain from the wall
with a firelocke bullet: and also Captain Murrey a Scotch Captain.

The fourth, those of Venlo came to a parley and shooting was left on both
sides for a while: the Magistrates came out unto the Prince of Orange his Army,
and made their own quarter and conditions, without making any mention of the
military men, which the soldiers understanding, that they were not included
in the composition, began to Shoot again, and obtained good quarter, both for
Burgers and Soldiers, which was this, that the Burgers and the Clergy,
should live vnmolested for their Religion, and all their Cloisters and
Nunneries in their former estate that they should enjoy all their ancient
Privileges and Customs. That those of the reformed Religion should have a
public Church for the exercise of their Religion. That the Officers and
Soldiers should march out with flying colors, light matches, bullets in their
mouths, and with bagg and baggage, so on the fourth of June according to the
composition, there marched out of Venlo, six vveake Companies, which were not
above 300 strong, and six of our Dutch Companies marched into the town, and
Lieutenant Collonell Brederode a Dutch Captain was made commander of that
Garrison. While we were a taking in of Venlo, his Excie: sent certain
Companies of fierelocks, and loop-staues with some other forces out of the
Army to take in Strale, which presently yielded upon the first summons Venlo
being thus settled in the Princes possession, and a Garrison of six Companies
left in it (as is said,) commissions, and moneys were given to raise each
Company to 300 strong. This afternoon we had orders to provide victuals for
three days, and to be ready to march at the break of the day the next
morning.

The fifth of June we marched from Venlo to Roermondt, being a long and a
wearisome march, by reason of the abundance of rain which fell that day and
night, so that many of the soldiers were left behind, and could not get up
to the quarters till the next morning: the order of the march was this.

Count Earnest his Brigado being sent before to Roermondt, was accounted for
the Van-guarde, the French the Battle, and the English the Rear, and this
night we began to make our approches toward the town.

The next day being sunday, and the sixth of June, the States, Magistrates, and
soldiers of Roermondt, sent messingers to his Excie: entreating him to give
them good quarter, which he granted the^, and the agreement being on both
sides confirmed, the Enemy marched the same day out of the town with bag and
baggage, being six coullors in all about three hundred strong, and these
Companies were to go to Rhijne-bercke. Seven Dutch Companies of Foot, and
one troop of horse, marched out of our troops into the town, and Monseur
Randwijcke a horse Captain, was made Governor of Roermond: and these
Companies also had orders to strengthen each Company to 300 strong.

It was generally supposed, that those of Roermondt yielded up the town with
so much the more speed, fearing that his Excie: would with violence have
assaulted it, without giueing them any quarter, in reveng of Count Earnest his
death, who was shot and Slain before it.

The seventh we marched from Roermondt betimes in the morning, and came
about 4: a clock that afternoon to Maseycke, where we took up our quarter
that night: This day the French had the Vanguard, the English the Battle,
and the Dutch the Rear.

This evening two soldiers and a Drumer were apprehended, and hanged up for
robing and pillaging certain pesants, who brought in bread, and other
provision for the releife of our Army.

The eight, we lay still before Maseyck to stay for the Punts, which were not
yet come up* to make a Bridge over the Maze, and also to victual our Army
before that town being newtrall; they brought out great store of provision,
which the soldiers bought of them for their moneys.

This day there came news to his Excie: that Count John had put in two
thousand choice soldiers into Mastricht, with munition and other materials of
war.

The Arch-Duchesse perceiving his Excies: dessigne, sent with all expedition to
the Spanish Army in the Palatinate, to leave those parts, and to come to help
to defend her own, whose command they obeyed, and marched so fast downward,
that they left many men, Cannon, and baggage behind them, and the Rhijne Grave
pursued them close at their heels. Sittert a small walled town in
Gulick-Land, lying about two hours going from Maseyck, wherein were certain
parties of the Enemy horse andFoote, was given over into the hands of the
Prince of Orange upon the first summons.

We had orders to march the next day very early, and upon wensday the 9: we
marched from Maseyck in extreme and continual raynie weather, and that day
the Army passed over the Bridge, on that side that Maseyck, lies, and that
night quartered an hours going short of Maestricht, between two Villages,
called Harne, and Rick-ham, near unto the Lord of Petersons house, and the
Hoog-Cloister belonging to the principality of Liege.

The order of the march this day was,
The English had the Vanguard. The Duchess the Battle. The Frenches the
Rear.
From this quarter Mons: Perceuall the quarter-maister General, and diverse
other Officers of good experience, were sent with a strong guard of horse, to
view the situation of the city of Mastricht, and the most convenient places,
and grounds for the quartering of our Army about it, which was speedily done,
and a quartermaster of every Regiment, with a Sergeant of every Company, went
before to take up their ground, and to draw out their quarters against the
coming of the Army.

On the tenth we marched to our quarters before Masiricht* Count Henry of
Nassau had the Vanguard, the French the Battle, and the English the Rear.

This day the Army was divided into four quarters, the Lord of Brederodes, his
Excie: own quarter, Count Henryes upon the hill, and Colonel Pinsons by the
upper bridge, where provisions came from Luke.

The 11: of June, the quarter-maister General gave the ground to the
quarter-maister of every Regiment, for the entrenching of their several
quarters, which was performed by the Officers, and Soldiers, with great
diligence, and the quarters that night where made defensible.

The 12: five pieces of ordnance, were planted upon the brow of a hill, near
unto colonel Pinsons quarter, these did the town little harm, because the
Battery was to far distant.

The 13: and 14: Orders where given out, that every Soldier should with all
speed build up their huts, and cabbins, with Bed-steads from the ground,
which was done accordingly.

This night we began to break ground, and to make our approches toward the
town, on the west side toward Wymering port, and ran two lines toward the
highest and strongest part of all the town: It was ordered that Count Solms,
Count Maurice, and Count Hannaws Regiments, should always keep their turns,
and watch with the Frenches in the approches, which came to their turn every
scauenth night: and after the 4 English Regiments, had furnished the watch in
the approches 4. nights one after an other, the Scotch taking their turns
after the English, watched in the trenches with their own nation three nights,
till their Companies had all watched over, and what they fell to short of the
last night the English were to make up out of their Regiments, so that every
Regiment English and Scotch had the watch in the approaches every seventh night.

This night we had also orders, that those Companyes which had the watch in
the approches, should draw in Parado every night to the quarter of the Colonel
that commanded, to sing a Psalm, and hear Prayers, and the Companies to be
ready to march into the trenches at 7. of the clock in the evening, without
sound of Drumm, and without headpeeces, and taces.

And the Quarter-maisters of every Regiment were commanded to fetch materials:
the commanded workmen of our Nation, were 40: of each Regiment, and 80: of my
Lord General Veres. Monsieur Niels his Excie: Inginier appointed to go with
the English and Scotch.

And Collonell Harwood upon the 14: June of in the night, first broke ground in
the approches before Mastricht.

The 15. and 16. our approach went well forward and a battery was made.

The 17. there was sent by his Excie: command 18 companies of foot of diverse
Nations, under the coma^d of Count Maurice of Nassau, Colonel of the vvallon
Regiment, and quartered on the side of Falkenborch over against vvieck, where
they fortfied themselves most strongly, as if they had bin in a town, the
Companies of our Nation were these: Captain Killegrey, Captain Essex,
Captain Scudamore, Captain Courtney, Captain Morton, and Captain Inglebie.

Thus the Army being settled, and all quarters entrenched, the approches
furnished, and all out-vvorks, and by-guards, orderly Kept, and releived, many
other strong works of Fortification, as Redoubts, double ditches, Halfemoones,
Horneworks, Spurs and Traverses, were made along the line of
circum-valation, and prepared for the Enemies attempt, who was daily
expected, to come and fall on, upon some part of our Army, for the releife of
the town, and therefore a Fort Royal was made, called the English Fort, over
against the English quarter. And an other strong Fort called Belfide, but more
commonly Brederodes Skonce, because it lay near to the Baron of Brederodes
Quarter for defense of that part of the Leager, and of the lower bridge, which
was there laid for the passage of our Forces over the River, as occasion
should require.

In the beginning of the seige, those in the town annoyed us much in our
quarters with their great Ordnance, and many were slain in their huts and
tents, especially in the Scotch quarters, so that we were forced to make
Baracadoes, and blindes in most places for the defense of our quarters, and the
Prince of Orange being to near, removed his tents to the top of the hill,
near the French quarters.

The 16. Colonel Pakenham commanded in the approches, and many workmen were
sent to work in the trenches. This day it was ordanied, that a Sargeant
Mayor should go a grand-Round every night, between Count Henry's quarters and
ours.

Likewise orders were given out to all Captains, and their Sutlers, to
provide victuals for their Companies for ten days, and that to begin upon
Sunday following: after the expiration of those ten days, there was once or
twice a week Ammunition bread brought to every Regiment, to be equally dealt
among the soldiers for their moneys.

The 17. Certain workmen out of every Regiment were, sent to finish the
works begun this night in the trenches.

The letters and declarations of Count Henry of the Berke, touching his revolt
from Spain, this day came into our Army in print.

This night the Scotch Colonel Brogue his Regiment beginning, took their
turns to watch in the approches, from this day to the 22 our approches went
well forward, the Enemy many times sallying out, but were commonly beaten back
again with loss.

The 22. about 4 of the clock in the afternoon the Enemy sallyed out about
200* strong, an hundred fell into the English trenches, and as many into the
French.

The Horse troop which had the guard at the entrance into our trenches, fell
out on the French side, and beat them in and the Captain of the guard Shot
with a bullet, and Captain Skippon on the English side, fell out of our
trenches with some 80: men, and did encounter them in the plain field, the
Enemy stodd it out in the open field, but after some skirmishing retired: this
night we advanced our works in the approches, without interruption.

The 23: they of the town made a triumph with peales of Ordnance, and Volleys
of Musket-shott, which made us expect, they would attempt something upon us
that night, or the next day following.

This day we had a Conuoy from Nimwegen of 20: Ships laden with meal,
Ammunition, and diverse materials of war.

The 23. of June Colonel Pakenham commanding in the trenches was shot in his
face.

Upon Thursday the 24 the Enemy sallyed out of the town about 100 strong, to
beat in our workmen, and fell into our trenches: An Alferus or Ensign of
theirs, who had the Command of 30: men, followed the assault almost to our
Corps-du-guard, but at last they were put to retreat, and the Alferus slain
with most of his men: A parley was had for a certain time to fetch of the
Alferus his body, and other prisoners. Into this Alferus his pockets were
closely conveyed some Coppies of the letters of Count Henry of the Berke his
revolt: in this fight Captain Hickmans Sergant, and some Soldiers of his
Company were slain.

The 25: also Marquis Sancte Croce, came in the eueing with the Spanish Army to
Tongeren, where he lay to victual his Army two days.

Monday the 28: of June, the Spanish Army came and quartered in the Villages on
this side Tongeren, not above an hours going from his Excie: quarter, there
Reere being come up, they made a great noise with their ordnance, and
discharged four times 24: pieces of Cannon, one after another, and hung out
lights upon the steeple there abouts, to encourage their friends in the town*
and to signify unto them, that they were not far of: Those of the town
answered them again* and shot al their ordnance three times off round about
the town, their Bullets grazing, and raking throw our quarters.

This night, the Prince, sent a guarde of Musketteirs with lights to search a
Cave, which was imagined to go under the ground into the town, they entered the
Cave on the side of the Maze, in the hill of Luchtenberch Castle, and found it
to be hewn out by men's hands, through a rock of freestone, and came forth on
the other side of the hill, near unto the walls of the town.

Tuesday the 29: the Enemy marched from his quarters, in the sight of our Army
toward the heath. A spy which marched with them three days brought
intelligence, that their Army consisted of 178. Companies of foot 76: troops
of horse: 70 pieces of ordnance great and small, and 900: wagon, and marched
in Phalanges and great Battalions, with their Carriages, baggage, and wagons
after every Battalion.

This night they took up their quarters in the Village by the hooght Cloister
a little below the Baron of Brederods quarters, where we lay the night before
we sat down before Mastricht, and where they remained.

This night also a mortar was planted in the English approches, which Shot two
great Granados of 80* pound weight, one of them fell in the Enemies half-moone
before Brussells port, the other in the town, and blew up a house.

The 30: of June, our horse and the Enemies skirmished together, their horse
standing in Battalia, while their Foot marched forward, our horse skirmishing
with them slew some of them, and took others prisoners.

The first of July, our approches being well advanced, there was a traverse of
the Enemies which lay some 30 paces in the plain field beyond the further
point of our Sapp: His Excie: gave order that this night it should be assaulted.

The Earl of Oxford then commanded in the approches, and great store of Brushe
was brought down, and workmen appointed for that service: my Lord of Oxford
gave order to assault it in this manner.

That Sergeant Bagnall my Lord Veres Sergeant off Dort Company, should fall on
first with ^5* men, then Lieutenant Garth, Lieutenant to Sr: Henry Herbert with
40. men, and the workmen, and after him Captain Roockwood with 80: men more,
all which was performed accordingly, and they beat the Enemy out off the
^raverse, and maintained it a good while.

The Enemy this night had drawn out of the town about 800 men, with intent to
have given us a Camissado, and to have fallen upon our works, but this alarm of
ours prevented them; howsoever they were in Arms and in a readiness to receave
us, which made the fight more hard, for falling upon their traverse to regaine
it, they cast abundance of hand-Granadoes in amongst our men which did much
annoy them: and indeed it was doubtful for a while whether ours or the
Enemies men should carry it: upon this Sr. Simon Harecourt being then present
with my Lord of Oxford, was sent with fresh men in all expedition to second
Captain Roockwood.

The fight grew hott, by reason the Enemy shot so much among our men, and
diverse were slain and hurt, among the rest, Captain Roockwood had his arm,
(nere unto his Shoulder) shot in pieces: Sr. Simon Harcourt shot through his
cheeks by the Palate of his mouth, and his thigh sorely torn with a granadoe;
and Lieuetenant Garth received a mortal shot through his body, whereof he
dyed shortly after: These Officers being brought off, my Lord of Oxford sent
Captain Cave with 20: Pikes, and 20: Muskettieres off my Lord General Veres
Company off Dort, and after him Ensign Sydenham, with some Gentlemen and
Soldiers off his Company off Delff they fell on, and beat the Enemy out off
it again, and mayntained it, (not withstanding that the Enemy shot mightly
and cast abundance off grenades amongst them,) almost an hour, and Calling
for workmen to turn it up, which failing them, seeing that it was not tenible,
because it lay to open to the vvalls off the town, the Counter skarfe, their
halff-moone, and outworks quitted it, and retired again into our works;
Diverse Voluntieres, Gentlemen and Soldiers off my Lord Veres two Companies,
were slain, and hurt, as Captain Hauwton Reformado, Mr: Knowlls, Mr: Ewins,
Mr: Wittington, Mr: Sedgwicke, besides diverse Gentlemen and Soldiers off
other Companies.

To prevent the Spanish Army Coming over the Maze, there was sent diverse
Companies of English, Scotch, French, and Dutch, to lie along the River side,
in those places, which were like-lyest for the Enemy to come over: and every
night men were sent likewise to the Lord of Brederodes quartiers, where there
was made invincible works, to hinder the Enemy from approaching toward his
quarter, and our lower-bridge.

The Enemies Army lying so near us, it was now a time of action, for every
night the whole Army at the shooting off, of the warning piece, was in Arms,
and drew to the line, every Company standing 100. or 150. paces, one from
another, and the horse troops behind them: this lasted for six weeks every
night, till we had taken in the town.

The first of July also, out long running trench began to be made, on the other
side of the Maze, beneath the Lord of Brederodes bridge, for the safeguard of
our men, that went daily at noone to guarde the water side, even from the
Bridge to the house of Geul, where Count Stirums quarter was: the Enemy had
planted ordnance upon diverse Batteries, along the water side, and shot at our
men marching to their Guards, but did them little harm.

The second of July in the morning, six French Companies of the Duke of
Candales Regiment, the Marquis d'Esteaux his Leiftenant Colonel commanding,
had the guard on the other side of the River, to hinder the Enemy from putting
over the Maze, below the Lord of Brederodes quarter: The Marquis distrusting
the Enemy would attempt some such thing in the night, laid some of his men in
Ambuscadoe among the Reeds, and in the Corn, and suffered the Enemy to put
over two punts full of his men, about 300 strong, and another punt full
followed them; The Enemy being landed, high Duchess and Wallons, fell to work
with their Spades, to make good that piece of ground, where they intended to
lay over their bridge, and had cast up three Cross Batteries on the other side
of the River, that under the favor of them, he might pass over his men, and
had lodged some 3000 Musketeers along the River side in a brest-worke cast up
in the night, to play upon our men. The Frenches seeing them at work, burst out
of their ambuscadoes, fell upon them Pell-Mell, and got between the River and
them, and charged them up to the very middle in water: The Enemy played
cruellye upon the Frenches from their Batteryes, which flanckered that place,
and their Cannon bullets raked through he French Companies, slew many of them,
and shot of the Arms and legs of diverse of them, and some of them were shot
with Muskett bulletts, from over the River: Howsoever the Marquis and his men
carried them selves so well, that they beat the Enemy back, and sunck one
punt with men in it, so that there was drowned, slain, and taken Prisoners of
the Enemy upon this action, about 400 men, where of five or six of them were
Captains, two or three Alferusses, and 70. Soldiers. The Marquis d'Esteaux,
who had bestirred himself so bravelye, when all was done, and in coming of,
was slain with an unhappy cannon bullett of the Enemies, and with him also
were slain Captain Foullon, Captain du Fresnes, Monsieur Bois his
Leiftenant, and Leiftenant de Fay, besides diverse volunteers, Gentelmen, and
Soldiers* to the number of fifty which lay dead upon the place, and a great
many hurt men were brought of.

This afternoon the Enemy sent a Trompetter to demand his Prisonners, he
speaking with his Excie: for their releasment, commended much his clemency,
and mercy, that they were not all put to the sword, and also what good quarter
was given to the kings men the year before at Bergen op Zoom, when we took
their punts, and Shalloups, and that if ever they should have such an advantage
upon us, he hoped they would do the like.

Saturday the third of July, our horse took five carrs laden with bread, and
other provision which was going to the Kings Camp.

The next day being the fourth, the Regiment of Colonel Belford being in the
trenches, (Sr. James Levistone, his Leift. Colonel who then commanded) the
Enemy gave them an Alarm, Sr. James standing up to see what the matter was,
received a dangerous shot upon the crown of his head, whereof thanks be to
God he recovered.

The fourth of July also, our horse and firelocks, took 60 wagons and carres,
laden with wine, bear, and victuals for the Enemies Army, and brought in 103
Pesants, whereof some proved Newtralls, the other Enemies.

The fifth of July, without the loss of any men, our sapp was cut into the
Enemies traverse, which the English before had assaulted.

About this time it was a very wet season, and great store of Rain fell, so
that the River swelled, and the Enemy could not forde it over, till our works,
double entrenchements, Ditches, Skonces, Ravelings, and halfe-Moones on the
other side of the River, were defe^sible, which made us believe, that as God
fought for us before the Busse with dry weather, so now he did the like by
wett weather, and made the heave^s to favor us.

Tuesday the sixte off July, the beseiged fell out upon our workmen in the
sap off the traverse, my Lord Morgan then commanding, beat them twice out
off it, he himself was shot upon his breast, and some others hurt and slain.
This night the Enemy sprung a mine under the traverse in the English approches,
but did little harm.

This sixte off July also his Excie: hearing that the Enemy intended to fall
on, he sent Monsr: Stackenburch Lieuetenant General off the horse to give
them a sound alarm, which was done in this manner following: He had with him
some 80: horse, and some 80: firelocks, and took with him many trumpetts, and
Drums, which where to sound, and to beat a charge in sundry places, and coming
near them, he fell on with his horse, and firelocks, the trumpetts sounding,
and the Drums beating, gave them such a terrible alarm, that the Enemy
supposing (as the runewayes and prisoners reported) that his Excie: had given
on with his whole Army, did so pusle them, that they run too, and fro, like men
amazed, and could not get into Arms: Monsr: Stackenburch broke into their
trench and cut off a corpse de Guard, wherein a Spanish Captain was slain, and
taking diverse prisoners, returned back into his quarters.

The 7. our men brought in 20* horsemen prisonners with a Drossard, and 9 Carrs
laden with provisions, which were declared good boot.

The 8: they brought in likewise some kar^s laden with wine and provision which
was for Count John off Nassau.

The 9* an 10. our approches were well advanced.

The 11: of July a convoy came from Nimwegen, with money, and victuals.

The 12: off July we had intelligence that the Marquess Sancte Croce was in
Arms, and had divided his troops into three Battalio^s, with intent to
attempt some thing upon us, and to see if they could have brook through our
line, but bethinking themselves they returned back again into their quarters.
This day also six Soldiers off the Enemies, came out off the town with their
Arms, and advertized the Prince of the State of the town, and where their
Mines lay: they were sent to take entertainment of count Henry of the Berke,
which they themselves desired.

More over this day the French approches were so well advanced, that a Soudier
called Wild-boare of my Lord Veres Company of Dort, and 4: other soldiers, for
800: gilders undertook to sapp into the Counterscarfe of the town, this day
also there came nine Dutch Companies from Groaning to our Army, which were
quartered on Weick side.

Tuesday the 13. of July certain forces of the Enemy marched toward Maseyck,
the Prince fearing that they might get over the Maze, or take in the house of
Count Henry of the Berke in Steevens-weert, sent thitherward Count Stirum with
diverse Foot Companies, and the Duke off Bouillon followed him with some 20:
troops of horse more.

The 14: the Enemy found out a Mine in the French approches, and stole the
Powder out of it. The French likewise found out a Mine, under one of their
Corpse du guard, and served them in the like Manner. This day five women were
taken coming out off the town whereoff one had a packett of letters found
about her.

The 15. this day in the morning those off the town fell upon the French
works, and took in part off their sapp, and began to cast it up against them,
but in the afternoon the French falling on upon them recovered the most part
of it again with the loss of some men.

This night the Duke of Bouillon took in the Castle of Argenteau, situated on
a high Hill between Luke and our army to secure our provisions.

Upon Friday the 16. of July, the Enemy had in a readiness another Mine, and
springing that, filled the French sapp with earth some four rodds, where upon
the French Colonel Monsieur Maison-Neusve, that commanded, desired his Excie:
that the French might spring their mine, and have a revenge, which the Prince
not only granted; but also was present there himself: The mine then being
sprung the Frenches fell on bravely, and drove the Enemy into their Moate, and
followed them so close, that they cried out, Mesieurs Faitez Nous Graces, the
French lost above 40: men, among which Ensign Fay was slain, and the Enemy
above 100: slain and hurt that day, as they themselves confessed. The
springing off the Mine took but little effect, yet not with-standing: the
French Volunteers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers fell on and pursued them the Enemy
shooting so thick with their Cannon and small shot, from the wall and their
outworks, that they could not lodge in the Mine, nor cast up the earth against
the Enemy, where driven to retire again into their works.

The VVallons relieuing the French, about one of the clock in the night fell
on again upon the Enemies work, and beat them out off it, but fresh seconds
falling out of the town, the vvallons retreated into their works.

In this fight were slain Monsieur Beza a French Captain that commanded, a
French Lieuetenant, and a VVallons Ensign, beside, some 30: Soldiers slain
and hurt. The Enemy lost also in these several encounters 82 men, as they
themselves reported, and about 60 hurt, whereof some of them died of their
wounds afterward.

The 18: a Burger of Mastricht came voluntarily over into our Army. This day
also there came 60: Musketteirs from Liege, which were taken up there, and
raised for us.

A woman also was apprehended, and taken goeing with a letters to the Spanish
Army.

Also a Spaniard was taken in pesants Clothes, and brought in, which had
letters from Sancte Croce, to the Governor of Gulick.

Letters were likewise intercepted from the Infanta to Papenheim, wherein she
offered him present pay for two months, if he would help to releive
Mastricht, and come into the Land of Luke as an Enemy.

Upon Monday the 19: the Enemies Horse of Sancte Croce his Army, surrounded,
and made a brauado before the Princes Quarters, chased and took many of the
waggoners horses, and slew some Foremen, our ordinance played upon them, and our
horse charged them and slew a Captain of theirs and made them to retreat. The
Princes Captain of his troop of Harquebusiers was slain this day, our men
also slew some of the Enemy, and took others prisoners.

The Lord of Vpdam haueing 100: horse upon the Maze near unto Stockham, brook
out of an Ambuscado suddenly, and charged three of the Enemies troops of
horse, put them to flight, and pursued them so fast, that they took 12: horse
and 25: horsemen prisoners.

The 20. Nothing of consequence was done.

Wensday the 21. of July proclamation was made that he which. could take any
going in, or out of the town, with letters, should have two hundred gilders
for his labor.

The Count Warfuse Master of the King of Spanies finances, or revenues;
revolted and declared himself at Liege against the Spaniards and published his
reasons.

This day 25* firelocks sallied out of the town, near unto the place where
Sr: Robert Honywoods troop had the guard, he fell upon them slew six of them
and took three prisoners.

This night the Enemy attempted again to come over the water, and sent over
two hundred Italians in Sloops on our side of the Maze: but Colonel Varick
set upon them, slew diverse of them among the rest a Colonel which had the
command in that action, and took some 70: prisoners, and a Sariant Mayor, six
Captains, the most of the^ Reformados* and two Alferuses. The Dutch lost in
this sight Captain Bruyn, and no others.

This day also while the English gave the Enemy an allarum in their trenches,
the Princes guard, and the vvallons sprung a mine in the French approches, and
fell upon a Traverse of the Enemies, before their halfemoone, they fought a
long time with the Enemy, till their Ammunition was spent, and the alarm being
hott Leiutenant Viuian, Lieuetnant to Sr: John Manwoods Company, was sent with
all expedition with 40: fresh Musketteirs out off the English approches to
second them, and some Dutch; he fell upon the Enemy, and put them to retreat,
and made the place good, till the workmen turned it up, and lodged some of our
men in it the Enemy holding one side of the work and we the other. Count
Haynaw, who commanded the Regiments of the guards, did carry himself
valiantly in this action, charged the Enemy in the plain field, with his sword
drawn in his hand was there slain, whose death the Prince much lamented.
Three vvallon Captains were hurt, and diverse Gentlemen and Soldiers slain
in this service.

The 22. of July toward noone the Enemy sprung a mine near the point off the
English sapp, which cast up abundance of Earth, and falling into our sapp
filled it up a rodd. or more, and likewise stopped the entrance into our mine.

This cast us behind, and we were driven to work yt out again, and clear
both our sapp, and our mine before we could advance forward. When the Enemies
men sprung their Mine: we had three or four men a sapping forward, the earth
fell upon them, and buried two off them 12: or 13: foot deep under it in the
mouth of our sapp, my Lord of oxford upon Thursday night commanded, and a
little before the break of the day, these two Soldiers of Sariant Mayor
General Wits his Company, which were buried under the Earth, when the Enemies
mine was blown up, lying in the concaue thereof, wrought themselves out with
their hands, and a spade, and tumbled into our sapp, among our men, who
supposing they had bin the Enemy, were ready to give fire upon them, which they
seeing, cried out that they were our own men, thus it pleased God miraculously
to preserve these two poor men, which lay buried under the Earth 15: hours,
from Eleven a Clock in the day, till 3 a clock in the next morning. Lieutenant
Colonel Proud who commanded that day in the approches when the mine was
sprung, was shot dead in his head with a firelock bullet.

This day Count William off Nassan returned from Antwerpe, and came into our
Army, with 30 Companies, who were quartered between Count Maurice his
quarter, and the lower bridge.

Upon the 24: in the morning the Enemy sprang a Mine in the French Approches,
but did little harm. The English also sprung their Mine fearing that the Enemy
had discovered it, and would have prevented them, the Earth fell short of the
Enemies work.

This day two pesants were taken coming out of the town, whereoff one off them
had letters found about him.

The 25: two new Companies were raised at Liege which: came unto us.

About this time the States raised nine troops off horse.

About six off the clock this morning the Enemies troop off horse, which lay
in the town (laying some firelocks in Ambuscado for their retreat) sallied out
upon Weike side, and came upon the spur into a Village about an English mile
from the town, thinking that our horse troops, which lay there, had him upon
the watch, and so to have pillaged their lodgings in their absence: but our men
staying some thing longer them usual; taking the Alarm, charged them with
three troops off our horse, and falling in among them, made them return with
greater speed then they came, and followed them so close, un till they came
to the Ambushe off there firelocks, which brake out, and gave fire upon our men,
and the Cannon out of the Town played, among them, which made the Enemies
horse take courage again, and turning faces about, charged our men, but our
men broke them so, that their foot casting away their firelocks, ran away, and
after them their horse, whom our men charged home up to the very port, though
they shot much with their ordnance from the wall: In this skirsmish we lost 4
or 5 horsemen, and the Enemy lost many more. Captain Hurryes troop a Scotch
Captain was very much commended for this service: This day one of our sapps was
so far advanced, that it touched one of the Enemies works, this being St:
James his day, we were verily persuaded, that the Marquis Sancte Croce would
have fallen on upon our line, and outworks, to see if he could have releived
the town, but we kept so strong a watch, that he did not try what their
Patron-Saint would do for them.

The 26: the Enemy sent some of his troops toward Maseyck.

Tuesday the 27: of July, the beseiged sprung a Mine in the English trenches,
which defaced our sapp, and did a little hurt to one of our mines.

This afternoon the Enemy sprung two Mines in the French approches, the
vvallons having the guard there, had hurt and slain 18: of their men, among
whom Captain Duke his Ensign was slain. The Enemies horse of the town
salied out on Weike side, but were presently beaten i will

This night also a Corpse du guard, and a Battery was made in the ille above the
town, and a mortar planted, the which played with grenades, and two small
pieces into Weick.

The 28: of July about one of the clock in the night, the Enemy shot from
their leaguer, diverse pieces of ordna^ce, but did not attempt to put over.

The French this afternoon sprung a Mine, and fell on upon it, but the earth
lying so open toward the town, retreated with the loss off Captain
Lavilletta and some others.

Thusday the 29: of July that afternoon, the Enemy fell out, and shot much in
the English trenches: of ours there were some 20 men slain and hurt, among the
rest Captain Courtney, who commanded Colonel Pakenhams Company, had his
thigh broaken with a Granadoe, whereof three days after he dyed. And in the
night the Enemy sprung a Mine which did some harm to our sapp.

The 30: of July, the Prince went down into the French approches, to see the
gallery, which was newly begun: In the English approches, a Battery was made
and advanced nearer the wall, having two half Canon planted upon it, the one
played upon the Brussels Port, and the halfe-moone before it, and the other to
dismount a piece of the Enemies, which lay upon the Rondle of the wall, and did
much harm to our men, but the Enemy from the same Rondle, with their piece,
put one of our Canons to silence, and slew a Cannonier.

The last of July, Sr: Ieames Sanderling commannding, the Scotch having the
guard in the tre^ches, a sapt was brought into the Enemies spur, which lay
before their Counter* skarfe, which the Enemy seeing, shot continually from
10: of the clock in the morning, till 7. a clock in the Evening, with Cannon,
Slings, Firelocks, and Musketts upon them, and threw hand grenades among them,
and with all they fell on, with flayles, forkes, and clubbs, full of nails,
and set fire on our blind, which made our work lie open to their shot: not
withstanding the Scotch mainteyned yt bravely. In this fight was slain with a
Canon bullet worthy Lieutenant Bruce, who carried himself very vaillantly this
day, and fought in his shirt, and oftentimes came to push of the Pike with the
Ennemie upon the top of the work, and pulled their flayles, and clubbs from them
with his hands.

Ensign Riddle also a hope full young Gentlmen received their his mortal wound,
whereof with in two days he dyed. And Captain Leviston, and Lieutenant
Douglas were hurt. To conclude the scotch had and hurt slain this day some
30: of their men, whereof Colonel Broughs own Company had hurt and slain
about sixteen.

The first of August our new Battery which was put to silence before began to
speak again, and to shot upon the Ennemies Roundle, to se if they could
dismount their ordinance throw the port-holes they putt the^ to silence, yett
for all that now and then they shot very dangerously with their sling piece
upon our men.

This day also the Ennemy set fire upon two of out blinds and slew some of our
men.

The second of August our men with often shooting with two halfe-Canon from the
French Battery did so shake and beat upon the wall over against the French
approches, that it sunck down some three rodes, which: made the Ennemie to quitt
a part of their counterskarfe. And the French advanced well their great covert
gallerie under the dry Moate.

The third of August the Enemy was not so lavish in shooting away their powder
and bullets as wouts they to be, but did beginn to husband yt against a time of
more need; so that this night we had not one man shot, only Colonel
Harewood got a sligh hurt with a granado. This night the English sapt into the
Enemies counterskarfe and to the brinke of their moate, and made there two or
three small guards, to maintain the sapp, and to offend the Ennemie.

The fourth of August we brought an other sapp up on our right hand into their
moate, and made likewise two or three little Corpse off guard to secure yt. It
was admirable to see when we had got into their counterskarfe and the brinck
of their deep ditch, how many windings and turnings, lines, flancks, and sapps
we made, they were like a Maze wherein one might have lost himself, if he had
not known them well. They braunched out one both sides of our great gallerie,
and diverse pyenests, and small gards were made beyond the Entrance into yt,
to flanke^ along the moate, and to play upon the wall, which did so much
overloke us.

Our great gallerie was so under propt with supporters of timber, and plancks
above yt, that four men might march in Frunt in yt. Every day and night we
got a rode or more, it was 160 paces long, and went shelving down some 8:
foot under the bottom of their dry moate, which was of a hugh deepth, and
then rising up again to come to the foundation of their stone wall. Having
then (as is said) got into the Ennemies Counterskarfe, dry ditch or moate they
by degrees little and lite quitted part of yt, and retired toward their
halfe-moones, before both their ports casting up small traverses upon their
Counterskarfe and the brinck of their moate to hinder us from sapping forward,
so that they disputed every patch of ground with us, and we were forced to
cut them out of them, or else to fire them out of them.

The Enemy had planted a small piece in their halfe-moone, shot into our
sapps, and from the Roundle upon our right hand, which slew some of our men,
Among the rest Sargant Parker Conductor to Mr: Niel his Excie Inginier.

The fifth Count Stirum putt 300: men into Sittert, this caused the Burgers to
come to his Excie: to beseech him, that he would with draw his men out of yt,
or else putt a stronger Guarnison into yt, to hold yt against Count Papenheym,
who was passed over the Rhyne with 12000: foot, and 3000: horse, and was
marching toward Mastricht* pillaging and plundring all the villages, and
Gentlemen's houses that lay in his way.

The sixth our horsemen took 20: of Papenheyms horsemen just as they were a
breaking up, of a church, and plundring of yt, and brought them prisonners to
the Prince: but his Excie: sent them back to their General Without any
ransom, because he would not give the first occasion of breaking the
newtralitie.

This day his Excie: to prevent the Ennemies from approaching, and making of
Batteries, to shote into his own, and the French quarters from a village not
far of, where our me^ had discounered some work, which: the Enemy had cast
up, caused high Barrocadoes to be made with in the line along his one and the
French quarters, and ran aline from the trench into the field to meet the
Ennemy, and made a royal fort at the end of yt, to have planted ordnance upon
yt, which the Ennemy perceiving spared both the labor and the charge.

This day also the great English Gallerie, was begun under the Earth.

The Prince coming into the French and English approches, which he did commonly
every day, and so hazarerd his person more then the Officers were willing to
see, escaping narrowly many a shot, espied in the English approches a small
traverse, which the Ennemy held on the one side, and we on the other, from
whence the Enemy threw many Grenades into our sap among our men, which did
much annoy them. Colonel Broughs Regiment this night had the watch in the
trenches, and Sr. Ieames Sanderling* his Lieutenant Colonel commanded: his
Excie: gave him order that the Scotch should assault yt, to beat the Ennemy
out of yt, which they did* and about eleven a clock in the night: during the
fight our ordnance, and small shot from the French, and English Batteries,
played much upon the Enemy, they gave fire upon the wall, and the Enemy also
played with: their Canon and small shot from of the wall, and flanckers upon us.
The manner of assaulting of yt was this, Captain Ogleby who commanded Colonel
Brought Company, Ensign Hunns, and a Sargant with some 12 men fell on first,
and upon the topp of the work were at push of the pike a good while, and beat
the Enemy out of yt, and our spade men began to slight yt, and turn yt up
against them. Upon this service worthy Captain Ogleby, the Sariant, and one
Mr: Meaper were slain. The Ensign Hurt, and some 30: Gentlemen and Soldiers
slain and hurt.

This day also the Prince commanded we should fetch all the forage that
possibly we cold get in the la^d of Valckenburch, least Papenheym, who began
to draw near us should make use of yt.

The seventh his Excie: gave leave to the Marquis de Gere a French Vovoluntier
to go into Sancte Croces leaguer to visit the Marquis de Clayton, and the
Baron de Vieux-pont, two French Colonels, which served the Enemy, they told him
that though the Marquis Sancte Croce did despair off the releife of Mastricht,
yet he hopt, that the Prince of Ora^ge would not refuse to give him battle
in returning homeward toward Holland, and that Count Papenheym was come to him
to that end. Also their Runawayes and prisonners told us, that now they had got
between us, and Hollant we should be fought with all, and not a man of us come
off. It was reported that Papenheym, also should send word unto the Prince of
Orange, that he came not to offend him* and the lo: the States, but was sent
from the Elector of Cullen, to punnish the rebellions Legeois, whereof they
being advertired prepared for him presently, and two days before they
intercepted, and took materials, which were sent from Namur to Papenheym, to
make a bridge over the Maze.

The eight of August, the Enemy sallyed out of Weick with their horse, but
were beaten in with the loss of six of their men.

The 9: of August, Papenheym came to Sittert, some 8: or 9: English miles from
our Leaguer.

The 10: a woman was taken coming out of the town, and meaning to go to the
Ennemies Army, being strickly examined by Sariant Maiour Glaser, she
confessed, she had swallowed down a bullet, wherein was a letter, which after
a purge she voyed, and the letter was found: the letter being wrapped together
in alitle hollow bullet, and baked in paste.

The 11: Colonel Harwood having the command in the trenches, and being
bid-day, after dinner going to see the sapp, was slain with a sling bullet,
whose death was much lamented. This day those of the town sprung a mine in the
trenches, but did little harm.

The 12: Papenheym marched toward Count William his quarter, whereupon his
Excie: gave orders, that all our gards over, and about the Maze, as also Count
Styrums horse-troopes should retreat, within the line, and keep their guards
at the further end of the Lord of Brederodes bridge, and this night Papenheym
marched to our old quarters by Geule, where Sancte Croce, and he made a
bridge our the Maze.

This day also their was a great fire in Colonel Harewoods his quarter, which
burnt of a division, and his dead Corpse, escaped burning very near.

The Duke of Newburch came also into our Army to the States, and his Excie: It
was reported his Embassage was from the Bishop of Collen, to excuse Papenheyms
coming, and solicit that Weike might be made newtrall, they say he had noe
good answer from the Prince, and the States: but went away with a flea in his
ear.

This day those of the town sprung another mine, but it took noe great
effect, but at night they set some of our blindes on fire.

The 13: a Soldiers wife of Mastricht, who had bin formerly taken, going with
letters to the Kings Army, was now the second time apprehended, and brought to
his Excie: but noe letters could be found by her, yet at last being strictly
examined, and thretned to be hanged she ingeniouslie confessed, that she had
swalowed two Copper-boxes, with two letters, the one from the Baron of Leyde to
Sancte Croce in characters, and the other from the Magistrates off Mastricht,
to their old Governeur Count La Motterye.

The States Doctor over night gave her some pills in, the which wrought so well
with her, that the next morning they were found, washed, opened, and these
letters found in them: the letters (they say) were to this effect, that unless
they were presently releived (we being so near them) it was impossible for
them, to hold out the town any longer.

The 14: 14. women were taken, and 4. firelocks, which came out off the town
to get forage.

This day also Papenheyms horse, and ours skirmished together, and sought to
beat in our horse centinells.

This night the Ennemy hung out lights on the wall both against the English and
French approches, to shoot upon us, and to discover what we were a doing in
their moate.

The 15: also a Capuchian Friar belonging to the Earl of Vorstenburch came
from Papenheyms quarters into ours, to visit a Leiutenant of horse off theirs,
who was taken prisonner, and lay wounded in our quarters, he told us Papenheym
desired that Weike might be delivered to him, or else he made noe quastion,
but he would relieve the town, for his men had done wonders, and overrun
stronger works then ours at Magdenburch, we prayed the Pape that he would go
and persuade Papenheym to make a trial off the strength off our works, and he
and his muffs should have a very good wel-come.

This day also came Kutingen Agent off the Bishop off Coullen to our Army, to
excuse Papenheyms coming, but the States and the Prince gave him noe great
welcome.

The 16: of August, the Scotts having the guard in the trenches, the beseiged
about two a clock in the morning, came into the moate, and gave fire upon our
right hand sapp, that opened in it, and wounded two or three off our workmen:
they were presently beaten out, and left two or three of their men dead
behind them, afterward they shot into this sallie with a sling piece; (and
being in drink) as comonlie they were when they fell on, fell out again upon
our sappers, but the Scotch beat them back, with the loss of eleven of their
men: the scoth also lost a Sergeant with four men. This day Count Henry of
Nassau his stuard was slain.

This night Papenheym shot of five pieces of ordnance toward Count Maurice
his quarter, by which he declared himself an Enemy, as appeared the day
following.

Those of the town hung out lights this night three times, and extinquished
them again, we interpreted this to be some signal they could not hold out
long. This evening a corporal of the Enemies came out of the town, and told
us, that the beseiged intended to fallie out upon us the next day, with a
great many men.

Upon tuesday the 17: General Morgans Regiment had the guard in the trenches,
my Lord General Vere commanded the line, (as he did every night,) between
the English quarter and Count Henryes, accompanied with Sergiant Maiour Holles:
It was my Lord of oxfords turn to coma^d this night in the quarters (who being
sikly) my Lord Vere commanded his quartermaster to attend his lo. and to bring
him what orders should come.

This night about 12 a clock: Sergant Maiour General Witz hearing the Enemy
moved, gave order that 150 men should be drawn out of the quarters, and put
into the Fort Anglois to stregthe^ yt, this caused my Lord of oxford to come
forth, and see it executed and he stayed with the companies till morning. The
reveille being beaten my Lord Vere, and my Lord of Oxford gave order, that the
Companies should be drawn from the line to the quarters, and they had scarce
layne down an hour, to take their rest, but we heard a sudden, and a hott
alarm in the trenches, which was between 7 or 8 a clock in the morning. The
Enemy sallied out about 400 men, upon the English trenches, and over the plain
feilde fell into our sapps and guards: it was a mistie morning, and so came
stealing behind our centinells, who could not well discover them, and give the
alarm so soon as they might, if it had been clear: the Enemy fell into our
first Corpse du Guard, and beat our men out of yt, and so along our right hand
sapps, got into the second Corpse du Guard, and at last assaulted the Colonells
Corpse du Guard, where Sergt: Maiour Williamson commanded, and in which: General
Morgans own Company was, and some others. Our men made the best resistance
they could, and were at push a pike with them a long time: the Enemy gave fire
exceedingly from the wall with their ordnance and small shot, and with their
firelocks slew many of our men in the Colon. Work: Sergt: Maiour Williamson,
received two or three mortal wounds at push a pike and with a shot, that
fainting, they pulled him down from the top of the work, and carried him
prisoner into the town, where he shortly after dyed: Sergt: Mayor Holles
hearing this alarm in our quarter gave order to the quarter master that came
to him, that with all expedition my Lord Veres Company of Delff, Sr: John
Gibsons, and Capt. Skippons, who were newly come from the watch, and the
soldiers at rest in their huts, they should instantly draw forth, though they
could get but 20 me^ together of a Company. All expedition was made that
possibly could be, and getting some men together, the rest following, these
capt: ran with their Companies down as fast as they could into the trenches,
to second our men: and a scotch Company likewise which had the guard at the
scotch avenue got the start a little before them: now Sir: John Gibson, and they
when they came at the entrance into our trenches, for haste left the trenches,
and ran over the plain field the next way, to come to the point of our
trenches and saps, where the buisines was to be done: they shot exceedinglye
from the wall upon our men, and Master Treffery of my Lord Veres 2. Company
was shot in the head: the Enemy seeing the resolution off our men, fearing
that we should have got between them and home and so have cut the^ of. The
Governor Beckned and cried to their men from the wall, that they should
retreat into their works, but before these Companies came down, Capt. Brown,
who was newly releived from the point, Sergt: Mayor Cromwell Leift: Brown,
Leift: Temple, with some ten Musketeers entered the Colonels guard again, gave
fire upon the Enemy, and beat them out of yt, the Enemy having stripped our
dead bodies in it, where Captain Martin, and diverse brave gent: and soldiers
of General Morgans Company lay dead, and where quarter-maister Weyman: and
Mr: Ed: Mead: received their mortal wounds. After them entered Captain Trevery,
Captain Walker, Captain Avry Vere, with my Lord Craven, and his brother, and
beat the Enemy also out of the second work, there entered also 2. French
Volunteers, whereoff one was the Baron de Chastres, my Lord Craven and the
French Baron: Captain Treverye, Leift: John Gray, and Leift: Moncrife fell
into the third work, and to the very point off the sap it self, and beat
the Enemy out off the third guard, where the French Baron and Leift: Moncrief
were slain. The Enemy having possessed these works began to slight them, and
cast down many off our muskett-Basketts, which made them lie very open to the
wall of the town: then came my Lord Vere my Lord of Oxford, Sarga^t Maiour
Holles, Sr. Io. Manhood and Sr. Simon Harecourt, my Lord Vere being there, gave
presently order for the stre^gthning of the guards, and the relieving of our
men, and appointed workmen to repair our blindes, which the Enemy had begun
to slight, and by little and little to set up our musket-baskets again, and
coma^ded our men from all guards to give fire upon the wall, and the Roundels
of it, to keep the Ennemy from shooting, while our men did their buisinesse.
My Lord of Oxford coming down went to the point, and right hand sap, and
coming thither the Soldiers being over wearyed called out to his Lop: for
relief, whereupon my Lord off Oxenford promissed them they should be relieved
presently, and his Lordship coming out, and passing throw the Colonells Corpse
du Guard, a little beyond yt, met some of our Musketteirs, which were brought
up to relieve our men, his Lo: took about 16 of them, and though he was
entreated by my Lord General Vere, Sargant Maiour Cromwell, and some others,
not to venture his person, yet he went in with them, and before he came to the
point of the right hand sapp, being a dangerous place and lying open, received
their a mortal shot throw his head. What a heavy spectacle this was to the
standers by, and what a sudden impression of grief it was to my Lord General
Vere, the symptoms of his face did discover: nevertheless his Lop:
suppressing yt as well as he could, gave further direction that our men should
ply shooting, that the gards, and the sapps should be relieved, and the
musket*baskets, which the Enemy had thrown down, by little and little should be
set up again. And ere all things were done, it was twelve a clock at the
least. In this fight Sarrant Maiour Williamson, Captain Martin that commanded
General Morgan his Company, Lieutenant Avery, Qvartermaister Wayman, and some
30: of General Morgans own Company, were slain and hurt, besides others.
Among these that were hurt, Captain Trefferie was shot by the shoulder and his
leg hurt with a granado, likewise capt. Abree Vere was shot throw his
Munmouth cap, and bruysed on his foot with a granado. This action was noe
sooner ended, but an other alarm began on Count Maurice his side; for whilst
my Lord Vere, and diversse Officers, were at dinner with my Lord Craven in
the trenches, we heard ten or twelve rousing Canon go off from the brow of
the hill where Papenheym lay. It seems there was some secret intelligence
between Papenheym, and those of the town, to have fallen on both at one time,
if he had bin ready, or the hour had not bin mistaken. The night before, the
Marquess Sa^cte Croce had sent General Papenheym three Italian Regiments, and
some of his best Canon. Papenheym then thundering with his ordnance from his
great battery upon Count Maurice his quarter, and upon the line, came marching
down the hill in full Batalia some 6. or 7. thousand horse and foot, drawing
down two field pieces before them, which they planted within musket shot of
the place, were they intended to Enter. The place was upon a little church yard
called Ammy: where our line was not yet perfected, and where there were hedges
orchardes, and trees which did shelter them much from our shot. They took our
men just at dinner, and the alarm being so hotly given, our men leaving their
victuals behind them, ran in all expedition to answer yt. The Italian
Regiments had the honor to give us the first charge, and fell upon this
churchyard, and came to pushe of the pike with our men upon the topp of the
trench, The Italians gave on three or four times, and did their best
endeavor, to have entered: but our men gave them such a welcome, and did so
repulse them, that some of them were slain upon the breast work, and tumbled
down into the ditch, and others were knocked down with the stocks of Musketts,
and had their brains beaten out with brick batts. And our ordnance playing
from all our Batteries which flanckred those feilds, raked throw and throw the
midst of Papenheyms Battalions, and powered whole voleyes of small short among
them. Papenheym seeing the Italians thus beaten, and retreat (as Marquis
Spinola did at ^ergin upon the English) charged them in the Reere with his
horse to force them to fall on again: but at last seeing yt was in vain, and
that they cold not enter, gave way to their retreat. In this fight worthy
Captain Morton was slain. His Excie: also being at dinner, and hearing this
hott alarm, calls for his horse, and took diverse foot companies along with
him, and two pieces of French half cano^, made all the speed that possibly he
could to ge^t to count Maurice his quarter. The foot companies were placed
along the line, and some 30 troops off our horse stood in Battalie, that if
Papenheym had entered, not a man of them had got off. His Excie: being come to
count Maurice his quarters, presently planted there the two pieces, which: he
brought along with him, and which: did so rake throw Papenheyms battalions, that
often times a bullet swept away five or six off them at a shot, their horse
and horsemen tumbling down, and sprawling upon the Earth. This fight continued
along time from one off the clock, till 8 or nine in the night, before they
could come clear off. In this fight powder nor shot were spared on neither
side. Count Papenheym would feign have bin gone sooner, but he was engaged, to
stay the longer for the carrying off of his dead and hurt men, and the drawing
off his two field pieces, which cost many off his men theirs dearest lives. It
was credibly reported, that in this fight, he lost 1400 or 1500 hundred men,
and himself hurt. For the day following the Boores coming in told us, that
there were 24 wagon appointed in the night, to fetch of their dead and hurt
men, whereof some of them had their legs and their arms shot off. These
wagons went often to and again in the night, and by the churchyard, where
the Italians fell on, their lay 140 of their dead bodies stripped, our men did
them the honor to cast Earth upon them, and to bury them in the ditch off our
trench.

The (...) the three Italian Regiments were sent back by Papenheym to Marquess
Sancte Croce well beaten. And it was reported that count Papenheym vpbrayded
the Spaynards for not attempting in some other place, while he strived to
relieve Mastricht. when the news was brought to Sancte Croce who was at
play, that count Papenheym was beaten, he told his play follows, that he
knew as much before, for he had not to do with his Muffs, and so gee^ing at
him bad them play on. This day also the Enemy sallyed of out the Town upon
our saps, but the English being aware of them, beat the^ back again presently
with the loss of some of their me^.

The 19* Sr: Thomas Culpepper Lieut. Colonel to Colonel Packenham (who was
hurt) commanded in the approches, our great galletie this morning was so
advanced, that our Mineurs mined too far, that coming to the inside of the
wall apeece of it fell down into the Town, that a man might put his head in
at the hole thereof, and se into the town, which the Enemy discouvering, one
of the^ peeping in at the hole, was slain with a pistol, two Gentlemen of
ours standing on either side of the hole with their pistolls spanned. This
accident so happing Sr: Thomas Culpepper sent quarter-maister Watkins in all
have to advertise the Prince thereof, who instantly sent his Inginier Mo^sieur
Niels to command the Capt: of the Miners that he should stopp the galery
backwards, and make chambers for the powder, which was begunn with all
expedition.

The next day being friday and the 20. the Lord General Vere his Regiment,
had the guard in the approches, and was commanded by his Lieut. Colonel Holles,
after dinner Colonel Harewoods Corpse, was to be carried out of the trenches,
and all the Colonells, Captains and Officers, who had not the guard, were
invited to his obsequies, meeting all at his tent and hut to go alo^g with yt.
The Lord General Vere being come thither, and fynding his Excie: not there,
rodd up to his Excie: tents, where (it seems) speaking with the Prince, he
leaving the Company, gave him order to go presently down into the approches.
Sariant Maiour Gener^l, Sr: Thomas Culpepper Sariant Maiour Cromwell followed
him, and being come down into the trenches, met with Sariant Maiour Holles.
They went all into the Colonells first Corpse du Guarde, where putting the
soldiers out, and shutting the portall thereof, held their a Council of
War, what companies should besent for into the quarters, what workmen were
sufficient, who should command the workmen, and how and in what manner the
breach should be assaulted. Sr: To: Culpepper and the quarter mr: that was
there present with them, to help to Execute their comaunds, were sent into the
quarters for ten English Companies vidz. General Morgans, Capt. Griffins,
Colonel Packenhams, Colo. Herberts, Vicount Wimbletons Sr: Tho: Culpeppers,
Serga^t Maiour Cromwells, Sr: John Manwoods, Captain Skippons, and Capt.
Dudleys, and Colonel Brough, and Sr: Ieames Sanderling his Lieutenant
Colonel, this night being to relieve the English with the scotch, were
appointed to second them. while things were a ordring the Companies marching
down and the workmen come, diversse gapps were cut in the trenches and sallies
made in the most convenie^t places, where our men might fall out, and the two
little decked Galleryes or sallies on either side off our great gallerie were
cut in the bottom of the ditche and on the sides, for our men to fall up to
the breach. The Mine by this time was stoptt 14 foot backward, and 3 chabers
made where in 18 Barrells of powder were laid: but as fast as we wrought
backward the Enemy wrought forward, to give vent to our mine. The manner off
assaulting the breach was thus, Lieutenant Charles Kettleby, and Ensign
Munings were first to fall up with 50 Musketeers and Piks, to visit the
breach. After him Lieut. Holmes with 24: workmen, and Quarter, master Watkins
as Inginier. Next them Capt. Manly, Ensign Sydenham, and Capt Stantons Ensign
with 100 men more half pikes half Musketeers, after him Capt. Cave Lieut.
Jews, and Ens. Foster with the like number. Then Lieut* Col* Holles with Capt.
Peyton, Capt. Esda, Lieut. Brown, Ens Garret Ens. Moyle and Ens. Manly, with
200 more. These volunteers also fell on, my Lord Craven and his brother,
Sariant Maiour Huncks, Capt. Davis Reformado. Master Donogh o Brian, Mr:
Wilis. Ensign Brown, and Captain Griffin also fell up the breach with his
Company. Thus yt was ordered, and between 8: and 9* a clock this night, all
things being in a readiness, the Mine was sprung, and to amuze the Ennemy an
Alarm was given by the French in their Approches. Now ere the Mine was
sprung, the Ennemy had stolen out nine Barrels off powder out off yt, the other
nine Barrells being fyred, having such a vent, and such a huge wall of Earth
and stone to cast up, it made not so great a breach as otherwise yt would have
done, if all the powder had bin in yt: nevertheless it shook the fondation of
the wall so, that some Earth being blown up, the stone wall tumbled down
into the moate, about a rodd in breadth, which our men perceving, giving a
great shoot, fell on Courageously, from the bottom of the moate, and
clambring over the stones, which were fallen down, and helping one another
up, got up to the very topp of the Breach, gave fire in the teeth of the
Ennemy, and came to pushe of the pike with them: The Ennemy running from all
parts of the town to defend yt* and from the two Roundles, which flanckred the
Breach, gave fire a pace upon our men, that were upon the topp of the Breach,
and amounting, and with their ordinance from the halfe-moone before the port,
and from an other pecce which shot out of a hole within the port* played upon
our men, and scowred a long the moa^e, hanging out two great lights, upon
either side of the Breach, that they might see, and discouver our men the
better: the Ennemy casting down many hand-granadoes, stones, fireworks, and
pycht ropes burning, among our men* discharging their ordnance from all
flancks, as fast as they could charg and discharge, and ours likewise upon them
from all our Batteries, while our men fell up to the breach with agreat
resolution putting the Enemy hard to yt, Captain Dudley, Ensign Sydenham (now
Captain) Captain Sandall, Ensign Garret my Lord Veres Ensign of his Company
of Dort, with some other Officers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers sallyed a long the
moate, and the Ennemies Counterskarfe, and coming to the drawe-bridg before
Brussels. Port, entered the halfe-moone, cut the throats of those that had the
guard in yt, beat them down with their Musket-stocks, and mauld them
pitifully, so that they cried out for quarter, but none was given them* The
Ennemy that had the guard within the port, having the wicket open, shutt yt,
and left those that were without to our mercy. All this while our men strived
to enter the breach, and assaulted yt well nigh half an hour, slashing and
cutting of the heads of the Ennemies piks. His Excie: the Lord General Vere,
Sariant Maiour General, and diverse Officers stood upon the Battery, to see
the Breach assaulted, where the bullets flew thick, and threefold. It was very
difficult for our men to enter, because of the steepness of the wall, and
their clambring over stones, and dead men's bodies* being 80: foot in height
from the bottom of the moate to the stone wall. Our men giving on three or
four times with fresh courage, which his Excie: seeing (that the longer they
stayed in assaulting* the more men we lost) sent word, that our men should
come down from the breach, and retire into our works. In this fight captain
Davis a worthy Gentleman was slain, Captain Edmund Manly, who strived to
enter cutting off the heads of the Ennemies pikes, received a shot throw his
left arm by his shoulder, which brake his bone, and an other throw the same
arm a little above his Elbow, which likewise broke his bone asunder, and
another shot through his right thygh among his synowes, whereof the 23. of
August he dyed. Also Captain Griffin was shourdly hurt, and agreat many of his
Company slain and hurt. Lieutenant Colonel Holles was also hurt with a
granado on his foot: Captain Cave shot throw his right hand, the bones all
to pieces, and Captain Peyton throw his left hand. Capt. Dudley at push of the
pike with the Ennemy was run into his breast, and his Lieutenant* Read shot
through one of his hands the bones all to shatters. Captain Sandall received a
cruel shot, whereof (of late) he dyed. Capt. Sydenham hurt also with a
granado, and diverse Gentlemen and Soldiers of my Lord Vere his two Companies
slain and hurt, and a great many of other Companies also. The Ennemy likewise
lost a brave Captain upon the breach and a great many of other Officers and
men, who did ingeniously confess unto us, after we came into the Town, that
if our Mine had sprung but half an hour sooner, the Baron of Leyde Vice
Gouvernour, and some of the Magistrates standing above the mine, and giung some
orders how to defend the breach, had bin blown up into the air. Our men
falling on and striving to enter, there was a pityfull cry of men, woeme^ and
children in the Town, their great alarm Bell ringing out. And some of them
fearing that our men would have entered, and served them as the Prince off Parma
did Anno 1579. cried out for quarter, but our men gave noe ear unto them,
because his Exice: had promissed our men, they should pillage the Town if they
entered, which did much animate them. There was order giving when our men fell
first on, that if the breach was not mountable, and the assault feisible, they
should have sent his Excie: word, and have fallen off: but it seems the
overruling hand of the Lord of Hoasts was in this action, and the courage of
our men such, that it was omitted: for though we lost a Company of brave, and
worthy men, who desirous of honor lost their lives there, yet they did so
startle the Ennemy, that they durst not stand out a second assault, as ye
shall hear the day following.

Upon Saturday then the 21 in the morning a parley was beaten for the fetching
off of our dead bodies on both sides: Sr: Ieamet Sanderling then commanding in
the approches, the dead being brought off, our men begann to shoot again: but
it seems the Ennemie foreseeing an other storm, and for the prevention off a
further danger, took hold off this oppertunity, calls for a parley, and
desired that one or two of them might speak with his Excie: which Sr: Ieames
granting, caused his men to leave shooting, and sent word to the French
approches, that they would do the like also, so his Excie: sent down Saria^t
Maiour General Monsieur Witz, into the approches and hostages were sent out
and in, and the Articles of Composition agreed on, and accordingly performed on
both sides.

According to the Articles of Composition hereunto annexed Monday the 23. of
August the Ennemies Garnison marched out of the Town 29 Coullours a foot,
being about 14 comen in all, and a troop of horse. They had also with them
nine pieces of ordnance, two three quater canon, Carrying a bullet of 3^ pounds
weight, two half Canon, three ^ling pieces, and two Faulcons, the Prince at
their request out of his bounty gave them two pieces more then at the first
was agreed upon, but they taking three, his Excie: caused one of them to be
carried back again into the town. They had also a hundred of our wagon to
carrye away their hurt, and sickmen, their bagg and baggage, which brought
them to the Marquess Sancte Croce his Army. A great many of them taking their
leaves of their friends in Mastricht were foxt, and in going out discharging
their Musketts and firelocks, one more malicious then the rest having a bullet
in his firelock, shot dead a horsemans son of ours, for which offense he was
apprehended, and presently executed.

The 24. Count Papenheym having marched to a village called Esder near unto a
little town called Vysell attempted to have put a bridge over the Maze, to have
hindered, and cut of our provisions between Luke and our Army: but hearing
that Mastricht was come to a parley, that his Excie: had sent some forces to
prevent him, and that the boores round about rose up in Arms against him, not
willing to suffer the insolences of his Soldiers, who near visell had
murdered some of their pesants, in revenge whereof, the bores cut the throats
of some of his stragglars, he bethought himself, and returned back again to
his own quarters.

The 25. a day of thankgiving was solemnized to God the Author, and giver of
this Victory.

The 26. Papenheym marched again with 6 or 7 thousand men into the Country,
to pillage and plunder yt. where his men committed cruel Insolences, breaking
up Churches, Cloisters, and Gentlemen's houses, spared not the Romish
Catholics themselves, especially his men paid those of the Reformed Religion.
Among the rest some of his Officers and Soldiers fell upon a Gentleman's house,
brook up their Chests, Truncks, and Cubbarts, and took above 20000 gilders in
ready coin from him; this did not only content them, but also to satiate
their fylthy lusts (o horrible villainy) ravished his wife, and daughters:
notwithstanding the many tears and cries they made unto them for the
preserving of their chastetie.

The 27. Sancta Croce removed part of his quarter from the Hooght Cloister and
came and lay with some off his men nearer Stockham to guard his bridge, which
was laid over the Maze, to go into, and to come from Count Papenheyms quarter.

The 31. the Duke of Niewburch came again into our Army, to excuse Papenheyms
coming against us, now he had declared himself an Enemy, as well in his own
behalf as in the Bishop off Cullens, but they said he had noe great audience.

The first of September we heard there was agreat contestation between Count
La Motterie, the Baron of Leyde his Vice Gouvernour, and Sancte Croce and his
Spaynards, hitting them in the teeth, that they had layne there all that while,
and attempted nothing for the relief of Mastricht.

The fifth of September, Papenheym being marched away toward Cullen, Sancte
Croce took up his bridge, and let some of yt drive down the stream, he kept
it a day, or two longer, fearing least we should have fallen in the brich of
Papenheym, and have cut off his passage.

The next day he marched away with his foot toward Die in Brabant, leaving
his horse in the reere of his quarters: His Excie: went with our horse, to see
his going off, and some of our horse entertained skirmish with them, and
bulletts changed between ours, and their centinells. And thus the great braggs
they made, that they would give us battle, and fight with us before we came
home, came to nothing.

The Ennemy being gone, our ordnance were drawn off from all Batteries, and
set in order in our quarter.

Upon Sunday the 5. of September, two sermons were preached in Saint Mathews
Church in Mastricht: There was a great auditorie of Soldiers, and the
inhabitants, as full as ever the church cold hold. After the fore nones sermon
was ended Mr: Conrade Merkinius the States preacher, coming down from the
pulpit, there was an old woman, that had bin of the Reformed religion all her
life time, and whom God preserved from death, when the Prince of Parma took
in the town with an assault, and when so many, were Masacred and drowned in it
by the Spaniards. This good soul hearing the sound of the Gospel again in
Mastricht, was so over ioyd, that (as Symion did to our Savior) she catched
the preacher in her arms embrassed him, and blessed God for yt. This caused
also a great rejoicing to the standers by, which: made some of them shed tears,
and weep for joy

This night toward evening his Excie: Commanded Monsieur Stakenbrock
Lieutenant General of the Horse, and Colonel Pincen, who commanded the foot,
having with them certain Dutch companies, four pieces of ordnance, two
Morters, and sufficient ammunition, laden upon wagon, to march unto
Limborch, six dutch miles beyond Mastricht: on mundaye morning the sixth of
September they came before yt, made a Battery, and planted their Canon upon
the Castle, which by nature, and art was exceeding strong, and situated upon
a sleep Hill, overlooking the town: after they had made some 34 shot against
the Castle, they came to aparly and yielded, finding in yt ten or twelve pieces
of good ordnance, and so the States and his Excie: became master of the first
Dukedom of the 17 Provinces, It is a montaynous Country, and full of high
hills, in which there are Mineralls found, and great store of Calamine stone,
and copper, it is credibly reported, that these hills, especially one of them,
were farmed for 300000 gilders yearly, and besides that, this Town and Castle
brings in agreat deal of Contribution to the States from the adjacent
Provinces, as Namur, Luxenburch, little Brabant, etc. Those of the Town and
Castle had these Articles of Composition granted them, which are here unto
annexed.

Thus it pleased God to hear the prayers of his faithful ones, and to honor
the Land, and his Excie: so, that in the sight of these two Armies which did
beleaguer us on the one side, to take this city of Mastricht, and to send his
Excie: home (maugre our Ennemis) with Victory, to this God the Author and
Giver off all Victory be given Everlasting praises,

Amen.
A true List of the number of Officers slain, and hurt of all Nations of the
States Army before Venlo, Roermont, and the famous seige of Mastricht,
together with the Volunteers and Gentlemen slain, and hurt, and the number of
the Soldiers of every Regiment throw the Army Anno 1632.
COunt Ernest Lord Marshall of the field, slain before Roermont. Count Hanauw
slain before Mastricht. 2 Of the Regiment of the Lord General Vere. Robert
Earl of Oxenford. Captain Edmund Manly. Lieut. Edward Vere slain. 3 Lieut.
Colonel Holles hurt. Sr. Symo^ Harecourt Sar. Maiour. Captain Roockwood.
Captain Trefferie. Captain Avery Vere. Captain Dudly. Captain VVrengham.
Captain Cave. Captain Peyton. Lieutenant Duncum Junior. Lieutenant Temple.
Lieutenrnt Peter Vere. Ensign Sydenham now Captain. Ens. Read now Lieut.
hurt 14
Sariants slain.
Sariant Burton. Sariant Parker. Sariant Davis. Sariant Daff. Sariant Foster.
Sariant Niclaes. Sariant Bishop. Sariant Revells. Sariants slain of this
Regiment 8
Of Genesis Morgan his Reg.
Sariant Maiour Williamson. Captain Martin. Captain Wentworth.
Quartermaister VVayman. Lieutenant Avery. Ensign Foster slain 6 General
Morgan himself hurt beneath his breast. Captain Griffin. Lieutenant VVhally.
Ensign Stephens. Ensign Cleave hurt. 5
Of Col. Packenhams Reg.
Lieutenat Collonell Proud. Captain Courtney. Captain Gawdie. Lieutenant Jews.
Ensign Munnings slain 5 Sariants slain. 2 Colonel Packenham himself hurt.
Lieutenant Bradly. Ensign Dansy now Captain. 3
Of Collon. Herbert Reg.
Colon. Harewood himself slain. Captain Morton. Lieutenant Garth. Ensign
Johnson. Ensign Fleetwood. Ensign Brown slain upon the breach, slain 6
Captain Dorrell. Captain Sandall. Lieutenant Duncum. Ens. Doleman now Capt.
hurt 4 Ens. VVillowly of my Lord Veres Regiment slain before Venlo.
Of the three Scotch Reg. Of Colonel Broughs.
Captain Oglebly. Lieutenant Bruce. Ensign Ridly. Ensign Couts slain. 4
Captain VVilllam Morrey. Ensign Johnson hurt. 2
Of the Lord of Baucloughs.
Captain Ieames Morrey slain before Roermont. Lieutenant Moncrift. Ensign
Graham slain 3 Captain Leviston. Ensign Duglasse. Ensign Kerncroft hurt. 3
Of Colonel Belfords.
Sr: Ieames Leviston Lieut. Colon. Lieutenant Dowglasse. Ensign scott hurt 3
Scotch Sariants slain 2
Of the four French Reg.
Of the Marschalls Monsr: Chaste. Monsieur de Fay Ensign to Captain Croymar
slain. 1 Monsieur de Montagnet. Monsieur Brenelle Ensign. La Sauvage Ensign
hurt. 3
Of monsieur Hauterive his Regiment.
Captain Beza. Isabella Lieutenant. Mons. de Breville Ens. slain 3 Captain
Beringham. La Ville Lieutenant hurt. 2
Of the Duke de Candales Regiment slain.
The Marquess d'Esteaux his Lieutenant Colonel. Captain Fouillon. Captain
Du Fresne. Monsieur de Bois his Lieutenant. Monsieur de Fay Lieutenant.
Monsieur Paul Lieutenant. Monsieur de Granges Lieut. Monsieur Ruelle Lieut.
Monsieur la Panniere Lieut. Monsieur Sansure Ensign Slain of this Regiment.
10 Mons. de Verneville Sar. Maiour. Captain Croyer. De Forges Lieut. De
Charone Lieut. De Rupierre Ensign hurt 5
Of the Regiment of Mons. Maison-neufve.
Captain La Villete. De Chaulot Lieutenant. De Broullard slain 3 Monsieur
Croyer Lieut. Mons. Le Merle-Ensigne hurt 2 French Volunteers slain Mons.
Saint Surin. Le Baron de Chastres slain in the English approches. 2 Monsieur
da Ganges. Monsieur Bax hurt. 2 French Sargants slain. 6
Of Count Maurice his Regiment the Wallons.
Captain Marquett. Le Doux Lieutenant. Ensign Calwaert slain. 3 Captain
Harsholt. Krimits Ensign to Captain Harsholt hurt. 2 Telinghe Lieutenant to
the old Company slain. 1
Of Count Solms his Regiment.
Mons. Nieulant Ensign to Captain Duke. 1
Of Colonel Varicks Regiment.
Captain Bruyn slain when the Italians putt over. 1
Of Collonell Rosencrans.
Ulevelt Ensign. Henry Bolon Ensign to Captain Vlaverwaelt slain 2
Of Colonel Loos.
Captain Dorght slain. 1
The number of Foot Officers of all Nations slain and hurt.
Dutch Officers slain with Count Ernest and Count Haynaw. 8 English Officers
slain with the 8. Sariants. 29 Scotch Officers slain with two Sariants. 9
French Officers slain with the Volunteers and six Sariants. 25 VValloon
Officers slain 3 Officers of all Nation slain 74
Officers of all nations hurt.
Dutch Officers hurt. 3 English Officers hurt. 26 Scotch Officers hurt. 8
French Officers hurt. 12 VValloone Officers hurt. 2 Officers hurt. 51
Horse Officers slain.
The Captain of his Excie: Harquebussiers. Captain Bourmagnie. Coender Manck.
La Maire Cornett slain. 4
Beside some horsemen.
La Roze Lieutenant to Mons. Chastillon. La Bresse Lieutenant hurt. 2 Besides
some horsemen that were hurt whose name are not known.
A List of the English Volu^tiers, and Gentlemen of the four Colonells
companies slain before Mastricht Anno 1632.
Slain the first of July.
Upon the Ennemies Traverse of the Lord General Veres Company of Dort.
Captain Haughton reformado. Master Knowles. Master Ewins. Master Zachary
Folliot. Master Edward Hewes. 5
Of his Company of Delph.
Master Thomas VVittington. Master Sedgwick. 2
Volunteers and Gentlemen of the Lord General Veres Company of Dort slain
upon the breach the 20. off August 1632.
Captain Davis Reformado. Master Honywood. Master Hoo. Master Bleschenden.
Master Knosburow. Sariant Burton. Thomas Berry. Thomas Cook. Walter
Godscoate. 9
Of his Lops: second Company of Delph Slain upon the breach.
Corporal Trent. Richard Rycroft. Thomas Ioanes. John Poole. 4
Hurt of these two Companies Upon the Traverse and upon the breach as follows.
Sariant Bagnall grievously hurt (...) the Traverse. (...) Hill his arm shot
all to pieces. Master Willis. Master Ussher. Master Goodwyn. Master Miles.
Master Odinsel. Master Hunt. Master Williams. Master Mathewes. Master
Morris. Master Farewell. Master Brown. Master Patisson. Master Leake hurt.
Soldiers hurt. 16
Of his second Company of Delph. hurt.
M. Baynham. The 1, of July upon the Traverse. Mr. Quarles. The 1, of July upon
the Traverse. Mr. Turvill. Mr. Alford. Mr. Dye. Mr. Willams. Mr. Lower. Mr.
Robart Morris. Mr. Georg Foster. Robart Billings. Mr Knightly Vachill. Hurt
upon the breach. 9 Sariant Betty hurt. Hurt upon the breach. 9 Soldiers hurt.
10 Slain upon the breach of the whole Regiments 20 Hurt and shot 82

Of General Morgans Regiment slain before and the 17 of Aug.
Lieutnant Gilman Reforma(...) Mr. Henry Louewell. Mr. William Withers. Mr.
William Morgan. Mr. Amstrudder. Mr. Walter Arden. Mr. Edward Meade. 7 Soldier
slain.
Hurt of the same Company.
Mr. Henry Ashly now Ensign. Mr. Thomas Ashly now Ensign. Mr. Wright. Mr.
Clapham. Mr. Thomas Morgan now Ensign. Mr. William Booth. Mr. John Merick hurt
7
Of Colonel Packenhams.
Mr. Carcy. mr. Butlar slain. 2 Soldiers 12
Of Colonells Herberts Volunteers, and Gentlemen slain.
mr. Blishenden. mr. Goodwood. mr. Chickwood. mr. Woodhouse. mr. Moore. mr.
Dikes. mr. Gibs. mr. Parker. mr. Turnour slain. 9 Besides Soldiers slain 12
What Gentlemen of Colonel Packenhams, and Colonelll Herberts (...) were hurt
is not come to my knowledge.

The Number of Officers, Volunteers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers of every nation
and Regiment slain before Venlo, Roermont and the Seige off Mastricht Anno
1632.
Of the five Companies of the guards 67 Of the Lord Veres Regiment 157 Of
General Morgans 111 Of Colonel Packenhams 69 Of Colonelll Herberts. 86
English slain in all 423 Of the 3 Scotch Reg. were slain 113
Of the 4. French Regiments.
Of the Regiment of mons. Chastillon 33 Of the Regiment of mons. Hauter. 37 Of
the Reg. of the Duke of Condale 39 Of the Reg. of mons. Maison-neufve 31 French
slain 140 Of the Regiment of Count Maurice the Walloons 75 Of the Regiment of
Count of Hanaw 42 Slain of these 3. Regiments 162 Horse Officers slain 4
Besides some few horsemen the number whereof it not known.

Summa totalis slain of all Nations 909.

Besides some horsemen.

FINIS.
Articles accorded by the Prince of Orange to the Gouvernour of the Town of
Mastricht, and VViecke, and to the Captains, and Soldiers therein.
I. Article. THat the Baron of Led to whom the Gouvernement of the town is
committed, the Captains, Officers, and Soldiers both horse and foot, and al
such as receave pay from the King off Spain, off what quality or condition
soever, although they have without leave quitted, and abandoned the service of
the Lords the States of the united Provinces, together with the Captains of
the Companies, shall go out with the savegarde off lives, and bagage, with
their Arms, flying colors, light matches at both ends, bullets in their
mouths, as they use to march in the war, to the Army off the Marquis Sancte
Croce. 2. That on both sides shall remain two hostages until their going out
which: shall be on monday the 23 of this month. 3. That they shall have a hundredth
suffitient wagons, to transporte their baggage, and that his Excie: shall give
them two hostages to the said Army. 4. That the Baron of Led shall carry out
with him six pieces of cannon, with six Tonnes of Powder, and bullets fitting
the pieces to be chosen by the said Baron. 5. That the Count Mottery Gouvernour
of this place now absent, and all Captnes: Officers, and men of war as before
said both present and absent shall have two years time, to dispose of their
inheritances, howses, goods, and moueables without any damage, and in case
they shall sell their said goods, they shall be free from any tax, to be put
upon them by the States General. 6. That the wives of the men of war as
above said may remain in the town, the said two years to look to their
goods, and that during the said term, they shall upon request have wagons
horses and boats delivered them for their conduct to Namur or Teilremont, and
the like to such, as be wounded or sick. 7. That all Officers and Souldiets
wounded or sick may stay in the town as well by the hosts, where they are now
lodged, as in the hospitalls, and his Excellency will be pleased to give order
there may be particular care taken, that they may be used as is fit. 8. That
noe Officer, nor Soldier shall be arrested for any debte. 9. That the Soldiers
of his Excie: Army shall not go into the town, but the day of marching out,
as also the Soldiers of the town shall not go into the Army of his Excie:
10. That all horses, or other boot made, as well before as during the seige,
shall rest in the peaceable possession of such as have taken or bought them,
without being questioned for the same. 11. That the Prisoners on each side
shall be delivered with out rantsome paying only the charges. 12. That all
Munition of war and victuals belonging to the Kings of Spain shall be
delivered without fraud to such as his Excie: shall appointe.
Given in the Camp before Mastricht the 22. of Aug. 1632. Signed Henry d^
Nassan. The Baron of Led.

The Articles of Composition agreed on my Lord the Prince of Orange, to the
Clergy and Magigistrates of the Town of Mastricht.
I. Article. THat all offenses, and injuries done, as well by the Clergy and
religions persons, as the temporalls, not only before, but during this seige,
both on the one side, and the other, shall remain wholly forgotten and
forgiven. II. That within the town of Mastricht, the reformed Religon shall be
frelie and publicly preached, and exercised as it is exercised in the united
Provinces, and that in the Churches of St: Ieames and Hillary, if they be
convenient for it, if not two other fit Churches shall be used thereunto. III.
That the Lord high Priour of St: Servaes, and all spiritual Eclesiasticall,
and religious persons, as the chief Priour of our lady, and the chief,
deacons, and Chapiters with their supposts, the four Pastors, the colleges
off the societies, all Cloisters, and persons off what state and dignity,
order and function soever they be, none excepted, shall continued and be
mayntained, in their several goods revenues, and dignities privileges,
freedoms, exemptions, and Lordshipps, Jurisdictions, collations of prebends,
benefices, Offices, Functio^s administrations to use and possess, as well
within as without the before said town none excepted, even as they before this
have enjoyed, and possessed them, without any Molestation therein demunition or
hinderants whatsoever. IV. And accordingly the public exercise of the Romish
catholic Religion shall be taught in the Churches, cloisters, and in every
place, as the same has bin exercised hitherto, without any let or hinderance
whatsoever. V. That all persons familes, and goods, as also Privileges,
Immunities and freedoms, by water and by land, of the Burgers and
inhabitants, likewise of the Gilds, hospitalls the poores tables, the great
holy Ghost and such like foundations as well within, as lying without the
jurisdiction of the aforsaid town, shall continue free and vnmolested. VI.
That the Lords the States of the united Netherlands, shall undertake nothing
within the town, and the Jurisdiction off the same, then that with was
granted to the King off Spain, as Duke off Brabant, according to the
charters made thereoff, and exhibited, and are kept in the town, and shall be
according to the ancient costome, and some off late made and closed accounts
shall be delivered over, and that to the Bishopp and Prince off Luke, and the
common vndevided Jurisdictions, and other his demaynes shall remain as they
have don before this, and hitherto. VII. That the aforesaid Lords the States
off the aforesaid town shall govern jointly together with the aforesaid the
Prince off Luke as a particular town, and Province a part from the other
States, or Provinces off both the aforesaid Lords, as the Bishopp, and King off
Spain has done the same, and governed the town heretofore, as well in matters
of Justice and pollecy. VIII. And concerning the publishing off placcats, and
the edicts, together with the current, and permission off coins within the
aforesaid town, it shall continue and remain as was accustomed in the time off
the King off Spain, and as it was when the town was in his possession. IX.
The Officers having any commission from the Prince of Luke, shall keep their
Offices without any let, or difficulty whatsoever. X. That it is permitted to
all Burgers, and spiritual persons with their families, and goods, to depart
out off the town and at all times whenever they shall think it good, may
sell their inheritances, and goods, without having any charge laid upon them
whatsoever. XI. That with the Lords the States General consent, all
inhabitants off the aforesaid town, dureing the space off two years next
ensuing, may go, into any town subject to the King off Spain, there to
dispatch their affairs upon conditon, that before they go they give up their
names to the Governor off the town off Mastricht, and that they do not
attempt any thing to the prejudice, and harm of the States of the united
Provinces. XII. That for any new impostes of the said town, and the
inahbitants thereof to be brought in nothing shall be don but with the
communication and common advice off the Lords the States General off the
united Provinces. And the Lord the Bishop Prince off Luke. XIII. That the
said Gouvernours off the town and the rulers thereoff shall not be taxed with
any charges, touching new fortifications, but shall be done upon the towns
charges to maintain their ports and walls. XIV. The Garrison off foot and
horse with shall be laid in the aforesaid town, together with the waggo^s and
the carriages off the ordnance shall be lodged, and laid up as they, were in the
town in the time off the Kings off Spain, or according as the occurences of
business shall requier, and as shall be agreed on by the Magistrates. XV. All
town and other public accounts, made and closed heretofore, shall continue
so without any new charge to fall upon them.

All debts made during this seidge, as likewise before contracted in the
behalf, and in the name off the town shall be paid out off the towns means,
and the debts contracted in the name and in the behalf off the King off Spain
shall be paid out off the Demeanes off the same in the crown court, off the
lands over the Maze expressed before the date hereoff, thus concluded in the
Army before Mastricht the 22. off Aug: 1632. Sti: nono.


Signed: F: Henry de Nassau.
Winant-of Gelders Deacon of St. Servaes for the Clergy, Henry Conrade, Cannon
of our Ladies Church for the Clergy I. Cresen by letters of Attorney from the
Magistrates Signed, and also by order of his Excie: Iunius.



The Articles off composition granted to the Clergy, Burgers, and Soldiers
of the Town, and Castle of Limburch Anno 1632.
THat all offenses, and hostilities committed, aswellby the Clergy, as those
of the Laity before, and during this seige, shallbe wholly forgotten on both
sides. 2. That the public exercise of the Catholic Apostolic Romish
Religion, shall remain in the Churches, Cloisters, and every where within the
town of Limburch, and through the whole Province thereof over the Maze, as has
bine taught unto this day, without any disturbance, or molestation: provided
that they appoint a convenient place for the exercise of those that are of the
Reformed Religion, seeing there is but one Church in the Town. 3. That the
chief Pryour and Pastor of the parochial Church of the said town, all other
clergy men, and religious persons, as likewise all superior and inferior
Officers, Justices, and others of what state calling or condition soever they
be, shall enjoy and be mainteyned in the peaceable possession of their
goods, Estates, Revenues, Privileges liberties, immunities, Exemptions,
Colations, Jurisdictions, Offices, and other places whatsoever, none excepted,
as well without, as within the Town, and as all and every one of them have
heitherto held, possessed, and enjoyed them, without any hindrance or prejudice
to them whatsoever. 4. That all Maires, Shriefes, Secretaires, Forresters,
Proctours and other subordinate officers of justice, as they have bin invested
in them for their lives, so shall they be kept and mainteyned in their Offices
without any disturbance or hindrance, unless they themselves will remove out
of them, as then they shall be permitted to do so. 5. That the Lords the States
of the united Provinces shall receive nothing within the said Town of
Limburch, but that which belongs to the King of Spain, as Duke of Brabant, and
of Limburch, according to the Priveleges in Esse, which from time to time have
bin sworn unto, to be kept and observed. 6. That al persons as well clergy
men, Burgers lay men, as those who have bin soldiers, and have enjoyed any
entertaynment in the King of Spain his service, to such as are not willling to
stay, and dwell in the town they shall be permitted to go out of yt, with their
goods and families, or may at any time sell their goods, and inheritances
without any taxations upon them, or at any time may exchange them. 7. And as
for those that are willing to dwell in the Town of what quality soever they
be, they shall be permitted to go and do their affairs every where, provided
that they attempt not any thing to the prejudice of the Lords the States
General, and the Prince of Orange, but to do the same with the fore knowledge
of the Gouvernour. 8. That the Priveledges of the said Town touched before,
and which are to be mainteyned, concerns also the point of the fortification
and the keeping of the vvalls, with the other charges of the said Town. 9.
That all public accounts of the town heretofore shut, and clossed shall
continue so without let or obstacle whatsoever, which are due to the Lord the
Count of Noslie in all the Countries over the Maze, either as in qualite of
Gouvernour of the said Province, or otherwise, for the calling in of his debts,
he is permitted to send and depute, at any time any one in his behalf. The
like is granted also to Ian de Vaulx his Secretaire for that which rests due
unto him, within the said Province, conditionally that under this pretext
nothing be attempted to the prejudice of the Lords the States General, and his
Excie: 10. That the Guarnison which shall be laid in the said Town shall be
billeied and lodged by the intervention of the Magistrates, as shall be found
most convenient, and as heither to has bin practiced. 11. That the Recever of
the King of Spain his Demaines, within this County and Durchie, shall freely
receive the said Demaines and the subsidy agreed on by the States of the said
Country on the other side off the Maze, and all arereages, which are fallen due
unto this day. 12. That he may draw, prepare, and sell as much Calamie
stone, as may satisfy the moneys levied in the name of the King of Spain,
for the Merchants of Answerpe, and for as much as the Mountain of Calamie
stone is farmed out for, with this proviso, that the said Receiver and farmars
of this mountain, shall give up their particular obligations, and that upon
their requests the Lords the States General upon just proffe will disburse the
said moneys. This done and concluded the 8. of September 1632. between the
aforesaid Lord of Stackenbrock on the one side, and those of the Town on the
other side, and was signed Stackenbrock.
By the order of the maire, Burgemaster and Shriefs of the said Town, and was
signed: Ph. de Kaldenbourgh.


