MISCHEEFES MYSTERY: OR, Treasons Masterpiece, The Powder Plot. Invented by
hellish Malice, prevented by heavenly Mercy: truly related. And from the
Latin of the learned and reverend Doctor HERRING translated, and very much
dilated. By JOHN VICARS.



The gallant Eagle, soaring up on high:
Bears in his beak, Treasons discovery.
MOUNT, noble EAGLE, with thy happy prey,
And thy rich Prize to the King with speed convey.
LONDON, Printed by E. GRIFFIN, dwelling in the Little Old Bailey near the
sign of the King's Head. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr. JOHN LEMMON Knight, Lord Mayor of the most famous
City of London, and to the Right Worshipful Sr. William Crauen Knight,
Alderman of London, and President of Christ's Hospital, with the Worshipful
Mr. Richard Heath TREASVRER, together with all the Right Worshipful and
Worshipful Governors thereof, JOHN VICARS wishes all external happiness,
and internal peace of conscience in this life, and eternal beatitude in the
life to come.
AS diverse causes (Right Honorable, Right Worshipful, and my most worthy
Patrones) do produce diverse effects: so diverse motives do necessarily incite
and stimulate all men to diverse actions and intentions. Now therefore there be
3. especial motives which do at this time induce, nay compel me to dedicate
these my poor Labors rather to your Honor and Worships, then to any others,
to whom indeed the History it self might seem more peculiarly to appertain.
First, because as this deluge of destruction intended by the barbarous butchers
of Rome, had been (indeed Catholic and) universal to the whole kingdom: So
your Honor and Worships being the high-topt Cedars of Lebanon, chief
Magistrates of this famous City of London, especially being pious professors
of Christ's verity, should also have had no small part, yea too too great and
insupportable a portion and ponderous burden of sorrow and lamentation in this
unparalleled project of the Pouder-treason. The second Motive is that since I
amongst many hundred poor Orphans fostered in that blessed house of Piety,
Pity, and Charity, that Sanctuary of your Cities safeguard, yea that
Blocke-house of defense (as so I may term it) against Heavens justly deserved
judgments, which but for the due and daily prayers elsewhere, and thence
forcibly and (no doubt) effectually ascending, we might expect to fall upon us:
I mean Christ's Hospital whereof your Honor and Worships are principal
Patrones, and most godly Governors, Et o faelicia saecula, quae vos tales
genuere Parents. I, I say (as to Gods glory, your endless credit, and my no
less comfort, I do most thankefully acknowledge, and ingenuously confess)
having sucked from the breasts of your Charity, etiam ab origin prima, even from
mine infancy, the sweet milk of comfortable education and pious institution,
must thereby justly also confess that whatsoever is mine, is most properly
yours, as being derived from the ouer-flowing streams and radiant Sunbeames of
your bounty and benignity to me exhibited. Therefore as acceptam refero is the
Moons motto: so Quod recepi retribui, must with no less reciprocal due be
mine: At, at, o si, dignas persoluere grates opis esset meae, but alas, it is
not (o would to God it were) in my power condignely to remunerate your deserved
merits. The third and last motive or motion to this my dedication is, that
since this translated Poem is my first Essay and assay of what my weak faculty
could effect, being indeed better meant then made, and finished with much
defect and feebleness, defect I say of Rhetorical flourishes, and feeblenes,
in regard I have been but a mean proficient, if not a mere Trewant in the
School of the Muses, having e're cropped few or none of those odoriferous
fragrant flowers which grow upon, and most gorgeously do garnish the pleasant
banks of Parnassus, nor scarcely ever sipt of the aurifluous and mellifluous
streams of Vrania's learned fountain, having been (oh too too soon) wained
from the breasts of my sacred Mother the most famous University of Oxford, and
therefore like a weakling so feebly walking, as scarce able to go alone
without your Honorable and Worshipful protection, yet in regard it is the
Primitiae of that mean Talent which the Lord by you his most blessed
instruments has lent unto me, which (whatsoever it is, as indeed it is but
small) rather then I would hide it in the ground of ingratitude, I have been
bold, embouldned by these considerations, but especially by the experimental
proof of your Lordships and Worships wonted favors, and most courteous
dispositions in all humility to offer the same to your Honors and Worships
pious Patronage and pervse, most submissely entreating you (Right Honorable,
Right Worshipful, and my most worthy Mecaenaces) that as, ex paruis magna, ex
vngue Leonem, and ex pede Herculem: A man may see day light through a small
creuice: so you would be pleased favorably to accept this small present as a
pledge of mine obliged duty, and as a Symbol of my service, which is, and ever
shall be wholly at your Lordships and Worships command. Which your courteous
acceptance I desire, not so much for mine own sake, as for the History it
self, and that not so much for the manner as the matter, et res ipsa loquatur,
let the matter it self speak for it self, number ruminari and recordari
cordibus pioru^ omniu^ per vniuersam Britannie regionem, Whether all true
hearted English protestants have not just cause to ruminate and record to all
succeeding ages, the memory of this matchles Machination, and plotted
Pouder-treason, whereof if I should here enter into a copious discourse, it
would administer such an Ocean of ouerflowing turbulent waves of destruction,
such a world of wonder and admired accidents, and such a map of misery and
mischief, yea such an endless boundless extent of grievous aggrauations,
that I might with the sorrowful Trojan Prince, Infandos renouare dolores, and
totos vos in lachrymas resoluere, Tell you such a woeful tale as might with the
Prophet Jeremy turn your heads into fountains of tears: for Quis talia fando
(nisi Papista crudelis) temperet a lachrymis, none doubtless but the
Pharaonicall hard-hearted Papist could choose but be exceedingly sorrowful
thereat; yea and hereby I might rather write a large Volume, than a short
Epistle, for my part I cannot but horrescere referens, even tremble at the
relation thereof. But not to wrong your Lordships and Worships patience with
too much prolixity in this Epistle, lest thereby I seem to set a great pair of
Gates to a little City, I will conclude of it, as a certain grave Senator did
of a former ancient Treason, far inferior to this, Repertum esse facinus,
quod nec Poetae fingere, nec Histrio sonare, nec mimus imitari poterit, that by
Heavens providence such a treacherous villainy is discovered, as never any Poet
could feign the like, no Stage Player ever Act the like, nor Mimus ever imitate
the like, which since it is so difficult to describe, I will herein imitate,
though my self most unskillful, the skillful Painter Timanthes of whom it is
recorded, that being to describe and paint out the woeful Tragedy of Iphigema
sacrificed to Diana, that when he was to portray and set out her Father
Agamemnons most compassionate passion, and woeful countenance for her, that he
confessing his Art insufficient to set him out deservedly in his lively
lamentation, was feign to paint a veil covering Agamemnons face, that so he
might leave the extremity of his sorrow to the judgment and consideration of
the behoulders: So I, unskillful I, confessing my self (unless I had the
faculty of Maro or Meonides) altogether unable with heart or hand, with voice or
verse to discover the atrocrity and ineffable horror of this Romish barbarity,
yea more than Scythian, Thracian inhumanity; will cover the description thereof
with the veil of Silence, and leave it to the consideration of all that ever
knew or heard of the endless extent thereof: Most humbly desiring your
Lordship and Worships with wonted protecting paternall favor and courteous
disposition, to vouchsafe your gentle acceptance of this plain Poem, the
poor mite which my thankful heart and dutiful hand, do with all obliged
gratitude offer unto you, most submissiuely commending and committing the same
to your worthy name and Patronage, your examples of Piety and charity, to the
memory and imitation of posterity, and your selves and souls to Gods
all-sauing Grace, and all-sufficient Tuition in this life, never ceasing to
pray for the blessing of Zaccheus on you and yours, even eternal salvation in
the life to come; which he grant that has with the high price of his most
precious blood redeemed us, Christ Jesus the righteous, Amen.

Your Lordships and Worships most obsequious daily Orator duly and dutifully
pressed in all service to be commanded: JOHN VICARS.

To all the Loyal hearted Protestants of England, which sincerely love the
purity of Christ's Gospel, and Zealously detest the damnable doctrine of
Antichrist, I. V. wishes the blessings of Gods right hand, and of his left,
the blessings of this life and the life to come.
THe richest, rarest mercies daily sent
(Right Christian brethren) to us of this Land,
From Gods over flowing Grace, all-filling hand,
May be compared to the Sun in the firmament.
Whose glorious Rays, all creatures hearts revive,
Whose light enlight'ns all the world throughout:
Whose heat does cherish plants that spring and sprout,
Whose shine to want, does us of joy deprive.
Yet, since so daily Man does it enjoy,
Who is it almost that valew's it aright?
Who yields due praise to heaven, for heavens sweet light?
Oh, few or none: Abundance does us cloy.
From hence we therefore justly may conclude
That Gods rich mercies which we often possess,
Wherewith be daily, hourly does us bless,
We all receive with great ingratitude.
I need not stand t'exemplifie the same,
It is a fault too frequent, too rank grown:
And yet to God more odious there is not one,
Which unto christians brings more shame, more blame:
Of blessings spiritual, our blessed Salvation
Wrought by our Savior, bought with 's precious blood,
Was most Divine, gave man his cheifest good,
Was more admired then the Worlds Creation.
But of all Temporal blessings we enjoyed
Since God did form the Earth, and Heavens high frame,
To our deliverance, never greater came,
When Rome by Powder would have us destroyed.
How thankful for the first to God we are,
I Will tax nones conscience, but examine mine;
But for the second, how we do decline
From giving thanks to God, I may not spare,
To tell you all my Christian Brethren dear
That, which if I should silence, senseless stones
It Is to be feared would sound with mournful groans,
Englands Ingratitude is too too cleers.
And for this cause, I thus have took in hand
To sing, (though simply sung) to Heavens high glory,
In this mean Poem, Englands happy story
How powerfully God to his Church did stand.
Against which though some Athenian, Cretian mind
May scoff and scorn at this my good intention,
Though from Romes favorites naught but reprehension
And taunting terms I shall unjustly find;
Though Rome do curse me with Bell, Book, and Candle,
And like a gauld-backt Jade do kick and winch:
Yet I their soars have labored so to pinch,
As in their Nature justly them to handle.
But if to you (my Brethren dear) I may
For my poor Labors kindly be respected:
And from Calumniators fangs protected,
I shall acknowledge this a rich repay.
If I hereby may move and stimulate
Your Christian hearts to zealous detestation,
Of Romes most impious foul abomination.
And heavens rich mercies often to ruminate,
Chiefly the great miraculous defense
From this Nefarious Powder Plot of Rome:
Wherein our King and Kingdoms they did doom,
To dire destruction, fatal pestilence.
Then happy I, maugre all Romes despite
That God hereby may have due thanks and praise,
That this occasion may men's hearts incite
This fact with thanks to memorize always:
Read then (Kind Readers) what is amiss excuse,
And kindly censure my untrimmed Muse.
Thine in the Lord Jesus, IO: VICARS.

A Friend at a stand, at his Friends work.
Who reads this work, areade my wonder; tell
What skill to verse a Fact so ill, so well.
Unresolved of nothing in your Love but this.
Alias The Placet of his Friends Essay.
OThers thy zeal and vows, I praise thy skill
So well to lay the Plott, Rome laid so ill.
Another. Arts Pyramides, from Treasons Pouder-Fire.
WHat all fire has, has thine, black smoke, bright flame,
The flame thy Verse: the smoke the Traitors name:
Who can, decide; in which most time to spend
Or damn their smoke, or thy bright flame commend.
Himself not yet determined, THO: SALISBVRY, Mr. in Arts Camb.

To my good Friend Master JOHN VICARS.
THy love to Truth I love, thy hate of Errors,
Thine Honesty, thine Industry, thy zeal
For God, the King, the Church, and Commonweal
Against the rage of Romes intended terrors:
I like thy loathing of those Treason-stirrers,
That for APOLLYON in these plots do deal
With ghastly, ghostly Fathers that conceal,
(Or rather counsel) so inhumane horrors.
I praise thine Anthors, and thine own desire
To have recorded unto all Posterity,
The Ignatian Furies, ignominious fire,
Flaming from Hell against the heavenly verity:
In Fauks, Grants, Garuets, Winters, Catesbies, Percies,
Let others praise thy vows: I praise thy verses.
IOSVAH SYLVESTER.

In Authorem.
THe Pope to patronize his hellish tricks
Makes Cardinals of his most dearest friends,
An English An Englishman turning Jesuit was made Cardinal.
Parsons plays the Jade and kickes
Against Country, Kingdom, and to Rome he wends;
But now an English Uicars plays his part,
And at such Popish Parsons casts his dart.
Long may thy work be Usher to thy name,
And thou a Master in this English strain,
That if from Thames to Tyber flies thy fame;
Still may thy Muse reserve to thee this vain,
That if more Parsons in Romes dregs be drowned,
New Vicars still may rise, them to confound.
R. P.

In viri mihi fratris Vice, Iohannis Vicarij dignissimos Labores, (...).
MIttor Apollineos Ego paruulus inter Alumnos, vt tibi pro Libro Laurea serta
feram.
Ne metuas Romae Iesuitas.
laruas, lemuresue sequaces: nec criticos, critica qui grauitate valent.
Est liber ille tuus scelerato crimine Liber perge (igitur) Libro prela subire
tuo.
Idem ad eundem.
THou carping Momus poison of good wits,
I call not thee to give the Author praise:
Silence I tell thee better thee befits
Because Detraction is thy common phrase:
Thou can not come and mend, yet must commend,
This work so neately by the Author pend.
THOMAS BRACLEY.

To my loving friend Mr. John Vicars, in praise of his praiseworthy labors,
encouraging him to discourage our enemies.
I Saw thy work, should I not laud the same,
With Traitor thou might justly brand my name.
I saw thy work, and from my soul I vow:
I think none honest will it disallow,
I saw't, or who else sees't? without commend,
He is a Traitor, or a Traitors friend.
I saw, and praise thy work, in spite of Rome:
Hell and the Pope, I say it is sweetly done,
I saw thy work, though thee I do not know:
But figs (l'me sure) on Thistles never grow.
Courage (brave spirit) thou have done so well,
Thou need'st not fear Romes candle, book, or bell:
Thou have a Master (in whom's all our hopes)
That will support thee against a thousand Popes.
Show it thy Master, then his censure past,
Let others blow, regard not thou their blast.
But tell them, I, and tell them to their face,
He is a Traitor, which does Treason grace,
Your friend unknown NATHANIEL CHAMBER. of Grayes Inn.

In Authorem.
LEt Rome with Bell, Book, Candle, curse thy name,
Thy hand, thy pen, the broacher of her shame,
Pass not, if good accept, though Bad refuse:
Religious hearts bid welcome to thy Muse.
It may be some condemn thee, what is the Reason?
They hate thy work because they love the Treason.
W. C.

In Commendation of the Authors worthy Work.
TO show my Love, as forward as the best,
My Infant Muse, as one among the rest
Has daign'd to write: not as thou art my friend
To praise thy work; that will it self commend.
Good Wine no sign at any time does need:
Thy Work does Love, thy self does Laurel meede,
TO adorn thy head, as one of Phoebus brood,
Who sing'st a Fact so ill, in Verse so good.
But, thy pure Love to God, the Church, thy King,
I truly praise, which (maugre Enuies sting,
In detestation of that Roman Whore)
Unto the World dorh blazon forth, the store
Of Soule-polluting crimes, Rome does maintain
That them, and Her, all good men may refrain.
This is the thing praiseworthy I approve,
Which shows to God thy zeal, to All thy Love.
Thomas Knight.

To his most kind friend, Mr. John Vicar, in praise of his translated and
largely dilated Poem.
THough Romish shauelings rage with execrations,
And downright damn thee and thy causeles book,
Fear not: but take as blessings such damnations,
For sure the Lord nere turns his gracious look
From those that deigne Religions cause to cherish,
In heart detest all Traitors, wish them perish.
I cannot but commend the industrious care
Thou take to raise from black Oliuions Den,
The memory of that deliverance rare
And wonderful, much taxing thankelesse men:
Who can so soon forget to give God glory,
For that whereof, like nere was found in story.
N. B.

The names of the chief Traitors that plotted and endeavored this
Powder Treason.
Iesuite-Priests. Henry Garnet. John Gerrard. Osw. Tesmond. Edw: Hall. --
Hamon. Will: Baldwin. Sr Euerard Digby. Robert Winter. Thomas Winter. Guydo
Fanks. John Grant. Ambrose Rookwood Robert Keys. Tho: Bates. Henry Morgan.
Tho: Abington. Sr. Edm: Bainham. Sr. W: Stanley. Hugh Owen.
Catesby, Piercy, John Wright, and Christopher Wright were slain in Rebellious
fight, the former two with a Gunne: the other two with Halberts. Francis
Trefham murdered himself in Prison.

To Momus or the carping Catholic.
LEt Zoilus bark and Momus carpe.
Let Mass Priests mumble and mutter:
Let Romish Jesuits rail and rage,
And all their venom utter;
Yea though they should with envy swell,
And Toade-like burst in sunder:
Yet Truth will shine and Error pine,
To Babels woe and wonder.
The Cloud of Ignorance and Error.
Curses and Excom^unications Falsification of Scriptures Opposing the Thruth
Recusancy and Rebellion Envy and malice. Blasphemies and Lies. Daggors Daggs
Poison kill all. The Armado in 88.


FRVSTRA.



Enclosed with Clouds of Ignorance and Error,
Rome, Hell and Spain, do threaten Englands terror:
The Card'nall, Legate, Jesuit, impious Friars
Homebred Recusant, Britains bane desires;
Each puffs and snuffs with envy, all in vain,
At Christ's pure Gospel, which shall still remain.
Mischeefes Mystery, OR, Treasons Masterpiece.
RIse (o my Muse) mournful Melpomene,
Vouchsafe thine aid, to thy weak Orator,
Distill sweet streams from thy rare Deity,
Erst, too too long by him unasked for:
Urania, take thy lute, hung up too long,
Lest posts and stones sound out my tragique song.
O that I could, in sacred Helicon,
Or precious Nectar of Parnassus Muse,
Dip my dull pen: or from fair Citheron,
Vrania's sacred skill and power could use:
T'anatomize and paint to public view,
A stratagem most horrid, strange and true.
Than which, did Phoebus fair resplendent face,
A more prodigious project, nere behold,
On Marble-pillers worthy to take place,
Engraven in letters of bright Indian gold:
Thou then (Heavens King) whose grace us safe preserved,
Grant I may sing thy praise so well deserved.
GReat Pluto, Prince of darkness Tartars King,
Became enamored of Romes Strumpet fair,
His lustful pleasure then to pass to bring,
From Hell to Rome, sends for his whore so rare,
Whom Charon rows over black Auernus flood,
And brings to Styx, where Pluto's palace stood.
Then, to his presence, soon She had access,
Where they enjoyed infernal copulation:
Whose hideous act did from her womb express,
A monstrous birth exceeding admiration,
A more then Centaure strange, strong, fierce and fell
Misshapen cruel, cursed fiend of Hell.
To Lerna's poole this purple Strumpets doom
Was to return, where She this fiend brought forth,
And with the infectious milk of faithless Rome,
It fearfully was fostered to full growth,
There, there, I say, did this fierce Hydra live,
There to this Monster She did vigor give.
No sooner was this offspring of the Devil,
This impious Impe of Hell, this Viper vile,
Fraught with Thessalian spells, pride, mischief, evil,
With serpentine deceit prompt to beguile,
Completely furnished with each Stygian Art:
With unheard impudence to act his part.
But that, his damned The Pope.
Dam observed the same,
Perceived his Genius vile, his wit, his will,
With dulcide language calls him by his name:
With most pernicious council does him fill.
Wrath boyles within, revenge and furies fire,
And thus t'her Son, Sh'vnfolds her foul desire.
Among all the Kingdoms of Europa fair,
None ever bore more hatred unto me. The Whore of Rome makes her complaint to
her first begotten Son Treason.

(Thy Mother dear) none ere sought to impair
Thy Parents welfare and prosperity:
As those damned Heretics of Britanes nation,
Endeavoring daily our dire extirpation.
Alas (dear Son) it is woeful to declare.
The many mischeeues, injuries and wrong;
Which Peter's holy Kingdom sacred Chair,
Has been constrained to suffer too too long:
Yea, more and more they daily work our woe,
Hoping to effect our final overthrow.
Aye me, I grieve to think on our great loss,
What rich revenues daily we possessed:
What sums we did into our coffers toss:
What great devotion to our See expressed
In them we daily found, strange to be spoke,
How bounteously they made our chimnies smoke,
Whose zeal indeed (sweet Son) I must confess,
Did far exceed all others of their days:
What swarms of Friars and Nuns even numberless,
By them were fostered to their lasting praise?
By them our holy Mass great Pluto's lore,
Was gorgeously bedight him to adore.
What stately Monasteries with turrets high,
Did they then spare most sumptuously to build?
What Temples fair whose tops even touched the sky?
With relics richly garnished and filled:
For holy Votaries and Virgins chaste,
Whom we among Saints and Angels blessed have placed.
In every City each fair wealthy seat,
In every Country each most fertile soil,
Has been possessed by our Champions great,
On them conferred without cost or coil.
What Nation did not our great name adore?
What people sought not our help to implore?
I tell thee Son, this only Albions Isle,
Has Romes revenues mightily increast:
Through daily discord, variance, fraud and guile,
Which twixt them bred for bribes we forthwith ceast:
Not France so great, nor spacious Germany,
Came near to this for our vtility.
But to conclude, thou happily may say
It Is strange I speak, but doubtless it is most true*
The mighty sums they did us yearly pay
Surmounted far their Kings own revenue.
And think thou then I can with patience brook
So rich a prey to be thus from me took?
And only by damned Luthers heresy,
That cursed Caitiffe, cause of all our woe:
Shall I put up this great indignity,
And so give way t'a greater overthrow?
No, no, irreuocable is my doom
I Will be revenged, not cease till they consume.
For since this wicked varlet from us fled,
Renounced our hests and Catholic profession,
With how sore tempests, storms and direful dred,
Have we alas endured there great oppression?
Our kingdom shaken, and our Triple Crown,
In hazard often to be smitten down.
He, he, even Luther that base Runaway.
To his increasing error has allured,
The Germans, English, yea I well may say,
Most of the French, too bad to be endured:
All these and more this wretch deluded has
To follow him, and leave our Romish Faith.
Often with my self, I to my self have said,
I am a puissant Queen, most firm and stable,
My glorious prime shall never be decayed,
A widow desolate none shall be able
In future age to make me. Time shall see
Me still to flourish like a fair Palm Tree.
But lest too long with needless ambages,
And vain tautologie I should thee hold,
It now behooues us foorth-with to appease
Their madness, and to tametheir courage bold,
Yea, now I see that our declining hope
Bids us not linger, nor give longer scope.
Bids us advised be and counsel take,
On Pluto's anuill strange wiles how to frame,
With unheard craft, intricate snares to make,
And subtle stratagems to work their shame,
All practices to prove, no shifts to shun,
Whereby our glorious welfare may be won.
And now in thee (sweet Nourceling) does consist
Of our desires the fortunate event:
In thee, I say, our fortunes may be blist,
So apt thou art to effect our great intent.
So exactly practiced in thy The Devil.
fathers skill,
So well acquainted with thy The Pope.
mothers will.
Expert thou art a treason to contriue,
Though nere so hateful, horrible and bloody,
Of life and liberty soon to deprive
A King or Kingdom without stop or study,
To swear, forswear, cozen and equivocate,
By mine instruction rarely literate.
Then haste with speed (Alecto be thy guide)
To Albion great that proud presumptuous nation,
Be It just or unjust leave no means untried
Them to reduce to our ancient domination.
Then Romes officious most pernicious Son,
Replies but this, dear Mother count it done.
Then like swift Euphrates with foul pretense,
And Vultures appetite he swiftly flies
To England, where for's first ingredience,
A Priest-like habit shapes his best disguise:
And marvel not, for thus the Devil does use,
Like Angel bright Gods people to abuse.
And thus in Guydo Faukses faithless breast, Fauks is not here first mentioned
as the Prime Author, but because he was so inhumane as to be the fatal ^ctor,
for Catesby (as afterward is shew^n) was the first Author of this
Powder Treason.

He harbor finds, and kindly's entertained,
A man to mischief prompt and ready pressed,
Swift to shed blood; and soon with treason stained,
With envy stuffed and puffed, sly, malcontent,
Dissembling Sinon Double-diligent.
Whose name he ever changes with his place
Of residence, like Neptunes Proteus,
His name and shame equal in his disgrace,
Foster sometimes, Johnson and Or Brown.
Brunius,
His name not nature, habit not his heart,
He takes, forsakes, as best befits his part.
Here now this base-borne Brat of Rome not stayed:
But farther flings, sollicits others more,
Whose hearts already Babels Whore obayd,
With muttering Israel hungring very sore
For Aegypts fleshpots and with deadly thurst,
To quaffe Romes poison till their belly burst.
These does he stir with spur of innovation,
With high built hopes, and thus strives to persuade them,
The day so long desired of Lamentation,
Your foes to foil and boldly to invade them,
Is now come on, wherein base Caluins rout,
And Beza's vassals you may clean root out.
Romes walls to rear, and ruins to repair,
Her enemies triumphantly to baine,
The splendour brave, and ancient beauty rare
Of Romes profession, strongly to maintain.
And then to Sinons sugared words they vow
Theirs and themselves unto his beck and bow.
This good success adds fuel to the fire,
His Doctors hellish documents to broach,
To Court he comes with treacherous desire,
And into favor there, hopes to encroach,
Where pious James our King, so good, so great,
Justly enjoyed his Predecessors seat.
With majesty and mildness compast round,
With Nobles, Princes, and maiesticke Peers,
Whose happy reign their joint applause resound,
Whose Peerless presence his true subjects cheeres,
Whose mildness (o blessed Prince) and clement mind,
His loyal subjects largely feel and find.
For thus he hoped his peoples hearts to win,
(Best rule indeed for Regal government)
But yet the vassals of that Man of Sin,
To whom Truths rule is great disparagement,
The refractory Papists proud, disloyal,
Abuse his clemence, patience, and long trial.
These Tyger-like, their envious bristles rear,
Mildness with Mischief, love with hate repay,
Mercy with murder, freedom with great fear
They him remunerate, more brutish they,
Filling men's ears with tales and idle charms,
With false pretense to stir them up to arms.
In which foul rank, Watson that vile rank Traitor,
That impudent and insolent Baals Priest:
To civil broiles a treacherous animator,
Like Prophets like profession, here thou see:
Lancaster then and Wales their malice show,
From Romes false doctrines such effects do grow.
But look we back where we did lately leave,
Bi-lingued Sinon ramping in the Court,
Searching the man whom straight he did perceive,
A wished companion and most fit consort,
Percy infected, yea of treason confected,
And even by nature thereunto addicted.
A graceless Guardian to his gracious King,
A most bold Bond-slaue to his holy Pope,
T'whom Fauks unfolds each material thing,
Assures good luck, feeds him with golden hope.
Who man and message presently embraces,
And in his love his confidence son places.
Then each to other they themselves fast tie,
Like Pilate and proud Herod, CHRIST to kill;
What neither had, Faith and Fidelity,
They mutually do promise to fulfill:
Then as their pledges each gave hand to others,
And here were made treasons chief sworn brothers.
O you great Peers, whose power these wrongs may right, A Caution to Courtiers.

Harbor not thus within you noble breast,
Permit not in your company nor sight,
These Antichristian Idolists to rest:
For slaughtering Sirens and Echidnes train,
Do grossly, closely in their hearts remain.
The poisonous Serpent lurkes in longest grass,
If you it foster, 'twill ingrately foster,
Gall's in their heart, their golden glister's brass:
With their intestine turmoiles they will you pester,
For tetricke murders, hellish poisons, treason
They practice more then piety and reason.
These are their studies studious exercise,
To all the world most palpably made known,
Most fit effects of Romes damned heresies,
With these they gape to get heavens glorious throne,
These are their works of Supererogation,
Whereof they boast with wide-mouthed ostentation.
Perfidious Fauks and Percy thus combinde,
His name being changed he is taken for Percies man:
Fit opportunity they hereby find,
Their project thoroughly to contriue and scan.
And being disguised in that unknown hew,
Securely do their rancorous poison spew.
Here now with Fauks and Percy, Catesby met,
An ancient Traitor and Recusant stout,
Whose head, heart, hands, and all to work were set,
Some horrid treason how to bring about,
Some strange domesticke deluge to ordain,
Since now their hopes were frustrated in Spain.
For why, long since in sweet Eliza's reign,
That Paragon of past and future age,
They had sent Winter to the King of Spain,
To crave his ay de and hostile equipage.
Our Kingdom to invade and to possess,
Therein to plant Romes laws, their wrongs redress.
Assuring him, that in his powerful aid,
The Catholics in England would all join,
The King as then their proffer not gaine-said;
But promised to furnish them with coin:
An hundredth thousand crowns he would bestow,
And being Victor them all favor show.
This eke he prayed, that if it should so chance Queen Eliza beth.

The Queen to die, he might it forthwith know:
For thereupon he would his powers advance,
With expedition to our overthrow:
Which was on both sides promised and concluded;
But Heaven in mercy all their hopes deluded.
Then, then, I say, did Spain intend our doom,
When as that miserable woman did,
(For thus it pleased that proud High-Preist of Rome,
That gracious Queen to term with impious pride)
O most nefarious Lier, how could She
Unhappy, or so miserable be.
Whom neither th'arrow which by day did fly,
I mean th'Armado mighty Spanish Sail;
Nor pestilence by night, to wit, your sly
And secret practiced treasons nere could quail,
Or once come near her gracious harmless life,
Neither by daggers, dags, or poisonous knife.
Who in herself and subjects ere was blessed
With peace and plenty, Princely Royalty:
Whose Kingdom while she lived, enjoyed sweet rest,
Whose people ever lived in loyalty
Unto her Majesty, whose power enstall'd The King of Portugal.

A King in's Kingdom by proud foes enthralled.
Who reigned in glory, lived Religions Tower,
And Fortress strong, ayding her wronged friend:
Defended Nations by her puissant power,
And after made a most blessed Christian end,
Know then thou foul-mouthed slanderer we retort
Into thy throat this envious false report.
We need not wonder that without all shame,
You thus endeavor impiously to wrong
Her Peerless, spotless most renowned fame,
Since Satan is in you so powerful strong,
As that you dare Christ and his sacred writ,
Blasphemously abuse, as you think fit.
Who dare (oh tremble heart) tell Christ to's face,
That he has taught you how to cousen and lie.
Oh impious equiuocating race!
If heavens great King, the God of Verity,
You thus do dare so horribly to wrong,
Who then shall escape the poison of your tongue?
But now behold, a wonder you shall hear,
It Heaven so pleased our glorious Sun went down, Soloccubuit nox nulla
secuta est.

And yet no night did unto us appear,
No clowd of darkness did upon us frown,
No loss appeared, only a change we had,
Which our neere-dying hearts revived, made glad.
For why, in our Horizon soon did rise
From her resplendent Iubar a bright Sun, Our Kings coming into this Kingdom.

Whose gracious sight was object to the eyes
Of all good subjects, for in him begun
Our peaceful days again to sprout and flourish,
And ever may this milk of peace us nourish.
But malcontent, malignant Catesbyes heart,
Together with his base confederates,
Being galled and grieved, to The King of Spain impart
These accidents, and that they thought th'estates
Of English Catholics would now prove worse,
Because King James held on the late Queens course.
Therefore they of him did again desire
His promised assistance for invasion,
Protesting that their hearts were all on fire,
To serve him in this great negotiation:
But he being purposed then to treat of peace
With England, wished them from that suit to cease.
Which unexpected answer did them trouble,
And with infernal wrath their hearts did burn,
Their mischeeuous imaginations double,
What course to take, which way themselves to turn,
And when they saw all foreign force forsook them,
Unto this Powder Treason they betook them.
And now this furious fiery triplicity
Of Percy, Catesby, and false Fawkes being met,
Catesby chief Author of this treachery,
Did thus begin their malice on to whet,
Right trusty friends, since now we private are,
My mind to you I freely will declare.
My swelling Tympany of hate is such,
To see our Holy Father still neglected,
Which does with grief my very heart even touch,
And how small hope to see him ere respected
Within this Kingdom, for I plainly see,
Thelate Queens courses shall maintained be.
I see, I see, and to our grief we find,
That this King James an heretic will prove,
Us Catholics to spare he is not inclined,
Which we to him did most submissely move,
As before they impiously slandered Q. Elizabeth, so here they do grossly
belly our Sovereign King.
Wherein he once to us did condescend,
But now breaks promise and our wrack intend,
Wherefore it is now high time to take advice,
To pluck up and supplant this growing weed;
To stop such dangers we must not be nice,
Nor with faint-hearted fear must we proceed,
But since the wound is now so putrified,
The sharper medicines must thereto be plied.
Four strong inducements heereunto have we,
Wherein both I and you are fully instructed,
First that the King and all his Subjects be 1

Vile Heretics, the Catholics excepted.
Also we know that our high Priest of Rome, 2

Them excommunicate and cursed does doom,
Another motive to this sacred fact, 3

Is, that no Heretic ought to be King;
And lastly, that it is a lawful act, 4

Yea, a most holy meritorious thing,
To extirpate, destroy and quite root out
This King and his heretical baserout.
Oh then dear friends, why stand we to demurre?
Why fear we? faint we? doubt we to go on?
Let this to us be a sharp goad and spur,
T'ncourage us with resolution:
Namely, that we in Romes rare Rubrickes shall
Our name eternize and our fame enstall.
That Rome, I say, will ever us account
Re-edifiers of St. Peter's rites,
By whom her glory did again remount,
This hope, this hap, our valiant hearts encites,
To be such Fosterers and such Fautours strong,
Thus to redeem our selves, our Saints from wrong.
See here, o Christian, what strange course is took,
To set up Romes religious adoration: Coacta religio vix vera religio.

Whose most malignant spirits cannot brook
Obedience, though with Laws mild mittigation,
Oh must our blood be spilt? our King be slain?
And many death-doore-knocking souls complain?
O devilish doctrine whence such works do flow,
O damned Doctors thus to preach and teach,
O miserable souls seduced so,
O bloody thoughts beyond all humane reach:
If thus you hope to climb to Heavens high throne, Constantine to Ascesius,
erige tibi scalam and incoelum solus ascend.

Then with Ascesius climb to Heaven alone.
Was David being a man just and upright,
A man to Gods own heart conformed and made,
Great Iuda's joy, and happy Isreal's light,
Was he, I say, to build Gods house gaine-sayd?
And all because his hands were full of blood,
Yea though his battles were both just and good.
And yet must Romes base Bond-slaues undertake,
Not Gods but Belials temple to re'rect
With blood, yea, must they their oblation make
With blood of Gods anointed Saints elect?
Romes faithless Synagogue to re-aduance,
Full stuffed with error and foul ignorance.
Must they not only touch but trample on
Gods pious Prophets? whose blood in his sight
Is dear and precious, must confusion
Upon Gods Church with such dire mischief light?
If this be the way as diuellishly they hold,
Gods Church to plant, then I Will to say be bold;
That cursed Caine may also hope to please
The Lord, by shedding Abels guitlesse blood:
And Ieroboams Idols may appease
Gods wrath, and take away the mark which stood
Upon his front, namely that he did cause
The Israelites to leave Gods sacred Laws.
O far be this from each true Christians thought,
But rather let me with King David say, Psalm. 83.

Woe to the work which bloudily is wrought,
Woe unto those which Sions groundwork lay
By crying blood, which build Jerusalem
By such a crafty cursed Stratagem.
But yet these Romish Absalons past grace,
Do either think themselves to be more wise,
Then God himself, or else like Atheists base,
That there is no God, they do in heart surmise,
For instantly at Catesbyes vile oration
They vow revenge with ardent protestation.
And thereupon being filled with hellish craft,
And poisonous hatred, they together clustre,
Counsel to take: each shoots his deadly shaft,
At Englands peace, and Gospels glorious luster.
Some this way would their wills effect, some that,
But dire destruction each one aymeth at.
Ones vile opinion is, with sword, or knife
His guiltless King perfidiously to slay:
Another would deprive him of sweet life
By powerful poison, then a third does say,
When he by hunting tired to sleep would lay him,
Pretending friendly harbor, we may slay him.
I quake to speak my tongue to tell does tremble,
These Traitors impudence audacious heart,
With God and man thus foulely to dissemble
And most profanely fearelesse to subvert
Those holy rites of Harbor amiable,
Which even the Turks do keep inviolable.
Medusa's Catesby.
Son was silent all this while,
Hears their opinions, counts all but shallow:
Pluto in's heart infused such a wile,
As in one gulf a kingdom whole to swallow.
I mean that Caitiffe Catesby who at last,
From's poisonous stomach thus this vomit cast,
True zealous Catholics, Romes proved friends,
Your love you show, but yet believe me this,
Rather to our then their destruction tends,
What you advise, you paint the way amiss:
So small attempts bring danger, we will contriue,
To leave nor boughs, nor branch, nor root alive.
For what though we the King alone destroy,
Leaves he not after him a Princely heir,
To sway his Scepter, and his Crown t'enioy,
To take revenge, as we may justly fear,
A virtuous Prince, and of most pregnant hope,
Then let us not give to Vengeance so great scope.
Do we not see small seeds grow up full high,
Do we not see the slender tender Dear
Though weak at first, at last stalk sturdily,
With snaggy horns loftily to appear,
Great flames have grown, and burnt down cities fair
Even by small sparks left kindling without care.
This young Prince Henry to my mind does call,
Reuolting Henry the eighth, who was the first,
That wrought our Holy Fathers chief downfall,
A deed most heinous, hateful and accursed:
Whose hateful name may ere be execrable,
And t'all good Catholics abominable.
Wherefore this is my mind and constant doom,
To race and utterly to extirpate
This seed heretical, to glorious Rome
Which bears such rancour and represselesse hate:
Now that this stratagem may prosperous be,
With patience tend and lend your ears to me.
An ancient house there is near situate
To Percies chamber, unto which repaires,
In most magnificent and princely state,
To parle about the Kingdoms great affairs,
Englands chief Peers, Nobles and Counsel wise,
Their reverend Bishops our chief enemies.
Thither also, as custom does maintain,
The first day of the Parliament does go,
The King, the Queen, the Prince and Princely train,
Most pompously making a glorious show,
In scarlet roabes glistring with pearl and gold,
Great multitudes assemble, it to behold.
Under this house we closely may prepare
An undermined vault, wherein to hide
Great quantity of Powder; which to the air
May, like a whirle-winde, cause the corpse to glide
Of King and Counselors, of Prince and Peer:
Your liking and consent now let me hear.
With joint consent and great content, they all
Laud and applaud this his most strange invention:
Yea, Demoniacke Fauks, proud, cynicall,
Promptly perceiues the drift of this intention;
And thus thereof concludes. The house (quoth he)
Which Rome has ruined shall our vengeance see.
So we (quoth he) for our dear Catholic Truth,
Shall canonized be, and much renowned,
So we our foes with horror, grief and ruth
Shall profligate, supplant and quite confound:
So those (I say) which against us made sharp laws,
Shall griped be in dire destructions claws.
And those which quondam used to prosecute
Our sacred Priests, and stained their hands with blood
Of Ro^es dear Saints, whom they did persecute
With rigorous hatred and represlesse mood,
These, these (I say) made proud by our rich spoils,
Shall tumble headlong int' our nets and toiles.
Now hereupon, to others they this break:
Amongst the rest, to Gerrard Jesuit.
Gray Headed, but greene-heeded Garnet eke,
Superior of the Jesuits, whose mere sight
Was a strong warrant, to confirm and prove
This enterprise, so much they prized his love.
Without whose counsel nothing was effected,
And whose advise confirmed all they did;
Whom as a Demi-god they all respected.
Did what he would, left what he should forbid.
Oh most Satanicall nefarious Doctors,
Antichrists Chaplains, Lucifers Arch-Proctors.
Can ye for shame assume the sacred name
Of Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God most pure,
When by your barbarous actions you defame
Your selves, your names, your function, and inure
Your selves and followers, how to kill and slay
All such as do Romes Iezabel gainsay.
Can they, said I? yes that they can, nay more,
They Will brag and boast of such inhumane deeds,
And which is worst, dare aid and help implore
Of our high God, from whom none ill proceeds,
These, even these holy Fathers of that Sect
Confirm this plot, advise, instruct, direct.
From sacrilegious Gerrards hands they took,
Right Iudas-like their own damnation:
First for their oath of secrecy a book,
Whereon they swore firm resolution:
And to confirm it with a stronger band,
Received the Sacrament from Gerrards hand.
O heavens, o earth, o impious age and times, The Oath. You shall swear by the
blessed Trinity and by the Sacra^ent you (...) purpose to re^i^e, never to
disclose directly or indirectly, by word or circumstance the matter that shall
be proposed to you to keep secret, nor desist from the execution thereof,
until the rest shall give you leave.

O graceless, godless, more than devilish fact*
Were ere yet known such blasphemous foul crimes,
So damnably to abuse that heavenly act
Of man's terrestrial comfort, confirmation
Of faith, of grace, and of our blessed salvation.
O who has any spark of true devotion,
Or ardent zeal of Gods most sacred truth,
Who, which to piety has but least motion,
Can hear Romes blasphemies without much ruth,
Those most apparent marks of Babels Whore
So truly, justly prophetiz'd of yore.
Nay will you yet hear more impiety,
And equal almost to the greatst of these;
Inhumane Catesbyes devilish policy
Willed him to cast in mind, how to appease
There discontent, if any should arise
About the warrant of this enterprise.
For why, he now considered in his mind,
The great and bloody slaughter they should make:
And that he could no means contriue or find.
But that therein friends must with foes partake:
The lawfulness hereof since some might doubt,
And so perchance revolt, or else stand out.
With haste he hies to his Achitophel,
Grand-Iesuite Garnet his advice to have,
That outside Angel, inside Devil of hell,
To whom he knew they special credit gave:
Whose answer if it to his mind did hit,
He knew all was cock-sure and firmly fit.
Then in this sort to Garnet he began,
O holy Sir, whose gravity and years,
Whose learning, wisdom, discreet counsel can
Resolve all doubts, dissolve heart-daunting fears,
In whom Romes sacro-sancted Oracles,
Are powerful in effecting miracles.
Vice-Vicar to our Deified Father,
High Priest of England, sent here to reduce,
To re-vnite into Romes fold, to gather
The wandering flock, withheld thence by abuse
Of cursed Caluins, Beza's, Luthers Sect,
Which damnably their souls do daily infect.
O thou, I say, Vicegerent to our Pope,
I much desire, gladly would impetrate,
Thy holy Counsel in a doubtful hope,
In a great Action, which to perpetrate,
Many of us devoted Catholics
Have joined and sworn our selves against Heretics.
Romes sacred zeal has so enflamed our hearts,
To right her wrongs, her losses to restore,
To vulnerate with penetrating darts
Of dire destruction, those which heretofore
Have the brave luster of Romes faith suppressed,
And too too long opposed her holy Hest.
And now, I say, considering this great wrong,
And how it is likeliest worse and worse to grow:
We vow to work our freedom er't be long,
To give our foes one fatal final blow:
Wherewith their souls and bodies shall be sent,
By Sulphur fierce to Pluto's regiment.
But herein, holy Sir, the doubt remains,
Wherein your ghostly counsel we desire;
That time and place this action so constraines,
That all at once must perish in one fire,
The doubt therefore which in us does arise,
Is, whether friends may die with enemies.
Whether with Nocents, Innocents may die
(For in the destined place both mingled are)
We cannot, may not with security,
The one without the other save or spare:
Yet on this acts effecting does depend
Of Romes great wrongs the happy hopeful end.
This Pseudo-postle full of Romish zeal,
Traveling with iniquities conception,
Brought forth the Impe of mischief: thus does heal
Base Catesbyes sore. Hear now his strange direction,
Hear o ye Heavens, hearken both God and Man,
How holily this Baals Priest began.
First with accursed salutes they often embrace,
Hyena with the crafty Crocodile:
And then with poisonous heart and brazen face,
He vtters words most impious full of guile:
With green device, not grave advice thus spoke
This holy Hell-hound, horrible Man-drake,
Oh thou dear darling of the Church of Rome,
Hopeful Protector of St. Peter's chair,
Which so high honor do to thee assume,
As by a fact so meritorious rare,
To be condignely saintified and graced,
And highest in Romes rubrickes to be placed.
Thou Atlas of our now succeeding joys,
Matchless Mecoenas of Romes doctrind rare,
Herculean chaser of our dire annoyes,
Perillus th'enginer may not compare
With skillful Catesby Arts-Master of Treason:
For stratagems past humane reach and reason.
I cannot choose but like and love thee dearly,
Thou apt proficient in Romes document:
And yet much marvel thou could not see clearly,
Of so rare enterprise so blessed intent,
The strong inducements to perseverance,
Not to desist for some ill petty-chance.
I see, thou art not yet so inly seen
Into the Doctrine of us Jesuits:
Thy knowledge therein yet seems raw and green,
That make monsters of such little mites.
That in smooth bull-rushes do seek a knot,
Like Questionists who ask they know not what.
This case is most apparent, clear and plain,
That since the occasion, time and place require
Such expedition, and such precious gain,
And great advantage Rome shall hence acquire,
You may most justly by the Laws of Rome,
Some Innocents with Nocents vile consume.
And herein thee most strongly to instruct,
And to repel all objects in that kind:
That none against this assertion may reluct,
That in thy Creed it may more credit find:
Mark this comparison which thou shall hear,
Wherein this truth shall clear as Sun appear,
As in a City by fierce foes besieged,
Wherein some friends inhabit and abide,
T'whom those besiegers are in love obliged,
Yet how to free them there is no means espide,
Delays would breed dangers inevitable,
The City also prove unvanquishable.
Should they not then from wise discretion swerue?
Should they not to their foes base dastards seem?
Whiles in fond pity few friends to preserve,
They a whole City lose for friends esteem?
If then to th'Church great profit may redound,
You fearelesse may some friends with foes confound.
And as for me the best which I can do,
Which is, my prayers and Orizons devout,
That heaven may herein bless and favor you,
I duly truly for you will power out;
And all our Saints, and meritorious Martyrs
Implore, to aid you and your zealous partners.
O most pernicious Priest, o Scythian Sect,
Is this the charity you all profess?
Do you with blood, your followers thus infect?
Your false conceived wrongs thus to redress?
Now how this Jesuits censure does agree
With Jesus Doctrine, you shall plainly see.
When God with sinful flesh vouchsaf't to talk,
Did he not unto faithful Abraham say?
That if in Sodom: he could find ten folk
That upright were: his vengeance he would stay,
And for their sakes on all he would mercy show,
But ghostly Garnet was more wise then so.
Did not the heavenly Husbandman decree?
Considering how with wheat grew up the tare,
How intricate a business then it would be
The weed to pluck up, and the Wheat to spare,
Therefore gave charge to let them both alone
But of this Husbandry Garnet would none.
Does not St. Paul, does not all Scripture teach? Non facienda sunt mala vt
eueniant bona.

That none ill ought be done, though thence may rise
A greater good, but what though Paul thus preach?
Loiolae's Priests are now grown far more wise:
For if that any good to th'Church may grow
They hold it lawful to kill friend or foe.
Was it not Mercies Majesty and joy?
Wast not our blessed Saviors comfort great?
That none of his did suffer least annoy,
Not one was lost, he all did well entreat:
Adding moreover that he came to save,
Not to destroy, whom God unto him gave.
If Christ's blessed kingdom of this world had been,
Legions of Angels he might have commanded;
But Anti Christ, great Babels Man of Sin
Must here be Lord, and King, and richly landed:
Peter must not once strike in Christ's defense,
But Popish-Priests may use all violence.
O says our Savior, Love your enemies,
For Persecutors pray, bless them that curse:
But you than Christ would seem to be more wise,
Or rather than unholy Pagans worse:
For Pagans love their friends, you would us slay
Which favor you, and for your souls health pray.
You are so far from praying for our good
(Such is your fiery burning charity)
That you had rather prey upon our blood,
With more than Canibals barbarity,
Oh is it possible such wrath should rest,
In Romes vn-erring Popes most sacred breast? Tantaene animis caelestibus ira?

But why of Christ and Scripture do we talk?
To those Ignatian wicked Regicides,
Who (maugre all Truths arguments) will walk
In their own bloody paths what ere betides:
They Will hazard life, soul, body, goods and all,
To work their wills most Diabolical.
Oh what Religion call you this I pray?
Can any give a proper Epithet?
Unto this doctrine, or these Doctors gay,
Incarnate Devils, seeming-Saints of light,
Who not themselves alone to Hell thus throw,
But many thousands cause with them to go?
These doubtless are those latter days foretold,
Of Satan's reign, and powerful tyranny:
Who like himself, shall thus men's hearts even mould
Into all forms of strangest villainy.
But Lord we pray thee, still preserve thy flock,
And all Romes mischiefs, frustrate, thwart, and mock.
Things thus contrived for Rome, Fauks privily
Is shipped away: to th'Pope he hasts with speed:
To whom their labors he does signify
From first to last, how all things did proceed.
His Holiness his treacherous Son commended,
Persuades perseverance till all were ended.
Assures success and fortunate conclusion:
And so dismissed him with a bounteous gift,
More amply fraught with precepts of confusion
And rapid Tigris-like he flies full swift,
Visits his ancient friends and old acquaintance
In The Duke of Austria's Court with welcomed entrance
Whereas he meets with many Fugitives, Sir William Stanly and Master Owen. Sir
Ed: Bainham, notorious traitors and fugitives in the Low Countries.

And banished shauelings of our English nation:
Questioning how each thing in England thriues,
Greedy to hear of change and alteration:
With sanguinary Nero who desire
Their Countries glory extinct with sword and fire.
Monsters of men like those which love to angle
In rivers billowing by fierce Borea's blast,
Which love to live by discord, strife and wrangle,
This their best pastime, this their chief repast:
These, these I say, pricked forward him that ran,
And contribute to help what he began.
Furnishing him with counsel as with coin,
His heart they fill with cunning, craft, and guile,
Brother^ in mischief heads and hearts do join
His heart to hatch, his tongue to lie they file,
They teach him how with Demonologie
To hide the platform of this treachery.
Like furious Hagge he home returns with speed
And to his Mr. Piercy does unfold
His good success, prays that they might proceed
With expedition, and with courage bold.
For he was filled with all the Arts and Arms
That Rome could yield, or Acherontine charms.
And now they having with blasphemous hearts
(As is foreshowne,) received the Sacrament,
And taken an oath boldly to act their parts, Which was done in a house behind
St. Clements Church by the Strand.

To here Plutonicke-Masse, incontinent
They them prepare, which done, they all desire
Now to proceed, to build this furious fire.
And hereupon some choice men they elect
Whose charge should be, to dig and undermine
The Parliament, who that they might neglect
No time, provided baked meats, beer and wine,
That so they might not often go in and out,
Fauks at the door being Sentinel or scout.
Who still discovered all that passed by,
And as he saw occasion, warning gave
Sometime to work, sometime to lay it by,
And by their sides their Pieces charged they have:
Resolving there to die, if so it hapt,
That by discovery they should be entrapt.
These Pioners through Piercies chamber brought
Th'exhausted earth, great baskets full of clay:
Thereby to have made a mighty concaue vau't,
And of the house the groundwork took away:
But then at last an obstacle they find,
Which to remove proud Piercy casts in's mind. This was the most happy chance
that did or could fall out for the discovery of this plot, as afterward is most
apparently seen and approved.

A thick stone wall their passage then did let,
Whereby they could not finish their intent:
Then forthwith Piercy did a seller get,
Under that sacred house for yearly rent:
Feigning to fill't with Char-coale, Wood and Beer
From all suspect themselves to cloak and clear.
Here now they did consider Catesbyes charge,
How all that while the cost on him had lain:
Wherefore to show their love and bounty large,
For due effecting of this foul design:
Sir Euerard Digby promised to bestow
Five hundred pounds, that all things well might go.
Then traitorous Tressam his great zeal to express,
Unto this work of Popish Piety
Two thousand pounds would have in readiness,
To be imployd in each necessity:
Percy to pierce the eye of this our state,
Does also promise he will associate
And bear a part, in this so rare collection:
And from Northumberlands great rents would get
Four thousand pounds at least with due direction
All things in order to dispose and set.
Others would Horse and Armor there provide,
Others procure an Army against the tide.
Wherewith they might eradicate and stroy
With fury great, the Protestants suruiuing,
Yea all that would Christ's verity enjoy
Of liberty, of lands, of life depriving:
Such was the hatred of this holy brood,
Such the effect of their nefarious mood.
Amongst them then was this objection made,
That since as they all hoped the Prince would be
In The Parliament: how best might be assaid
The next Heir to suprize: but Percy he
Soon freed them of this fear, and undertook,
With his bold mates to seize on Charles then Duke.
Next how to get into their custody
(O hellish Guardians) Lady Elizabeth:
Who at Lord Harringtons as then did lie,
Not being far remote from Dunchurch-Heath
Where they a Hunt would covertly pretend,
And friends there meeting, might that danger end.
Lastly, they all consult and take advice
What English Lords and Noblemen to save:
And then what foreign Prince they might entice,
Who of this Kingdom might possession have:
Of these and all these circumstances they
Firmly resolved against the appointed day.
Each thing thus happning to their hearts desire,
The final, fatal Act to Fauks committed,
Whom we not Man, but Fury of hell fire
May ever term, a title best befitted.
This ghastly Ghost-like monster night by night
To th'Celler goes, all things to order right.
Then do these damned disciples of deceit
Most wickedlie place in this hollow vau't
Small firkins, all with Gunpowder repleat,
Barrels and Hogsheads, all with Sulphur fraught:
Placing some here, somethere, laying thereupon
Great Iron-bars right under the Kings throne.
And to prevent the danger of suspect.
This Carnifox with foul Medea's guile,
That none these Stygian engines might detect,
Great store of billets thereupon does pile
And fagots, thus the barrels so to hide,
That they could not without great search be spide.
Now having framed this Chaos of confusion,
This seuenfold heated furnace of proud Rome:
The fifth day of November for conclusion,
They now expect, for Englands fatal doom:
And now this rau'ning, Fauks.
Wolf with hungry jaws
Greedily gapes to gripe us in his claws.
Thus then he stands prepared to perpetrate
A more then barbarous most inhumane fact:
The like could never Catelines great hate
Against Rome attempt, with hot Cet^egus hackt.
Nor arrogant ambitious Hamans thought
Against the Hebrews like despite have wrought.
Inferior far to this transcendent treason
Was the Sicil^n woeful ^uen song.
The Massacre at Paris with great reason
Comes far behind this project. And among
The best Chronographers thou nere shall find
A fact so foul, so cruel and unkind.
Not barbarous Scythia, nor Tartaria wild
Did ever here, or see, or enterprise
A plot more impious, horrible and vilde
Then which a worse could Pluto never devise,
Nor such a palpable Aegyption fogge
Have raised, to rear Romes faithless Synagogus.
Wherein they hoped a Kingdom to devour
Like vn-resistible, remorselesse waves:
At once, with one blow, in less than one hour
To make in the empty air the tombs and grues
Of our dread King, the Queen, the Prince our joy
And Princely Olive branches thus to stroy.
Of peerless Peers, and chief Nobility,
Lycurgus Sons, our Justices and Judges,
The Sons of Leui, our most reverend Clergy,
To whom indeed our foes bear greatest grudges.
The flower of Gentry, yea from Commonweal,
Death and destruction should all comfort steal.
The greatest part of our accomplished Knights,
Our Commonwealths men, prudent Burgesses,
Each skillful Clarke and Officer that writes
The Parliament important businesses:
Most of the soundest Lawyers in this Land,
Had altogether perished out of hand.
Nay not these reasonable souls alone
Should in this roaring thundering plague have did,
Without all difference or distinction
Of mean, or mighty, flock or princely guide,
Of Majesty or Honor, Sex or Age,
Such was the horror of Romes wrath and rage.
But many senseless creatures they had meant
To make partakers of this mischief great,
Our famous ancient house of Parliament,
Westminster Hall, fair Euglands judgment seat:
The Church wherein Kings had their Coronation,
All turned to ashes by this conflagration.
The Church I say, wherein the Tombs most rare
Of former famous Kings and Princes high,
Were with most precious curious cost and care
From age to age erected gloriously,
As endless Trophies of triumphant reign,
All these mustfall, and naught but dust remain.
Yea all the marks of Britains royal State,
The Crown of England, Scepter, Sword and Mace,
Records and Charters which appropriate
To all their portion, honor, right and place:
O woeful, ^uthfull, these had been Romes prey,
In this Sulphurious, furious hells doomsday.
So horrid and exorbitant a plot,
Doubtless the tongue of man did never tell,
Man's eyes did nere behold so foul a spot
Nor did like wrath in humane heart ere dwell,
Nay all the Furies of the infernal pit,
Could never such contagious poison spit.
So rare a King, so rare a Queen to kill,
So rare a Prince, so rare a Progeny,
So rare a State, with so much ruth to fill,
So rare a Realm to bring to misery,
Whom all the World admires, beloved of all
Whom none but Pope and Papist wish to fall.
If a mean man to slay be execrable,
If to shed blood be called a crying sin:
Oh then how much more odious detestable,
Had this most monstrous matchless murder been?
This more than crying, yea this roaring Crime,
Vnparalel'd, vnpattern'd by all Time.
These thus destroyed, what is the Realm but dead?
Without a head dismembered bodies die:
And as the silly Hare without all dread,
Securely thinks within his Form to lie,
Whom when the Countriman asleep does find,
With his Plow-staffe he kills with eager mind. Simile.

Even so Romes cruel bloody Dragon had
Obliterated Englands name and Nation,
Her glorious beauty, Babell would have clad
In sable mourning, woe and lamentation:
So huge a throat had this foul monstr' of Rome,
Christ's flock at once to swallow and consume.
Who thus at one (indeed fierce Catholic blow)
Had Neroes most inhumane wish effected,
Namely that all our English heads might grow
Upon one body, and who then expected
Not a whole year, a Month, week, day, but hour,
To strike off all those Heads with Romish power.
Yea, as it were with one loud thunderclap,
as with a Pettard fiercely to break open,
Our peaceful gate of Ianus, and to entrap,
Of all our Halcyon days of joy, the Hope,
With more than Cambals blood-thirsty mood,
Deeming than mans-flesh nothing sweeter food.
Oh who is able to articulate?
The several sorrows of that dismal day,
Or who can lively paint, or personate
These vile Neronians? vaunting in the pray,
Triumphing with the Trophies and the spoil
Of their destroyed Kingdom, native soil.
No though I had an hundred tongues and hearts,
T'indite and tell the extent of their intention,
Both heart and tongue would fail to do their parts,
With Sense and Science of so strange invention:
Yea learned Homer doubtless would refuse
A task so great, so grievous for to choose.
For why? me thinks would then have fresh been shown,
Distressed conquered Troy with flames a burning,
London, I mean, Great Britains Princely throne,
Spoiled and abused, repleat with moan and mourning:
The wealthiest City Europe ere enjoyed,
With Aetnean furious flames burnt and destroyed.
Her walls with rammed ruptures rent and torn,
Her stately Turrets, high Piramides,
Demolisht and beat down, as quite forlorn,
Her streets with Soldiers filled, none them to appease:
Then Mars usurping mild Astrea's room,
Their swords, not words, must give the fatal doom.
In streets great streams of blood like rivers run,
Through houses and through sanctified places:
Great screekes and cries, help, help, we are undone,
Women with blubbering tears bedrench their faces,
Wringing their hands, and running up and down,
Fearfully frighted with their F^^-mens frown.
Mothers into their arms their Infants taking,
With brinish tears kissing their tender cheeks:
Children in parents arms trembling and quaking,
Houses to ring with Damsels woeful screekes,
Aged men murdered, young men stricken dead,
Wives widows made, chaste maidens ravished.
This corollary also let me add,
Which greater cause of grief might justly bring:
That no man had been left in mourning clad,
At Londons obsequies a knell to ring
Of Lamentation, to condole her fall,
Which was Great Britains seat Imperial.
For, this was doubtless their infernal drift,
The King (proh dolor) Counselors and State,
Being (alas) confounded) they would shift
The blame and shame on those whom most they hate.
A Villai^e falsely should proclaim as truth,
That Puritans were authors of this ruth.
So that in every Country, Town and City,
(Oh most vnparalell'd, most wicked wile)
All that were godly given without all pity,
Should be destroyed, as male-factors vile:
Yea desperately they would with sword and fire,
All godly men confound with damned ire.
Doubtless this was a craft raked out of Hell
By Devilish Furies, framed not by men:
So foul a crime, so falfly to repel
From guilty on the guiltless, and o then
With perjured marble hearts, and brazen face,
By impious lies Gods people to disgrace.
To glut themselves, like Anthropophagi,
With blood of men holy and innocent;
Our state to make a woeful Anarchy,
Their corrupt cankered mischief thus to vent:
If Devils they were not, yet without all doubt,
This plot by devilish men was brought about.
He that can number all the drops in showers,
Which from the Pleiades and moist Orion fell;
Or Bees of thousand swarms which suck May flowers,
In England then the tears had fallen might tell,
Beyond the Arcticke and Antarcticke Poles
May this fact fly, and stand in lasting roles.
But now behold, God most omnipotent,
Maker, maintainer of the circled Globe,
Whose seat's in heaven above the firmament,
With majesty being clothed, as with a robe:
His Isreal's careful Keeper, Shepherd great,
Who man's affairs beholds from heavenly seat.
Th'omniscient knowledge, and all-seeing eyes
Of whom, does all things every where fore know
What ere is done, under the starry skies,
In deepest Seas, or ponderous earth below:
Who knows the closest and most secret deed,
Whose sight does fained Lynxes far exceed.
Who is the Seacher of the reins and heart,
To whom seditious slaughter of his Saints,
All craft and couzenage wrought by humane Art,
Are most apparent, and who hears the plants
Of his dear Sons, dispersed, despised, forlorn,
Delights in the just, th'vniust does scorn.
He, he, I say, in mercy did behold
From his supernall and tribunal seat,
The miseries and mischeefes manifold,
Wherewith Great Britains King his foes did threat:
Thus to his glorious Angel with sweet voice,
His will unfolds, which they to do rejoice.
You (says Iehoub) now shall understand,
How that the crafty Hunter Satan, proud
With Cholcos spells and spite, has taken in hand
Great Britains spoil to spoil, yea and has vowed
To root out of the earth the English Nation,
Who to our Name performetrue adoration,
Which, If he should accordingly atchiue,
The monstrous Antichrist.
Beast would salve her deadly sore:
Babel would her dead hopes again revive,
And re-erect a stews for her great Whore:
Then Rome the Mistress of enormity,
Would baske her self in Sins deformity.
Then also would the Prophesies of old
Seem (and that justly) clean annihilated:
Which of Romes downfall formerly have told,
And that this Antichrist.
Beast should sure be captiuated:
All these (I say) might hereby frustrate seem,
And thus my people me forgetful deem.
Wherefore I purpose with all expedition,
This hasty hateful enterprise to stop,
To promulgate and thwart this their ambition,
Of this rank rising weed the flowers to crop:
And though my wrath Englands great sins deserve,
Yet for my names sake I will them preserve.
Although (I say) Englands ingratitude,
Does my rich mercies carelessly abuse,
Deserving thereby pains amaritude:
Yet will I not permit this Beast to use
My sword of power, nor give those Traitors.
Imps my right;
But speedily in wrath their pride I Will smite.
This God of mercy, just man's consolation,
To show to us his love and bounty large,
With most ineffable commiseration,
A heavenly Angel forthwith gives in charge,
To Albions Kingdom with swift course to fly;
And in his sleep the King to certify.
How many dangers he is inuolu'd into,
How many infectious Snakes in's Court do lurk:
Which him and's peaceful Kingdom would un do,
And to that end what snares and gins they work:
Wish him be circumspect, the The Parliament house.
place refrain,
Where Julius Caesar treacherously was slain.
Like Sampsons house they purpose to pull down
His Kingdom, all at once about his ears:
Their impious plotted Protasis does frown,
And their Epitasis intend great fears:
But both of these he joyfully shall see
Transmuted to a blessed Catastrophe.
Then to the Lord Mounteagle haste with speed,
To whom these Traitors have a caution sent
In friendly sort, to monish him take heed,
That from this Senate he himself absent:
For why (say they) both God and Man agree,
By a fierce blast their foes destroyed to see.
And that he should into the Country hie,
And there that woeful spectacle expect:
And for his safety and security,
That none the danger might see or suspect,
They wished him having read, the Letter burn,
That so it might not to his danger turn.
Him thou shall warn his duty to perform,
His King and Countries weal and heal to further:
And of this peril his dread King t'informe,
That he may escape this direful dreadful murder,
Which that same Letter mystically meant
Without a name but not a blessed event.
Then from great Jove does winged Minerua fly,
And ere bright Titan on th'Iberian flood
Had banished Cynthia from the spangled sky,
This blessed Messenger, with message good,
Arrived upon the coasts of Britain fair,
His charge to discharge duly does prepare.
Who noble Morleyes heart does first inflame
With honest care, and diligent desire
Of his dear King and Countries health and fame
And does the Kings heart graciously inspire
With judgment most profound, the knot t'vntie
(Like Oedipus) of this Aenigma high,
For thus the Lord in's all protecting grace,
Ten days before the Parliament began,
Ordained, that one of that most traiterous race,
Did meet the Lord Mounteagles Seruing-man,
Who about seven a clock at night was sent
Upon some errand, and as thus he went,
Crossing the street a fellow to him came,
A man to him unknown, of personage tall,
In's hand a Letter, and he gave the same
Unto this Seruing-man, and therewithal
Did strictly charge him to take special heed,
To give it into's Masters hand with speed.
The Footman home unto his Lord did hie,
Gave him the Letter, told him how it was brought,
Which soon he opens, but could not epsy,
Or date, or name subscribed, the hand but naught,
And hardly legible, wherefore his man
He calls to help him read, which thus began.
THE LETTER.
MY Lord,
out of the love I bear to some of your friends; I have a care of your
preservation, therefore I would advise you, as you tender your life, to devise
some excuse to shift off your attendence at this Parliament. For God and Man
have concurred to punish the wickedness of this time, and think not slightly
of this advertisement, but retire your self into your Country, where you may
expect the event in safety. For though there be no appearance of any stir, yet
I say they shall receive a Terrible Blow this Parliament, and yet they shall
not see who hurts them. This counsel is not to be contemned, because it may
do you good, and can do you no harm, for the danger is past so soon as you
have burnt the Letter. And I hope God will give you the grace to make use of
it: To whose holy protection I commend you.


These strange contents his thoughts much discontent,
A thousand cogitations hence arise:
What fact? what friend? what this Aenigma meant?
What my stick danger these words might disguise?
Or whether it were some addle idle brain,
That this had writ, to cause him thence refrain.
If it should prove a fond fantastic toy,
To stir therein would turn to his disgrace:
But if it should include some dire annoy
Unto his person, or that sacred place
Of Parliament, he then might prove disloyal,
He Is loath, and yet desires to make a trial.
Wherefore, at last, as is fore-specified,
Gods sacred Angel Messenger of grace,
To his perplexed thoughts this cure applied,
And willed him this occasion to embrace,
And in his heart kindled a zealous flame,
Not to conceal, but to reveal the same.
Thrice noble Morley (quoth this Angel bright)
Whom Heaven has vouched worthy this great honor,
That thou should be the man shall bring to light,
Thy King and Countries threatened woe and horror;
By that usurping whorish Beast of Rome,
Who Albions Island hopes now to consume.
O stand not doubting, pondring in thy mind,
Whether this be a toy or true report,
A truth, a happy truth, thou here shall find
Of woe and wrack, to Country and to Court.
If thou it hide, a world of woes ensue,
If thou reveal it, honor be thy due.
And though this Letter seems most obscure,
Like great Apollo's Delphean Mystery,
Yet I a Joseph, Daniel will procure,
T'vntwine the twist of its obscurity:
Since in thy hands then lies both weal and woe,
Haste, haste with speed, in Court this Letter show.
This happy motion drives out former doubt,
In this right noble Lord Mount eagles heart:
Who now resolves t'examine and find out
The truth hereof, and forthwith to depart:
And though it were both dirty, dark and late,
Yet he the time will not procrastinate.
But like a noble Eagle having caught
A rich, a princely prey, aloft he sores,
He Is not at quiet till he have dispatched
This great affairs: He Heavens great aid implores,
To auspicate and grant a blissful end,
To this most anxious act he did intend.
And thus with loyal heart away he goes,
Thereto resolved what ever should betide:
To the Court he went this matter to disclose,
To The Earl of Salsb'ryes chamber soon he hide,
Whither heavens finger doubtless him directed,
As the best means to have this fact detected.
To this Ulysses he the Letter shows,
He the other Counsel, they in doubtful wise
Possess the King therewith, who straightway goes
Together with them thereof to take advise:
Each one propounds his judgment severally,
As in a case of great anxiety.
One thinks it was some idle vain conceit,
Another he is of the self same mind,
Others do judge it did some danger threat,
None could the right way of this Lab'rinth find:
Not one of them could diue to th'depth and ground,
None could this obscure my stick riddle expound.
At last our prudent King, Apollo's Son,
Fair Englands Joseph, waighing with discretion
Each circumstance, unto them thus begun,
Our judgments must take yet more deep impression,
This is no triuiall work or fantasy,
But must be sifted with great scrutinie.
I well remember, and you all do know,
That little smoke being at first deprest
Does mighty fires (though hid) at length forth show;
And in this grass some Serpent foul does rest,
Or else I am deceived: for to my mind
Now comes that Magna licet nunquam n^cuit cautela Monarchis.
rumor of the Romists blind.
Whose Genius guided by Erynnis vile
Never pull down the black flag of dissension,
But what with threats, poisons, deceit and guile,
They practice to effect their foul intention,
Plodding and plotting as a most just thing,
By Jesuits principles to kill their King.
No doubt but here is framed some Engine strange,
Some second Trojan horse, or traitorous train?
Or else about us does some Jesuit range,
Who would his hands in our dear heart-blood stain:
Some monstrous Machination (credit me)
Is in this letter couched privily.
It Is not the froth of fickle, brittle, brain,
But Hierogliphicke of black treachery:
In that he prays his friend thus to refrain
From coming thither: and in have to fly,
Yea farther, he great danger menaceth,
A sudden, terrible, fierce stroke of death.
Which with great Wonder, like a thunderclap
Should on their foes precipitately fall:
Unless by Gunpowder this thing may hap,
Naught else so likely I to mind can call:
And't may be they will abuse that hellish Art,
To our great ruin and ensuing smart.
Therefore most loyal Sirs I much desire
To be resolved, and truly t'vnderstand
Who the adjacent houses hold or hire
To our great Capitol, what cellers and
What arched vaults there are under the ground,
Let secret search be made, the truth out found.
Then straight Lord Chamberlain with others more,
Makes careful inquisition of each thing:
What houses, who them held, what cellers low,
Of each particular resolves the King:
Percy (says he) dwell's there and has a vaut,
With wood and char-coale plentifully fraught.
Hence presently, greater suspicion grows,
And Wise Sir Thomas Kneuet that good Knight,
Was given in charge the matter to disclose,
Who on the fourth day of Nouembr ith night
Perlustrated each doubtful part and place,
And did each thing uncover and uncase.
And least hereby suspicion might have grown,
They feigned to seek out stolen vestiments:
Where first he finds Guido Fauks alone
Devil of that Den, ord'ring his instruments,
Booted and spurred then standing at the door,
Having dispatched his task little before.
Having as then, I say, in order placed
His all-disordering fuming Aetnaes pit:
Which should his causeless country quite have raced,
And all her stately towers in sunder split.
He apprehends him, graspes and clasps his hands,
With hempen cords, and then no longer stands.
But quickly enter; this infernal Cell,
And trustily pulls down the piles of wood,
But sudden fright this Knight did daunt and quell,
For why, his servants as he searching stood,
Cry out, alas, this wood does powder hide,
For I two hogsheads full have here espid'e.
Let us search further, for we more shall find
Among'st these billets placed privily:
Oh treason past the reach of mortal mind,
Oh hateful, unheard, strange conspiracy:
Then more and more they speedily find out,
And thereby prove the truth of former doubt.
Then thirty barrels more with Sulphur filled,
And two great hogsheads ere they ceas't they found,
Now Fauks to search he his attendants willed,
Which did his treacherous heart with envy wound:
For from his neck a Crucifix they snatch,
A shirt of hair he wore his skin to scratch.
From forth his pocket then the Match they took
Which should have raised Chimera's Mino-taures,
From hell to earth, yea and with horrid-looke station,
The Gorgons, Hags, Alecto's, Semitaures:
Which would have brought Vulcan from's hellish
To work in Aetna doleful desolation.
Wherewith, he vowed to stroy and clean put out,
The Illustrious fame of famous Albion:
Whose peace and plenty, strength and valor stout
In fair Europa will give place to none:
This glorious Realm in the twinkling of an eye,
He would have robbed of all her royalty.
Yea with such vn-heard craft they did contriue
This treason, and concealed so secretly,
That but poor twelve houres-England should survive
From this fierce blow, whose ecchoing roar would fly
Louder then Nyle rushing from rockie coombe,
Or than Encelade when he shakes his toombe.
The project crossed, their flower of hope thus cropped,
The Traitors self the fact confessed, but said
He grieved most to see his will so stopped,
And that but this, naught should his hand have stayed.
O heart more hard than Judas, Pharaohs, Caines,
O cursed religion which man's soul so banes.
They hearing this, do thus in grief burst out,
Here o ye heavens, tremble o earth below,
Was ever seen or known the world about
A deed so strange, prodigious? nay we know,
That even the heart of Turkey or Barbary
Like monstrous mischief never did descry.
To which the bloody butchery in France,
By Popish Edomites made on Christ's flock
Is vnequiualent, gives but a glance
(Respecting this) of Romes rebellious stock:
Whose memory much dim's each former slaughter,
Disgrace of this, and of all age hereafter.
The unheard horror whereof may appear An aggrauation from the incomparable
cruelty of the fact.

In these six circumstances which here follow:
First, if they had adjudged us to bear
By reasonable creatures, deaths great sorrow,
If men by men should have been deaths fierce fuel, 1

The fact had been more humane, far less cruel.
For why? there had been hope by force or fence,
By tears or treates some pity to obtain:
Yea mittigation of their violence:
Even in the Act their fury to restrain:
As to heavens glory our dread King did find
In Gowries treason cruel and unkind. The Armed man in the closet which was
set to kill his Majesty.

Or, if by any other brutish Animalls
Though they then men are far more pitiless,
Inexorable, at our woeful calls 2

Would us devour with beast like greediness:
This kind of death indeed had been more fierce,
Yet here were hope Deaths sentence to reuerse.
For why by force, or pleasurable cause,
There may evasion, mercy often be found:
To escape the furious fangs* and crushing claws
Of fiercest Lions penetrating wound.
Daniel in the Den, the Androdus
Roman in the Cave,
Sampson, Richard the first, surnamed Cor de Lion.
Ring Richard ore them conquest have.
Again, which is most cruel of the three
By things insensible, inanimate,
To which all groans all moanes must frustrate be, 3

Being senseless of themselves, most of our state:
By these (alas) to perish and decay,
No hope, no help, naught can their fury stay.
Besides observe, that of all senseless things,
Those two fierce Elements, Water and Fire
Are most devouring, great'st confusion brings,
By their represselesse and resistlesse ire:
Whose inundations, all-confounaing flames,
Orewhelms whole Realms, makes dust of rarest frames.
Add yet this one material observation,
Which to this purpose here may noted be;
Farther to extend this endless aggrauation,
That all men may their hellish mischief see:
Of these two all-quick-eating elements,
By fire we have most grievous detriments.
For, though the Waters hugely ouerflow,
Drown man and beasts, and all things in their source:
Yet when into their bounds they backward go,
All things remain in substance little worse:
Although the life and beauty be quite lost,
Yet lifelesse most things bide within their coast.
But when or wheresoever the fires fierce rage
Takes hold on houses, Palaces or Places,
On Shepherds cottage, or rich heritage,
Of gold, or treasure, all it quite out-races:
Cartell and Corn, all together thrust,
Are all consumed, naught left but dross and dust.
Therefore that we by fire should be consumed,
Yea and of fires the fiercest most outrageous,
By puffing powder unto death thus doomed,
A death so desperate, bloody, and contagious:
O speak (alas) what hope was of redemption
From this so mortal mischievous consumption?
No tears (alas) could here a jot prevail,
For why (o woe) no time for tears was given:
No strength was able, no power to assail,
With such strange violence they had been driven:
No mortal might, might stay this mortal blow,
No power protect us from this monstrous woe.
No means I say less then a miracle,
And that immediately from Gods own hand:
Such as is mentioned in the Oracle
Of sacred Scriptures, when heaven did command
That Babilonian fiery furnace power,
That it could not once touch, much less devour.
That rare pare-royall of true Piety,
Sweet Shedrach, Mesach, and Abednago:
True worshippers of Heavens Deity
In whom the Lord did such a wonder show:
And certainly such was to us Gods grace,
And we well nigh in as like dangerous case.
But blessed, o thrice blessed Trin-one Lord,
Our powerful, and most pitiful protector,
Thine endless praise we ever shall record;
O our most holy, glorious, just director:
The gracious smiles of thy preventing pity,
Makes blessed Hosanna be our joyful ditty.
Here may we not omit this observation:
Namely, the great impossibility
Of hope, of this strange treasons publication Another aggrauation from the
impossibility of discovering the fact.

By all the reach of humane policy:
And therefore that God only did us save,
And hereunto five reasons more we have.
First to keep secret and perform the intent
They bound themselves by oath, firm, deep and strong. 1

Then hereupon received the Sacrament,
Oh horrid fact, o most blasphemous wrong. 2

They also tutred were by Iosuites,
To use all couzening tricks, deluding slights. 3

Namely on Oath, yea even on their salvation,
(That none the truth might from them ere get out)
To use that trick of false Equivocation,
Men's senses so to circumuent and flout:
As that we might have proou'd vain questionists
Deluded by these impious Idolists.
Moreover though it is granted that that Letter 4

Was the first instrument of our blessed peace:
Yet certainly little t'had been the better,
If God had not so caused that work to cease
Of vnderming that great Capitol,
By reason of the thick and stony wall.
Which so should cross what they did first intend,
As that they must the Powder-Celler hire,
Whereinto they their hellish stuff did send
To set our King and Senate all on fire:
Which had it been of those things void and free,
Where might it have been thought that stuff to be?
If when the powder being with Charcoale hid
Though found at first, was not at all suspected:
Oh had not God that Mining-worke forbid,
How could the vault in time have been detected?
Since no man thereof ever dreamt or thought;
Nor till the Traitors selves confessed, 'twas sought.
The last, not least thing which we note herein, 5.

That God did move the King still to reioine
The time he should the Parliament begin,
Which also fitted best the Traitors turn:
But chiefly unto us it fell out best,
Heavens King be ever therefore praised and blessed.
Now through both Court and Country speedily,
Through Town and City, street, and every place,
Through all the kingdom does the rumor fly
Of this deliverance, Gods preventing Grace:
Annoy is turned to joy and sweet content,
Men's hands, and hearts, and knees to prayer bent.
O thou the great commander of Heaven high,
The Almighty ruler of the earth below,
Which by thy Thunder do all terrify,
In promise just, to anger very slow:
Oh how can we sufficiently recount
Thy condign praise which do the heavens surmount?
Thou did us save from slaughtering sword and fire,
From miserable Massacre and death:
From those which against thy Laws, our lives conspire,
Thou only Sions Savior gave us breath:
And as from teeth of greedy Savage Bears,
Did us recover, and redeem from fears.
And like Cephean fair Andromadee
Whom Perseus guarded from the gaping Whale;
So we being bound to boundless misery
By thee more powerful Perseus do prevail:
By thy great bounty and benignity
Are we set free, from grim adversity.
Thou, only thou, by power of thy right hand,
Have our poor silly sinful souls preserved:
Unworthy, most unworthy for to stand
Before thy presence, having from thee sweru'd.
We though thy foes, yet do thy mercies find,
Thou wast most courteous when we were unkind.
Though we (alas) daily delight in sin,
Quenching thy Spirit in us, fostring the flesh,
Endangering Heavens loss, our Lust to win:
Like dogs to vomit, sinning still afresh,
Contemning thy behests and holy name,
Using thy Saints with scornful scoffs and shame.
Choosing the wrong, forsaking the right way,
Laboring to please our selves, though displease thee,
Blindly persisting when we go astray:
Thinking to live like Saints in vanity,
As he which raues not with the frantic mad,
Being amongst them is esteemed as bad.
Great are thy works, greater thy mercies are,
Thy meekness, mildness, patience, infinite:
Who in thy Love (oh our good God) did care
For us, of our selves careless: Day and night
Neglecting thee and thine, preferring more
Our profit, pleasure, thy sweet grace before.
O let thy grace our graceless hearts revive,
And turn our eyes into a flood of tears:
Oh let us not still live, as dead alive,
Sleeping in Sin, fearelesse of Sins great fears:
O give us grace the Old Man to forsake,
And with true faith, firm hold on Christ to take.
Illuminate the blindness of our heart,
That we may see the ill which we have done:
And grant (o father) though not our desert,
With tears it seen we may desire to shun,
And with incessant sighs and groaning grief,
Give grace to wail our wants and find relief.
Yea feed us Lord with heavenly Manna sweet,
Thy sacred Word, to which terrestrial treasure
Is but dry moss, or dross; oh guide our feet,
To tread the paths which lead to lasting pleasure:
That as Christ's name with tongue we do profess:
So by our works we may our faith express.
The year precedent was most fatal found, For the year before this
Powder Plot was the great plague in England.

To many thousands of our brethren dear:
Whom the great plague infectiously did wound,
And now this Powder-plague we escaped full near:
But thy strong hand, o Lord, the slaughtering blade
Has back retorted, and our foes dismaide.
These things, o Lord, do plainly testify,
Our grievous sins to have highly thee displeased:
Yet we may see, by this thy clemency,
How quickly thou from wrath wilt be appeased:
Thou show thy rod, and mildely do it shake,
That we may see thy grace and sin forsake.
And as a Mother chastizing her child,
Lothly lifts up her hand, soon lets it fall:
So with like love even of a father mild,
Thou us thy children labourest to recall:
But if nor words, nor warning may reclaim us,
Thy punishments, o Lord, will justly tame us.
And doubtless though the Lord to wrath be slow,
Yet if too far prouok't, his ire will burn:
His vials of destruction he will throw
Upon th'vngodlyes head, which will not turn
From vanity: like stubble in the field
They shall consume, and to his judgments yield.
Then let us, oh let us with special care
Learn, by the Lords so frequent exhortation,
To love and fear him, yea let us declare
The Gospells fruits in our lives reformation,
And let us hate Babel the just man's foe,
The seat of Antichrist where sin does flow.
The very Basis of impiety,
And Cage of unclean birds loathsomely fould,
Of which I may affirm most faithfully:
That though thou had Alcides courage bold,
Thou could not cleanse Romes sin-proud shining hals,
More foul by far then foul Angea's stals.
But that of ancient Prophets the prediction
of Babels bane, this age to pass may bring,
To see both Rome, and Romes proud Whores conviction,
This conquest great Lord grant unto our King:
Whose life as it is most precious in thy sight,
So let thy glory shine in his great might.
To propagate, and further to extend,
The glorious Sunshine of thy Gospel pure:
His foes to see, and shun, his power to bend
To punish and pull down the evil doer:
To love the good, the haughty to suppress,
To maintain virtue, beat down wickedness.
That Justice like a river with swift source,
Through all the Kingdom to all people may
Extend her streams, and uncorrupted course,
And that he so this noble Realm may sway,
As that here living he may live in peace,
And after death his fame may never cease.
That all his Nobles, and right noble Peers,
The most illustrious Senate of this Land,
Whose hearts this thy great love and mercy cheeres,
May fear thy name, and Gospels foes withstand,
That till their end of days and lives last hour,
They may adore thy Majesty and power.
And for so great, so good deserts of thine,
So blessed deliverance, life and liberty,
Grant from that sacred Of Parliament.
house such Laws divine
May be established, with severity,
As may redownd to the honor, joy and health,
Of King and Subjects, Church and Commonwealth.
That these most cruel cursed Canaanites,
The props and pillars of that shameless Whore,
These sons of Edome, Churches Ismaelites,
Who (even as Sheep to die) had marked us ore,
May be cut off from among us, which so long
Have wrought and sought our peace to break and wrong.
Which like inhumane barbarous Paricides,
Would cut the throat of their sweet Parents dear,
I mean their Country, o vile Homicides,
With one fierce blow to make their passage clear,
Inferior naught to Nero's foul desire,
Who wished to see his Country all on fire.
Who plot and practice guiltless blood to spill, A brief recapitulation of
Romes enormities.

Delighting most in rapine, thefts and lies,
Teaching as most true doctrine, Kings to kill,
Forbidding Marriage, not Adulteries,
Yea, incest and such other sins of shame
They slight esteem, which Christians should not name.
Whose Pope, and holy Priesthood, for their gain
And filthy lucre, think it not a shame,
Their odious Stews in public to maintain;
And yearly tribute for this cause to claim:
Whose practice is, to cousen and dissemble,
Whose blasphemies would cause the godly tremble.
Who do by grounds of their Religion hold
(That which no Heretics or Sect whats'ere,
No not the Turk, the Jew, nor Pagan bold,
Nor those of Calicut which serve and fear
The Devil) to kill their King, (o most notorious)
For Conscience sake, and say it is meritorious.
Who mingle with Gods word, and to prefer
Their own traditions, do esteem most just:
With strong delusions causing men to err,
Using, abusing Scriptures to their lust,
Teaching for truth the For the Popes East India, I mean Purgatory, was first
occasioned by Friar Ioachim who dreampt of such a thing.
dreams of idle Friars,
Slandring Gods truth like most nefarious Liers.
Who both the Laws of God and Man abuse,
Breaking the bands of blessed humanity,
The Turks profane such vilenessenere did use,
Nor savage Indians like barbarity,
Nay impious Assyria never saw,
Th'impieties, which Rome maintains by Law.
O why then foster we these poisonous Snakes?
These monstrous Hydra's with us to abide:
With whom what People, Kingdom long partakes
In which Romes furious fangs are not descride?
But if we will persist them still to spare,
Lets blame our selves if we fall in their snare.
Then leave we them and all their sly delusions,
And as it is fit, let us with fervent zeal
Renounce their love, repel their false intrusions,
Nor ere in ought with them commerce or deal:
For though in show they silly Lambs would seem,
Yet who so tries them, will them woolues esteem.
Thou then the God of our inheritance,
Our part, our portion, buckler, staff and stay.
Thy Sions Savior, strong deliverance,
Under thy wings preserve us still we pray:
Make void and frustrate Babels hateful pride,
The cause is thine (o Lord) stand on our side.
Resist their rage, for against thy Church they rave,
Revenge the blood of thy distressed Saints,
And let thy people thy protection have,
And when they grieve, relieve their sad complaints:
O Lord we pray thee bless and dress thy Vine:
Thy Love, thy Dove, this little Flock of thine.
Yea Lord at all times in extremest straights
Thy help is present, and thy presence sweet:
Thy sacred arm our secret armies waits,
To foil our foes and cast them at our feet:
Thou Lord do cause the fell Monocerote,
To bear on's brow a sovereign Antidote.
Wherefore (o Lord) this wondrous work of thine,
Our voice and verse for ever shall record:
To sing thy praise our hearts we will incline,
Thy name and fame, o our celestial Lord,
In every House, Shire, City, Street and Temple,
And teach our children this by our ensample.
Throughout this Kingdom we thy fame will raise,
And tell thy works unto each foreign nation:
While vital breath from death prolongs our days,
While Sun and Moon shine in their clowdy station,
Our Singers shall sing Psalms to thee on high,
Oh blessed, blessed, blessed Trinity.
Omnis gloria solius est Domini.
FINIS.
MISCHEEFES MYSTERY: OR, Treasons Masterpiece. The second Part.



Infernal Fauks with Daemoniacke heart,
Being ready now to act his Hellish part,
Booted and spurred, with Lantern in his hand,
And match in's pocket, at the door does stand;
But, wise Lord Kneuet by Divine Direction
Him apprehends: and finds the Plots detection.
LONDON, Printed by E. GRIFFIN, dwelling in the Little Old Bailey near the
sign of the King's Head. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Mr. Henry Iay Alderman of London, and one of the
principal Governors of Christ's Hospital, to whom I. V. wishes a full
measure of Grace in this life, and the fulness of Glory in the life to come.
IT is as easy as ridiculous
(Right Wordhipfull) for men officious
By favors bound: to promise very fair,
But to perform and pay is all the care.
Here Is all the labor, this the only stop.
This does the flower of frequent promise crop.
Since then to promise much, and naught to pay,
Is the chief badge vainglory to display:
And with fond Ciclicus to promise fair,
Is vainly to build castles in the Air;
How then should I without deserved disgrace
Presume to promise? knowing my weak case:
For as both I and my dear fostered Brother
Have both of us Christs-Hospitall our Mother.
And he in you does find Paternall care;
And you of that blessed- House a Patron are,
A principal and pious Governor,
Religions friend, and Learnings favorer.
Therefore I must ingenuously agnize
That I, with him, am bound to you likewise:
Both for the good which he in you does find,
Whereof I do partake by joy in mind:
As also that your Worship ruling there
Whereas I now do a poor office bear,
Therefore I say, I owe unto you more,
And am obliged in so large a score,
As my poor Talent never will suffice
To pay the debt, or ere to equalize
The merit, of your manifold desert
By other real sign, than thankful Heart.
Yet, rather then I would so brutish be,
Ingratefully my duty thus to flee:
Because not able to pay what I owe,
Promise and payment rudely to fore-slow.
I have been bold, embouldned by your favors,
To give this second part of my poor labors:
To dedicate this Mite of my Good Will
To your Good Worship: but not to fulfill
Or fully satisfy the boundless bond,
Wherein obliged unto you I stand.
But only thus to show, and to express,
My best and pressed desire of thankfulness:
Which with my prayers for your prosperity,
Shall never cease t'implore Heavens Deity.
Accept therefore (Right Worshipful) I pray
This Symbol of my service, first Essay.
Regard not (Worthy Sir) the Quantity
Of this poor present, but the Quality.
The gift but mean, the giuers heart sincere,
Thus some small part of my great debt to clear:
Which, hoping your good Worship will respect,
Heaun's Grace and Goodness you and yours protect.
Your worships in his best endeavors to be commanded: JOHN VICARS.

The Mystery of Mischief OR, Treasons Masterpiece. The second Part.
NOW look we back, whereas we lately left:
Incarcerate Fauks that cursed incarnate Devil,
Whose heart was clean of Piety bereft,
And strangely hardened with infernal evil:
So that a second Scoenola most bold,
In this audacious wretch might all behold.
For why? he durst most shamelesly proclaim
This hateful fact, to be an holy deed:
And that the zeal of Romes Faith did inflame
His cursed heart, with boldness to proceed;
And that he grieved for nothing more than this,
That of the Works conclusion he did miss.
Adding moreover, with strange impudence,
That if he had been in the Cellar taken
As it was abroad, he being new come thence:
He would have set on fire the powder-traine,
And both himself, with those that had him caught,
Would then have blown up, and of life dispatched.
Yea when before the King and Counsel grave
He stood, to be examined and tried,
Most scornefully he did himself behave,
And oftentimes would seem even to deride
What was demanded, so small grace he had:
So hard a heart, his conscience was so bad.
Nay more, there were those which did surely hear
Vile Robert Winter, Winter impudent,
In whom the very Autumn did appear,
And fruitless Wintr of an impenitent:
Who being in the Tower a time did find.
To speak to Fauks, and thus to vtter's mind.
Thou know (friend Fauks quoth Winter to his mate,)
That Catesby and myself have children left:
And Boys will once grow up to Man's estate,
Then are we not of comfort quite bereft:
For why I hope they will then revenge our wrong,
And for our sakes our Foes once lay along.
Yea, though we had no children of our own,
Yet God to Abraham can children raise
Even from the fiery flint, the sterile stone,
And I much marvel no man in our praise
For this most zealous Action does indite
And an Apology for us does write.
But howesoe're, let us vow and here protest,
When we before the people are to die
To maintain our just cause, and manifest
Our ardent zeal for Romes supremacy.
Content quoth Fauks, for this I do suppose,
The Devil not God did this our fact disclose.
Oh monstrous men, o hard hearts, brazen faces,
Pastgrace, past goodness, void of fear or shame:
To offer God and man these foul disgrace,
Our good, heavens God, thus foulely to defame
Far worse then Julian that Apostata,
Of Ecebolius, worse than these I say.
For though proud Julian with blasphemous words
And tyrannous attempts against Christ did fight,
Slaying the Christians with his murdering swords,
Scorning and scoffing at Truths glorious light:
Yet ere he di'd, he did confess and cry,
Thou, Galilean, have the victory.
So Ecebolius a Philosopher,
Who also lived in wicked Iulians time,
Remorse of Conscience forcing him so far,
At the Church door fell down, confessed his crime,
And woefully to the Christians thus did say,
On me unsavory salt, tread, tread, I pray.
But this remorselesse, graceless, godless brood Calcate me salem insipidum.

Of rammish Romists most unsavory salt:
Are not ashamed, afraid, with impious mood,
Not only not to grieve for this great fault,
But, most impenitent, avouch and joy,
This hellish plot, their country to destroy.
So impenitent and impudent are they,
So far from impious Iulians forced confession:
So far from Ecebolius, as to say
With heart relenting, and with true contrition:
O Truth, o Truth, thou have the upper hand,
O no, to th'death against Truth these will stand.
And, to this strange impenitence, I may
Here add the Traitor Tressam's perjury:
As most apparent marks thus to display
This Whore of Babell, and her blasphemy:
And let no Romish Rabsheca be moved,
To say they are false, for both were justly proou'd.
This Tressam to the Counsel had confessed
That often with Garnet he had conference
About this Treason, yea he did protest
That Garnet knew and had intelligence
Of that invasion by the King of Spain,
Which greedily they gapt for, but in vain.
This also being proou'd to Garnets face:
Yet Tressam ere he died did take his oath
And on his souls salvation (void of grace)
Vilely recanted, falsely forswore them both,
And said that sixteen years at least were past
Since he did see or talk with Garnet last.
O what a wretched state live these men in?
Who have indulgence for such damned attempts,
Who hold it but a triuiall venial sin
To wrest and jest with oaths and Sacraments:
But desperate Iudas-like did Tressam dye,
Murdering himself in prison cruelly.
O who so Stoicke-like, so senseless stock?
Cannot be moved with deep admiration
Of Babels strong delusions, which thus mock
Nay which bewitch with hellish incantation,
The silly vassals of that Mitred whore,
In The Revelation spoken of long before.
Whose Cup full fraught with Circes poisonous spell,
They having drunk, have Metamorphoz'd been
Into the shapes of Swine, or Haggs of hell;
No sparks of humane Nature left within,
Their shameless face with steel enameled,
Their flinty hearts with Marble hardened.
Put case our gracious King had grieved you:
Wherein had brave Prince Henry you offended?
What on sweet Charles your churlish hatred drew?
Why to Eliza was such spite pretended?
What gain'st the Nobles did your malice move?
Why to the State did you so unkind prove?
Nay tell me what degenerous unknown passion,
So much over swayed your furious hateful heart?
That even your loving friends without exception:
With Heretics being mingled must take part:
Both friends and foes must all of one cup drink,
And into the pit of fierce confusion sink.
But to omit digression and proceed,
Let Us here leave Fauks fast locked in Londons Tower:
And briefly we will relate each scelerous deed
Which did and should succeed that fatal hour,
In which discourse, each godly wise shall see
By truth and reason all confirmed to be.
There was a Gentleman religious, wise,
Unto our foes the Papists known full well:
With whom one of these Traitors did devise
A swift pac't horse to buy, which then to sell
He moved this Gentleman, and straight way gave
The horse to Fauks, himself by flight to save.
That when the furious flamei'th air should blaze,
He might take horse, and swiftly have away:
Glutting his devilish eyes, fearelesse to gaze
On his dear countries downe-fall and decay:
But then the Devil and they had thus decreed,
To pay him home with his deserved meed.
He hoped for Honor, they would pay't with Horror,
He gap't for Gould, they would it turn to Gall:
His dignity should be his death and dolor,
And when he hoped to rise, he down should fall:
Thus even thus it turns to their perdition
Which hope to raise their happ by proud Ambition.
For why these cunning Crafts-men used this wretch
But as an instrument, the fact to effect
To serve their turn, and this was then their fetch
To cure all care and danger of suspect.
With gould they had procured most diuellishly,
A rout of Rascals in the woods to pry.
Who like so many Currs should here and there
Lie lurking to surprise in his return
This ravening Wolf: being then secure from fear
Save that in's Conscience which like fire did burn;
Of life and coin, these should with desperate mood
Him reaue and leave his corpse for Ravens food.
These Demoniacke Furies hoped hereby
Closely to lay the guilt and guerdion,
Of this atrocious fact foul treachery
Upon the guiltles, as before was shown:
And publicly would publish without shame,
Puritans authors of this woe and blame.
That wretched Fauks being by those slaves thus slain,
None could the truth or Traitors manifest:
But search being made, the horse brought back again,
His owner might be speedily expressed:
And that good Gentleman of whom it was bought,
Plotter of this foul Treason should be thought.
Hence, hence I say had rufully been raised
Clamours of men, clattering of sword and spear,
With thundering drums and guns men's hearts amazed;
Death-threatning wars, on all sides then to rear.
Oh English Protestants, why stand you still?
As 'twere afraid, to curb their cursed will.
Have, have, take arms, let not vnpunish't go
So monstrous mischief, let your slaughtering sword
Repay into the bosom of your foe,
The measure which they would to us afford:
O most inhumane manners, O strange age:
Wherein like brute-beasts, brutish men thus rage.
But why alas do I in vain complain?
My tongue cleaues to my mouth, I wholly tremble,
My heart and soul deprest with pining pain,
As though these monstrous men did right resemble
And personate, unto my present view,
Foul Hidra's manifold and fearful hew.
Methinks their blasphemous wide gaping throat,
Their bloody hands and heart treason to invent,
Is like black Pluto's Curs loud triple note:
The foul Harpeian-birds do represent,
Yea even the hideous Gorgons rightly are
To their pernicious lives of least compare.
And though three hundred mouths and tongues full clear
I did enjoy: with Stentors sounding voice,
My breast then oak more strong, this task to bear,
And Argos or bright Lynxes eyes at choice:
Romes devilish couzenage to perceive and tell,
As it deserves, 'twould far this power excel.
For these impieties do plain portend
This age to be those sterile latter days,
Wherein sweet virtue languisheth to'r end,
And faith as at deaths door among men decaies:
Envy, dishonesty, too fast do flow,
And even at heaven darts of defiance throw.
And as the Ocean does all streams contain,
So does this age embrace each ancient Sin,
Whereby a deadlier deluge flows amain,
Then that of ancient time, that Noe lived in:
That did the body, this the soul destroy,
That living they still die with worse annoy.
Who then this sinful, most foul Angea's stall,
Strong Hercules being dead can cleanse or clear?
Nay none (unless we could from death recall,
And cause the Ghost of Virgil to appear.)
Could lively purtract Romes degenerous brood,
Their malice, mischief, pride and devilish mood.
Now let us here, as if the fact were done,
Imagine Fauks well mounted on his beast:
His hellish hope of joy, even now begun,
His gaping for reward in's speed expressed:
Puffed up with pride of prosperous success,
Hasting to's Mates with most strange nimblenesse.
But as with fiery Phaeton he flings,
With haire-brain'd fury, false-conceiued joy,
Hoping for honor and to sit with Kings,
Those Slaves prepared his cursed life to stroy
Encountered him, and his swift passage stayed,
And with like bloody purpose to him said.
Stay, stay, fierce Boar, why foam'st thou out of breath?
We know thee well, whither so fast do fly?
Turn, turn, thy way thou'st lost, we will soon by death
Send thee the right way to black Tartarie,
To Pluto's Court, who has thee long expected,
Wherethy reward shall be no whit neglected.
For since by his direction and decree,
Thou have effected a damned villainy:
Thy cursed soul to hell shall swiftly flee,
Of thy proceeding him to certify;
And Charon hels foul Ferry-man does wait,
To row thy soul to black Auerniu gate.
Yea hels grim Porter ugly Cerberus,
(For why, there never came nor never will,
A soul to Pluto's self more gracious)
With hideous noise will bark most loud and shrill
For joy of thine approach, and without stay
To hels black palace will thee lead the way.
Where as Tartarean Dis does rule and reign,
Who from his fiery throne will soon descend,
With hellish joy thy soul to entertain,
And run to meet thee as his dearest friend:
With damned conioyes to congratulate,
Thy wished approach and fact so fortunate.
Yea then thou shall at his right hand be placed,
And there receive those damned dignities,
Wherewith great Pluto's friends are always graced,
For matchless mischeeues and strange villainies:
Then in our name solicit hels great King,
To grant us his assistance in this thing.
Namely, that heel be pleased from hell to send
The Infernal Furies and most hideous Hags:
Who here in England may their powers bend
In our assistance, to erect the flags
And ensigns of destruction and blood shed,
Which through this Kingdom shall be spilt and spread.
Now then base Traitor know for certainty,
That we are of Lysanders stamp and strain,
To love foul treasons, but to hate and fly
The Traitors, which the fact have vndertane:
Wherefore false Sinon take thy just desert,
And with these words, their swords do pierce his heart.
O Nemesis of vengeance the just God!
Which in thy hands do equal balance bear:
Wherein to weigh men's faults, and with thy rod
Their souls to strike and stroy, which will not fear,
Nor love thy treats and threats, on such, I say,
Thou soon or late thy heavy hand wilt lay.
O then you frantic Atheists tell me why?
Why (as in prison) think y'in heaven to lock
Gods ternall and eternal Majesty?
Behold your folly, think not God to mock:
Learn to discern his justice, be advised;
Let not your souls by Satan be surprised.
What, see you not Gods wrath the sinner wounding?
Like billowing waves, resistlesse vengeance great
The heat of pride and sinner proud confounding,
Quite to quench out sins fire and fiery heat:
Oh fools, perceive you not that God above
Guards and regards his Flock, his Love, his Dove,
Nay which is more, do you not plainly see,
Gods just revenge, with like for like repayd?
An homicide his deaths man for to be,
That had by murder Pluto's hests obayd:
Most strange it is, that you iuch deeds commit,
And at these just plagues are not moved a whit.
By this first Scene we easily may guess
The grievous progress of this Tragedy.
Oh how much blood? what slaughters numberless?
What scuffling ruffling noise tumultuously
Every where raised? what woeful sights and shows
England had then beheld, no creature knows?
The Land like Lerna's poole of mischief full,
Then made a tragique stage for neighboring Nations,
On this side France from us a piece would pull,
On the other side proud Spaines hateful invasions:
Here would the Germans, there the Irish wild,
Not spare to proule and pill what might be spoyld.
Unhappy Albion this most glorious Realm,
A prize, a prey to each insulting foe,
Like pasture which the Sea does ouerwhelme,
Or like Leander tossed too and fro
In tumide Hellespont, by Boreas blast,
Until his soul ith'waues had breathed its last.
Now, let us here suppose our foes in field,
With clattering arms and battering engines strong,
Amazed Citizens ready to yield,
Yet run to arms with strange promiscuous throng:
As though a second conquering Hannibal,
The gates had entered, and had scaled the wall.
Loud sounding noise of drums and trumpets high,
Filling the empty air with Cannon-thunder,
The earth therewith to quake, and furiously
Base pesants ransaking with woe and wonder
Each worthy, wealthy place, with greedy mind
Committing rapes and rapines most unkind.
The holy Levites Englands Prophets good,
As they to prayer do go with sighs and sobs,
By Demi-deuils of Rome offering their blood,
Before Gods altar, drawn forth by the stabs
Of barbarous Butchers, who without all pity,
Would Christ's true worship chase from shire and city.
A fearful famine then would t'Albion chance
A grievous change, a far more woeful case,
By enormious error and blind Ignorance,
Men's souls to pine and perish in each place:
O then alas those lamps of light thus lost,
Oceans of blood, Gods Martyrs 'twould have cost.
Then ruthful Rachel full of groans and grief,
Her children slain, all comfort would refuse:
Then fear would call to faintness for relief,
While proud oppressors poor distressed abuse,
Then bloody Nero void of grace and fear,
His mothers womb with sword would rip and tear.
Then mercilesly should the infant tender,
Be lugg'd and tugged from woeful mothers breast:
And tostvp into the air, on pikes so slender,
Before the face of parents most oppressed:
Yea unborn babes in mothers womb lie slain,
Whose birth even in their birth slaves would restrain.
But whither would my pen me lead, if I
Should here commemorate, each stately town,
Each fertile field, destroyed, made barren dry,
Each gallant architecture clean pulled down:
Consuming fires, and flashing flames by night,
The air like lightning glistering with the light.
The famous river Thamisis likewise,
The adjacent shoares to Neptunes watery region
Struck with amazement of these miseries,
A stonisht at this strange confusion:
More mercy Androde in his Lion meets,
Than then would have been found in Englands streets.
Oh if I should proceed, here to recite
All other bloody slaughters, hostile woes,
The dearth, the famine, and each fearful sight,
The miserable plagues threatened by foes:
Who rouing, robbing, spoiling every thing,
On sick and whole a world of woes 'twould bring.
Easier 'twere, for any man to count
The leaves in Autumn, from trees falling fast:
The sands of Lybean shores, which do surmount,
Cast up by Boreas lowd-clowd-chasing blast:
Or twinkling stars which nightly brightly roll
On sabled circles of the whirling Pole.
(...) And doubtless had not heavens great King of might,
More prudent far then Phrygian Priamus,
Extinguished this fierce brands increasing light:
It soon had flamed and grown most dangerous,
And thou, o Catesby, to thy Parents horror,
Than that of Paris, had wrought greater terror.
For why, within the walls of the Parliament,
The mighty monstrous Horse thou had brought in,
Not stuffed with Greeks, but Powder violent,
With Grecian craft thy conquest thus to win:
And as a Whore was cause of all Troyes woe,
So Babels Whore had caused my overthrow.
Henceforth therefore, I thee renounce, refuse,
Thou have a Step-dame, nay a Strumpet mother,
And since thou do her fornications use,
And in oblivion all my favors smother,
Accursed be thou rebellious Absolon,
Accursed be thou proud Whore of Babylon.
And happy doubtless I the man will call,
Which her re-plagues, as she to plague me thought,
Who beats her childrens brains against the wall,
My just revenge thus on her to be wrought,
And as she cried, down, down with Isreal's City,
So let her fall without remorce or pity.
Hate them, oh England, hate them I thee pray,
Which thus do hate Christ and his worshippers:
Yea curse them with the curse Maran-atha,
Thus 'blessed Paul, thus David thy zeal stirs:
Hate I not them (says he) which God molest,
Yea them with deadly hatred I detest.
O then shall favor, friendship so prevail?
Shall kindred, profit, fear, cause us to shroud
These? which but only watch a time t'assaile,
Which gained, they would soon lift up their horns most proud,
Impunity does naught but cause them bide
S^ill thorns to the eyes, and goads unto our side.
But now to pass to that which does remain
Of this succinct and most authenticke story,
Further to view this traitorous hateful train,
The more to magnify heavens praise and glory.
Here then what Satan's Pseudopostles did,
(Shall be declared) after all was vnhid.
These bold Competitors, these traitors base,
Perceiving that by heavens most just decree
Their treason was made known: Like Bears in chase
Their prey being lost, in have with fury flee.
Their hearts began to ache and quake with fear,
Like dogs they grin, curse, ban, rage, sweat and swear.
To horse they have and swiftly post away,
(Like Zephirus blown by angry Eolus;)
To Dun-Church: where their accomplices did stay,
For they their place of meeting pointed thus:
And in those fields did Digby falsely feign
His holy- Hunt, a fat Bucke to be slain.
It Was such a Hunt as that of Nimrod proud, The traitorous Catholics Holy Hunt.

Who lived in our ancient Fathers days:
Their villainy thus cunningly to shroud,
By rumor of this Hunt which they did raise:
And as in word, so to avoid suspicion
Ofall things for this Hunt they made provision.
Their toiles and nets they place with joyful cheer,
Their hounds whose barking noise should pierce the air
They ready made, to chase the fearful Dear,
The sturdy Stag, the tripping skipping Hare,
Having made choice of a large Champeon ground,
A fitter for their turn could not be found.
With bramble bushes set conveniently,
And here and there planted a lofty tree:
Most fit with swift Careers their horse to try,
And their fierce dogs chasing the Bucke to see:
Yea it was a plain so spacious that they might
An army place, in battell-ray to fight.
In this great Heath proud Digby and the train
Of his attendants, first does pass along:
Whom traitorous Tressam followed amain,
And after him a mighty thrust and throng,
Inhabiting in the villages about,
To know the cause of this vncustom'd rout.
Then forthwith all the Gallants and best choice
Of Gentlemen, and youths fit to endure,
To ride, to run, to hollow with loud voice
He does elect; and to his sports allure:
And every village situate thereby,
Does thither flock together speedily.
The woods about with snares and haies they fill,
Some with their swords cut boughs, some nets do lay,
Others do blow their horns both loud and shrill,
Yea all prepare them to their sport and play,
And from their hounds the collers they untie,
Who to their game do run most eagerly.
At whose loud opening, and huge yelping noise,
The Dear which fearfully lay hid in the bushes,
Now suddenly to their content and joys,
Out of the thickers among them nimbly rushes:
And from them all does swiftly run and scud,
Whom men and dogs pursue as they were wood.
But, in the midst of this their hasty pace,
By chance an honest countri-man does keep
By th'side of one of this most traitorous race,
And as he leaped ore a ditch most deep,
A clattering armor perfectly did hear,
Which vnder's clothes that traitor then did wear.
And that which in him more suspicion bred,
The wind as then did somewhat blustr' and blow,
That up and down his coat often houered,
Whereby the harness he might see and know,
This sight did him amaze, and secretly
He thus did whisper to one standing by.
Good neighbor tell me what you think of this?
I know not, but this mighty company
In these our fields I judge is much amiss:
Being unusual, and yet unknown why.
I heartily could wish their hunting were
Bent only against these Foxes, Hares, and Dear.
No, no, I doubt they gape for greater things:
Themselves being fiercest Wolves though sheepe-like clad,
These subtle Serpents doubtless hide their stings,
This hunt is not alone for bruit- beasts had:
But worser mischief in their bosom lies,
Not beasts to kill, but men's lives to surprise.
Lord keep the King, and Princely Progeny,
And noble Counsel of this kingdom fair:
From being caught and trapt in treachery,
By these audacious Hunters subtillsnare:
My mind presageth some great villainy,
And yet I wish my judgment false may be.
For, otherwise why should they armor wear
Under their Clothes? a furniture unfit
For such a sport; besides all of them are
Vassals to the Pope of Rome who often did spit
His envious poison, against Queen El'zabeth
Whose Fame as in her life lives after death.
They are I say, the props and pillars all
Of Romes religion, Antichrists hirelings,
Who sends his bellowing Bulls, whose roaring brall
Disposes Realms, Deposes lawful Kings,
Which he composeth of false couched treason,
Beyond the bounds of Piety and reason.
Wherewith he strove that blessed Queen to abuse,
To work and win by this his damned Art,
Her subjects to relinquish and refuse
Their duty and Allegiance in their heart:
Hoping thereby of life, Kingdom and crown,
Thus to bereave that Queen of blessed remowne.
First, Holt a Jesuit vilely did suggest
Cullen and Williams that rare Queen to kill:
Absolu'd them both, gave them the Eucharist,
Which they in vain attempted to fulfill:
Walpoole the Jesuit did false Squine incite,
This Queen to kill, by poisons fatal might.
Yea that base peasant Jacques Frauncis, he
Himself being but a Laundresses proud brat,
Said Englands state so firm would settled be,
If Mistress El'zabeth were not aimed at
With a fierce Deaths-dart, thus this slave durst call
That all-admir'd Princess Angelical.
Then Lopez, rather Lupus hither came,
With poisonous heart, a poisoning part to play,
Campion that Popish Champion of such fame,
With Romish holiness came her to slay.
Babbington and his consorts, Romes dear friends,
Parry and more, assayed like treacherous ends.
But though they did this oftentimes attempt,
Yet heavens protection did her still preserve:
And though they often of mischief against her dreampt,
God was her shield, nor did she from him swerue:
He made her the more glorious among all Kings,
And of their devilish hope still clipped the wings.
Doubtless this most viperious generation
Both ever was, and so continue still
Disloyal, thirsting after innovation
The cunning Craftes-masters of fraud and ill:
The foes to our felicity and peace,
But here is more need of swords then words: I Will cease
I Will for my self provide as best I may,
And hie with have from this so dangerous crew,
And with these words his staff on's neck did lay,
And without answer he himself withdrew.
By chance also as they thus hunting were,
A friend of traitorous Winters, this did fear.
And therefore he thus unto Winter said,
I pray thee tell me Winter, what is the reason?
Of this so great concourse of people made
Amongst us, at this unbefitting season:
What wind has blown our Catholics together?
I prithee tell me, wherefore come they hither?
To whom thus Winter in his ear replide,
To tell the truth to you, my loving friend:
This hunt of beasts is but a sconce to hide
A holy hunt, which forthwith we intend:
And to be brief we hunt Religion: Religionem venamu^.

Which into holes, as into woods was flowne.
Again now to regaine our freedom lost,
And to Romes fold the wandering flock t'reduce,
To repossesse our livings and great cost,
Which we endured by wrong and foul abuse
We hope to hunt these Wolves heretical.
From our too long enjoyed possessions all.
And in these few days this will be effected,
Then be advised, remember what I say:
And that thou may not be with them rejected,
Hold on our side, it is the wisest way.
But now the night draws on, our sport must end,
And with these words he parted from his friend.
The huntsmen then their horns aloud did blow,
To make their retrograde back to repair:
Both hounds and hunters to their homes do go,
And by the way their passed sport declare,
When being housed, their Host had set on board,
Such viands as the time would best afford.
Great fires were made, themselves to warm and heat,
A Parlour fair to sup in, ready dressed,
Their Tables spread with linen clean and neat,
And gould and silver goblets of the best:
Then Digby being chiefest ofthem all,
Puts off his arms, and for his gown does call.
Wherein he walks and sta^kes with Princely gate
Amidst his cursed consorts, traitorous train,
Prescribes them statutes, answers, asks in state:
His breast no triuiall trifles does retain,
His heart and head negotiate Princely affairs
He unto each his place of honor shares.
So insolent and confident is he
Of prosperous success, and wished event,
That he even loades his mates with dignity,
And this being done, they all to supper went,
Where was no want of mirth and dainty cheer,
As in their quaft carouses did appear.
In drinking health's and wishing good success
To their companions, which near London staid:
Whose coming they expect with greedines,
Thinking each hour ten, till they were made
Partakers of their tidings, but mean while,
With mirth and music they the time beguile.
But while they sat as twere overwhelmed in joys,
Glutting themselves with dainties and delight,
In scornful verses, scoffs, flouts, jesting toys
On those whom they term Pure in scorn and spite,
On whom they breaking jests in great disdain,
Would hoot and hollow, laughing out amain.
As thus I say they ieyuing, jesting sat,
News was brought in that Purcy and Catesby
Were at the door, to whom in have they gat
Them for to meet, distracted diversely:
Whom Digby first with speedy pace does meet,
And 'bout the middle does them kindly greet.
Often demanding what good news they brought,
Who with dejected face, abiected plight,
As brief as full of grief, said All is naught:
At which they all were suddenly affright.
(Srange alteration) like to ghosts they stand:
As if not able to stir foot or hand.
Such numbnesse, dumbness seemed in them to be,
A chilling cold possessed their trembling bones,
Their bodies quake and quiver, you might see
Within their face disgrace and shameful moanes:
Their countenance cast down, they stare and gaze,
Their fainting hearts half dead at that amaze.
And thus, o thus, the Lord conuerts the joy
Of unjust men, in the twinkling of an eye,
Into lamenting grief, and dire annoy,
Their pleasure turns to pain and penury:
A while they flourish like a pleasant Bay:
But quickly they do wither like dry hay.
Percy at length all fear does from him cast,
And dissolutely resolute began
His friends to comfort, who thus stood aghast,
Uttering these words befitting such a man:
Take courage friends, do not all hope neglect,
The first attempts do seldom take effect.
If thus to had fared with Caesar in the field
Of Thessalie, where he his battle fought
Pompey being Victor, would have made him yield,
And Caesar had been slain past fear or doubt:
And with his life his Empire he had lost,
Each enterprise at first great pains does cost.
Yea commonly great dangers do attend
The noblest acts: life's but a chance at dice:
The Gamester first does lose, yet ere he end
He wins as much at once, as lost at thrice,
Though for the time a little loss he suffer,
Great heaps of coin he does at length recover.
Believe me (noble friends) virtue best shines
In troublesome and intricate affairs:
This time requires bold spirits, strong medicines
Cure the disease, which cowardice impaires:
Fortune's a friend to the courageous wight:
But dastard fear declares the pesant right.
What, are we not all of us Catholics?
Is not our war religious, just, and right?
Does not our High Priest curse these Heretics
And pray for us? Valiantly then let us fight.
This Pluto's orator scarce made an end,
When they to arms themselves did fiercely bend.
Then forthwith Catesby, and his traitorous mates
Consult among themselves, what first to do:
Who with a Letter sends his man Bates
To Garnet, this their ill success to show:
Who was at Coughton-towne in Warwickeshire,
And all Recusants Rendeuous was here.
And by this Letter, Catesby him desired
With all convenient expedition,
(For so their ominous estate required)
To stir up Wales unto Rebellion,
And else whereas he could, all Papists slout
To stimulate and move, to fight it out.
Now Garnet, being with Greenewell there that time
And surely certified, that all was known:
Considering they were deeply in the Crime
That his vile Sect, would (sure) be overthrown,
Did seemeto Prophetize. Which Lord we pray
With speed to grant, hasten that happy day.
But, hot spurred Greenewell being more resolute,
And fiery-spirited away does post:
To raise to arms Recusants dissolute,
Hither and thither roames about the coast.
Then at the house of Abbington he meets
With Hall the Jesuit, whom he kindly greetes.
And after salutations, him does pray
To work as many as he could to rise:
But Hall as in a dump a while did stay,
Doubting both what to say or enterprise,
As fearing, of such rash attempts the end,
And that thereby they would soon him apprehend.
To whom, so doubting, Greenwell thus began:
Why how now man, what art thou now affright?
Betwixt a flegmaticke faint-hearted man,
(Such as thou art) I see the difference right,
And me, who am more chollericke and hot,
Why man? it mooues not, fears not me a jot.
And will thou now a milke-sop-dastard prove?
And hide thy head now when we want most aid?
Fie, fie, for shame take heart, and with me move
As many as thy can, our foes t'inuade;
With martial might these Heretics to slay,
Nor must we now to pause, the time delay.
And thus away he flies like Northern wind,
And as he past through every Town and City,
This lie he made and published most unkind:
That Catholics that night without all pity,
By Protestants should all have murdered bin,
Hoping hereby rebellion to begin.
Wishing them all take heed and soon provide
To save themselves and make resistance strong:
If they desired in freedom to abide,
To save from grave their wives and children young,
And if they would their lives and goods possess,
And clear themselves of imminent distress.
Yea, if they hoped the ancient faith of Rome
To re-establish, too too long deprest:
Or would enjoy the sentence, laws and doom
Of Peter's Chair, most ancient blessed and best:
That then they should take arms against their foe,
And with him join, no time they must fore-slow.
Then Hall the Jesuit meeting after this
With Littleton, who urged him very much,
That since this action fell out thus amiss,
It could not choose, but near their conscience touch,
And that the Lord was doubtless much offended
With such a course, as so much blood intended.
But Hall as white-liuer'd as erst he seemed,
As simple Doves as Jesuits, would appear,
As harmless holy Lambs as they are esteemed,
Now doffs the mask which he before did wear,
The violent and virulent hearts gall
He now declares even of the Jesuits all.
For why, in steed of humble acknowledgement,
And of contrite confession of his fault,
Whereof he seemed before him to repent,
When Greenwell him to stir up rebels wrought,
He diuellishly began to justify
Their most atrocious vicious villainy.
And thus he answered Littletons great doubt:
Judge not (quoth he) the cause by the will event,
For why the eleven Tribes, which two battles fought
Against Benjamin at Gods commandment,
In both the conflicts those Tribes had the worst,
Shall we therefore affirm their cause accursed?
So when as Lewis King of France did fight
Against the Turks, himself of the plague did die,
And all his host by Turks were put to flight.
The Christians eke defending valiantly
Their Town of Rhodes against Pagans, lost the same,
Must we the cause then by the event here blame?
No, good Sir, no, be sure our cause was good,
How ere the event has proou'd and fallen out cross,
Then for Religion, thus to spend our blood
What greater cause to hazard greatest loss?
Thus, thus, this bloody Iehuite did persuade
This Papist, who was therewith well appaide.
Doubtless great Lucifer could never find.
Amongst all his hellish Hags, more flinty hearts,
Nor apter instruments to please his mind,
To act his most infernal tragique parts:
Than these inhumane Jesuits Satan's Sect,
These most pernicious props which Rome protect.
To Robert Winters house those Rebels came,
Where that rank Jesuit Father Hammond, he
To show his zeal to this foul work of shame,
Gave to these Traitors absolution free:
Even then when they were in rebellion hot,
After the blessed discovery of the plot.
This holy Father of that Hell-spawn'd Sect,
Bad these rebellious Traitors courage take,
For why, their High Priest highly did respect
Their zeal, and would them Saints and Martyrs make.
These pious words Ignatians Imp did utter, When the Steed is stolen, shut the
stable door.

Showing the Popes great pardon sealed with Butter.
Hell being now broke loose, though but a while,
Sends forth more Hell Hounds, Bloodhounds fierce and fell,
Grant, whose foul hopes heaven also did beguile,
Whom none did yet of this discovery tell:
For why, he kept his house and stirred not out,
Till he supposed all now past fear and doubt.
For he resolved not to stir forth of's house,
Until the next day that the attempt were ended,
Then like a Tiger fierce himself does rouse
And all his power to mischief now he bended:
But he which makes his reckoning and his price
Without his Host, must make his reckning twice.
And as those forty Jews which vowed and swore,
That in their ambush they S. Paul would kill:
So Grant what he had sworn to long before,
Now hopest' effect his most accursed will:
And with his rabble of Recusants stout,
Perfidious Papists, now he issues out.
He then by night to Warwick Castle went,
Where diverse Nobles dwelling thereabout,
In time of peace, wars danger to prevent,
Fed and bred up great horses strong and stout:
Which he did steal, and to their Camp convey,
Their owners to confront, repulse and slay.
This most audacious fact, bred such suspicion
In Sr. Fulke Greuill the elder, who was then
Of Warwick Shire Lieutenant. This the ambition
And robbery of these bolder rebellious men,
Caused him (I say) most like a worthy Knight,
To gather up munition for a fight.
And with all speed he fortified those parts,
And all the cheifest Gentlemen there dwelling
He heereunto exhorts, and wins their hearts,
Fearing (as 'twas indeed) some strange rebelling:
And wise directions he sent up and down
Into each village, place and neighboring town.
So that as these vile Traitors roam'd about,
A Smith gave Winter such a sudden blow,
As had he not been rescued by their rout,
He had been caught ere they did further go:
But at that time the Townes-men sixteen took,
The rest in haste their captived Mates forsook.
Now as they fled, I mean Grant and his Mates,
At length with Catesby, Percy and the rest
He meets, and him with them associates,
To whom then Catesby their estate expressed:
Told Grant their enterprise was now descride,
And that they now the event thereof must bide.
Thus rs they altogether troop't in haste,
Sr. Richard Verney Sheriue of Warwicke-shire,
Forth of his confines these vile Rebels chac't,
And so they passed into Worster-shire,
Still hoping their rebellious troopet' augment,
But our good God their hopes did still prevent.
Mean while that they these tumults thus did raise,
The Honorable Harrington thereby,
Who to his glory and nere ending praise
Did educate, with love and loyalty,
The Kings eldest Daughter Lady Elizabeth,
Whose fear and fright him greatly pittieth.
He then, I say, with this his Princely Jewel,
Whom he more dearly nearly tendered
Then his own life: hearing of this most cruel
And traiterous vproare, he soon assembled,
And to him called his loving faithful friends:
Whom all his gates to lock he straightway sends.
And with a double watch he strongly pent
His house, being fortified against ingruent fear,
Their traiterous intentions to prevent,
But yet his heart doubted her safety there:
For, in his private house he thought not good
Her long to keep, and thus in doubt he stood.
But taking counsel he most prudently
Does thus resolve, her forthwith to convey
Unto the stately City of Couentry:
Which from his house was distant no great way,
Whose duteous Citizens good government,
Has made this City famous, eminent.
Being also fenced with a strong built wall:
And thither comes this Peer and Princess fair,
The Citizens with joy assembled all,
With one consent they do themselves prepare
This Princely Lady thereto entertain,
In glistering arms her safety to maintain.
The City Mayor and all his Brethren grave,
In scarlet gowns, and massy chains of gold,
With kindest salutations cry, God save
Our gracious Princess, whom when they behold,
With fear oppressed in her tender mind,
All grief they banish with these words most kind.
Be comforted, sweet Princess, we you pray,
For we with all our Citizens are pressed,
In your defense the foe to foil and slay,
Our strength, our fortunes, nay, which is the best,
Our loyal hearts, lives, blood and valiant a^mes,
Ready to give your foes most fierce alarmes.
Our gold, our goods, our love and labors all
We will not spare (sweet Princess) you to pleasure:
Yea whatsoere is ours, you yours may call,
Even to the utmost of our cheifest treasure:
These words the tender Ladies heart rejoice,
Whom they throughth' City lead with cheerful voice.
Conducting her unto a house prepared,
Most sumptuously set out, and richly dight:
Befitting her estate and great regard,
Where a strong guard was kept both day and night:
And watch and ward the City round about,
And careful search whosoere went in or out.
Now all this while this band of Ban-dogs rage
And roue about, like wild Boares in the chase
Sweating, entreating aid and equipage,
For these affairs, but nothing could take place:
'Twas all in vain, for none how bad soever
Would with them join, but from them, themselves sever.
Nay scarce a man of all their own profession,
So vile a Catholic could they then find,
In whom their plaints would make the least impression,
Or to their factious fact a whit enclinde:
Such was the hatred of this hellish deed;
Such love of quietness sweet Peace did breed.
And when they had got all they could entreat,
Some foure-score persons was the most they had:
And yet do what they could, pray, swear or threat:
Even their own servants shrunk away full glad,
Both fearful of success and conscience prick,
Knowing against thorns it was in vain to kick.
But these religious Romists fondly thought,
And idly dreamt they were of nature right
Like little Snow-bals, which in the Snow being wrought
And rolled to and fro, grow of great height,
And hugely are encreast: These Traitors so,
Thought Rebels would like Rivers to them flow.
They surely thought that what they had begun
In this one part of England, would incite
All Catholics to sympathize and run
To arms, with them to join their power and might:
Which also though their lying Jesuits sought,
Yet heaven their hellish hopes did bring to naught.
Wherefore like vagrants straggling to and fro,
Through all those parts, hopeless and clean bereft
Of comfort, aid, or counsel; as they go
Poor people gazing on them, never left
To prosecute with bitter execration
The devilish actors of this innovation.
These miserable Miscreants then did enter
Into a mighty Wood, and thence they came
To Holbeach: where they boldly did adventure
Into the house of Littleton by name:
Being most spacious, able to contain
These desperate devils and their damned train.
Here then they pitched their most nefarious camp,
Whose great despair and worse disparagement
Struck to their hearts such madness, wrath and damp,
As made them rage like Furies violent,
Like angry Bears, who when their whelps are slain,
Run up and down, ramp, rage and roar amain.
The gates and doors some look up and fast bar,
Others their pieces charge with powd'r and shot,
Some whet their swords and fit them for the war,
Others their armor scowre from rust or spot,
Their vain and haire-braind labor was but lost,
And must them all their dearest heart-blood cost?
For now St. Richard Walsh the High-Sheriue came,
And did the house begirt with soldiers slout,
And sent to the Rebels one, who should proclaim
His proferred mercy, if they stood not out:
By him he them entreats not to resist,
But peaceably from further harm desist.
Aduising them their weapons to forsake,
To yield unto the mercy of their Prince;
But if they'ld not his gentle warning take,
He quickly would their stubborn hearts convince:
That few by arms but of such clemence failed,
But many by submission have prevailed.
That potent Conqueronrs those to mercy take,
Which voluntarily to mercy yield:
Therefore he promised, he would for their sake
In their behalf, entreat the King most mild,
Their youthful folly mildly to forgive,
To grant their lives a better life to live,
The Sum'ner in his Masters name thus said:
But they, like madmen, cruelly entreat
The messenger; and him this answer made,
Go, tell thy Master we do scorn his threat:
If he by dint of sword will force us yield,
He must bring greater forces to the field,
Wish him break off from this his woman's fight,
And vainly with us to contend in words,
That silly syllables are too too slight,
To daunt our manlike hearts. We Will trust our swords:
But when this valiant Gentleman did see
Himself and's counsel scorned, to arms did flee.
While things thus past, a most strange accident
Happened within, which did these Traitors fright,
A sore forerunner of due punishment
From heaven was sent, their treachery to requite:
Namely, that by a fire of wood did lie
A bag of powder, which they then did dry.
Not far from which, close by the fire side,
A tray of gunpowder uncovered stood:
Into which tray a crackling spark did glide,
Which flew from forth the fire, being made of wood,
And fired it, so that most furiously
It with fierce flames and smoke flew up on high.
And with resistlesse rage like Aetna's flame,
The roof of the house it reft and cleft in sunder:
And on the face of Catesby fiercely came,
To all his traitorous mates a maze and wonder:
Grants face it also scortch't, Rookwood also,
Did not in this great judgment untouched go.
But, like unto the foul stigmaticke slaves
Of Dionysius, brended in their face
They marked were, their bodies seemed the graves
Of heart and senses, in such woeful case
They stood astonished, pale faced, faint, affright,
Their hair did stare with horror bolt upright.
Now, Robert Winter dreamt that he did see
(The day before this fearful accident)
Steeples to stand awry, and as't might be,
Strange faces in those Churches: this event
Caused him this his dream to mind to call,
And thereof thus made him resolve withal.
That those strange faces whereof he then dreamt
And saw in the Churches, were right like those same,
And did unto him lively represent
The Visms of these whom thus the powder flame
Had burned and scorcht, this him amazed much,
And did this traitors heart most deeply touch.
And then with guilty conscience they remember
Their Epidemick purposed treachery:
Confessing Christ to be a just revenger
Of such gross wickedness, great villainy:
Their countries causlesse ruin they did mind,
The fires they should have kindled most unkind.
Yea then they seem to see the great bloodshed,
Which from their harmles brethrens corpse should run,
Wherewith the ground should grievously be spread,
And on their bended knees they now begun
To wring their hands, with tears their fault confessing
Beating their breasts, their groans and griefs expressing.
And now too late they do lament their folly,
Acknowledging this judgment to be just:
And heavens just wrath against them to be most holy,
Cursing the time they did such Counsel trust;
Read, O ye Atheists, read, and mark this well,
Which are persuaded there is no heaven nor hell.
Yea read, o you, blind Iebusites of Rome,
Which think heaven marks not, nor regards men's deeds,
And which to pluck God out of heaven presume,
Esteeming less Hells flames, then crackling reeds.
Saying with David's fool, God sees us not:
The Almighty slumbers, and has us forgot.
Oh, if within you any shame remain,
Or if you have not brows more hard then brass,
If that your hearts lest tenderness retain;
Or if one spark of grace may from you pass:
Then think, nay doubt not, but the Lord does fight
For his afflicted flock their wrong to right.
If Piety be not extinct, exiled,
Or if y'haue not less reason then bruit beasts,
Then read Gods judgments and his mercy mild,
And learn to reverence and observe his hests,
Know that the Lords invincible strong arm,
The righteous and religious saues from harm.
By whom (oh impious Synagogue) you are,
By whose great power, you live, move, have your being
Without whom you are naked, wretched, bare,
And without whom, your eyes are blind, though seeing:
Yea wanting him, you want true power to speak,
And sacrilegiously his laws you break.
Yea he alone protects, props, propogates
Us, and our actions, and intentions all:
Even God it is who guides our states and fates,
Who sees and smiles at men fantastical:
He Will soon lay hold on, catch at unawares,
The proud malicious, in their nets and snares.
The Crafts-master in his own craft is caught,
As does this former president present
In that these Powder-plotters, which had wrought
By powder so great danger: first were brent
In their own fire, for innocents prepared,
Gods justice among them their own mischief shared.
And this like peril to Perillus fell,
That cunning Caruer, expert engin-maker:
Whose workmanship pleased Phallaris so well,
That of his mischief he was first partaker:
Oh let this therefore move all traitors hearts,
That heaven will surely pay them their deserts.
But to proceed, the hooded Hypocrite
A while may cousen, cogge, entreat, intrude,
But long it shall not last. God will off finite
Their impious vizard, wherewith they delude
The eyes of mortal man, and this abuse
The Lord will to their sorrow soon reduce.
For, presently their temporizing tears
Were dried up, their sorrow soon forsaken,
No Piety or shame in them appears,
And their new virtues, old vices mistaken:
A sudden madness did all grace push out,
Opening their gates, they all being armed rush out.
And like mad dogs or Gaderens devilish hogs,
They headlong run amongst their enemy,
Despairing with their conscience heavy clogs;
Smiting on all sides, here, there, furiously:
Vowing and swearing, since such was their fate,
To sell their hateful blood at a dear rate.
The valiant foresaid high Sh'riff ceast to treat,
Seeing, as is declared it was all in vain:
And with a martial spirit in furious heat
Them to entreated duty does constrain:
Strongly they fight on both sides, these for fame,
The other fight with desperate fear and shame.
Then Thomas Winter vaunting in the Court,
Being shot in the shoulder lost the use of's arm,
And traitorous Rookwood one of this consort,
Was also shot, and had no little harm,
After that both the Wrights with shot were slain,
Which much discouraged their perfidious train.
With cursed Catesby, Piercy pestilent
Does join himself, and so fight back to back:
Unto whose sides the traitor Winter went
And thus this knot of Knaves do hold them tacke,
Placing themselves in manner like a wedge,
They boldly fight it out with swords sharp edge.
The traitors smite their foes with furious blows
These do themselves defend, their foes offend,
And as the fight of Bulls, as story shows,
Being by sturdy dogs on all sides pend
And sorely set upon, they tail to tail
With their strong horns the furious dogs assail.
But, as Alcides, though most stout and strong,
Or Theseus brave, for all his courage bold,
Against many foes could not continue long:
No more could these their enemies long hold,
For at them presently a gun was shot
Whose bullet both these traitors deadly smot.
Through Piercies and vile Catesbyes body straight
This bullet pierced, when with a deep fetched groan,
Their feeble knees too weak to bear the weight
Of their declining bodies, both fell prone
Upon the earth, struggling with pangs of death,
And quicky gasp't their last most hateful breath.
And like two mighty Oaks, whose branches high
May seem to touch the top of heaven fair;
But by a rapid whirlewind suddenly
Are blown, and ouerturn'd, whose branches are
Laid low upon the earth, the bows being meat
For cattellin the field to brouse and eat.
Thus to these cursed Champions of the Pope
It did directly happen, justly fall:
Who had already swallowed up in hope
Englands fair Realm and seat Imperial:
Yea, in their most infernal fond conceit,
They Had climbed the top of high promotions seat.
But see with shame their high Pyramides
Of hateful pride, shattered in pieces small:
Their odious flesh (for so it heaven did please)
Left for to feed fowls, beasts and worms withal,
But Rookwood, Winter, Grant, alive were taken,
And all the rest of succor soon forsaken.
Here Robert Winter having boldly fought,
His Cateline and hot Cethegus slain:
Not able longer now to hold them out,
By his fiercefoes alive was quickly taken:
And with a pike in the belly he received,
A dangerous wound, but not of life bereaved.
The rest I say, being taken and disarmed,
Were thus subjected unto Justice stroke:
By prick of Conscience, then by death more harmed:
Their fainting hearts confounded, wounded broke:
And as the custom is with hempen bands
They were fast bound behind, their backs their hands
Most deadly sick was Catesby and his train,
Of Achabs foul disease, his stomach cloyed
With Naeboths vineyard, none could ease his pain:
Till bloody Iesabell her skill employed
To give him Physic, with poor Naboths blood,
But our vile Achabs case far worser stood.
For why? although their greedy appetite
Old Achabs did exceed, and that proud Who,
This vpstart Iesabell of Romes great spite,
More mischief did devise then she of yore:
Yet since they could nor kill nor yet possess,
They were in far more desperate wretchedness.
And now by happy consequence to us
It falls out, that Percyes treacherous pate
Should stand as Sentinel pernicious,
Where he was Captain Pioner of late:
And Lambeth to be Catesbies Horizon,
Which was his Arsenall till his hopes were gone.
And on the house of Parliament full high,
Their Crow-pickt sculs, placed like a ships high mast,
(To use the Prophets words) that passers by
May understand, what end befell at last
Unto those rouing, robbing Pirates vile.
Who hoped to rise by treason, theft, and guile.
Who by ambitious and pernicious ways,
The Golden Fleece thus hoped to obtain:
Not by stout Iasons merit and just praise,
But by Medaeas so rceries: in vain
They gap't toget their golden-fleece their prize,
This did they fondly in their hearts surmize.
Waspes here we see make combs as well as Bees,
But, for sweet honey there we Powder find:
Their hearts contain naught but the dregs and Lees
Of a most corrupt canckered treacherous mind:
See here thou Pole-shorne Papist what is the end,
See what reward your treasons do attend.
See, you Achitophels, you Jesuits all,
The end of your Counsel to your Absolon, Malum consiliu^ consultori pessimum.

Bad council still, to the Authors worst does fall,
A woeful end rash gests attend upon.
And these who like great Consuls would have reigned,
As base Conspirators are now arraigned.
And like as fond Empedocles did east
Himself, even headlong into Aetna's flame;
Hoping, that if he could vnspide have past,
TO have been esteemed a God with endless Fame:
But when the flames, his slippers did retort,
His haire-brain'd folly each one did report.
So these, which hoped, which fondly hoped to be
No less then Saints, by this their Aetnaes plot:
God, who in mercy did their mischief see,
And what strange folly did their minds besot:
The slippers of discovery did cause
To foolifie, their deifi'd applause.
And by this blessed Catastrophe, to call
And justly term them, most notorious Traiters:
In stead of that usurped name, they all
Hoped for, to wit, Romes meritorious Martyrs,
And cursed be they which call such evil good,
Accursed Romes doctrine grounded thus on blood.
Now then to London fast on horseback tied
They were conuai'd, and people flock to meet
These monsters of mankind, whom being spied,
With execrable curses they do greet:
Threatening, abiuring, hating in their heart
These which thus hoped to act so foul a part.
Whose mention, unto aftertimes may be
Supposed a thing devised, not enterpriz'd:
So much the credence and the verity
Are different, by man's judgment to be poys'd:
Thus as they past, I say, with much ado
Men were restrained their present wrath to show.
Some if they had their wills, alive would tear
Their cursed corpse, others in mind invent*
And wish strange death their damned souls to bear
From earth to Lucifer, who for them sent:
And thus to London being brought at last,
In pris'n with fetters they were locked fast.
Some few days after was the appointed day
For their arraignment, and as use required,
The Nobles and the Judges in array
Unto their judgment came, where with admired
And learned eloquence deliberately
The Kings Attorney then did signify.
And recapitulate, from first to last
The foulness of this execrable deed:
With every most material fact which past,
And then to judgment forthwith they proceed:
The conscience-pricked prisoners did confess,
That what they did it was for Romes holiness.
And that they had for their most firm direction,
The precepts of Romes Faith, and holy rite,
The zeal whereof was a most strong suggestion
To execute her will, with all their might,
Which precepts are, by force, fraud, or deceit,
By poisons, treasons, murder, curse or threat,
By just, or unjust means, hows'ere to kill
The Hugonets, Caluinists, Lutherans,
Which do oppose themselves to her great Will,
If Rome but send against them her Bulls and bans,
And all is most true (they teach) the Pope does say,
Or charg^ her children, for, Alluding to Pope Ioane.
she cannot stray.
Hence we may note that Romes rebellious brood
All other malefactors far transcend,
For though it cannot be gainsaid, with-stood,
But some in all professions do offend
Either by murder, treason, whoredom, theft,
For which they justly are of life bereft:
Yet when they are to die, they nere accuse
The doctrine or religion they profess
To be the cause, that they did so abuse A very remarkable observation in the
Romish Martyrs as they are falsely termed.

Themselves, their souls, with hart-stain'd guiltiness:
But that their natural bad inclination,
And want of grace, wrought that their desolation.
But, these besotted Eate-Gods void of shame,
These foul birds, thus their own nests to beray,
Do not their Natures, but Religion blame,
And if in ought, Herein the truth they say:
But oh, oh misery beyond compare,
That with such woe they thus contented are.
Oh if the understanding eye be blind,
If once the Lord unto our selves us leave,
How hard it is Truths perfect paths to find:
How hard the Truth from error to perceive:
O woe to those which shut up heavens gates,
Both from themselves and their seduced mates.
O strong delusions, as St. Paul does call them,
Oh poisonous cup of Romish fornication:
How can it choose but danger must befall them,
That are bewitched with such strange incantation:
Oh if the blind do lead the blind both stumble,
Nay both do headlong into mischief tumble.
The Judges grave pronounced their judgment just,
And them and their religion damned to hell,
Which does ptoduce such fruits, and in them trust,
And then that Scripture they remember well
My dear Disciples, go, and teach each Nation,
Baptizing all men to regeneration,
Clean contrary, this base child of perdition
The Pope of Rome his blind disciples teaches
Saying, O my Sons receive mine admonition
Which here your Holy Father to you preaches:
Go extirpate, kill and confound each Nation
Which does refuse our yoke and domination.
O! is not this a brood of Vipers vile?
Yea are not these the very Spawne of Hell?
And Plutoes Locusts full of fraud and guile,
The Furies of Auernus fierce and fell:
Satan their Fathers footsteps t'imitate,
By sword and fire Virtue to ruinate?
From whose most damned counsel and devise
They Spider-like this Stygian poison sucked,
Which treacherous Fanks that vessel full of Vice,
To us to administer, they did instruct:
Doubtless the Devil was not a little glad,
That he sorich a prey and purchase had.
For to his ancient friend does Pluto say,
O Fanks thou see the effect of our intentions,
How I to thee did show and open lay
Hels secrets, hidden counsel, strange inventions,
Nor shall we without some consorts return,
Unto black Tartar where souls scorch and burn.
Indeed, I must confess, we did expect
A greater harvest, far more company:
But this shall now suffice, and we will erect
Unto our selves trophies of victory
For this attempt, Fortune hereafter may
Grant us a time, more mischief to display.
And to the full our counsel to contriue:
Yea all our new found stratagems to try,
Nor shall this fact Hels counsel quite deprive
Of future hopes: Hell is not yet drawn dry,
Our coffers are not empty; yet, indeed,
This last, did all our others far exceed.
Yet many tuns of treachery remain,
And deep deceit, which are not yet abroach,
Which future times shall taste of to their pain,
As fast as we in favor can encroach,
With our choice friends in Court, Romes champions bold, ^os, o Rex magne
cau^t^.

For these are they, which all our hopes uphold.
This said, to Justice he does leave them all,
No other comfort then disconsolation
From Pluto they receive: a thing usual
To subtle Satan, who by's instigation
Does cause men sin, and when they are to die, Note this.

Comfortless leaves them in most misery.
Oh therefore, you, whose hearts and senses all
Are thus bewitched by Circes poisonous potion:
With love of Romes great Whore, recall, recall
Your understanding, from this blind devotion:
A biure that doctrine, cease to call them blessed,
In whom such maps of mischief are expressed.
Learn with relenting tears, repenting heart,
Romes subtle Sirens, iuggling Iebusites
Far from you to repel, with speed depart
From Magogs cursed marks, mere Canaanites,
O take unto you Christ's Collyrium sweet,
And you shall see how they from truth do fleet.
Yea, you shall then perspicuoufly perceive,
That they true Faith do impiously pervert:
And notwithstanding that, they will not leave,
Gods Saints with malice on all sides to girt;
Afflicting them with dangers and despite,
Yet shall the just prevail and stand upright.
For why, both Christ and all the heavenly host.
Yea even the stars, according to their kind,
Do fight for them, whereof they well may boast,
Yea day and night, they heavens protection find:
Oh why does man then Christ's true Church disturb?
Since Heaven resists him and his wrath does curb.
Thee, thee, o England, I may happy call,
Thou little Isle, whom father Neptunes wave
And mighty streams embrace, I most of all
May term most fortunate, if thou could have
A perfect knowledge of thy blessed estate,
Or Heavens rich mercies would commemorate.
If in the tables of a thankful heart,
And registers of never ending days,
Thou would imprint, impresse, to all impart
The endless, matchless due deserved praise
Of thy ereliuing, all-good-giuing King,
Which still does fill thy heart with each good thing.
Oh say, how often? and from what great assaults,
Has Heavens protection safely thee protected?
Which were brought on thee for thy grievous faults,
God in his mercy having thee respected:
And when thou wast in danger almost drowned,
Thy proud presumptuous foes he did confound.
Witness that great assault in Eighty eight,
When as the faithless Spaniard, impious, proud,
Insulting and consulting with great hate,
Our fearful, final, fatal ruin vowed,
And their great madness to this pass had brought,
That English Seas with Spanish ships were fraught.
So huge a Navy had they then provided,
Like that of Xerxes against the Athenians bold:
And by such bloody Champions strongly guided,
That had not God their cruelty controlled,
And sent us two Themistocles most stout,
Brave Englands luster had been clean put out.
For stout Lord Howard and Sr. Francis Drake,
By heavens assistance, fought so valiantly:
That at the length they made their proud foes quake,
And (maugre all their power) to yield or die:
And captiuated many Captains great,
The rest the Seas devoured for fishes meat.
Great was the Lord, in this great victory;
And great his mercy, that time to thee shown,
In this great freedom thy blessed liberty,
Calming vn-ciuill-ciuill discords grown:
Lopping their sprigs, cropping them in the flower,
That they could nere take root or raging power.
How often has the Lord from thee withheld
His all-deuouring plague and pestilence?
Whose great mortality has killed and quelled
Men of the highest place and eminence:
Without respect of simple or of sage,
Of Cottage, or of Palace, sex or age,
Insteede of famines foul deformity,
He has in thee placed rivers which do flow
With mike and honey, the blessed harmony
Of peace and plenty, yea this Land does show
Like fertile ^anaan, no Land ere did find
Dame Natures bounty in like various kind.
Yea thou, o England, justly seem to be
Another world, all things afresh renude
A pleasant Paradise, wherein's the Tree
Of Knowledge, wherewith thou art richly indude:
Wherewith, I say, thou do all Nations pass,
As far as Crystal does thick spotted glass.
And for to make thy glory more complete,
Thy bliss and blessedness more clear to shine:
The Lord has given thee Manna Angels meat,
The glorious Sunshine of his Word divine:
His everlasting Gospel, light of Grace
Most precious pearl, which Wisdom does purchase.
Whose most invaluable estimation,
Does more surpass the gold and silver fair,
The precious jewels, iems of Indies Nation,
Or wealthy treasure of Arabia rare:
Then does bright Phoebus in his glorious light,
The brightness pass of twinkling stars by night.
Do but compare this thy beatitude,
With other Nations want and woeful case,
Who are even pined with th'amaritude
Of foggy ignorance and error base,
Living (alas) in beast-like wretchedness,
As in the shade of death most comfortless.
Without the knowledge either of God or Christ,
Without whose knowledge all is but dirt and dross:
And worshipping instead of God the highest,
Unto their souls perdition, fearful loss,
Dumb Idols, rotten timber, metals vile,
Which underfoot they should tread and defile.
And as in the days of our forefathers dear,
In Egypt, in the Land of Goshen small,
Gods love to Israel cheefely did appear:
So has the Lord blessed England most of all.
And far before all others in thee placed
The light of Justice, wherewith thou art graced.
Reigning down showers of heavenly Nectar sweet,
Far richer then Danaes rich golden shower:
Making his word a Lantern to thy feet,
Guarding thy soul with his celestial power,
Giving thee all things to thy hearts desire,
Needful or necessary to require.
So that thou may, now freely thus confess,
To heavens high honor, and thy hearts content:
That God to thee more mercy does express,
Than t'any Nation in Earths continent:
Wherefore since thou heavens blessings thus do find,
Prove not ungrateful, churlish or unkind.
Be not more blind then earth-deuouring moles,
Nor more unthankful than the sluttish Swine,
Who feed on fruit, which from the tree down roles,
Thither whence't fell, nere casting up their eyne,
Not caring how they came by it, nor do thou
Receive Gods blessings, careless whence, or how.
Shake off, and shun such great impiety:
Such gross ingratitude and brutishness,
And let your tongues to all posterity
With thankful hearts acknowledge and confess
The most admired least deserved favor
Of thy so gracious God so sweet a Savior.
Who plenteously replenisheth and fills
Thy soul with blessings of his blessed right hand:
Sweet drops of mercy daily he distills
Upon thy head, who does as Guardian stand,
And does refell, repel the dangers great
Which furious foes do menace, work, or threat.
Snatching the prey from forth their hungry jaws,
Thrusting them headlong into their own pit:
Recovering it from their most bloody claws,
And tearing teeth, wherewith they would have bit,
Nay utterly have swallowed at one meal,
Our Kingdom, King, Peers, Prophets, Commonweal.
Which has thee blessed with amiable Peace,
Even such as our old Ancestors nere knew:
Nor to our childrens childrens ioies increase
Is likely to be seen, or ere ensue:
Yea God alone has given us this great rest,
And his great love thus largely has expressed.
That God (I say) whose majesty and might,
Whose greatness, goodness, justice, works of wonder,
The heavens, the earth, seas and each breathing wight,
Rain, hail, frost, snow, lowd-winds, lightning and thunder,
Do mightily show forth, tell and declare,
What Heathen God, with thy God may compare?
He is thy Savior, Shield and Buckler strong.
To him, both for thy being and blessed estate,
Does all thanksgiving, praise and laud belong:
Whose tender mercy most compassionate,
Whose patience and whose power infinite,
To future times all people shall recite.
Oh let us then, o let us never cease,
In heart and voice his praises to record,
Yea on loud trumpets let his praise increase,
In Hymns and Psalms, o laud the living Lord:
Proclaim his fame to the Hyperborean coasts,
To those whose clime continual Summer rosts.
Let Phoebus first leave off his annual course,
And Phoebe want her monthly borrowed light:
Let Neptune stop the Oceans billowing source,
And Nature want in all things wonted might:
Yea Lord, then let us cease to be, we pray:
When inobliuion we thy mercies lay.
But, doubtless, if this duty we neglect,
Like those ungrateful Lepers of King Saul,
The Lord most justly will our sins correct,
And on our heads his heavy hands will fall:
Nothing the Lord can worse endure or hate,
Than thankelesse persons, and the mind ungrate.
The Husbandman, which plenteously does sow,
The greater harvest justly may expect:
The Land where naught but thorns and thistles grow,
Though well manured, no man does much respect:
Since God has given, he looks to receive:
Oh lets take heed how we our duty leave.
Did God with grievous punishments afflict
His holy offspring, faithful Abraham's seed?
When they themselves to folly did addict,
And him forget, that did them so long feed,
Abusing his most gracious clemency,
His patience, love, and sweet facility.
If his peculiar people he not spared,
Who first his laws and worship did enjoy:
If thus for their ingratitude it fared,
That they were smitten with such dire annoy:
Alas, what madness should the Gentile move?
To think that God does him more highly approve.
And since he has cut down his choicest vine,
Think thou the fruitless wild olive shall stand?
Oh no, it soon shall wither, rot and pine,
Like to our Saviors fig tree out of hand:
And thou whom God has thus with graces blessed:
If thankelesse, shall with dangers be distressed.
Yea, multitudes of mischeefes will thee follow,
And troops of bloody Traitors daily strive,
Thee in the jaws of treason up to swallow,
Of life and liberty thee to deprive.
Wherefore, that thou (o England) still may have
Gods friendly favor, thee from foes to save:
Preach and proclaim, with heart, tongue, pen and voice,
With thanks and praise, each hour, month and year,
Yea, teach thy childrens children to rejoice,
For this so great deliverance. And to bear
A deadly hatred, zealous detestation,
Of Romes false Doctrines, foul abomination.
FINIS.
A Psalm of thanksgiving for Englands most blessed deliverance from the most
horrible intended Powder Treason practiced by the Synagogue of Satan the Romish
Babilonians.
Psalm. 123. King DAVID against the Philistines. King JAMES against the
Anti-christians.


NOW may England confess, and say truly,
If that the Lord had not our cause maintained:
If that the Lord, had not our right sustained:
When Antichrist against us furiously
Made his proud bragg, and said we should all die.
Not long ago they had devoured us all,
And swallowed quick, for ought that we could deem:
Such was their rage, as we might well esteemd:
And as the floods, with mighty force do fall:
So had they then our lives even brought to thrall.
Our King and Queen, the Prince and Princely race,
Their Counsel grave, and chief Nobility:
The Learned Judges, and tribe of Leui:
With all the prudent Statesmen of this Land,
By Powder fierce, had perished out of hand.
The raging streams, of Rome with roaring noise,
Had with great woe ore-whelm'd us in the deep,
But blessed Lord, thou did us safely keep:
From bloody teeth, and their devouring jaws:
Which as a prey, had griped us in their claws.
But, as a bird out of the Fowlers grin
Escapes away, right so it fared with us:
Broke were their nets, and we have escaped thus:
God that made heaven and earth, is our help then:
His mercy saved us from these wicked men.
Oh let us therefore, with all thanks and praise,
Sing joyfully; to Christ our heavenly King
Whose wisdom high, this fact to light did bring:
Grant then O Lord we do thee humbly pray,
We may accord, to praise thy name always.
An Epigram against Jesuits, the Principal disturbers of Peace, the Authors
and Firebrands of Sedition and Treachery throughout the World: OR, The Romish
White Devil.
THE Fatal Sisters Latin Poets call
Parcae, though Parcunt nulli they kill all: Qui cum Jesus itis non itis cum
Iesuitis.

And Latinists the thick Wood Lueus write,
Ceu nunquam lucens wherein comes no light.
Bellum fierce war, is by them understood:
Ceu nunquam bonum as nere being good.
And by the same Antiphrasis, of late
The Jesuits to themselves appropriate
The sacred name of Jesus, though their works
Declare their lives, to be far worse than Turks.
Heavens lightness, brightness differs not so great,
From drossie vaporous Earth: nor Southern heat
To Northren chilling, killing frosts so far
Are different: nor from Lara, the Articke star
Is more remote than this rank of Make-shifts,
(Whose hateful life, craft, practice, subtle drifts
To all men are apparent) are unlike
To Christ, or Jesus doctrine: if y' outstrike
But even their name, and do their works behold,
Their best part then, will prove but dross to gould.
Do Thorns bear Grapes? or figs on thistles grow?
Or the hard Oak yield tender fruit? O noe.
The tree by's fruit may manifested be
On good trees good, on ill we bad fruit see.
The Jesuits doctrine, who to know does list,
It does of 5. Dees certainly consist: 5. Dees.

In Daunting subjects, and Dissimulation,
Depose, Disposing, Kings, Realms, and Destruction.
Whether the Jesuits come more near to those
Which bear the Arms of Christ, or Mars with blows
It is a question, but with ease discided:
As thus, Christ's soldiers ever are provided
Of these blessed weapons, Tears, Prayers, Patience,
These foil and spoil their foes with heavenly fence.
But Daggers, Dags, keen Swords, Poisons, Deceit,
Close fawning, treasons, wiles, to cousen and cheat.
These are the Jesuits Arms, and with these Arts
The Pope to Deifie, they play their parts.
Nor Faith, nor Piety their followers have,
They diuellishly against Truth rage and rave.
How fit those arms Loiolaes brats beseem,
Britain can witness, and the whole world deem.
I Will pass by other sleights, all in this one,
In this great Powder Treason all were shown.
Blush, blush, (O Jesuits) England knows too well,
Your Counsel furthered most this work of Hell.
Yea, impious Garnet for the traitors prayed,
Pricked and pusht forward those he might have staid:
Being accessory to this damned intent,
Which with one word this Jesuit might prevent.
Such barbarous traitors, and strange treachery
To hide, and silence, is gross villainy:
But oh, with Gencem anferte, etc.
Orizons, God to implore
To grant success, oh speak, was ere before
In all the world like wickedness ere known?
In any age such Monsters seen or shown?
Which, with religious shows shelter foul Crimes,
With Virtues cloak, hiding them often, often times,
And then, oh then, I tremble to declare,
Calling the Lord of Heaven with them to share
In this foul fact: nor yet heerewith content,
To offer Heaven this high disparagement:
But that they act more gross impiety,
If any can be worse, t'Heauens Deity.
These sacrilegious trators falsely think,
No surer bands themselves to tie and link
To secrecy, and resolution strong,
Than thereunto blasphemously to wrong,
Our Saviors glorious body and blood also,
To their eternal and infernal woe
And who so impious? so audacious bold?
In's wretched hand the Eucharist to hold,
Who was so godless, who so graceless trow?
So rich a Pearl unto such Swines to throw:
Who? but a Priest, of this society,
Would know his name? it was Gerard certainly.
Persuade your selves you holy Fathers all,
You have no wrong, though you may say we braule,
For naught is spoken against you but most right,
Then blush for shame, and hide your selves from sight,
Oh heavens, oh earth, oh treacherous times and season
Degenerous minds, and hard hearts void of reason,
Truly it is doubtful, difficult to tell;
Whether of these two mischiefs did excel:
At one blow bloodily so to confound,
The King and Queen, three Kingdoms so renowned:
The Nobles, Senate, thus to strike and stroy,
By Powder them to spoil with great annoy.
Or that Christ's glorious, sacred, body and blood,
His holy, yea most holy Supper should
By such damned vn-bidden-guests be taminated*
And by this holy band conglutinated
And linked together, with such vchemence
To perpetrate that Stygian foul pretense.
The Pristine Poets used in verse to sing
The noble gests, of every Prince and King,
But now it is needful in this weed-full age,
Wherein impiety and vice do rage,
Yea and all too too little to declare
The hateful times and crimes which most rise are.
Whose monstrousnes to paint to public sight,
The true relation would pass credit quite.
For to these stains, worthy eternal shame
Add this: which these good Fathers eke did frame:
I mean Equinocation, which they use,
Men's understanding neatly to abuse:
It Is doubtless Gyges ring, for, hereby they
Though captiuated, can themselves convey:
And with a trick which Jesuits use to try,
They can delude, and none can them descry:
They Will smooth and sooth, and one thing to you say,
And yet their heart goes clean another way.
This Ambiguity was Apollo's Art,
Under whose name the Devil played his part:
Even Tully, may these Popish Priests repr'end,
By whom such Lamb-skin Wolves are often condemned:
Who, if he now lived, o how is eloquence
Would thunder out Loiolaes impudence!
Satan that subtle Serpent did them teach,
This lying Art, they nere heard Christ so preach.
Are not these then Romes White-Deuils? fie for shame
Naught but bare out sides, their best part their name
Believe me, for Christ's goulden rule most true
(If truth it be, as it is,) this truth does show.
Their inclination smells of a Fugitive
Or Devil rather, or l'me not alive:
What was the Devil? a Liar, Homicide:
What Is he? a sly Dissembler, Regicide.
And with best reason may this Jesuit Devil
Most properly be called the Kings Evil.
If then, affinity of manners vile,
If just proportion of like fraud and guile,
If deeds so consonant and disposition
To practice greeable, may with permission
Avail to prove a truth: then (Magog) know,
These do a great part of thy warfare show;
And palpably declare, to th'truely wise,
This offspring did from thee their Father rise.
Auant you Locusts, hence you Spawne of Hell,
From whose black smoke you are derived full well.
If still you will the name of Jesus take,
Let all men know, you do it only make
A Cloak to hide your knavery, for you are
But Gray Wolves bearing in your front a slarre.
In stead of Jesus take you Judas name,
Your hatefullliues, will best befit the same:
For by your works we perfectly do find,
No part with Christ is unto you assigned.
An Epitaph dedicated to the neuer-ending memory of that Illustrious second
Alexander, Prince HENRY, that glorious day star of Britains comfort, too
soon hid from us by the cloud of Gods wrath: that most odoriferous flower of
Englands Hope, too suddenly nipt by the chilling frost of Heavens high
displeasure.
Ex Epic: Canta:
A Three fould Mother God thee gave
O Princely Youth
A Royal Queen, the Church, the Grave
Which caused our Ruth.
The Church thy Mother in her Lap the Queen in Womb
The Grave in Clay thy Corpse does wrap in Princely Tomb
The Church thee made a heavenly Saint a Prince the Queen
A Life-lesse Corpse Earth does depaint thee to be seen.
In Church eternized is thy Name The Queen.

SHE does deplore
Thy Loss. From Grave to Heavens high Frame, thou Namely when the body as well
as the soul, shall live eternally in heaven.
once shall soar.
Another of the same.
Exeodem ad eundem.
HENRY the As the fire or torch give, heat and light to others, but consume
themselves.
Heat of All, ah, his own fire,
HENRY brave Mars his Son, grave Arts sweet Sire,
HENRY Arts Nourceling, and great Mars his Master,
HENRY our Glory, but by Death, Disaster;
HENRY Romes Terror, whole Worlds Admiration;
HENRY our Day Star, and Suns Deprauation,
HENRY the Glory of the Henry's all;
HENRY, naught grieved us, as thy Funeral;
HENRY the Ninth was He? nay Nine in One
In HENRY di'de, the more's our grief and moan.
A succinct Memorial of that matchless Mirror of Princely Royalty, that
Queen of Virtue, Patroness of Christian Piety, and Parterne of most worthy
imitable Virtues, and endowments of Grace and Goodness, Angelical ELIZABETH,
late Queen of England.
Behold the Pourtract of fair Virtues Queen,
Rare Paragon of Time, by Fame still seen,
Sweet Nurse of Love, grave Wisdoms Darling dear,
Religions Fortress, Fortitudes chief Peer,
Chastities Lamp, Faiths Nourceling, Charity,
Constancies Bulwark, Gemme of Piety:
Delights fair Arbor, Pleasures Palace rare,
Where subjects hearts were freed from woe and care:
The Flower whose top, foul Envy nere could crop,
The Tree whose boughs, Traitors could never lop.
A pious Deborah to overthrow
Proud Sisera of Rome, Christ's mitred foe.
The Vine whose juice, t'hir subjects comfort gave,
The Rose of England flourishing most brave.
To whom fair Venus deigneth to give place,
As to the Mirror of Perfections Grace.
Whose princely, Noble, and Heroic mind,
Bids bold Semiramis come far behind.
Not chaste Diana with her Nymphs most fair,
With chaste Eliza dare attempt compare.
Whose learning, wit, and knowledge most profound,
Parnassus Nymphs with great applause resound.
Whose Amity, what King did not desire?
What potent Nation dreaded not her ire?
What puissant Keisar could her courage quell?
Who ere in ought Eliza could excel?
On whom as hand maids Peace and Plenty tended,
Whose life in glory led, in glory ended,
And though grim Death has robbed us of this treasure,
And She an Angel in celestial pleasure:
Yet still on earth her neuer-dying name
Shall propagated be by sounding fame.
An Aenigmaticall Riddle, which OEDIPVS himself can scarcely resolve.
A Bird of late,
When Birds could prate,
Said, black's the Crow.
The Crow replyde,
Told him he lyde,
And 'twas not so.
Mine eyes, quoth he,
Shall witness be,
That I am fair;
The Swan so white,
And Snow full bright,
Foul to me are.
The Bird again,
Laughing amain,
Said, strange it is not.
For why, one's eye
Cannot espy
The stain and spot,
Which it own face
Does much disgrace,
And vilify.
This matter strait
To arbitrate,
The Eagle high
Their King they move:
Who soon does prove
This folly great.
A Mirror fair
Bids them prepare,
Both large and neat:
The Crow it took,
Therein to look,
Whereon he gazed.
On's shape most true,
And proper hew,
Which he so praised.
Then with great shame,
He much did blame
His own bleare eyes:
And all thereby,
Did laugh full high,
And's pride despise.
This Riddle, if thou can resolve, thou shall Apollo be,
Or else another Oedipus, fair Phyllis take it to thee,
Laus soli sit Domino.
FINIS.

