THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.

IN TWO BOOKS.

BY PET. HEYLYN.

DEVT. 32. 7. Remember the days of old, consider the years of many
Generations: ask thy Father, and he will show thee; thy Elders, and they will
tell thee.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Tygers-head in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, CHARLES, By the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most dread Sovereign,
YOur Majesty's most Christian care to suppress those rigours, which some, in
maintenance of their Sabbath-Doctrines, had pressed upon this Church, in these
latter days; justly deserves to be recorded amongst the principal Monuments
of your zeal and piety. Of the two great and public enemies of Gods holy
Worship, although profaneness, in it self, be the more offensive; yet
superstition is more spreading, and more quick of growth. In such a Church as
this, so settled in a constant practice of Religious Offices, and so confirmed
by godly Canons, for the performance of the same: there was no fear, that ever
the Lords Day, (the day appointed by Gods Church for his public service) would
have been over-runne by the profane neglect of any pious duties, on that day
required. Rather the danger was, lest by the violent torrent of some men's
affections, it might have been ore-flowne by those superstitions; wherewith,
in imitation of the Jews, they began to charge it: and thereby made it far
more burdensome to their christian Brethren, than was the Sabbath to the
Israelites, by the Law of MOSES. Nor know we where they would have staid, had
not your Majesty been pleased, out of a tender care of the Churches safety,
to give a check to their proceedings; in licencing on that day, those Lawful
Pastimes, which some, without authority from Gods Word, or from the practice of
Gods Church, had of late restrained. Yet so it is, your Majesty's most pious,
and most Christian purpose, has not found answerable entertainment; especially
amongst those men, who have so long dreamt of a Sabbath day, that now they will
not be persuaded, that it is a Dream. For the awakening of the which, and
their reduction to more sound and sensible counsels, (next to my duty to Gods
Church, and your sacred Majesty) have I applied my self to compose this
Story; wherein I doubt not but to show them, how much they have deceived both
themselves and others, in making the old Jewish Sabbath, of equal age and
observation with the Law of Nature: and preaching their new Sabbath doctrines
in the Church of Christ, with which the church has no acquaintance; wherein I
doubt not but to show them, that by their obstinate resolution, not to make
publication of your Majesty's pleasure, they tacitly condemn, not only all
the Fathers of the primitive times: the learned Writers of all Ages, many most
godly Kings and Princes of the former days, and not few Councels of chief
note, and of faith unquestionable: but even all states of Men, Nations, and
Churches, at this present, whom they most esteem. This makes your Majesty's
interest so particular in this present History, that were I not obliged unto
your Majesty in any nearer bond, than that of every common Subject; it could
not be devoted unto any other, with so just propriety. But being it is the
Work of your Majesty's servant, and in part, fashioned at those times* which
by your Majesty's leave, were borrowed from attendance on your sacred person;
your Majesty has also all the rights unto it, of a Lord, and Master. So that
according to that Maxim of the civil Laws, Quodcunque perservum acquiritur,
id domino acquirit ^uo; Institut. l. 1. tit. ^. 5. 1.
your Majesty has as absolute power to dispose thereof, as of the Author: who
is,

Dread Sovereign, Your Majesty's most obedient Subject, and most faithful
Servant, PET. HEYLYN.


A PREFACE
To them, who being themselves mistaken, have misguided others, in these new
Doctrines of the Sabbath.
NOt out of any humor or desire of being in action, or that I love to have my
hands in any of those public quarrels, wherewith our peace has been
disturbed: but that posterity might not say, we have been wanting, for our
parts, to your information, and the direction of Gods people in the ways of
truth; have I adventured on this Story. A Story which shall represent unto you
the constant practice of Gods Church in the present business, from the Creation
to these days: that so you may the better see, how you are gone astray from
the paths of truth, and tendries of Antiquity, and from the present judgment
of all Men and Churches. The Arguments whereto you trust, and upon seeming
strength whereof you have been emboldned to press these Sabbatarian Doctrines
upon the consciences of poor people, I purpose not to meddle with in this
Discourse. (...). They have been elsewhere thoroughly canvassed, and all those
seeming strengths beat down, by which you were your selves misguided; and by
the which you have since wrought on the affections of unlearned men, or such at
least, that judged not of them by their weight, but by their numbers. But where
you give it out, as in matter of fact, how that the Sabbath was ordained by God
in Paradise, and kept accordingly by all the Patriarchs, before Moses time; or
otherwise ingraft by nature in the soul of man, and so in use also amongst the
Gentiles: in that, I have adventured to let men see, that you are very much
mistaken, and tell us things directly contrary unto truth of Story. Next, where
it is the groundwork of all your building, that the Commandment of the
Sabbath, is moral, natural, and perpetual; as punctually to be observed, as
any other of the first or second Table: I doubt not but it will appear by this
following History, that it was never so esteemed of by the Jews themselves; no
not when as the observation of the same, was most severely pressed upon them by
the Law and Prophets, nor when the day was made most burdensome unto them, by
the Scribes and Pharisees. Lastly, whereas you make the Lords day to be an
institution of our Savior Christ, confirmed by the continual usage of the
holy Apostles, and both by him and them imposed, as a perpetual ordinance, on
the Christian Church; making your selves believe, that so it was observed in
the times before, as you have taught us to observe it in these latter days: I
have made manifest to the world, that there is no such matter to be found at
all, either in any writings of the Apostles, or monument of true Antiquity, or
in the practice of the middle or the present Churches: What said I, of the
present Churches? so I said indeed; and doubt not but it will appear so in
this following Story: the present Churches, all of them, both Greek and
Latin, together with the Protestants of what name soever, being far
different, both in their Doctrine and their practice, from these new
conceptions. And here I cannot choose but note, that whereas those who first did
set on foot these Doctrines, in all their other practices to subvert this
Church, did bear themselves continually on the authority of Calvin, and the
example of those Churches, which came most near unto the Plat-forme of Geneva:
in these their Sabbath-speculations, they had not only none to follow; but
they found Calvin, and Geneva, and those other Churches, directly contrary unto
them. However in all other matters, they cried up Calvin and his writings,
making his Books the very Canon, to which both Discipline and Doctrine was to
be confirmed: Hooker in ^i^ Preface.
yet hic magister non tenetur, here by his leave they would forsake him, and
leave him fairly to himself, that they themselves might have the glory of a
new invention.

For you my Brethren, and beloved in our Lord and Savior, as I do willingly
believe, that you have entertained these tenets upon misperswasion, not out of
any ill intentions to the Church, your Mother; and that it is an error in your
judgments only, not of your affections: so upon that belief, have I spared
no pains, as much as in me is, to remove that error, and rectify what is
amiss in your opinion. I hope you are not of those men, Quos non persuadebis,
etiamsi persuaseris, who either hate to be reformed; or have so far espoused
a quarrel, that neither truth nor reason, can divorce them from it. Nor would
I gladly you should be of their resolutions, Qui volunt id verum esse quod
credunt, nolunt id credere quod verum est; who are more apt to think all true
which themselves believe, than be persuaded to believe such things as are true
indeed. In confidence whereof, as I was first induced to compose this History;
so in continuance of those hopes, I have presumed to address it to you, to
tender it to your perusal, and to submit it to your censure: that if you are
not better furnished, you may learn from hence, that you have trusted more
unto other men, than you had just reason. It is my chief endeavor, as it is
my prayer, that possibly I may behold Jerusalem in prosperity, all my life
long* Nor doubt I by the grace of God, to reduce some of you at the least, to
such conformity with the practice of the Catholic Church; that even your
hands may also labor in the advancement and promotion of that full prosp^rity,
which I so desire. This that I may the better do, I shall present you, as I
said, with the true Story of the Sabbath: and therein lay before your eyes, both
what the Doctrine was, and what the practice, of all former times; and how it
stands in both respects, with all Gods Churches, at this present. First, for
the Sabbath, I shall show you, that it was not instituted by the Lord in
Paradise, nor naturally imprinted in the soul of man, nor ever kept by any of
the ancient Fathers, before Moses time: and this, not generally said, and no
more but so; but proved particularly and successively, in a continued descent
of times and men. Next, that being given unto the Jews by Moses, it was not so
observed or reckned of, as any of the moral precepts; but sometimes kept, and
sometimes not; according as men's private businesses, or the necessities of the
state, might give way unto it: and finally was for ever abrogated, with the
other ce^emonies, at the destruction of the Temple. As for the Gentiles all
this while, it shall hereby appear, that they took no more notice of it,
(except a little, at the latter end of the Jewish State) than to deride both
it, and all them that kept it. Then for the Lords day, that it was not
instituted by our Savior Christ, commanded by the Apostles, or ordained first
by any other authority, than the voluntary consecration of it, by the Church,
to religious uses: and being consecrated to those uses, was not advanced to
that esteem, which it now enjoyes, but leisurely and by degrees, partly by the
Edicts of sec^lar Princes, partly by Canons of particular Councels, and finally
by the Decretals of several Popes, and ^rders of inferior Prelates: and being
so advanced, is subject still, as many Protestant Doctors say, to the Authority
of the Church, to be retained, or changed, as the Church thinks fit. Finally,
that in all Ages heretofore, and in all Churches at this present, it neither
was nor is esteemed of as a Sabbath day: nor reckned of so near a kin to the
former Sabbath, but that at all such leisure times, as were not destinate by
the Church to Gods public service; men might apply their minds and bestow
their thoughts, either about their businesses, or upon their pleasures, such as
are lawful in themselves, and not prohibited by those powers, under which they
lived. Which showed and manifestly proved unto you, I doubt not but those
paper-walls, which have been raised heretofore to defend these Doctrines, how
fair soever they may seem to the outward eye, and whatsoever colors have
been laid upon them; will in the end appear unto you to be but paper-walls
indeed: some beaten down by the report only of those many Canons, which have
successively been mounted in the Church of God; either to fortify the Lords
day, which it self did institute, or cast down those Jewish fancies, which
some had labored to restore. Such passages as occurred concerning England, I
purposely have deferred till the two last Chapters, that you may look upon the
actions of our Ancestors with a cleerer eye: both those who lived at the first
planting of Religion; and those who had so great an hand, in the reforming of
the same. And yet not look upon them only, but by comparing your (...)
Doctrines, with those which were delivered in the former times; your severe
practice, with the innocent^libertie which they used amongst them: you may the
better see your errors, and what strange incens^ you have offered in the
Church of God. A way, in which I have the rather made choice to wa^^e, that by
the practice of the Church in general, you may the better judge of those Texts
of Scripture, which seem to you to speak in the behalf of that new
Divinity, which you have preached unto the people: and by the practice of this
Church particularly, it may with greater case be showed you, that you did never
suck these Doctrines from your Mothers breasts.

It is an observation a^^ a ^ule in Law; that custom is the best interpreter
of a doubtful statute; and we are lesson'd thereupon, to cast our eyes, in
all such questionable matters, unto the practice of the state in the selfsame
case. De ligi^. and lo^ga consuet.
Si de interpretatione legis quaeritur, imprimis inspiciendum est, quo jure
civitas retro in hujusmodi casibus usa fuit: Consuedo enim optima interpretat
^o l^g^^ est. If you submit unto this rule, and stand unto the Plea which you
often have made: I verily persuade my self that you will quickly find your
error; and that withal you will discover, how to abet a new and dangerous
Doctrine, you have deserted the whole practice of the Christian Church, which
for the space of 1600. years, has been embraced and followed by all godly
men. These are the hopes which we project unto our selves. The cause of this
out undertaking, was your information; and the chief end we aim at is your
reformation: Your selves, my Brethren, and your good, if I may procure it, are
the occasion and the recompense of these poor (...) all prejudice, which
possibly you may be possessed withal, either in reference to the Argument, or
unto the Author: and (...) per^use thi^ following Story, with as much
^^^^glenesse of (...) of truth, and in^ocation of Gods Spirit to find out the
same; as was by me used in the writing of it. It is your welfare which I aim
a^, as before was said; your restitution to your functions, and reconciliation
to the Church, from which you are at point of falling: that we with you, and
you with us, laying aside those jealousies and distrusts, which commonly attend
o^ divided minds; may join our hearts and hands together for the advancement
of Gods Honor, and the Churches peace. And God even our own God, shall give
(...) his blessing.

For others which shall read this Story, whether by you misguided, or yet
left entire; I do desire them to take notice, that there i^ none so much a
stranger to good Arts and Learning, whom in this case and kind of writing, I
dare not trust with the full cognizance of the cause herein related. In points
of Law, when as the matter seems to be above the wit of common persons; or
otherwise is so involved and intricate, that there has been no Precedent
thereof in former times: it is put off to a demurrer, and argued by my Lords
the Judges, with their best maturitie of deliberation. But in a matter of fact,
we put our selves upon an ordinary Jury, not doubting, if the evidence prove
fair, the Witnesses of faith unquestioned, and the Records without suspicion
of imposture, but they will do their conscience, and find for Plaintiff or
Defend^nt, as the cause appears. So in the business* now in ^and, that part
thereof which consists most of argument, and strength of disputation, in the
examining of those reasons which Pro or Con have been alleged; are by me lef^
to be discussed and weighed by them, who either by their place are called, or
by their learning are enabled to so great a business. But for the point of
practice, which is matter of fact, how long it was, before the Sabbath was
commanded, and how it was observed, being once commanded; how the Lords day
has stood in the Christian Church, by what authority first instituted, in what
kind regarded: these things are offered to the judgment and consideration of
the meanest Reader. No man that is to be returned on the present Jury, but may
be able to give up his verdict, touching the title now in question* unless he
come with passion, and so will not hear, or else with prejudice and so will
not value, the evidence which is produced for his information. For my part, I
shall deal ingenuously, as the cause requires, as of sworn counsel to the
truth; not using any of the mysteries or Arts of pleading, but as the holy
Fathers of the Church, the learned Writers of all Ages, themost renowned
Divines of these latter times, and finally as the public Monuments and
Records of most Nations christened have furnished me in this inquiry. What
these, or any of them have herein either said, or done, or otherwise left upon
the Register for our direction, I shall lay down in order, in their several
times; either the times in which they lived, or whereof they writ: that so we
may the better see the whole succession both of the doctrine, and the practice
of Gods Church, in the present business* And this with all integrity and
sincere proceeding, not making use of any Author, who has been probably
suspected of fraud or forgery; nor dealing otherwise in this search, than as
becomes a man who aims at nothing more than Gods public service, and the
conducting of Gods people in the ways of truth. This is the sum of what I
had to say in this present Preface; beseeching God, the God of truth, yea the
truth it self, to give us a right understanding, and a good will to do
thereafter.

SYLLABVS CAPITVM.
PART. I.
CHAP. I.
That the Sabbath was not instituted in the beginning of the World. (1) The
entrance to the Work in hand. (2) That those words Genesis 2. And God blessed the
seventh day, etc. are there delivered as by way of Anticipation. (3)
Anticipations in the Scripture confessed by them, who deny it here. (4)
Anticipations of the same nature not strange in Scripture. (5) No Law imposed
by God, on Adam, touching the keeping of the Sabbath. (6) The Sabbath not
ingraft by nature, in the soul of man. (7) The greatest Advocates for the
Sabbath, deny it to be any part of the law of nature. (8) Of the morality and
perfection suppos^d (...) be in the number of seven, by some learned men. (9)
That Other numbers in the confession of the same learned men, particularly the
first, third, and fourth, are both as moral and as perfect, as the seventh.
(10) The like is proved of the sixth, eighth, and tenth, and of other numbers.
(11) The Scriptures not more favorable to the number of seven, than they are to
others. (12) Great caution to be used by those, who love to recreate themselves
in the mysteries of numbers.
CHAP. II.
That there was no Sabbath kept, from the Creation to the Flood. (1) Gods rest
upon the seventh day, and from what he rested. (2) Zanchius conceit touching
the sanctifying of the first seventh day by Christ our Savior. (3) The like of
Torniellus, touching the sanctifying of the ^ame, by the Angels in heaven. (4)
A general demonstration that the Fathers before the Law, did not keep the
Sabbath. (5) Of Adam, that he kept not the Sabbath. (6) That Abel and Seth did
not keep the Sabbath. (7) Of Enos, that he kept not the Sabbath. (8) That
Enoch and Methusalem did not keep the Sabbath. (9) Of Noah, that he kept not
the Sabbath. (10) The Sacrifices and devotions of the Ancients were
occasional.
CHAP. III.
That the Sabbath was not kept from the Flood to Moses. (1) The Sons of Noah
did not keep the Sabbath. (2) The Sabbath could not have been kept, in the
dispersion of Noah's sons, had it been commanded. (3) Diversity of
Longitudes and Latitudes, must of necessity make a variation in the Sabbath.
(4) Melchisedech, Heber, Lot, did not keep the Sabbath. (5) Of Abraham and his
sons, that they kept not the Sabbath. (6) That Abraham did not keep the
Sabbath, in the confession of the Jews. (7) Jacob nor Job no Sabbath-keepers.
(8) That neither Jacob, Joseph, nor the Israelites in Egypt, did observe the
Sabbath. (9) The Israelites not permitted to offer sacrifice, while they were
in Egypt. (10) Particular proofs that all the moral Law was both known and
kept amongst the Fathers.
CHAP. IV.
The nature of the fourth Commandment: and that the Sabbath was not kept
amongst the Gentiles. (1) The Sabbath first made known in the fall of Mannah.
(2) The giving of the Decalogue, and how far it binds. (3) That in the
Judgment of the Fathers in the Christian Church, the fourth Commandment is of
a different nature from the other nine. (4) The Sabbath was first given, for a
Law, by Moses. (5) And being given, was proper only to the Jews. (6) What
moved the Lord to give the Israelites a Sabbath. (7) (...) the seventh day was
rather chosen for the Sabbath, than any other. (8) The seventh day not more
honored by the Gentiles, than the eighth or ninth. (9) The Attributes given by
some Greek Po^ts to the seventh day, no Argument that they kept the Sabbath.
(10) The Jews derided for their Sabbath, by the Grecians, Romans, and
Egyptians. (11) The division of the year into weeks, not generally used, of
old, amongst the Gentiles.
CHAP. V.
The practice of the Jews in such observances, as were annexed unto the
Sabbath. (1) Of some particular adjuncts affixed unto the Jewish Sabbath. (2)
The Annual Festivals called Sabbaths in the Book of God, and reckned as a
part of the fourth Commandment. (3) The Annual Sabbaths no less solemnly
observed and celebrated, than the weekly were; if not more solemnly. (4) Of
the Parasceve or Preparation to the Sabbath, and the solemn Festivals. (5) All
manner of work, as well prohibited on the Annual, as the weekly Sabbaths.
(6) What things were lawful to be done on the Sabbath days. (7) Touching the
prohibition of not kindling fire, and not dressing meat. (8) What moved the
Gentiles generally to charge the Jews with fasting on the Sabbath day. (9)
Touching this prohibition, Let no man go out of his place on the Sabbath day.
(10) All lawful recreations, as dancing, feasting, man-like exercises, allowed
and practiced by the Jews upon their Sabbaths.
CHAP. VI.
Touching the observation of the Sabbath, unto the time, the people were
established in the promised Land. (1) The Sabbath no^ kept constantly during
the time the people wandered in the wilderness. (2) Of him that gathered
sticks on the Sabbath day. (3) Wherein the sanctifying of the Sabbath did
consist, in the time of Moses. (4) The Law not ordered to be read in the
Congregation, every Sabbath day. (5) The sack of Hi^richo, and the destruction
of that people, was upon the Sabbath. (6) No Sabbath after this without
Circumcision; and how that ceremony could consist with the Sabbaths rest. (7)
What moved the Jews to prefer Circumcision* before the Sabbath. (8) The
standing still of the Sun ^t the prayer^ of Iosuah, etc. could no^ but make
some alteration about the Sabbath. (9) What wa^ the Priests work on the
Sabbath day; and whether it might ^^and with the Sabbaths rest. (10) The (...)
of the Levites over all the Tribes, had (...) relation unto the reading of the
Law, on the Sabbath day.
CHAP. VII.
Touching the keeping of the Sabbath, from the time of David to the Macchabees.
(1) Particular necessities must give place to the Law of Nature. (2) That
David's flight from Saul, was upon the Sabbath. (3) What David did being King of
Israel, in ordering things about the Sabbath. (4) Elijahs flight upon the
Sabbath; and what else happened on the Sabbath, in Elijahs ^ime. (5) The
limitation of a Sabbath days journey, not know^e amongst the Jews when Elisha
lived. (6) The Lord becomes offended with the Jewish Sabbaths* and on what
occasion. (7) The Sabbath (...) by the Samaritans, and their strange ^^^ities
therein. (8) Whether the Sabbaths were observed d^ring the captivity. (9) The
special care of Nehemiah to reform the Sabbath. (10) The weekly reading of
the Law on the Sabbath day, begun by Ezra. (11) No Synagogues nor weekly
reading of the Law, during the Government of the Kings. (12) The Scribes and
Doctors of the Law, impose new rigours on the people, about their Sabbaths.
CHAP. VIII.
What does occur about the Sabbath, from the Macchabees, to the destruction
of the Temple. (1) The Jews refuse to fight in their own defense, upon the
Sabbath; and what was ordered thereupon. (2) The Pharisees, about these times,
had made the Sabbath burdensome by their traditions. (3) Jerusalem twice taken
by the Romans, on the Sabbath day. (4) The Romans, many of them, Iudaize, and
take up the Sabbath; as other nations did by the Jews example. (5) Whether the
Strangers dwelling amongst the Jews did observe the Sabbath? (6) Augustus
Caesar very gracious to the Jews, in matters that concerned their Sabbath. (7)
What our Redeeme^ taught, and did, to rectify the abuses of, and in the
Sabbath. (8) The small ruin of the Temple, and the Jewish Ceremonies, on a
Sabbath day. (9) The Sabbath abrogated with the other Ceremonies. (10) Wherein
consists the Christian Sabbath mentioned in the Scriptures, and amongst the
Fathers. (11) The idle and rediculous nicities of the modern Jews, in their
Parasce^es and their Sabbaths, conclude this first part.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I.
That there is nothing found in Scripture, touching the keeping of the Lords
day. (1) The Sabbath not intended for a perpetual ordinance. (2) Preparatives
unto the dissolution of the Sabbath, by our Savior Christ. (3) The Lords day
not enjoined in the place thereof, either by Christ, or his Apostles: but
instituted by the authority of the Church. (4) Our Saviors Resurrection upon
the first day of the week, and apparition on the same, make it not a Sabbath.
(5) The coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the first day of the week, makes
it not a Sabbath. (6) The first day of the week, was not kept more like a
Sabbath than the other days, by Peter, Paul, or (...) other of the Apostles.
(7) Saint Paul frequents the Synagogues on the Jewish Sabbath; and upon what
reasons. (8) What was concluded against the Sabbath, in the Council holden at
Jerusalem. (9) The preaching of Saint Paul at Troas, upon the first day of the
week, no Argument, that then that day was set apart by the Apostles for
religious exercises. (10) Collections on the first day of the week 1 Cor. 16.
conclude as little for that purpose. (11) Those places of Saint Paul, Galat. 4.
10. Coloss. 2. 16. do prove in (...) Lords day, until the end of this first
Age: and what that title adds unto it.
CHAP. II.
In what estate the Lords day stood, from the death of the Apostles, to the
reign of Constantine. (1) Touching the Order^, s^^led by the Apostles, for the
Congregation. (2) The Lords day, and the Saturday both Festivals, and both
observed in the East, in Ignatius time. (3) The Saturday not without great
difficul^y made fasting day. (4) The controversy about keeping Easter; and how
much it conduces to the present business. (5) The ^east of Easter (...) to
the Lords day, without much opposition of the Eastern (...). (6) what Justin
Martyr, and Dionysius of Corinth have left us of the Lords day: with Clemens
Alera^drinus his dislike thereof. ((...) the Christians of these Ages used to
pray, standing* on the Lords day, and the time of Pentecost. (8) what is
recorded by Tertullian of the Lords day; and the assemblies of the Church. (9)
Origin, as his master, Clemens, had done before, dislikes set days for the
Assembly. (10) Saint Cyprian, what he tells us of the Lords day; and of the
reading of the Scriptures, in Saint Cyprians time. (11) Of other holy days
established i^ these three first Ages; and that they were observed as
solemnly, as the Lords day was. (12) The name of Sunday, often used by the
primitive Christians, for the Lords day; but the Sabbath, never.
CHAP. III.
That in the fourth Age from the time of Constantine to Saint Augustine, the
Lords day was not taken for a Sabbath day. (1) The Lords day first established,
by the Emperor Constantine. (2) What labors were permitted, and what
restrained on the Lords day by this Emperors Edict. (3) Of other holy days,
and Saints days, instituted in the time of Constantine. (4) That weekly,
other days, particularly the Wednesday and the Friday, were in this Age, and
those before, appointed for the meetings of the congregation. (5) The Saturday
as highly honored in the Eastern Churches, as the Lords day was. (6) The
Fathers of the Eastern Church cry down the Jewish Sabbath, though they held
the Saturday. (7) The Lords day not spent wholly in religious exercises: and
what was done with that part of it, which (...) left at large. (8) The Lords
day, in this Age, a day of Feasting: and that it has been always judged
haereticall, to hold fasts thereon. (9) Of recreations on the Lords day; and of
what kind those dancings were, against the which the Fathers inveigh so
sharply. (10) Other Imperial Edicts about the keeping of the Lords day, and
the other holy days. (11) Of public Orders on the Lords day, and the other
holy ^ayes, at this time in use. (12) The infinite dif^erences between the
Lords day and the Sabbath.
CHAP. IV.
The great improvement of the Lords day in the fifth and sixth Ages, make it not
a Sabbath. (1) In what estate the Lords day stood in Saint Austins time. (2)
Stage Plays and public shows prohibited on the Lords day, and the other
holy days, by Imperial Edicts. (3) The base and beastly nature of the
Stage Plays, at those times, in use. (4) The barbarous and bloody quality of
the Spectacula, or Shows, at this time prohibited. (5) Neither all civil
business, nor all kind of pleasures, restrained on the Lords day, by the
Emperor Leo; as it is conceived. (6) The French and Spaniards, of the sixth
Age, begin to Iudaize about the Lords day: and of restraint of husbandry on
that day, in that Age first made. (7) The so much cited C^non of the Council
of Mascon proves no Lords day Sabbath. (8) Of public honors, done, in these
Ages, to the Lords day, both by Prince and Prelate. (9) No Evening Service on
the Lords day, till these present Ages. (10) of public orders now established,
for the better regulating of the Lords day meetings. (11) The Lords day not
more reckoned of than the greater Festivals; and of the other holy days, in
these Ages instituted. (12) All business, and recreation not by Law
prohibited, are in themselves as lawful on the Lords day, at on any other.
CHAP. V.
That in the next 600. years, from Pope Gregory forewards, the Lords day was
not reckned of, as of a Sabbath. (1) Pope Gregory's ^are to set the Lords day
free from some Jewish rigours, at that time obtruded on the Church. (2) Strange
fancies taken up, by some few men about the Lords day, in these darker Ages.
(3) Scriptures, and miracles, in th^se times found out, to justify the keeping
of the Lords day holy. (4) That in the judgment of the most learned in these
six Ages, the Lords day has no other ground, than the authority of the
Church. (5) With how much difficulty the people of these west^rne parts were
barred, from following their husbandry, and Courts of Law, on the Lords day.
(6) Husbandry not restrained in the Eastern parts, until the time of Leo
Philosophus. (7) Markets, and Handy-crafts, restrained with no less
opposition, that the Plough, and pleading. (8) Several casus reservati in the
Laws themselves, wherein men were permitted to attend those businesses, on the
Lords day, which the Laws restrained. (9) Of diverse great and public actions,
done, in these Ages, on the Lords day. (10) Dancing and other sports, no
otherwise prohibited on the Lords day, than as they were an hindrance to Gods
public service. (11) The other holy daye^, as much esteemed of, and observed,
as the Lords day was. (12) The public hallowing of the Lords day, and the
other holy days, in these present Ages. (13) No Sabbath all these Ages heard
of, either on Saturday, or Sunday: and how it stood with S^turday, in the
Eastern Churches^*
CHAP. VI.
What is the judgment of the Schoolmen, and of the Protesta^t^, and what the
practice of those Church^^ in this Lord's Day ^usin^sse. (1) That in the
judgment of the Schoolmen, the keeping of one da^ in seven, is not the
moral part of the 4. Commandment* (2) as also that the Lords day is not
founded on divine authority, but the authority of the Church. (3) A Catalogue
of the holy days (...) up in the Council of Lions* and the new doctrine of
the Schools, ^ouching the natural sanctity of the holy days. (4) In what
estate the Lords day stood, in matter of restraint from labor, at the
Reformaton, (5) The Reformatiours find great fault both with the said ^ew,
doctrine, and restraints from labor. (6) That in the judgment of the
P^otestant Divines, the ^^^ctifying of one day in seven is not the moral part
of the 4. Commandment. (7) As also that the Lords day has no other ground, on
which so stand, than the authority of the Church. (8) And that the Church has
power to change the day, and to transfer it to some others. (9) What is the
practice of the Roman, Lutheran, and chiefly the Calvinian Churches on the
Lords day, in matter of devotion, rest from labor, and sufferance of lawful
pleasure. (10) Dancing cried do^ne by Calvin, and the French Churches, not in
relation to the Lords day, but the sport it self. (11) In what estate the
Lords day stands in the Eastern Churches: and that the Saturday is observed by
the Ethiopians, as the Lords day is.
CHAP. VII.
In what estate the Lords day stood in this Isle of Britain, from the first
planting of Religion to the Refor^^tion. (1) What does occur about the Lords
day, and the other Festivals, amongst the Churches of the Brittans. (2) Of the
estate of the Lords day, and the other holy days in the Saxon Hep^ar^hie. (3)
The honors done unto the Sunday, and the other holy days, by the Saxon
Monarchs. (4) Of public actions, civil, Ecclesiastical, mixed, and military,
done on the Lords day under the first six Norman Kings. (5) New Sabbath
doctrines br^ached in England in King John's reign; and the miraculous
original of the same. (6) The prosecution of the former Story, and ill
success therein of the undertakers. (7) Restrain of worldly business on the
Lords day, and the other holy days, admitted in these times in Scotland. (8)
Restraint of certain servile works on Sundays, holy days, and the Wakes,
concluded in the Council of Oxon under King Henry* 3. (9) Husbandry and
legal process prohibited on the Lords day, first, in the reign of King
Edward 3. (10) Se^^ing of Woollon the Lords day, and the solemn Feasts
forbidden first by the said King Edward; as after, Faires, and Markets
generally by King Henry 6. (11) The Cordwainers of London restrained from
selling of their wares on the Lords day, and some solemn feasts, by King
Edward the 4. and the repealing of that Law by King Henry the 8. (11) In what
estate the Lords day stood, both for the doctrine and the practice, in the
beginning of the Reign of the said King Henry.
CHAP. VIII.
The Story of the Lords day from the reformation of Religion in this Kingdom,
till this present time. (1) The Doctrine of the Lords day and the Sabbath
delivered by ^. s^v^rall Martyrs, conformably unto the judgment of the
Protestants before remembered. (2) The Lords day, and the other holy days
confessed by all this Kingdom, in the Court of Parliament, ^o have no other
gr^^nd than the authority of the Church. (3) The meaning* and occasion of that
clause in the Common Prayer Book, Lord have mercy upon us, etc. repeated (...)
end of the fourth Commandment. (4) That by the Queens Injunctions, and the
first Parliament of her reign, the Lords day was not meant for a Sabbath day.
(5) The doctrine in the Homilies delivered, about the Lords day and the
Sabbath. (6) The (...) and substance of that Homily; and that it proves no
Lords day Sabbath; but the contrary. (7) The first original of (...)
Sabbath^specula^ions in this Church of England; by whom, and for what cause
invented. (8) Strange and most monstrous Paradoxes, preached on occasion of the
former doctrines; and other effects thereof. (9) What care was taken of the
Lords day in King James his Reign; the spreading of the former doctrines; and
of the Articles of Ireland. (10) The Jewish Sabbath set on foot: and of King
James his Declaration about lawful sports on the Lords day. (11) What tracts
were writ and published in that Princes Reign, in opposition of the Doctrines
before remembered. (12) In what estate the Lords day and the other holy days
have stood in Scotland, since the reformation of Religion in that Kingdom.
(13) Statutes about the Lords day made in the Reign of our dread Sovereign
now being, and the misconstruing of the same: his Majesty reviveth and
enlarges the Declaration of King James. (14) An exhortation to obedience unto
his Majesty's most Christian purpose, concludes this History.
An Advertisement to the Reader, touching the Errata.
THat the Errata of this Book, are g^^wne unto so great a number, is neither
novum crime^, nor in auditum. We may with far (...) complain thereof, than
we can amend it: yet for the present I have taken the best care I could,
although not to prevent, yet to correct them. Such as are me^^ely literal, or
no impediment to the sense, are left unto the Readers care, and ingenuity. The
rest, the Greek alone excepted, (which both for accent and for letter, has
been exceeding much mistaken) are here collected to thy ^and; and are these
that follow. viz.

PART. 1.
P. 8. l. 14 r. I deny not. p. 9 l. 17 r. narratione. p. 10 l. 34 r. posaiv^^.
p. 13. l. 10 r. Ames. p. 16. l. 25. for which r. what. p. 19. l. 4. r. wherein
Bodinus. p. 21 l. 2 r. multa. p. 23 l. 17 r. palliate their. p. 27 l. 29 del.
says. p. 3 r 1 32 r. S^bbatizasse. p. 32 l. 22 r. which does. p. 37 r.
present. p. 57 l. 36 r. dictated. p. 76 l. 31 r. notes it of every month. p.
83 l. 13 r. weeks. p. 94 l. 8 for one, r. on the. p. 95 l. 34 r. against
Marcion. p. 104 in marg. r. In ^^ta sua. p. 114 l. ^8 r. dedicated. p. 121 l.
26 r. Commonwealth. p. 135 l* 37 for the other, r. those. p. ^39 r. Iss^char.
p. 147 l. 3^ yet was it not. p. 161 l. 5 r. Tamuz. p. 177 l. 5 r. Load.

PART. 2.
Epistle l. 2. r. part. p. 12 l. 7 for as it is, r. who, as (...) ls. p. 13 l.
5 r. (...) Christus. p. 23 l. 9 del. ancient. p. 27 l. 37 r. from whom it
seems. p. 47 l. 21 r. decretory ib. l. 25 r. neither for the. p. 49 l. 9 r.
(...) ib. 17 del. Bu^. p. 57 l. 5 r. the old use in. p. 58 l. 5 for nor* r.
now. ib. l. 34. r. instituted by. ib. l. 35 r. in those. p. 62 l. 13 r. as not
to. p. 66 l. 29. r. entitled. p. 69. l. 1. for evil, r. civil. ib. 11 r.
runs. ib. 19 20 for care, many, r. ceremony. p. 71 del. up. p. 73 l. 22 r. on
wednesdayes. p. 74 l. 31 ^. Iudaisme. p. 75 l. 1 r. fair. p. 76 l. 11. for
Romish, r. Jewish. ib. l. 23 r. contrived. ib. 34 for Two, r. To. p. 82. l. 17
for or, read on. ib. 28 r. followers. p. 88 l. 1 r. discreet behavior. p. 91
l. 10 for Easter, r. Earth. p. 101 l. 10 r. possessed, ib. l. 23 r. fifth
Centurie. p. 107 l. ^ r. whereas tha^. p. 112 l. 34 del. that. p. 116 l. 4 r.
wholly. p. 130 l. 31 for true, r. its true. p. 144 l. 34 r Ovied^. p. 147 l. 20
r. Chartres. p. 175. l. 33 r. Ryve^. p. 224 l. 13 r. envying. p. 226 l. 9 for
now in, r. now at the first. p. 230 l. 37 r. clause. p. 253 r. on the jews. p.
255 l. 35 r. the Musicians head. p. 258 l. 31 r. with as much violence. p. 260
l. 4. for or, r. on. p. 263 l. 11. r. go back a little. p. 265. l. 35. r. 560.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.

THE FIRST BOOK.

From the Creation of the World, to the destruction of the Temple.

BY PET. HEYLYN.

EXODUS 31. 15, 16. Wherefore the children of Israel shall keep the Sabbath, to
observe the Sabbath throughout their generations* it is a sign between me
and the children of Israel, for ever.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Tygers-head in Saint Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.
CHAP. I.
That the SABBATH was not instituted in the beginning of the World.
(1) The entrance to the work in hand. (2) That those words* Genes. 2. And God
blessed the seventh Day, etc. are there delivered, as by way of anticipation.
(3) Anticipations in the Scripture confessed by them, who deny it here. (4)
Anticipations of the same nature not strange in Scripture. (5) No Law imposed
by God on Adam, touching the keeping of the Sabbath. (6) The Sabbath not
ingraft by nature in the soul of man. (7) The greatest Advocates for the
Sabbath, deny it to be any part of the Law of Nature. (8) Of the morality and
perfection, supposed to be in the number of seven, by some learned men. (9)
That other numbers in the confession of the same learned men, particularly the
first, third, and fourth, are both as moral and as perfect as the seventh.
(10) The like is proved of the sixth, eighth, and tenth; and of other numbers.
(11) The Scripture not more favorable to the number of seven, then it is to
others. (12) Great caution to be used by those, who love to recreate themselves
in the mysteries of numbers.

(1) I Purpose by the grace of God to write an History of the Sabbath, and to
make known what practically has been done, therein, by the Church of God, in
all ages past, from the Creation till this present: Primaque ab origin mundi,
ad mea perpetuum deducere tempora carmen. One day, as David tells us, teaches
another. Nor can we have a better Schoolmaster in the things of God, then the
continual and most constant practice of those famous men, that have gone
before us. An undertaking of great difficulty, but of greater profit. In which
I will crave leave to say, as does Saint Austine, in the entrance to his Book^
de Civitate; Magnum opus and arduum, sed Deus est adjutor noster. Lib. 1. c. 1.
Therefore* most humbly begging the assistance of Gods holy Spirit to guide me
in the way of truth, I shall apply myself to so great a work; beginning with
the first beginnings, and so continuing my discourse, successively, unto these
times, wherein we live. In which no accident of note, as far as I can
discern, shall pass unobserved, which may conduce to the discovery of the
truth, and settling of the minds of men in a point so controverted. On therefore
(...) to the present business. In the beginning (says the Text) God created
the Heaven and the Earth. Genesis 2.
Which being finished, and all the hosts of them made perfect, on the seventh
day God ended his work which ^e had made, and he rested on the seventh day
from all his work which he had made. And then it follows* And God blessed
the seventh day and sanctified it, because that in it he had rested from all
his work, which God created and made. Unto this passage of the text, and this
point of time, some have referred the institution and original of the Sabbath;
taking these words to be a plain narration of a thing then done, according to
that very time, wherein the Scripture does report it: And that the sanctifying
of the seventh day therein mentioned, was a Commandment given by God to our
Father Adam, touching the sanctifyng of that day to his public worship.
Conceiving also that there is some special mystery and morality in the number
of seven, for which that day, and none but that, could be designed and set
apart for this employment. Others and those the ancienter, and of more
authority, conceive these words to have been spoken by a Prolepsis or
Anticipation; and to relate unto the times wherein Moses wrote. And that it was
an intimation only of the reason why God imposed upon the Jews, the
sanctifying rather of the seventh day, then of any other: no precept to that
purpose being given to Adam and to his posterity; nor any mystery in that
number, why of it self it should be thought most proper for Gods public
service. The perfect stating of these points, will give great light to the
following story. And therefore we will first crave leave to remoove these
doubts before we come to matter of fact, that afterward I may proceed with the
greater ^ase unto my se^f, and satisfaction to the Reader. The groundwork or
foundation laid, the building will be raised the surer.

(2) And first it is conceived by many learned men, that Moses in the second of
Genesis relates unto the times in the which he lived, and wrote the History of
the Creation: when God had now made known his holy will unto him, and the
Commandment of the Sabbath had by his Ministry been delivered to the house of
Israel. This is indeed the ancienter and more general tendry, unanimously
delivered both by Jew and Christian; and not so much as questioned til these
later days. And howsoever some ascribe it to Tostatus, as to the first
inventer of it; yet is it ancienter far then he: though were it so, it could
not be denied, but that it had an able and a learned Author. A man, considering
the times in which he lived, and the short time of life it pleased God to give
him; that hardly ever had his equal. I^ Genesis 2.
Its true, Tostatus thus resolves it. He makes this quaere first, Number Sabbatum
cum a Deo sanctificatum fuerit in primordio mundi rerum, etc. Whether the
Sabbath being sanctified by God in the first infancy of the World, had been
observed of men, by the Law of nature. And thereunto returns this answer, quod
Deus non dederit praceptum illud de observatione Sabbati in principio, sed per
Mosen datum esse, etc. That God commanded not the Sabbath to be sanctified in
the beginning of the World, but that it was commanded afterward by the Law of
Moses; when God did publicly make known his will upon Mount Sinai. And that
whereas the Scripture speaks of sanctifying the seventh day, in the second of
Genesis, it is not to be understood, as if the Lord did then appoint it, for
his public worship; but is to be referred unto the time wherein Moses wrote,
which was in the Wilderness. Et sic Moses intendebat dicere quod Deus illum
diem sanctificavit sc. nobis, etc. And so the meaning of the Prophet will be
briefly this, that God did sanctify that day, that it to us, to us that are
his people of the house of Jacob, that we might consecrate it to his service.
So far Tostatus. In which I must confess, that I see not any thing, but what
Josephus said before him, though in other words: who speaking of the Worlds
Creation, does conclude it thus, (...), etc. So that Moses says, Antiqu. l. 1.
2.
that the World and all that is therein was made in six whole days and that
upon the seventh day God took rest, and ceased from his labors. (...), etc. By
reason whereof we likewise desist from travail on that day, which we call the
Sabbath, i. e. repose. So that the institution of the Sabbath by Tostatus; and
the observation of it, by Josephus; are both of them referred, by their us, and
we, unto the times of Moses, and the house of Israel. Nor is Josephus the only
learned man amongst the Jews, that so interprets Moses meaning Solomon
Iarchi, one of the principal of the Rabbis speaks more expressly to this
purpose; and makes this Gloss or Comment upon Moses words* Benedixit ei, i.e.
in manna, etc. God blessed the seventh day, i.e. in Mannah, because for every
day of the week, an Homer of it fell upon the earth, and a double portion on
the sixth, and sanctisied it, i.e. in Mannah, because it fell not on the seventh
day at al. Et scriptura loquitur de refutura. And in this place (says he) the
Scripture speaks as of a thing that was to come. But what need more be said.
Mercer a learned Protestant, In Genesis 2.
and one much co^versant in the Rabbis, confesses that the Rabbis generally
referred this place and passage to the following times, even to the
sanctification of the Sabbath, established by the Law of Moses. Hebreifere ad
futuru^ referunt, i.e. sanctificationem Sabbati postea lege per Mosen sancitam:
unde and Manna eo die non descendit. And howsoever for his own part, he is of
opinion, that the first Fathers being taught by God, kept the seventh day holy:
yet he conceives withal, that the Commandment of keeping holy the Sabbath
day, was not made till afterward. Nam hinc (from Gods own resting on that day)
postea praeceptum de Sabbato natum est, as he there has it. Doubtless, the
Jews, who so much doted on their Sabbath, would not by any means have robbed
it of so great antiquity; had they had any ground to approve thereof, or not
known the contrary. So that the scope of Moses in this present place, was not
to show the time when; but the occasion, why the Lord did after sanctity the
seventh day for a Sabbath day: viz. because that on that day he rested from the
works which he had created.

(3) Nor was it otherwise conceived, then that Moses here did speak by way of
Prolepsis, or Anticipation, till Ambrose Catharin, one of the great sticklers
in the Trent-Councell, opined the contrary. He in his Comment on that text
falls very foul upon Tostatus; and therein leads the dance to others, who have
since taken up the same opinion. Ineptum est quod quidam commentus est, etc. It
is a foolish thing (says he) that* In Genesis 2.
(as a certain Writer fancieth) the sanctification of that day which Moses
speaks of, should not be true as of that very point of time whereof he speaks
it, but rather is to be referred unto the time wherein he wrote: as if the
meaning only were, that then it should be sanctified when it was ordered and
appointed by the Law of Moses. And this he calls Commentum ineptum, and contra
literam ipsam, and contra ipsius Moseos declarationem; A foolish and absurd
conceit, contrary unto Moses words, and to his meaning. Yet the same Catharin
does affirm in the self same Book, Scripturis frequentissimum esse multa per
anticipationem narrare; that nothing is more frequent in the holy Scriptures,
then these anticipations. And in particular, that whereas it is said in the
former Chapter, male and female created he them, per anticipationem di^tum esse
non est dubitandum, that (without doubt) it is so said by anticipation: the
woman not being made, as he is of opinion, till the next day after, which was
the Sabbath. For the Anticipation he cites Saint Chrysostom, who indeed tells
us on that text, (...). Behold, says he, how that which was not done as yet,
is here related as if done already. He might have added, for the purpose,
Origin on the first of Genesis, and Gregory the Great, Moral. lib. 32. cap. 9.
both which take notice of a Prolepsis, or Anticipation in that place of Moses.
For the creation of the woman he brings in Saint Jerome, who in his Tract
against the Jews expressly says, mulierem conditam fuisse die septimo, that
the woman was created on the seventh day or Sabbath: to which this Catharin
assents, and thinks that thereupon the Lord is said to have finished all his
works on the seventh day; that being the last that he created. This seems
indeed to be the old tradition, if it be lawful for me to digress a little:
it being supposed that Adam being wearied in giving names unto all creatures on
the sixth day, in the end whereof he was created; did fall that night into a
deep and heavy sleep: and that upon the Sabbath or the seventh day morning
his side was opened, and a rib took thence, for the creation of the woman. Aug
Steuchiu^ in Genesis 2.
So Augustinus Steuchius reports the Legend. And this I have the rather noted,
to meet with Catharinus at his own weapon. For whereas he concludes from the
rest of God, that, without doubt, the institution of the Sabbath began upon
that very day wherein God rested: it seems, by him, God did not rest upon that
day, and so we either must have no Sabbath to be kept at all; or else it will
be lawful for us by the Lords example to do what ever work we have to do,
upon that day; and after sanctify the remaynder. And yet I needs must say
withal, that Catharinus was not the only he, that thought God wrought upon
the Sabbath. Problem l^^. 5^
Aretius also so conceived it. Dies itaque tota non fuit quiet transacta, sed
perfecto opere ejus deinceps quievit, ut Hebraeus contextus habet. Mercer a man
well skilled in Hebrew, denies not but the Hebrew text will bear that
meaning. In Gen* 2.
Who thereupon conceives that the seventy Elders in the translation of that
place, did purposely translate it, (...), that on the sixth day God finished all
the work that he had made, and after rested on the seventh. And this they did,
says he, ut omnem dubitandi occasionem tollerent, to take away all hint of
collecting thence, that God did any kind of work upon that day. For if he
finished all his works on the seventh day, it may be thought (says he) that
God wrought upon it. Saint Hierome noted this before, that the Greek text was
herein different from the Hebrew; and turns it as an argument against the
Jews; and their rigid keeping of the Sabbath. Artabimus igitur Iudaeos qui de
ocio Sabbati gloriantur, Qu Hebrai^^ in Genesis
quod jam tunc in principio Sabbatum dissolutum sit, dum Deus operatur in
Sabbato, complens opera sua in eo; and benedicens ipsi diei, quia in ipso
vniversa compleverat. If so, if God himself did break the Sabbath, as Saint
Hierome turns upon the Jews: we have small cause to think that he should at
that very time, impose the Sabbath as a Law upon his creatures.

(4) But to proceed. Others that have took part with Catharinus against
Tostatus, have had as ill success as he; in being forced either to grant the
use of anticipation in the holy Scripture; or else to run upon a tenet, wherein
they are not like to have any seconds. I will instance only in two
particulars, both Englishmen, and both exceeding zealous in the present cause.
The first is Doctor Bound, who first of all did set a foot these Sabbatarian
speculations in the Church of England, 2. Edit. p. 10.
wherewith the Church is still disquieted. He determines thus. I deny says he,
but that the Scripture speaks often of things, as though they had been so
before, because they were so then, when the things were written. As when it is
said of Abraham, that he remooved unto a Mountain Eastward of Bethel, whereas
it was not called Bethel till above a hundred years after. The like may be
said of another place in the Book of Judges called Bochin, etc. yet in this
place of Genesis it is not so. And why not so in this, as well as those?
Because (says he) Moses entreats there of the sanctification of the Sabbath,
not only because it was so then when he wrote that Book, but specially
because it was so even from the Creation. Which by his leave, is not so much a
reason of his opinion, Medull^ Th^ol. l. 2 c. 15. ^ 9.
as a plain begging of the question. The second Doctor Ames, the first I take
it, that sowed Bounds doctrine of the Sabbath, in the Netherlands. Who says
expressly first, and in general terms, hujusmodi prolepseos exemplum nullum in
tota scriptura dari posse, that no example of the like anticipation can be
found in Scripture; the contrary whereof is already proved. After more warily,
and in particular, de hujusmodi institutione Proleptica, that no such
institution is set down in Scripture, by way of a Prolepsis or Anticipation,
either in that Book, or in any other. And herein, as before I said, he is not
like to find any seconds. We find it in the sixteenth of Exodus, that thus
Moses said. This is the thing which the Lord commands: Verse. 32.
Fill an Omer of it [of the Mannah] to be kept for your generations, that they
may see the bread wherewith I have fed you in the Wilderness, when I brought
you forth from the land of Egypt. It follows in the text, that as the Lord
commanded Moses, Verse. 34.
so Aaron laid it up before the testimony to be kept. Here is an ordinance of
Gods, an institution of the Lords, and this related in the same manner, by
anticipation, as the former was. Lyra upon the place affirms expressly, that it
is spoken there per anticipationem: and so does Vatablus too, in his
Annotations on that Scripture. But to make sure work of it, I must send Doctor
Ames to school to Calvin, who tells us on this text of Moses, non contexuit
Moses historiam suo ordine, sed narrarem (...) interposita, melius confirmat,
etc. Indeed it could not well be otherwise interpreted. For how could Aaron lay
up a pot of Mannah to be kept before the testimony, when as yet there was
neither Arc, nor Tabernacle, and so no testimony before which to keep it. To
bring this business to an end, Moses has told us in the place before
remembered, that the children of Israel did eat Mannah forty years, Verse. 35.
which is not otherwise true, in that place and time, in which he tells it, but
by the help and figure of anticipation. And this Saint Austin noted in his
questions upon Exodus, Qu. 62.
significat scriptura per Prolepsin, i. e. hoc loco commemorando quod etiam
postea factum est. And lastly, where Amesius sets it down for certain, that no
man ever thought of an anticipation in this place of Moses, Verse supra.
qui praejudicio aliquo de observatione diei Dominicae non prius fuit prius
anticipatus, who was not first possessed with some manifest prejudice against
the sanctifying of the Lords day: this cannot possibly be said against
Tostatus, who had no enemy to encounter, nor no opinion to oppose, and so no
prejudice. We conclude then, that for this passage of the Scripture, we find
not any thing unto the contrary, but that it was set down in that place and
time, by a plain and mere anticipation; and does relate unto the time wherein
Moses wrote: And therefore no sufficient warrant to fetch the institution of
the Sabbath, from the first beginnings. One only thing I have to add, and
that's the reason which moved Moses, to make this mention of the Sabbath, even
in the first beginning of the Book of God, and so long time before the
institution of the same. Which doubtless was, the better to excite the Jews
to observe that day, from which they seemed at first to be much averse: and
therefore were not only to be minded of it, by a Memento in the front of the
Commandment; but by an intimation of the equity and reason of it, even in the
entrance of Gods Book, derived from Gods first resting on that day after all
his works. Theodoret has so resolved it, in his Questions on the Book of
Genesis, Qu 21.
Maxim autem Iudaeis ista scribens, necessario posuit hoc, sanctisific avit
eum^, ut majore cultu prosequantur Sabbatum. Hoc enim in legibus sanciendis
inquit, sex diebus creavit Deus, etc.

(5) I say an intimation of the equity and reason of it, for that's as much as
can be gathered from that place: though some have labored what they could, to
make the sanctifying of the seventh day, therein mentioned, a precept given by
God to our Father Adam touching the sanctifying of that day, to his public
worship. Of this I shall not now say much, because the practice will disprove
it. Only I cannot but report the mind and judgment of Pererius a learned
Jesuit. Who amongst other reasons that he has alleged, to prove the
observation of the Sabbath not to have took beginning in the first infancy of
the World, makes this for one: that generally the Fathers have agreed on this,
Deum non aliud imposuisse Adamo praeceptum omnino, posit^^^um nisi illud de non
edendo fructu arboris scientiae, etc. that God imposed no other Law on Adam,
then that of the forbidden fruit of the Tree of knowledge. Of which since he
has instanced in none particularly, I will make bold to lay before you some
two or three; that so out of the mouths of two or three witnesses the truth
hereof may be established. And first we have Tertullian, Adv. Iudaeos.
who resolves it thus. Namque in principio mundi ipsi Adae and Evae legem
dedit, etc. In the beginning of the World, the Lord commanded Adam and Eve that
they should not eat of the fruit of the tree, which is in the middle of the
Garden. Which Law (says he) had been sufficient for their justification, had
it been observed. For in that Law, all other precepts were included, which
afterward were given by Moses. S. Basil next, De jeunio.
who tells us first, that abstinence or fasting was commanded by the Lord in
Paradise. And then, (...), etc. the first Commandment given by God to Adam,
was that he should not eat of the tree of knowledge. The very same, which is
affirmed by Saint Ambrose in another language, Lib. de Elia and jejunio c.^.
Et ut sciamus non esse novum jejunium, primam illic legem, [i. e. in Paradise]
constituit de jejunio. So perfectly agree in this, the greatest lights both of
African, the Eastern, and the Western Churches. If so, if that the law of
abstinence had been alone sufficient for the justification of our Father Adam,
as Tertullian thinks; or if it were the first law, given by God unto him, as
both Saint Basil and Saint Ambrose are of opinion: then was there no such law
at all then made, as that of sanctifying of the Sabbath; or else not made
according to that time and order, wherein this passage of the Scripture is laid
down by Moses. And if not then, there is no other ground for this Commandment
in the Book of God, before the wandering of Gods people in the Wilderness, and
the fall of Mannah. A thing so clear, that some of those, who willingly would
have the Sabbath to have bin kept from the first Creation; and have not the
confidence to ascribe the keeping of it, to any ordinance of God, but only to
the voluntary imitation of his people. And this is Torniellus way, Ann* 236.
amongst many others, who though he attribute to Enos both set forms of
prayer, and certain times by him selected for the performance of that duty;
praecipue vero diebus Sabbati, In die 7.
especially upon the Sabbath: yet he resolves it as before, that such as
sanctified that day, if such there were; non ex praecepto divino, quod nullum
tunc extabat, sed ex pietate solum, id egisse. Of which opinion, Mercer seems
to be, as before I noted. So that in this particular point, the Fathers and the
modern Writers; the Papist and the Protestant, agree most lovingly together.

(6) Much less did any of the Fathers, or other ancient Christian Writers,
conceive that sanctifying of the Sabbath, or one day in seven, was naturally
ingrafted in the mind of man, from his first creation. Its true, they tell us
of a Law, which naturally was ingrafted in him. So Chrysostom affirms, In
Romans 7. 12. ^om. 12.
that neither Adam, nor any other man, did ever live without the guidance of
this Law: and that it was imprinted in the soul of man, as soon as he was
made a living creature. (...) as that Father has it. But neither he nor any
other, did ever tell us that the Sabbath was a part of this law of nature: nay,
some of them expressly have affirmed the contrary. Theodoret for example, In
Ezech. c. 20.
that these Commandments, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not commit adultery,
Thou shall not steal, and others of that kind, alios quoque homines natura
edo^uit, were generally implanted by the law of nature, in the minds of men.
But for the keeping of the Sabbath, it came not in by nature, but by Moses law.
At Sabbati observandi non natura magistra, sed latio legis. So. Theodoret. And
answerably thereunto Sedulius does divide the law into three chief parts.
Whereof the first is de Sacramentis, In Romans 3.
of signs and Sacraments, as Circum^^sion, and the Passover: the second is,
quae congruit legi naturali, the body of the Law of nature, and is the summary
of those things which are prohibited by the words of God: the third and last,
factorum, of ^ites and ceremonies (for so I take it is his meaning) as new
Moons and Sabbaths* which cle^rly does exempt the Sabbath, from having any
thing to do with the law of nature. De (...) ^ide l 4 c. 24.
And Damascen assures too, that when there was no law enacted, nor any
Scripture inspired by God, that then there was no Sabbath neither (...). To
which three Ancients we might add many more of these later times, In Dec^l^g.
Ryvet and Medulla theol. l. 2 cap. 15.
A^^es, and diverse others, who though they plead hard for the antiquity of the
Sabbath: dare not refer the keeping of it, to the law of nature, but only
(as we shall see annon) unto positive laws, and divine authority. But hereof
we shall speak more largely when we are come unto the promulgating of this
Law, in the time of Moses: where it will evidently appear to be a positive
Constitution only, fitted peculiarly to the Jews; and never otherwise
esteemed of, then a Jewish Ordinance.

(7) Its true, that all men generally have agreed on this, that it is consonant
to the law of nature, to set apart some time to Gods public service: but that
this time should rather be the seventh day, then any other, that they impute
not unto any thing in nature; but either to divine, legal, or Ecclesiastical
institution. The Schoolmen, Papists, Protestants, men of almost all persuasions
in religion, have so resolved it. And for the Ancients, our venerable Bede
assures us, that to the Fathers before the law, all days were equal; the
seventh day having no prerogative before the others: In Lu^. 19.
and this he calls naturalis Sabbati libertatem, the liberty of the natural
Sabbath, which ought (says he) to be restored at our Saviors coming. If so,
if that the Sabbath or time of rest unto the Lord, was naturally left free and
arbitrary, then certainly it was not restraind more unto one day the^ another;
or to the seventh day, more than to the sixth or eighth. Even Ambrose Catharin,
as stout a cha^pion as he was for the antiquity of the Sabbath, finds himself
at a loss about it. For having took for granted, as he might indeed, that
men by the prescript of nature, were to assign peculiar times for the service
of God; and adding that the very Gentiles used so to do: is fain to shut up all
with an Ignoram^s. Nesci^^^ modo quem diem praecipue observarunt prisci illi
Dei cult^res. We cannot well resolve (says he) what day especially was
observed by those who worshipped God in the times of old. Wherein he does agree
exactly with Ab^lensis, against whom principally he took up the bucklers; who
could have taught him this, if he would have learnt of such a Master, that
howsoever the Hebrew people, or any other, before the giving of the Law, were
bound to set apart some time for religions duties: non ^amen magis in Sabbat^,
In Exodus 20. Qu. 11.
quam in quolibet ali^rum dierum, yet were they no more bound to the Sabbath
day than to any other. So for the Protestant Writers, two of the greatest
Advocates of the Sabbath, have resolved accordingly. Quod dies ille solennis
unus debeat esse in septimana, hoc positivi juris est; that's Amesius doctrine.
And Ryvet also says the same, Lege de Sabbato pos^tiv^^, non naturalem
agnosci^us. The places were both cited in the forme^ Section; and both do make
the Sabbath a mere positive Law. But what need more be said in so clear a
case; o^ what needs further Witnesses be produced to give in evidence, when we
have con^^tentem (...). For Doctor Bound, who first amongst us here endeavored
to advance the Lords day into the place of the Jewish Sabbath; and fained a
pedigree of the Sabbath even from Adams infancy: has herein said enough to
betray his cause, and those that since have either built upon his foundation;
or beautified their undertakings with his collections. Indeed (says he) this
law was given in the beginning, not so much by the light of nature, as the rest
of the nine Commandments were; but by express words when God sanctified it.
For though this be in the law of nature, that some days should be separated to
Gods worship, as appears by the practice of the Gentiles: yet that it should
be every seventh day, 2. Ed^^ p 11. and 16.
the Lord himself set down in express words; which otherwise by the light of
nature they could never have found. So that by his confession, there is no
Sabbath to be found in the law of nature; no more then by the testimony of the
Fathers, in any positive law, or divine appointment, until the Decalogue was
given by Moses.

(8) Nay, Doctor Bound goes further yet; and robs ^is friends and followers of
a special argument. For where Danaeus asks this question, Why one of seven
rather then one of eight or nine; and thereunto makes answer, that the number of
seven does signify perfection and perpetuity: First, says the Doctor, Ib. p.
69.
I do not see that proved, that there is any such mystical signification,
rather than of any other. And though that were granted, yet do I not find that
to be any cause at all in Scripture, why the seventh day should be commanded to
be kept holy, rather then the sixth, or eighth. And in the former page. The
special reason why the seventh day should be rather kept than any other, is
not the excellency or perfection of that number, or that there is any mystery
in it, or that God delights more in it, than in any other: though, I confess
(says he) that much is said that way, both in divine and humane Writers. Much
has been said therein; indeed, so much, (...) we may wonder at the strange
niceties of some men, and the unprofitable pains they have took amongst them,
in searching out the mysteries of this number; the better to advance, as they
conceive, In Genesis 2.
the reputation of the Sabbath. Aug. Steuchius has affirmed in general, that
this day and number is most natural, and most agreeable to divine employments,
and therefore in omni aetate inter omnes gentes habitus venerabilis and sacer,
accounted in all times and Nations, as most venerable; and so have many others
said since him. But he that lead the way unto him, and to all the rest, is
Philo the Jew; who being a great follower of Platos, took up his way of
trading in the mysteries of several numbers: wherein he was so intricate and
perplexed, that numero Platonis obscurius, did grow at last into a Proverb.
This Philo therefore Platonizing, Tu^. ad Attic. l. 7. Epl. 13.
first tells us of this number of seven, (...), that he persuades himself, De
mundi ^pificio.
there is not any man able sufficiently to extol it; as being far above all
the powers of Rhetoric: and that the Pythagoreans (from them first Plato
learnt those trifles) did usually resemble it, (...), even to Jove himself.
Then, that Hippocrates does divide the life of man into seven ages, each age
containing seven full years; to which the changes of man's constitution are all
framed and fitted: as also that the Bear, or Arcturus, as they use to call it,
and the constellation called the Pleiades, consist of seven stars severally,
neither more nor less. He shows us also, De legis All^g. l. 1
how much nature is delighted in this number, (...), as viz. that there are
seven Planets, and that the Moon quartereth every seventh day, that Infants
borne in the seventh month are usually like enough to live; that there are
seven several motions of the body, seven intrailes, so many outward members,
seven holes, or out-lets, in the same, seven sorts of excrements; as also that
the seventh is the critical day in most kinds of maladies. And to which
purpose this, and much more of the same condition, every where scattered in his
Writings; but to devise some natural reason for the Sabbath. For so he
manifests himself in another place. Ap. Eusebius. Praepar. l. ^. c. 7.
(...), etc. Now why God chose the seventh day, and established it by law for
the day of rest, you need not ask at all of me, since both Physicians and
Philosophers have so often declared, of what great power and virtue that number
is, as in all other things, so specially on the nature and state of man. (...).
And thus (says he) you have the reason of the seventh day Sabbath. Indeed
Philosophers and Physicians and other learned men of great name and credit,
have spoken much in honor of the number of seven, and severally impute great
power unto it in the works of nature; and several changes of man's body.
Whereof ^ee C^nsorinus de die natali, cap. 12. Varro in Gellius lib. 3. c. 10.
Hippocrates, Solon, and Hermippus Beritus in the sixth Book of Clemens of
Alexandria, besides diverse others. Nay, it grew up so high in the opinion of
some men, that they derived it at the last, (...), i. e. ab insita maj^state.
So Philo tells us. Macrobius also says the same. De legis All^gor.
Apud veteres (...) vocitatur, quod graeco nomine testabatur venerationem
debitam numero. Thus he in Somnio Scipionis.

(9) But other men as good as they find no such mystery in this number, but
that the rest may keep pace with it, if not go before it: and some of those
which so much magnify the seventh, have found, as weighty mysteries in many of
the others also. In which I shall the rather enlarge my self, that seeing the
exceeding great both contradiction and ^ontention that is between them in these
needl^^e curiosities; we may the better find the slightness of those
arguments, which seem to place a great moraliti^ in this number of seven; as
if it were by nature the most proper number for the service of God. And first,
whereas the learned men before mentioned, affixe a special power unto it in
the works of nature, Iustine the Martyr plainly tells us, Respo^s. ad qu 69.
(...), etc. that the accomplishment of the works of nature is to be ascribed
to nature only, not unto any period of time accounted by the number of seven:
and that they of^ times come to their perfection sooner, or later, then the
said periods; which could not be, in case that nature were observant of this
number, as, they say, she is, and not this number tied to the course of
nature. (...), etc. Therefore (says he) this number has no influence on the
works of nature. Then whereas others attribute I know not what perfection to
this number above all the rest; Cicero affirming that it is plenus numerus;
Macrobius, that it is numerus solidus and perfectus: De Repu^ l. l. 4.
Bodinus does affirm expressly, neutrum de septenario dici potest, that neither
of those attributes is to be ascribed unto this number; that the eight number
is a solid number, although not a perfect one; the sixth a perfect number also.
Now as Bodinus makes the eighth more solid, and the sixth more perfect; so
Servius on these words of Virgil, Septima post decimam foelix, In Georgic. 1.
preferres the tenth number a far deal before it: Vt primum locum decimae
ferat, quae sit valde faelix; secundum septimae, ut quae post decimae
foelicitatem secunda sit. Nay, which may seem more strange then this, the
Arithmeticians generally, Ora^io secund^.
as we read in Nyssen, make this seventh number to be utterly barren and
unfruitful, (...). But to go forwards in this matter. Macrobius who before had
said of this number of seven, that it is plenus and venerabilis; has in the
same Book said of the number of one, that it is principium finis and omnium*
and that it has a special reference or resemblance unto God on high: which is
by far the greater commendation of the two. In Amos 5.
And Hierom, that however there be many mysteries in the number of seven: prima
tamen beatitudo est, esse in primo numero, yet the prime happiness or
beatitude is to be sought for in the first. So for the third, In Genesis hom. 8.
Origin generally affirms that it is aptus sacramentis, even made for
mysteries: and some particulars he names. Macrobius finds in it all the
natural facultie^ of the Soul; (...), or rational; (...)* or irascible, and
last of all (...), or concupiscible. Saint Athanasius makes it equal
altogether with the seventh; Ad Antioch* qu. 51.
the one being no less memorable for the holy Trinity, then the other for the
Worlds Creation. And Servius on these words of Virgil, numero Deus impare
gaudet, In Eclog. ^.
says that the Pythagoreans hold it for a perfect number, and do resemble it
unto God, a quo principium and medium, and finis est. De repub. l. 4.
Yet on the contrary, Bodinus takes up Aristotle, Plutarch, and Lactantius, for
saying that the third is a perfect number: there being in his reckoning, but
four perfect numbers in 100000; which are 6. 28. 496. and 8128. Next for the
fourth, De mundi opif.
Philo, not only has assured us, that it is (...), a perfect number, Bodinus
contradicts him: but that it is highly honored, De Abrahamo.
as amongst Philosophers, so by Moses also, who has affirmed of it, that it
is, (...), both holy, and prayse-worthy too. And for the mysteries thereof,
Clemens of Alexandria tells us, that both Jehovah in the Hebrew, Strom. l. 5.
and (...) in the Greek, consists of four letters only: Orat. 44.
and so does Deus in the Latin. Nazianzen further does inform us, that as the
seventh amongst the Hebrew, so was the fourth honored by the Pythagoreans:
(...), and that they used to swear thereby when they took an oath. Yet for
all this, Saint Ambrose thought this number not alone unprofitable but even
dangerous also. Numerum quartum plerique canent, and inutile putant, Lib 4. c. 9
as he in his Hexaemeron. Then for the fifth, Macrobius tells us that it
comprehends all things both in the Heavens above, In Levit. hom ^6
and the earth below. And yet by Origin it is placed indifferently, partly in
laudabilibus, partly in culpabilibus; there being five foolish Virgins for the
five wise ones.

(10) Now let us look upon the sixth, which In Genesis 2*
Beda reckons to be numerus perfectus; and Bodin, De rep. l. 4.
primus perfectorum. De mundi opif.
Philo, and generally the Cle^ Alex. S^rom l. 4.
Pythagoreans do affirm the same. Yet the same Bodin* tells us in the
selfsame Book, that howsoever it be the first perfect number, such as
according unto Plato, did sort most fitly with the workmanship of God: Videmus
tamen vilissimis animantibus convenire, yet was it proper, in some sort, In
Levit 12.
to the vilest creatures. As for the eighth, Hesychius makes it an expression,
or figure of the world to come. Macrobius, tells us that the Pythagoreans used
it as an Hieroglyphick of Justice, quia primus omnium solvitur in numeros
pariter pares; because it will be always divisi^le into even or equal
members. Nay, whereas those of Athens did use to sacrifice to Neptune, on the
eighth day of every month: In These^.
Plutarch has found out such a mystical reason for it, out of the nature of
that number; as others in the number of seven, for the morality of the
Sabbath. They sacrifice (says he) to Neptune on the eighth day of every
month, because the number of eight is the first Cube, made of even numbers,
and the double of the first square: (...), which does represent an immovable
steadfastness properly attributed to the might of Neptune; whom for this cause
we name Asphalius and (...), which signifies the safe keeper and stayer of
the earth. As strong an argument for the one, as any mystery or morality
derived from numbers, can be for the other. But if we look upon the tenth, we
find a greater commendation given to that, then to the seventh: yea, by those
very men themselves, to whom the seventh appeared so sacred. Philo affirms
thereof, De mundi ^pific.
that of all numbers it is most De congress. qu erudi^. gr.
absolute and complete; not meanly celebrated by the Prophet Moses; most proper
and familiar unto God himself; De Decalog^.
that the powers and virtues of it are innumerable: and finally, that learned
men did call it (...), because it comprehended in it self all kind of numbers.
With whom agree Macrobius, who styles it numerum perfectissimum; and Strom. l.
6.
Clemens Alexandrinus, who gives it both the attributes of holiness and
perfection, Qu. ad Antioch 51.
Nazianzen and* Ora^. ^2.
Athanasius are as full, as they. And here this number seems to me to have
got the better: there being nothing spoken in disgrace of this, as was before
of the seventh, by several Authors there remembered. So that for ought I see,
in case the argument be good for the morality of the Sabbath, we may make every
day, or any day a Sabbath, with as much reason as the seventh: and keep it on
the tenth day, with best right of all. Ad^o argumenta ab absurdo petita in^ptos
habent exitus, said Lactantius truly. Nay, by this reason, we need not keep a
Sabbath oftener, then every thirtieth day, or every fiftieth, or every hundredth:
because those numbers have been noted also to contain great mysteries, and to
be perfecter too then others. For Origin has plainly told us, that if we
look into the Scriptures, In Gen him. 2.
invenies nulla magnarum rerum gesta sub tricenario and quinquegenario
contineri; we shall find many notable things delivered to us in the numbers of
thirty and fifty. Of fifty more particularly Philo affirms upon his credit,
De vita contempl.
that it is (...), the holiest and most natural of all other numbers: and
Origin conceived so highly of it, that he breaks out into a timeo hujus numeri
secreta discutere, In Number. ^om. 8.
and durst not touch upon that string. So lastly for the Centenary the same
Author tells us, that it is plenus and perfectus, no one more absolute. In Genesis
him* 2.
We may have Sabbaths at our will, either too many, or too few, if this plea
be good.

(11) Yea, but perhaps, there may be some thing in the Scripture, whereby the
seventh day may be thought more capable, in nature, of so high an honor. Some
have so thought indeed, and thereupon have mustered up all those texts of
Scripture, in which there^ has been any good expressed or intimated which
concerns this number, or is reducible unto it. Bellarmine never took more
pains, out of that fruitless topic to produce seven Sacraments: then they
have done from thence to derive the Sabbath. I need not either name the men, or
recite the places: both are known sufficiently. Which kind of proof if it be
good, we are but where we were before, amongst our Ecclesiastical and humane
Writers. In this, the Scriptures will not help us, or give the seventh day
naturally, and in it self, more capability or fitness for Gods worship, then
the ninth or tenth. For first the Scriptures give not more honor to this
number in some texts thereof, then it detracts from it in others: and secondly,
they speak as highly of the other numbers, as they do of this. The Jesuit
Pererius shall stand up, In Genesis 6. n. 17.
to make good the first; and Doctor Cracanthorp to avow the second. Pererius
first resolves it clearly, numerum Septenarium etiam in rebus pessimis and
execrandis saepenumero positum esse in Scriptura^ sacra. As for example. The
evil spirit (says Saint Luke) brought with him seven spirits worse then
himself: and out of Mary Magdalen did Christ cast out seven Devils, as Saint
Mark tells us. So in the Revelation, Saint John informs us of a Dragon that
had seven heads and seven Crowns, as also of seven plagues, sent into the
earth, and seven Viols of Gods wrath powered out upon it. (He might have told us
had he listed, that the purple beast whereon the great Whore rid, had seven
heads also, and that she sat upon seven Mountains.) It Is true (says he)
which David tells us, that he did praise God seven times a day: but then as
true it is, which ^olomon has told us, that the just man falls seven times a
day. So in the book of Genesis, we have seven lean kine, and seven thin
ears of Corn; as well as seven fat Kine* and seven full Ears: To proceed no
further. Pererius hereupon makes this general resolution of the case; Apparet
igitur eosdem numeros, aeque in bonis and malis poni, and usurpari in sacra
scriptura. Next whereas those of Rome, Contra Spalat. cap. 30.
as before I noted, have gone the same way to find out seven Sacraments: our
Cracanthorpe, to show the vanity of that argument, does the like, for the
proof of two. Quod and si nobis fas esset, etc. If it were lawful for us to
take this course, we could produce more for the number of two, then they can
for seven. As for example, God made two great lights in the Firmament, and gave
to man two eyes, two ears, two feet, two hands, two arms. There were two
Nations in the womb of Rebecca, two tables of the Law, two Cherubins, two
Sardonich stones in which were written the names of the sons of Israel. Thou
shall offer to the Lord, two Rams, two Turtles, two Lambs of an year old, two
young Pigeons, two Hee-goats, two Oxen for a peace offering. Let us make two
Trumpets, two Doors of the wood of Olives, two Nets, two Pillars. There were
two Horns of the Lamb, two Candle sticks, two Olive branches, two Witnesses,
two Prophets, two Testaments; and upon two Commandments hang all the Law and
the Prophets, says our Savior. Congruentiis facile vinceremus, si nobis in
^une campum descendere libet, etc. We should (says he) presume of an easy
victory, should we thus dally with congruities, as do those of Rome. Hence we
conclude, that by the light of Scripture, we find not anything in nature, why
either every seventh day should; or every second day should not be a Sabbath.
Not to say any thing of the other numbers, of which the like might be affirmed,
if we would trouble our selves about it.

(12) Its true, this trick of trading in the mysteries of numbers, is of long
standing in the Church, and of no less danger: first borrowed from the
Platonists and the Pythagoreans; by the ancient Heretics, Marcion, Valentinus,
Basilides, and the rest of that damned crew; the better to disguise their
errors, and their palliate impieties. Some of the Fathers afterward took up
the devise, perhaps to foil the Heretics at their own weapons: though many of
them purposely declined it: Sure I am Chrsostome dislikes it. In Genesis him 24*
Who on those words in the 7. of Genesis, by seven and by seven (which is the
number now debated) does instruct us thus. (...), etc. Many (says he) do
tell strange matters of this fact, and taking an occasion hence, make many
observation, out of several numbers. Whereas not observation, but only an
unseasonable curiosity has produced those fictions, (...), from whence so
many heresies had their first original. For oftentimes (that out of our
abundance we may fit their fancies) we find the even or equal number no
less commemorated in holy Scripture, as when God sent out his Disciples by
two, and two: when he chose twelve Apostles, and left four Evangelists. But
these things it were needles to suggest to you, who have so many times been
lessened, (...), to stop your ears against such follies. Saint Augustine also,
though he had descanted a while upon the mysteries of this number: De Civil.
Dei, l. 11. c. 31.
yet he cuts off himself, in the very middle, as it were, Ne scientiolam suam
leviter magis quam utiliter, jactare velle videatur; lest he should seem to
show his reading, with more pride, then profit. And thereupon he gives this
excellent rule, which I could wish had been more practiced in this case;
Habenda est itaque ratio moderationis and gravitatis, ne forte cum de numero
multum loquimur, mensuram and pondus negligere judicemur. We must not take,
says he, so much heed of numbers, that we forget at the last, both weight
and measure. And this we should the rather do, because that generally there
is no rule laid down, or any reason to be given in nature, why some particular
numbers have been set apart for particular uses, when other numbers might have
served: why Hiericho should be rather compassed seven times, then six or
eight; why Abraham rather trained three hundred and eighteen of his servants,
then three hundred and twenty; or why his servant took ten Camels with him
into Padan Aram, and not more or less: with infinite others of this kind in
the Law Leviticall. Yet I deny not, but that some reason may be given, why in
the Scripture, things are so often ordered by sevens and sevens: viz* as Justin
Martyr tells (...), R^spons. ad qu. 69.
the better to preserve the memory of the Worlds Creation. Another reason may
be added, which is, by this inculcating of the number of seven, unto the Jews,
to make that people, who otherwise were at first averse from it, as before I
noted, continually mindful of the Sabbath. Numerum septenarium propter
Sabbatum Iudaeis familiarem esse, In Esaiae. 4.
was the observation of Saint Hierom. To draw this point unto an end, It is
apparent by what has before been spoken, that there is no Sabbath to be found
in the beginning of the World, or mentioned as a thin done, in the second of
Genesis: either on any strength of the Text it self, or by immediate ordinance
and command from God, collected from it, or by the law and light of nature
imprinted in the soul of man, at his first creation: much less by any
natural fitness in the number of Seven, whereby it was most capable in it
self of so high an honor, which first premised, we shall the easier see what
has been done in point of practice.

CHAP. II.
That there was no SABBATH kept, from^ the Creation, to the Flood.
(1) Gods rest upon the seventh day, and from what he rested. (2) Zanchius
conceit touching the san^tifying of the first seventh day, by Christ our
Savior (3) The like of Torniellus, touching the sanctifying of the same, by
the Angels in Heaven (4) A general demonstration that the Fathers before the
Law, did not keep the Sabbath. (5) Of Adam, that he kept not the Sabbath. (6)
That Abel, and Seth did not keep the Sabbath. (7) Of Enos, that he kept not
the Sabbath. (8) That Enoch and Methusalem did not keep the Sabbath. (9) Of
Noah, that he kept not the Sabbath. (10) The Sacrifices and devotions of the
Ancients were occasional.

(1) HOw little ground there is, whereon to build the original of the ^abbath,
in the second of Genesis, we have ^t large declared in the former Chapter. Yet
we deny not but that Text affords us a sufficient intimation of the equity and
reason of it, O^igen c^ntra Ce^s l. 6.
which is Gods rest upon that day after all his works that he had made. Not as
once Celsus did object against the Christians of his time, as if the Lord,
(...), etc. like to some dull artificer, was weary of his labors, and had need
of sleep: for he spoke the word only and all things were made. There went no
greater labor to the whole creation, then a dixit Dominus. Therefore Saint
Austin rightly notes, D^ Genesis ad lit l. 4. c 14.
nec cum creavit defessus, nec cum cessavit refectus est; that God was neither
weary of working, nor refreshed with resting. ^he meaning of the Text is this,
that he desi^ted then, from adding any thing, de novo, unto the World by him
created: as having in the six former days, fashioned the Heaven and Earth, and
eve^ thing in them contained; and furnished them with all things necessary,
both for use and ornament. I say, from adding any thing, de novo, unto the
World by him created; but not from governing the same: which is a work by us
as highly to be prized, as the first creation; and from the which God never
rests. Sabbaths and all days are alike in respect of providence: in
reference to the universal government of the World and Nature. Hom 23. in Number.
Semper videmus Deum operari, and Sabbatum nullum est in quo Deus non operetur,
in quo non producat Solemn suum super bonos and malos. No Sabbath, whereon God
does rest from the administration of the World by him created, whereon he does
not make his Sun to shine both on good and bad; whereon he raines not plenty,
upon the sinner and the just, as Origin has truly noted Nor is this more, then
what our Savior said in his holy Gospel. I work (says he) and my Father
also works. Contra Faus^um Man. l. 16. ^. 6.
A saying, as says Saint Austine notes, at which the Jews were much offended,
our Savior meaning by those words that God rested not, nec ullum sibi
cessationis statuisse diem, and that there was no day wherein he tended not the
preservation of the creature: and therefore for his own part, he would not
cease from doing his Fathers business, ne Sabbatis quidem, no though it were
upon the Sabbath. By which it seems, that when the Sabbath was observed, and
that if still it were in force, it was not then, and would not be unlawful
unto any now, to look to his estate on the Sabbath day, and to take care that
all things thrive and prosper which belong unto him: though he increase it not,
or add thereto by following, on that day, the works of his daily labor. And
this according to their rules, who would have Gods example so exactly followed,
in the Sabbaths rest: who rested, as we see, from creation only, not from
preservation. So that the rest here mentioned, was as before I said, no more
then a cessation or a leaving off, from adding any thing, as then, unto the
World by him created^ Upon which ground, he afterward designed this day for
his holy Sabbath, that so by his example the Jews might learn to rest from
their Worldly labors; and be the better fitted to meditate on the works of
God, and to commemorate his goodness manifested in the Worlds Creation.

(2) Of any other sanctification of this day, by the Lord our God, then that he
rested on it now, and after did command the Jews that they should sanctify
the same, we have no Constat in the Scriptures: nor in any Author, that I have
met with, until Zanchies time. Indeed he tells us, a large story of his own
making, how God the Son came down to Adam, and sanctified this first Sabbath
with him; that he might know the better how to do the like. Ego quidem non
dubito, etc. I little doubt, says he, De creat ^aminis l. 1. ad finem.
(I will speak only what I think, without wrong or prejudice to others, I
little doubt) but that the Son of God, taking the shape of man upon him was
busied all this day in most holy conferences with Adam; that he made known
himself both to him, and Eve; taught them the order that he used in the Worlds
creation; exhorted them to meditate on those glorious works; in them to praise
the Name of God, acknowledging him for their Creator; and after his example,
to spend that day for ever, in these pious exercises. I doubt not, finally,
says he, but that he taught them on that day the whole body of divinity: and
that he held them busied all day long, in hearing him, and celebrating with due
praises their Lord and God; and giving thanks unto him for so great and many
benefits as God had graciou^ly vouchsafed to bestow upon them. Which said, he
shuts up all with this conclusion. Haec est illius septimi diei benedictio and
sanctificatio, in qua filius Dei una cum patre and spiritu sancto, quievit ab
opere quod fecerat. This was (says he) the blessing and sanctifying of that
seventh day, wherein the Son of God together with the Father and the Holy
Ghost, did rest from all the works that they had made. How Zanchie thwarts
himself in this, See n. 5.
we shall see hereafter. Such strange conceptions, though they miscarry not in
the birth: yet commonly they serve to no other use, then monsters in the works
of nature, to be seen and shown; with wonder at all times, and sometimes with
pity. Had such a thing occurred in Pet. Comestors supplement, which he made
unto the Bible, it had been more tolerable. The Legendaries and the Rabbis
might fairly also have been excused, if any such devise had been extant in
them. The gravity of the man makes the tale more pitiful, though never the
more to be regarded. For certainly, had there been such a weighty conference
between God and Man; and so much tending unto information, and instruction: it
is not probable, but that we should have heard thereof in the holy Scriptures.
And finding nothing of it there, it were but unadvisedly done, to take it on
the word and credit of a private man. Non credimus quia non legimus, was in
some points Saint Hieroms rule; and shall now be ours.

(3) As little likelihood there is, that the Angels did observe this day and
sanctify the same to the Lord their God: yet some have been so venturous as to
affirm it. Sure I am Torniellus says it. Annal. d. 7.
And though he seem to have some Authors, upon whom to cast it; yet his
approving of it, makes it his, as well as theirs who first devised it. Quidam,
non immerito, existimarunt hoc ipso die in Coelis omnes Angelorum choros,
speciali quadam exultatione in Dei lauds prorupisse, quod tam praeclarum and
admirabile opus absolvisset. Nay, he, and they, who ever they were, have a
Scripture for it; 38. 4, 6.
even Gods words to Job: Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
earth; when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God
shouted for joy? Who, and from whence those Quidam were, that so interpreted
Gods words, I could never find; and yet have took some pains to seek it. Sure
I am, Saint Austin makes a better use of them, and comes home indeed unto the
meaning. Some men, it seems, affirmed that the Angels were not made, till
after the six days were finished, De Civit, Dei, l. 11. c. 9.
in which all things had been created: and he referres them to this Text for
their confutation. Which being repeated, he concludes. I am ergo erant Angeli,
quando facta sunt sydera, facta autem sunt sydera die quarto. Therefore (says
he) the Angels were created before the Stars; and on the fourth day were the
stars created. Yet Zanchius, and those Quidam, be they who they will, fell
short a little of another conceit of Philos, De vita Mosis lib. 3.
who tells us that the Sabbath had a privilege above other days, not only from
the first Creation of the World (though that had been enough to set out the
Sabbath:) (...), but even before the Heavens and all things visible were
created. If so it must be sanctified by the holy Trinity, without the tongues
of men and Angels: and God, not having worked, must rest; and sanctify a time,
when no time was; But to return to Torniellus, however those Quidam did mislead
him, and make him think that the first Sabbath had been sanctified by the holy
A^gels; yet he ingenuously confesses that sa^ctifying of the Sabbath here upon
the earth was not in use till very many ages after, Annal* d 7.
not till the Law was given by Moses. Veruntamen in terris ista Sabbati
sanctificatio non nisi post multa secula in usum venisse creditur, nimirum
temporibus Mosis, quando sub praecepto data est filiis Israel. So Torniellus.

(4) So Torniellus, and so far unquestionable. For that there was no Sabbah
kept amongst us men, till the times of Moses, the Christian Fathers generally,
and some Rabbis also, have agreed together. Which that we may the better show,
I shall first let you see what they say in general, and after what they have
delivered of particular men, most eminent in the whole story of Gods Book,
until the giving of the Law. And first that never any of the Patriarchs before
Moses time, did observe the Sabbath, Justin the Martyr has assured us; Dial.
cum T^yph
(...). None of the righteous men, says he, and such as walked before the
Lord, were either circumcised or kept the Sabbath, until the several times of
Abraham and Moses. And where the Jews were scandalized, in that the Christians
did eat hot meats on the Sabbath days: the Martyr makes reply, that the said
just and righteous men, not taking heed of any such observances, (...),
obtained a notable testimony of the Lord himself. Adv haeres. l. ^. c. 30.
So Irenaeus, having first told us that Circumcision and the Sabbath were both
given for signs; and having spoke particularly of Abraham, Noah, Lot, and
Enoch, that they were justified without them: adds for the close of all, that
all the multitude of the faithful before Abraham were justified without the
one; Et Patriarcharum ^orum qui ante Mosen fuerunt, and all the Patriarchs
which preceded Moses, without the other. Adv. Iud^^s.
Tertullian next, disputes thus against the Jews, that they which think the
Sabbath must be still observed, as necessary to sal^ation; or Circumcision to
be used upon pain of death: Doceant in Praeteritum justos sabbatriasse, aut
circumcidisse, and sic amicos Dei effectos esse; ought first of all, says he,
to prove, That the Fathers of the former times were circumcised or kept the
Sabbath, or that thereby they did obtain to be accounted the friends of God.
Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
Then comes Eusebius the Historian, and he makes it good, that the Religion of
the Patriarchs before Moses Law, was nothing different from the Christian: and
how proves he that? (...)* They were not circumcised, no more are we; they kept
not any Sabbath, no more do we: they were not bound to abstinence from sundry
kinds of meats, which are prohibited by Moses: nor are we neither. Which
argument be also uses to the self-^ame purpose in his first Book, de
demonstr. Evang. and sixth Chapter. And in his seventh, de praeparatione, Cap.
6.
he resolves it thus, (...), etc. The Hebrews which preceded Moses, and were
quite ignorant of his Law (whereof he makes the Sabbath an especial part)
disposed their ways according to a voluntary kind of piety, (...), framing
their lives and actions to the law of nature. Adv haereses l. 1. n. 5.
This argument is also used by Epiphanius, who speaking of the first ages of
the World, informs us that as then there was no difference among men, in
matters of opinion, no Iudaisme, nor kind of heresy whatsoever: (...), etc.
but that the faith does now flourish in Gods Church was from the beginning. If
so, no Sabbath was observed in the times of old, because none in his. I could
enlarge my Catalogue, but that some testimonies are to be reserved to another
place: when I shall come to show you, that the commandment of the Sabbath was
published to Gods people, See Chapter 4.
by Moses only; and that to none but to the Jews. After so many of the
Fathers, the modern Writers may perhaps seem unnecessary; 2 Edit p 12.
yet take one or two. First, Musculus, (as Doctor Bound informs me, for I
take his word) who tells us that it cannot be proved that the Sabbath was kept
before the giving of the Law, either from Adam to Noah, or from the flood to
the times of Moses, or of Abraham and his posterity. Which is no more then what
we shall see shortly out of Eusebius. Hospinian next, Def^^is 1 cap ^
who though he feign would have the sanctifying of the Sabbath, to be as old as
the beginning of the World; yet he confesses at the last, Patris idcirco
Sabbatum observasse ante legem, that for all that it cannot be made good by the
Word of God, that any of the Fathers did observe it, before the Law. These two
I have the rather cited, because they have been often vouched in the public
controversy, as men that wished well to the cause, and say somewhat in it.

(5) We are now come unto particulars. And first we must begin with the first
man Adam. The time of his Creation as the Scriptures tells us, the sixth day of
the week, being as Scaliger conjectured in the first Edition of his Work,
Emend. temp. l. 5.
the three and twentieth day of April; and so the first Sabbath, Sabbatum
primum, so he calls it, was the four and twentieth. Doctrina temp. l 4 c. 6
Petavius, by his computation, makes the first Sabbath to be the first day of
November; and Scaliger, in his last Edition, the five and twentieth of October:
more near to one another then before they were. Yet says not Scaliger, that
that primum Sabbatum had any reference to Adam, though first he left it so at
large, that probably some might so conceive it: for in his later thoughts he
declares his meaning to be this, Sabbatum primum in quo Deus requievit ab opere
Hexa^meri. Indeed the Chaldee paraphrase seems to affirm of Adam, that he
kept the Sabbath. For where the 92 Psalm does bear this Title, A Song or
Psalm for the Sabbath day: the Authors of that paraphrase do expound it thus,
Laus and Canticum quod dixit homo primus pro die Sabbati, the Song or Psalm
which Adam said for the Sabbath day. Somewhat more wary in this point was Rabbi
Kimchi, who tells us how that Adam was created upon Friday about three of the
clock; fell at eleven, was censured and driven out of Paradise at twelve, that
all the residue of that day, and the following night he bemoned his miseries;
was taken into grace next morning, being Sabbath day; and taking then into
consideration all the works of God, brake out into such words as those,
although though not the same. A tale that has as much foundation, as that
narration of Zanchie, before remembered. Who though he seem to put the matter
out of doubt with his three non dubito's, that Christ himself did sanctify
the first Sabbath, with our Father Adam; and did command him ever after to
observe that day: yet in another place, he makes it only a matter of
probability, that the commandment of the Sabbath, Iu 4. manda^u^.
was given at all to our first parents. Quomodo autem sanctificavit? Non solum
decreto and voluntate, sed reipsa; quia illum diem, (ut non pauci volunt and
probabile est) mandavit primis parentibus sanctificandum. So easily does he
overthrow his former structure. But to return unto the Rabbis, and this dream
of theirs, Besides the strangeness of the thing, that Adam should continue not
above eight hours in Paradise, and yet give names to all the creatures, fall
into such an heavy sleep, and have the woman taken out of him, that she must
be instructed, tempted, and that both must sin, and both must suffer in so
short a time: besides all this, the Christian Fathers are expr^sse, that Adam
never kept the ^abbath. Iustine the Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho, a
learned Jew, makes Adam one of those, (...), etc. (...), which being neither
circumcised, nor keeping any Sabbath, were yet accepted by the Lord. And so
Tertullian in a Treatise written against the Jews, Adv* Iudaeos.
affirms of Adam, quod nec circumcisum nec sabbatizantem Deus ^um instituerit.
Nay, which is more, he makes a challenge to the Jews, to prove unto him if
they could, that Adam ever kept the Sabbath. Doceant Adamum sabbatizasse, as
he there has it. Which doubtless neither of them would have done,
considering with whom the one disputed, and against whom the other wrote: had
they not been very well assured of what they said. The like may be affirmed
both of Eusebius, De Praepar. E. v^^g l. 7. c. 8.
and Epipha^ius, two most learned Fathers. Whereof the first, maintayning
positively that the Sabbath was first given by Moses, makes Ad^m one of those,
which neither troubled himself with Circumcision, (...), nor any of the Laws
of Moses; Adv haer^^^s. l. 1. ^. 5.
The other reckons him amongst those also, who lived according to that faith,
which when he wrote, was generally received in the Christian Church. Therefore
no Sabbath kept by our Father Adam.

(6) But whatsoever Adam did, Abel, I hope, was more observant of this duty.
Thus some have said indeed, but on no authority. It is true the Scriptures tell
us, that he offered Sacrifice: but yet the Scriptures do not tell us, that in
his Sacrifices he had more regard unto the seventh day, then to any other. To
offer Sacrifice, he might learn of Adam, or of natural reason, which does
sufficiently instruct us, that we ought all to make some public testimony of
our subjection to the Lord. But neither Adam did observe the Sabbath, nor could
nature teach it, as before is shown. And howsoever some Modern Writers have
conjectured, and conjectured only, that Abel in his Sacrifices might have
respect unto the Sabbath: yet those whom we may better trust, have affirmed the
contrary. For Justin Martyr disputing against Trypho, brings Abel in for an
example; that neither Circumcision nor the Sabbath, the two great glories of
the Jews, were to be counted necessary. For if they were, says he, God had
not had so much regard to Abels Sacrifice, being as he was uncircumcised: and
then he add (...), etc. (...), that though he was no Sabbath-keeper, yet was he
acceptable unto God. And ^o Tertullian, that God accepted of his Sacrifice,
Adv. Iudae^^.
though he were neither circumcised, nor kept the Sabbath. Abelem offerentem
sacrificia incircumcisum neque sabbatizantem laudavit Deus, accepta ferens qu^
in simplicitate cordis offerebat. Yea, and he brings him also into his
challenge, Doceant Abel hostiam Deo sanctam offerentem, Sabbati religionem
placuisse: which is directly contrary to that, which is conjectured by some
Modern Writers. Adv. haeres. l* 1, n. 5.
So Epiphani^s also makes him one of those, who lived according to the tendries
of the Christian Faith. The like he also says of Seth, whom God raised up
instead of Abel, to our Father Adam. Therefore no Sabbath kept by either.

(7) It is conceived of Abel that he was killed in the one hundred and
thirtieth year of the Worlds Creation: of E^os, Seths son, that he was borne
Anno two hundred thirty six. And till that time there was no Sabbath. But then,
as some conceive, the Sabbath day began to be had in honor, because it is set
down in Scripture, that then began men to call upon the Name of the Lord. Genesis
4. A^^al. Anno 236. n. 4.
That is, as Torniellus descants upon the place, then, were spiritual
Congregations instituted, as we may probably conjecture, certain set forms
of Prayers and Hymns devised to set forth Gods glory, certain set times and
places also set apart for those pious duties: praecipue diebus Sabbati,
especially the Sabbath days, in which most likely they began to abstain from
all servile works, in honor of that God, whom they well knew had rested on the
seventh day from all his labors* Sure Torniellus mind was upon his Mattins,
when he made this Paraphrase. He had not else gathered a Sabbath from this
Text, considering that not long before he had thus concluded; That sanctifying
of the Sabbath here on earth was not in use, V. ^ 3. of this Chapter.
until the Law was given by Moses. But certainly this Text will bear no such
matter, were it considered as it ought. The Ch^ldee P^raphrase thus reads it,
Tunc in diebus ejus inceperunt filii hominum^, Q^ ^ebrai^. i^ ^n G^^.
ut non orarent in nomine Domini; which is quite contrary to the English. Our
Bibles of the last Translation in the margin, thus; then began men to call
themselves by the name of the Lord: and generally the Jews, as Saint Hierome
tells us, do thus gloss upon it, Tunc primum in nomine Domini, and in
similitudine eius fabricata sunt idola; that then began men to set up Idols
both in the name, and after the similitude of God. Ainsworth in his Translation
thus, Then began men profanely to call upon the Name of the Lord: who tells us
also in his Annotations on this Text, out of Rabbi Maimony, that in these days
Idolatry took its first beginning, and the people worshipped the stars and
all the host of Heaven; so generally that at the last there were few left which
acknowledged God, as Enoch, Methuselah, Noah, Sem, and Heber. So that we see
not any thing in this Text, sufficient to produce a Sabbath. But take it as the
English reads it, which is agreeable to the Greek, and vulgar Latin; and may
well stand with the original: yet will the cause be little better. For men
might call upon Gods Name, and have their public meetings and set forms of
Prayer, without relation to the seventh day more then any other. De P^aeparat.
Evang l 7* 8.
As for this E^os, Eusebius proposes him unto us, (...), as the first man
commended in the Scripture for his love to God: that we by his example might
learn to call upon Gods Name with assured hope. But yet withal he tells us of
him, that he observed not any of those Ordinances which Moses taught unto the
Jews, whereof the Sabbath was the chief; as formerly we observed in Adam. And
Epiphanius ranks him amongst those Fathers, who lived according to the rules
of the Christian Church: Therefore no Sabbath kept by Enos.

(8) We will next look on Enoch, who, as the Text tells us, walked with God,
and therefore doubt we not, but he would carefully have kept the Sabbath, had
it been required. But of him also, the Fathers generally say the same, as they
did before of others. For Justin Martyr not only makes him one of those which
without Circumcision and the Sabbath, had been approved of by the Lord: but
pleads the matter more exactly. The substance of his plea is this, that if the
Sabbath or circumcision were to be counted necessary to eternal life, we must
needs fall, upon this absurd opinion, Dial. cum Tryph^^^.
(...), that the same God whom the Jews worshipped, was not the God of Enoch,
and of other men about those times: which neither had been Circumcised, (...),
nor kept the Sabbath, nor any other Ordinances of the Law of Moses. So Irenaeus
speaking before of Circumcision and the Sabbath, places this Enoch among
those, Lib. 4 cap 30.
qui sine iis quae praedicta sunt justificationem adepti sunt, which had been
justified without any the Ordinances before remembered. Tertullian more fully
yet. Adv. Iudaeos.
Enoch justissimum nec circumcisum* nec sabbatizantem, de hoc mundo transtulit,
etc. Enoch that righteous man being neither Circumcised nor a Sabbath-keeper,
was by the Lord translated, and saw not death, to be an Item or instruction
unto us, that we, without the burden of the Law of Moses, shall be found
acceptable unto God. He set him also in his challenge, as one whom never any
of the Jews could prove, Sabbati cultorem esse, to have been a keeper of the
Sabbath. Eusebius too, who makes the Sabbath one of Moses institutions, De
Demonstr. l. 4. c 6.
has said of Enoch, that he was neither circumcised, nor meddled with the Law
of Moses: (...), etc. and that he lived more like a Christian, than a Jew. The
same Eusebius in his seventh de praeparatione, and Epiphanius in the place
before remembered, affirm the same of him, as they do of Adam, Abel, Seth, and
Enos: and what this Epiphanius says of him, that he affirms also of his
son, Methusalem. S^al. de Em^^d. Temp l 7.
Therefore nor Enoch, nor Methusalem ever kept the Sabbath. Its true, the
Aethiopians in their Calendar have a certain period, which they call Sabbatum
Enoch, Enoch's Sabbath. But this consists of seven hundred years, and has
that name, either because Enoch was borne in the seventh Century from the
Creation, viz. in the year six hundred twenty two, or because he was the
seventh from Adam. Its true, that many of the Jews, and some Christians too,
have made this Enoch an Emblem of the heavenly and eternal Sabbath, which
shall never end: (...) in Ge^. 4.
because he was the seventh from Adam, and did never taste of death, as did the
six that went before him. But this is no Argument, I trow, that Enoch ever kept
the Sabbath whiles he was alive. Note that this Enoch was translated about the
year nine hundred eighty seven: and that Methusalem died but one year only
before the Flood, which was 1655. And so far we are safely come, without any
rub.

(9) To come unto the Flood it self, to Noah, who both saw it, and escaped it;
it is affirmed by some, that he kept the Sabbath: and that both in the Arc,
and when he was released out of it, if not before. Yea, they have arguments
also for the proof hereof, but very weak ones: such as they dare not trust
themselves. It is delivered in the eighth of the Book of Genesis, that after
the return of the Dove into the Arc, Noah stayed yet other seven days before
he sent her forth again. Verse. 10 and 12.
What then? This seems unto Hospinian to be an argument for the Sabbath. In
historia diluvii, columbae ex arca emissae septenario dierum intervallo,
ratione sabbati videntur. So he, and so verbatim, Josias Simler, in his
Comment on the twentieth of Exodus. But to this argument, if at the least it
may be honored with that name, Tostatus has returned an answer as by way of
prophecy. In Genesis 8.
He makes this Quaere first, s^d quare ponit hic, quod No^ expectabat semper
septem dies, etc. Why Noah, betwixt every sending of the Dove, expected just
seven days, neither more nor less: and then returns this answer to it, such
as indeed does excellently satisfy both his own Quaere, and the present
argument. Resp. quod Noah intendebat scire utrum aquae cessassent, etc. Noah
(says he) desired to know whether the waters were decreased. Now since the
waters being a moist body, are regulated by the Moon, Noah was most especially
to regard her motions: for as she is either in opposition or conjunction with
the Sun, in her increase or in her wane, there is proportionably an increase
or falling of the waters. Noah then considering the Moon in her several
quarters, which commonly we know are at seven days distance, sent forth his
Birds to bring him tidings: for the Text tells us that he sent out the Raven and
the Dove four time^. And the fourth time, the Moon being then in the last
quarter, when both by the ordinary course of nature the waters usually are, and
by the will of God were then much decreased: the Dove which was sent out had
found good footing on the earth, and returned no more. So far the learned
Abulensis; which makes clear the case. Nor stand we only here, upon our
defense. For we have proof sufficient that Noah never kept the Sabbath. Vbi*
supra.
Justin the Martyr, and Irenaeus both make him one of those, which without
circumcision and the Sabbath, were very pleasing unto God, and also justified
without them. Tertullian, positively says it, that God delivered him from the
great water flood, Adv. Iuda^^^.
nec circumcisum, nec sabbatizantem: and chalengeth the Jews to prove if any
way they could, sabbatum observasse, that he kept the Sabbath. Eusebius also
tells us of him, that being a just man, and one whom God preserved as a
remaining spark to kindle piety in the World, yet knew not any thing that
pertained to the Jewish Ceremony: De demonstr. l. 1. c 6.
not Circumcision, (...), nor any other thing ordained by Moses. Remember that
Eusebius makes the Sabbath one of Moses Ordinances. Finally, Epiphanius in the
place before remembered, ranks* Noah in this particular, with Adam, Abel, Seth,
Enos, and the other Patriarchs.

(10) Its true, that Joseph Scaliger once made the day, whereon Noah left the
Arc, and offered sacrifice to the Lord, to be the seventh day of the week, De
Emend^^. Temp. l. 5.
28. Decembris, feria septima, egressus Noah, (...) immolavit Deo, says his
first Edition. Which were enough to cause some men, who infinitely admire his
Dictates, from thence to have derived a Sabbath: had he not changed his mind
in the next Edition, and placed this memorable action, not on the seventh day,
but the fourth. I say it might have caused some men, for all men would not so
have doted, as from a special accident to conclude a practice. Considering
especially that there is no ground in Scripture to prove that those before the
Law, had in their Sacrifices any regard at all to set times and days; either
unto the sixth day, or the seventh, or eighth, or any other: but did their
service to the Lord, I mean the public part thereof, and that which did
consist in external action, according as occasion was administered unto them.
The offerings of Cain and Abel, for ought we can inform our selves, were not
very frequent. The Scripture tells us that it was in process of time; Gen 4. 3.
at the years end as some expound it. For at the years end, as Ainsworth
notes; men were wont in most solemn manner, to offer sacrifice unto God, with
thanks for all his benefits, having then gathered in their fruits. Exodus 23. 16.
The Law of Moses so commanded; the ancient Fathers so observed it, as by this
place we may conjecture: and so it was accustomed too among the Gentiles; their
ancient Sacrifices and their Assemblies to that purpose, Ethic. l. 8.
(as Aristotle has informed us) being after the gathering in of fruits. No day
selected for that use, that we can hear of. This Sacrifice of Noah, as it was
remarkable, so it was occasional: an Eucharisticall Oblation for the great
deliverance, which did that day befall unto him. And had it happened on the
seventh day, it were no argument that he made choice thereof as most fit and
proper, or that he used to sacrifice more upon that day, then on any other. So
that of Abraham in the twelfth of Genesis, was occasional only. The Lord
appeared to Abraham saying, Genesis 12. 7.
unto thy seed will I give this land (the land of Canaan.) And then it
follows that Abraham builded there an Altar unto the Lord, who appeared unto
him. The like he did when he first set his footing in the promised land, and
pitched his Tents not far from Bethel, Verse. 8. and when he came to plant in
the Plain of Mamre, Verse. 18.
in the next Chapter. See the like, Gen 21. 33. and 1. 22, 13. Of Isaac, Genesis
26. 25. Of Jacob, Genesis 28. 8. and 31. 54. and 33. 20. and 35. 7. 14. No mention
in the Scripture of any Sacrifice or public worship, In Genesis 8. 20.
but the occasion is set down. Hoc ratio naturalis dictat, ut de donis suis
honoretur imprimis ipse qui dedit. Natural reason, says Rupertus, could
instruct them, that God was to be honored with some part of that* which he
himself had given unto them: but natural reason did not teach them, that one
day differed from another.

CHAP. III.
That the SABBATH was not kept from the Flood to Moses.
(1) The sons of Noah did not keep the Sabbath. (2) The Sabbath could not
have been kept, in the dispersion of Noah's sons, had it been commanded. (3)
Diversity of Longitudes and Latitudes, must of necessity make a variation in
the Sabbath. (4) Melchisedeck, Heber, Lot, did not keep the Sabbath. (5) Of
Abraham and his sons, that they kept not the Sabbath. (6) That Abraham did
not keep the Sabbath in the confession of the Jews. (7) Jacob nor Job no
Sabbath-keepers. (8) That neither Joseph, Moses, nor the Israelites in Egypt
did observe the Sabbath. (9) The Israelites not permitted to offer Sacrifice
while they were in Egypt. (10) Particular proofs that all the Moral Law was
both known and kept amongst the Fathers.

(1) WE are now come unto the hither side of the Flood, to the sons of Noah.
To whom, the Hebrew-Doctors say, their Father did bequeath seven several
Commandments, which they and their posterity were bound to keep* I^ Lexico,
p. 1530.
Septem praecepta acceperunt filii Noah, etc. as Shindler reckons them out of
Rabbi Maimony. First, That they dealt uprightly with every man: Secondly, That
they should bless and magnify the Name of God: Thirdly, that they abstained
from worshipping false gods, and from all Idolatry: Fourthly, That they
forbear all unlawful lusts and copulations: The fifth against shedding blood:
The sixth against theft and robbery: The seventh and last, a prohibition not to
eat the flesh, or any member of a beast, taken from it when it was alive;
whereby all cruelty was forbidden. These precepts whosoever violated, either of
Noah's sons, or their posterity, was to be smitten with the sword. Yea, these
Commandments were reputed so agreeable to nature, that all such Heathens as
would yee^d to obey the same, were suffered to remain and dwell amongst the
Israelites, though they received not Circumcision, nor any of the Ordinances
which were given by Moses. ^o that amongst the precepts given unto the sons
of Noah, we find no footstep of the Sabbath. And where a Modern Writer, whom I
spare to name, has made the keeping of the Sabbath, a member of the second
precept, or included in it; it was not so advisedly done: there being no such
thing at all, Cunaeus de repub. Hebr. 2. 19.
either in Schindler, whom he cites; nor in Cunaeus, who repeats the selfsame
precepts, from the self-same Rabbi. Nay, which is more, the Rabbin out of whom
they cite it, does in another place, exclude expressly the observation of the
Sabbath out of the number of these precepts given the sons of Noah. The man
and woman-servant, Ap. Ainsworth in Exodus 20.
says he, which are commanded to keep the Sabbath, are servants that are
circumcised, or baptized, etc. But servants not circumcised nor baptized, but
only such as have received the seven Commandments given to the sons of
Noah, they are as sojourning strangers, and may do work for themselves openly
on the Sabbath, as any Israelite may on a working day. So Rabbi Maymony in his
Treatise of the Sabbath, Chap. 20. 14. If then we find no Sabbath amongst the
sons of Noah, whereof some of them were the sons of their Fathers piety:
there is no thought of meeting with it, in their children or their childrens
children; the builders of the Tower of Babel. For they being terrified with the
late Deluge, as some conjecture, and to procure the name of great undertakers,
as the Scripture says; resolved to build themselves a Tower, unto the top
whereof, the waters should in no wise reach. A work of a most vast extent, if
we may credit those reports that are made thereof; and followed by the people,
Antiqu Iud l. ^. cap. 5.
as Josephus tells us, with their utmost industry, there being none amongst
them idle. If none amongst them would be idle; as likely that no day was spared
from so great an action, as they conceived that work to be. Those that durst
bid defiance to the Heaven of God* were never like to keep a Sabbath to the
God of Heaven. This action was begun and ended, Anno 1940, or thereabouts.

(2) To ruinate these vain attempts* it pleased the Lord first to confound the
language of the people, which before was o^e; and after to disperse them over
all the earth. By means of which dispersion, they could not possibly have kept
one and the same day for a Sabbath, had it been commanded: the days in places
of a different longitude, which is the distance of a place from the first
Meridian, beginning at such different times, that no one day could be precisely
kept amongst them. The proof and ground whereof, I will make bold to borrow
from my late learned friend Natha: Carpenter; that I may manifest in some sort
the love I bore him: though probably I might have furnished out this argument,
from mine own wardrope; at least have had recourse to many other learned men,
who have written of it. For that the difference of time, is varied according to
the difference of longitudes, in diverse places of the earth may be made
manifest to every man's understanding, out of these two principles: First, if
the earth is sphaericall, and secondly, that the Sun does compass it about
it twenty four hours. From hence it comes to pass, that places situate
Eastward see the Sun sooner then those do, that are placed Westward. And that
with such a different proportion of time, that unto every hour of the Suns
motion, there is assigned a certain number of miles upon the Earth: every
fifteen degrees* which is the distance of the Meridians, being computed to make
one hour; and every fifteen miles upon the earth, correspondent to one minute
of that hour. By this we may perceive, how soon the noontide happens in one
City before another. For if one City stands Eastward of another, the space of
three of the aforesaid Meridians, which is 2700. miles; it is apparent that it
will enjoy the noon-tyde, no less then three hours before the other: and
consequently in 10800. miles, which is half the compass of the earth, there
will be found no less then twelve hours difference in the rising and setting
of the Sun, as also in the noon and midnight. The reason of which difference
of times, is as before we said the difference of longitudes, wherein to every
hour, Cosmographers have allotted fifteen degrees in the Suns diurnall
motion: so that fifteen degrees being multiplied by twenty four hours, which
is the natural day, the product will be 360, which is the number of degrees in
the whole circle. Now in these times, wherein the sons of Noah dispersed
themselves, in case the Sabbath was to have been kept, as simply moral; it
must needs follow, that the moral Law is subject unto manifold mutations and
uncertainties, which must not be granted. For spreading as they did over all
the earth, some farther, some at shorter distance; and thereby chang^ng
Longitudes with their habitations: they must of meet necessity alter the
difference of times and days, and so could keep no day together. Nor could
their issue since their time observe exactly and precisely the self-same day,
by reason of the manifold transportation of Colonies, and transmigration of
Nations from one Region to another; whereby the times must of necessity be
supposed to vary. The Author of the Practice of Piety, though he plead hard
for the morality of the Sabbath, cannot but confess, that in respect of the
diversity of the Meridians, and the unequal rising and setting of the Sun,
every day varieth in some places a quarter, in some half, in others an whole
day: therefore the Jewish Sabbath cannot (says he) be precisely kept in the
same instant of time, every where in the World. Certainly if it cannot now,
then it never could: and then it will be found, that some at least of Noah's
posterity, and all that have from them descend^d, either did keep at all no
Sabbath, or not upon the day appointed; which comes all to one. Or else it
needs must follow that God imposed a Law upon his people, which in it self
without relation to the frailty, ne dum to the iniquity of poor man, could not
in possibility have been observed: Yea, such a Law, as could not generally have
been kept, had Adam still continued in his perfect innocence.

(3) To make this matter yet more plain, It is a Corollary or conclusion in
Geographie, that if two men do take a journey from the self-same place, round
about the earth; the one Eastward, the other Westward, and meet in the same
place again: it will appear that he which has gone East, has gotten; and
that the other going Westward, has lost a day, in their account. The reason
is, because he that from any place assigned does travail Eastward, moving
continually against the proper motion of the Sun, will shorten somewhat of
his day: taking so much from it, as his journey in proportion of distance from
the place assigned, has first opposed, and so anticipated in that time, the
diurnall motion of the Sun. So daily gaining something from the length of
day; it will amount in the whole circuit of the Earth to twenty four hours,
which are a perfect natural day. The other going Westward, and seconding the
course of the S^nne by his own journey, will by the same reason ad^^ as much
proportionably, unto his day, as the other lost, and in the end will lose a day
in his account. For demonstration of the which, suppose of these two
Travelers, that the former for every fifteen miles, should take away one
minute from the length of the day: and the latter add as much unto it, in the
like proportion of his journey. Now by the Golden Rule, if every fifteen miles
substract or add one minute in the length of the day; then must 21600. miles,
which is the compass of the Earth, add or substract 1440 minutes, which make
up twenty four hours, a just natural day. To bring this matter home, unto
the business now in hand, suppose we that a Turk, a Jew, and a Christian,
should dwell together at Jerusalem, whereof the one does keep his Sabbath on
the Friday; the other, on the Saturday; and the thi^d sanctifies the Sunday:
then, that upon the Saturday, the Turk begin his journey Westward, and the
Christian, Eastward; so as both of them compassing the World, do meet again in
the same place; the Jew continuing where they left him. It will fall out, that
the Turk by going Westward, having lost a day; and the Christian, going
Eastward, having got a day: one and the self-same day, will be a Friday, to the
Turk; a ^aturday, unto the Jew; and a Sunday to the Christian; in case they
calculate the time exactly, from their departure to their return. To prove
this further, yet by a matter of fact. The Hollanders in their Discovery of
Fretu^ le Maire, Anno 1615. 1615.
found by comparing their account, at their coming home, that they had clearly
lost a day (for they had travailed Westward in that tedious Voyage:) that which
was Monday to the one, being the Sunday to the other. And now what should these
people do when they were returned? If they are bound by nature, and the moral
Law, to sanctify precisely one day in seven, they must then sanctify a day a
part from their other Countrymen; and like a crew of Schismatics, divide
themselves from the whole body of the Church: or to keep order, and comply
with other men, must of necessity be forced to go against the law of nature, or
the moral law; which ought not to be violated for any by-respect-whatever. But
to return unto Noah's sons, whom this case concerns; It might, for ought we
know, be theirs in this dispersion, in this removing up and down, and from
place to place. What shall we think of those that planted Northwards, or as
much extremely Southwards; whose issue now, are to be found, as in part is
known, near and within the Polar circles: what Sabbath think we could they
keep? Some times a very long one sure, and sometimes none: indeed none at all,
taking a Sabbath, as we do, for one day in seven. For near the Polar Circles,
as is plainly known, the days are twenty four hours in length. Between the
Circle and the Pole, the day, if so it may be called, increases first by
weeks, and at last by months; till in the end, there is six months perpetual
day, and as long a night. No room in those parts for a Sabbath. But it is time
to leave these speculations, and return to practice.

(4) And first we will begin with Melchisedech, King of Salem, the Priest of
the most high God, Rex idem hominumque divumque sacerdos; a type and figure of
our Savior; whose Priest^ood still continues in the holy Gospel. With him
the rather, because it is most generally conceived, that he was Sem the Son
of Noah. Of him it is affirmed by Justin Martyr, that he was neither
circumcised, nor yet kept the Sabbath, and yet most acceptable unto God, Dial.
cum Tryphone. Adv. Iudaos.
(...), Tertullian also tells us of him, Incircumcisum nec sabbatizantem ad
sacerdotium Dei allectum esse: and puts him also in his challenge, as one whom
none amongst the Jews could ever prove to have kept the Sabbath. Eusebius yet
more fully then either of them: Them. l. 1. c. 6.
Moses, says he, brings in Melchisedech Priest of the most high God, neither
being circumcised, nor anointed with the holy Oil, as was afterward commanded
in the Law; (...), no not so much as knowing that there was a Sabbath; and
ignorant altogether of those Ordinances, which were imposed upon the Jews, and
living most agreeably unto the Gospel. Somewhat to that purpose also does
occur, Cap. 8.
in his seventh de praeparation^. Melchi^edec whosoever he was, gave meeting
unto Abraham, about the year of the World, 2118: and if we may suppose him to
be Sem, as I think we may, he lived till Isaac was fifty years of age, which
was long after this famous enterview. Now what these Fathers say of Sem, if Sem
at least was he whom the Scriptures call Melchisedech; the same almost is said
of his great grandchild Heber: he being named by Epipha^ius for one of those,
who lived according to the faith of the Christian Church; wherein no Sabbath
was observed in that Fathers time. And here we will take Lot in too although a
little before his time, as one of the Posterity of Heber; that when we come to
Abraham, we may keep our selves within his Family. Him, Justin Martyr, and
Iren^^s both, in the places formerly remembered, make to be one of those, which
without Circumcision and the Sabbath, were acceptable to the Lord, and by him
justified. And so Tertullian, that sine legis observatione, (Sabbath, and
Circumcision, and the like) de Sodomorum i^cendio liberatus est. Therefore nor
Lo^, nor Heber, nor Mel^hisedech ever kept the Sabbath.

(5) For Abraham next, the Father of the Faithful, with whom the Covenant was
made, and Circumcision, as a seal, annexed unto it: The Scripture is exceeding
copious in setting down his life and actions, as also of the lives and actions
of his Son, and Nephews; their fli^tings and removes, their Sacrifices,
forms of Praye^, and whatsoever else was signal in the whole course of their
(...): but yet no mention of the Sabbath. Though such a memorable thing, as
sanctifying of a constant day unto the Lord, might probably have been omitted
in the former Patriar^es, of whom there is but little left, save their (...)
into the story, to make way for him: yet it is strange that in a punctual and
particular relation of his life and piety, there should not be one Item to
point out the Sabbath, had it been observed. This is enough to make one think
there was no such matter. Et quod non invenis usquam, esse putes nusquam, in
the Poets language. I grant indeed that Abraham kept the Christian Sabbath, in
righteousness and holiness serving the Lord his God, all the days of his
life: and so did Isaac and Jacob. Sanctificate diem Sabbati, says the Prophet
Jeremiah to the Jews, i. e. ut omne tempus vitae nostrae in sanctificatione
ducamus, sicut fecerunt patres nostri, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, In Hier. 17.
as Saint Hierome glosseth it. Our venerable Bede also has affirmed as much,
In Luc. 19*
that Abraham kept indeed the spiritual Sabbath, quo semper a servili, i. e.
noxia vacabat action, whereby he always rested from the servile works of
sin: but that he kept or sanctified any other Sabbath, the Christian Fathers
deny unanimously. In Dial. cu^ Tryphone.
Justin the Martyr numbering up the most of those before remembered, concludes;
that they, (...), were justified without the Sabbath: (...) and so was Abraham
after them, and all his children until Moses. And whereas Trypho had exacted a
necessary keeping of the Law, Sabbaths, New-moones, and Circumcision: the
M^^tyr makes reply, that Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, and all the other
Patriarchs both before and after them until Moses time; yea, and their wives,
Sarah, Rebecca, Rach^l, Lea, and all the rest of religious women unto Moses
mother, (...). neither kept any of them all, nor had commandment so to do,
till Circumcision wa^ enjoined to Abraham and his Posterity. Lib. 4. 30.
So Irenaeus, that Abraham, sin^ Circumcis^one and observatione sabbatorum
credide^ D^o, without or Circumcision or the Sabbath did believe in God, which
was imputed to him for righteousness. And where the Jews objected in defense of
their ancient Ceremonies, that Abraham had been circumcised: Adv Iudaeos.
Tertullian makes reply, sed ante placuit Deo quam circumcideretur; nec tamen
sabbatizavit; that he was acceptable unto God before his being circumcised;
and yet he never kept the ^abbath. See more unto this purpose, in Eusebius de
Demonstr. l. 1. c. 6. de praeparat. l. 7. c. 8. (where Isaac and Jacob are
remembered too:) as al^o Epiphanius adv. haeres. l. 1. n. 5.

(6) Thus far the ancient Christian Writers have declared of Abraham, that
he kept no Sabbath: and this in conference with the Jew, and in Books against
them. Which doubtless they had never done, had there been any possibility for
the Jews to have proved the contrary. Some of the Jews indeed, not being
willing thus to lose their Father Abraham, have said, and written too, that he
kept the Sabbath, as they do: and for a proof thereof they ground themselves
on that of Genesis, because that Abraham obeyed my voice, 26. 5.
and kept my charge, my Commandments, my statutes and my laws. The Jews
conclude from hence, as Mercer and Tostatus tell us, upon the text* that
Abraham kept the Sabbath, and all other Ceremonies of the Law: as much I think
the one, as he did the other. Who those Jews were that said it, of what name
and quality, that they have not told us: and it were too much for wardnes to
credit any nameles Jew, before so many Christian Fathers. Tostatus though he do
relate their dicunt, yet believes them not: And herein we will rather follow
him, then Mercer; who seems a little to incline to that Jewish fancy. The
rather since some I^wes of name and quality, have gone the same way, that the
Fathers did, before remembered. De* Areanis l. 11. c* 10.
For Petrus Galatinus tells us, how it is written in Beresith Ketanna, or the
lesser exposition upon Genesis, a Book of public use, and great authority
among them, that Abraham did not keep the Sabbath. And this he tells us on the
credit of Rabbi I^^annan, who says expressly, that there, upon these words, God
blessed the seventh day; it is set down positively, Non scripta est de
Abrahamo observatio Sabbati. And where it is objected for the Jew, that in case
Abraham did not keep it, it was because it was not then commanded: this
Galatinus makes reply, Ex hoc saltem infertur sabbati cultum non esse de lege
naturae, that therefore it is evident that the Sabbath is no part of the Law of
nature. As for the text of Genesis, we may expound it well enough, and never
find a Sabbath in it, which that it may be done with the least suspicion, we
will take the exposition of Saint Chrysostom, who very fully has explaned it.
Because he has obeyed my voice, etc.] Right, says the Father, God said unto
him, Get thee out from thy Fathers house, and from thy kindred, and go into
the land that I shall show thee: and Abraham went out, (...), and left a fair
possession for an expectation: and this not wavering, but with all alacrity and
readiness. Then follows his expectation of a son in his old age, (when
nature was decayed in him) as the Lord had promised; his casting out of Ismael,
as the Lord commanded; his readiness to offer Isaac, as the Lord had willed,
and many others of that nature. Enough to give occasion unto that applause,
because he has obeyed my voice; although he never kept the Sabbath. Indeed
the Sabbath could not have relation to those words in Genesis because it was not
then commanded.

(7) Next look on Jacob the heir as well of Abraham's travels, as of his
faith. Take him as Labans shepherd, and the Text informs us of the pains he
took. In the day time the drought consumed me, Genesis 31. 40.
and the frost by night, and the sleep departed from mine eyes. No time of
rest, much more, no seventh part of his time allotted unto rest from his daily
labors. And in his flight from Laban, it seems he stood not on the Sabbath.
For though he fled thence with his wives and children, and with all his
substance; and that he went but easily, according as the cattle and the
children were able to endure: yet he went forwards still without any resting.
Otherwise Laban, who heard of his departure on the third day, and pursued after
him amayn, must needs have overtaken him before the seventh. Now for the rest
of Jacobs time, when he was settled in the Land appointed for him, and
afterward removed to Egypt; we must refer you unto Justin Martyr, ^ee n. 5.
of this ^hapter.
and Eusebius: whereof one says expressly, (...), that he kept no Sabbath; the
other makes him one of those, which lived without the Law of Moses, whereof the
Sabbath was a part. Having brought Jacob into Egypt, we should proceed to
Joseph, Moses, and the rest of his offspring there: but we will first take
Job along, as one of the posterity of Abraham; that after we may have the more
leisure to wait upon the Israelites in that house of bondage. I say as one of
the posterity of Abraham, ^emonstr. l. 1. ^ 6.
the fifth from Abraham, so Eusebius tells us; who says, moreover, that he
kept no Sabbath. What (says he) shall we say of Job, that just, that pious,
that most blameless man? What was the rule whereby he squared his life, and
governed his devotions? Was any part of Moses Law? Not so. (...); Was any
keeping of the Sabbath, or observation of any other Jewish order? How could
that be, says he, considering that he was ancienter then Moses, and lived
before his Law was published? For Moses was the seventh from Abraham, and Job
the eighth. ^o ^arre Eusebius. And Justin Martyr also joins him with Abraham
and his Family, as men that took not heed of New Moons, or Sabbaths, ^. Edit.
p. 14.
whereof see before, n. 5. l find indeed in Doctor Bound, that Theodor^ Beza
on his own authority has made Io^ very punctual, in sanctifying septimum
salte^ qu^mque diem, every seventh day at least, as God, says he, from the
beginning had appointed. But I hold Beza no fit match for Justin, and Eusebius;
nor to be credited in this kind, when they say the contrary, ^^^sidering in
what (...) they lived, (...) with whom they dealt.

(8) And now we come at last unto the Israelites in Egypt; from Joseph, who
first brought them thither, to Moses who conducted them in their flight from
thence; Them. l. 1 ^. ^.
and so unto the body of the whole Nation. For Joseph, first, Eusebius first
tells us in the general, that the same institution and course of life which by
the Ordinance of Christ was preached unto the Gentiles; had formerly been
commended to the ancient Patriarchs: particular instances whereof, he makes
Melchisedech, and Noah, and Enoch, and Abraham, till the time of Circumcision.
And then it follows, (...), etc. (...). That Joseph in the Court of Egypt long
time before the Law of Moses, lived answerably to those ancient patterns, and
not according as the Jews. Nay, he affirms the same of Moses, (...), the very
Lawgiver himself, the Chieftain of the Tribes of Israel. As for the residue
of the people, we can expect no more of them, that they lived in bondage, under
severe and cruel Masters: who called upon them day by day to fulfill their
takes; See Exodus 5. v. 5. and 14.
and did expostulate with them in an heavy manner, in case they wanted of their
Tale. The Jews themselves can best resolve us in this point. De vita Mosis
lib. 1.
And amongst them Philo does thus describe their troubles. (...), etc. The
Taskmasters or Overseers of the works were the most cruel and unmercifull men
in all the Country, who laid upon them greater taskes than they were able to
endure: inflicting on them no less punishment then death it self, if any of
them, yea, though by reason of infirmity, should withdraw himself from his
daily labor. Some were commanded to employ themselves in the public
structures; others in bringing in materials, for such mighty buildings; (...),
Antiqu. Iud. lib. 2. c. 5.
never enjoying any rest either night or day, that in the end they were even
spent and tired with continual travail. Iosep^^ go^^ a little further, and
tells us this, that the Egyptians did not only tire the Israelites with
continual labor; (...), but that the Israelites endeavored to perform more
then was expected. Assuredly in such a woeful state as this, they had nor
leave, nor leisure, to observe the Sabbath. Apud Ry^at. in Decalog.
And lastly, Rabbi Maimony, makes the matter yet more absolute, who says it
for a truth, that when they were in Egypt, neque quiescere, vel sabbatum agere
potuerunt, they neither could have time to rest, nor to keep the Sabbath,
seeing they were not then at their own disposing. So he ad Deuteronomy. 5. 15.

(9) Indeed it easily may be believed, that the people kept no Sabbath in the
Land of Egypt; seeing they could not be permitted in all that time of their
abode there, to offer sa^rifice: which was the easier duty of the two, and
would less have took them from their labors. Those that accused the
Israelites to have been wanton, lazy, and I know not what, because they did
desire to spend one only day in religious Exercises: what would they not have
done, had they desisted every seventh day from the works imposed upon them.
Doubtless, they had been carried to the house of Correction, if not worse
handled. I say in all that time they were not permitted to offer sacrifice in
that Country: and therefore when they purposed to escape from thence, Exodus 8.
they made a suite to Pharaoh, that he would suffer them to go three days
journey into the wilderness, to offer sacrifice there to the Lord their God.
Rather then so, Pharaoh was willing to permit them for that once, to sacrifice
unto the Lord in the land of Egypt: and what said Moses thereunto? It is not
meet (says he) so to do. For we shall sacrifice the abomination of the
Egyptians to the Lord our God, before their eyes; and they will stone us. (...)
26.
His reason was, because the Gods of the Egyptians were Bulls and Rams, and
Sheep and Oxen, as Lyra notes upon that place: talia vero animalia ab Hebraeis
erant immola^da, quod non permisissent Aegypti^ in terra sua; And certainly the
Egyptians would not endure to see their Gods knocked down, before their faces.
If any then demand, wherein the Piety and Religion of Gods people did consist
especially: we must needs answer, that it was in the integrity and hon^sty of
their conversation; and that they worshipped God only in the spirit and truth.
Adv. haeres l. 1. h^^. ^.
Nothing to make it known that they were Gods people, (...), but only that
they feared the Lord and were circumcised; as Epiphanius has resolved it:
nothing but that they did acknowledge one only God, and exercised themselves
in justice, in modesty, in patience and long suffering, both toward one
another and amongst the Egyptians; framing their lives agreeably to the will of
God, and the law of nature. Therefore we may conclude with safety, that
hitherto no Sabbath had been kept in all the World from the creation of our
first Father Adam, to this very time; which was above 2500. years: no nor
commanded to be kept amongst them in their generations.

(10) I say there was none kept, no nor none commanded: for had it been
commanded, sure it had been kept. It was not all the pride of Pharaoh, or
subtle tyranny of his subjects, that could have made them violate that sacred
day, had it bin commended to them from the Lord. The miseries which they after
suffered under Antiochus, rather then that they would profane the Sabbath; and
those calamities which they chose to fall upon them by the hands of the Romans;
rather then make resistance upon that day, when lawfully they might have done
it: are proofs sufficient, that neither force, nor fear, could now have
wrought upon them not to keep the same, had such a duty been commanded.
Questionless, Joseph for his part, that did prefer a loathsome prison before
the unchaste embraces of his Masters wife, would no less carefully have kept
the Sabbath, then he did his chastity; had there been any Sabbath then to have
been observed, either as dedicated by nature, or prescribed by Law. And
certainly either the Sabbath was not reckoned all this while, a^ any part or
branch of the Law of nature: or else it finds hard measure in the Book of
God, that there should be particular proofs how punctually the rest of the
moral Law was observed and practiced amongst the Patriarchs; and not one word
or Item that concerns the observation of the Sabbath. Now that the whole Law
was written in the hearts of the Fathers, and that they had some knowledge of
all the other Commandments, and did live accordingly: the Scripture does
sufficiently declare unto us. First, for the first, Genesis 17. 1.
I am God all-sufficient, walk before me, and be thou perfect. So said God to
Abraham. Then Jacobs going up from 25 2.
Bethel, to cleanse his house from Idolatry; is proof enough that they were
acquainted with the second. The pious care they had* not to take the Name of
the Lord their God in vain, appears at full, in the religious making of their
Oath^s; 2^. 27 etc.
Abraham with Abimelech, and 31. 51.
Jacob with Laban. Next for the fifth Comman^ement, what duties children owe
their parents, the practice of 24 67 and
Isaac and 28. (...).
Jacob does declare abundantly, in being ruled by them in the choice of their
wives, and readily obeying all their directions. So for the sin of murder, the
history of Jacobs 34 26* 30
children, and the grieved Fathers curse upon them for the slaughter of the
Sichemites; together with Gods precept given to 9. 6.
Noah against shedding blood; show us that both it was forbidden, and condemned
being done. The 39 8.
continency of Joseph before remembered; and the punishment threatened to 70. ^.
Abimelech for keeping Sarah, Abraham^ wife: the 31. ^0.
quarrelling of Laban for his stolen Idols; and 44. 4.
Joseph's pursuit after his brethren for the silver cup that was suppo^ed to be
purloyned: are (...) sufficient that adultery and theft were (...) unlawf^^l.
And last of all, Abi^elech^ reprehension of ^0 9.
Abraham and ^6. ^0.
Isaa^ for bearing false witness in the denial of their wives; show plainly
that they had the knowledge of that Law also. The like may also be affi^med of
their (...) the wives and good^, or any thing that was their Neighbors. For
though the history cannot tell us of men's secret thoughts: yet we may judge of
good men's thoughts by their outward actions. Had Joseph coveted his Masters
wife, Io^ 31. 26.
he might have enjoyed her. And Job, more home unto the point, affirms
expressly of himself, that his heart was never secretly enticed: which is the
same with this, that he did not covet. We conclude then, that seeing there is
particular mention how all the residue of the commandments had been observed
and practiced by the Saints of old; and that no word at all is found which
concerns the sanctifying of the Sabbath: that certainly there was no Sabbath
sanctified in all that time, from the Creation to the Law of Moses; nor
reckoned any part of the Law of Nature, or any special Ordinance of God.

CHAP. IV.
The nature of the fourth Commandment: and that the SABBATH was not kept among
the Gentiles.
(1) The Sabbath first made known in the fall of Mannah. (2) The giving of the
Decalogue; and how far it binds. (3) That in the judgment of the Fathers,
in the Christian Church, the fourth Commandment is of a different nature from
the other nine. (4) The Sabbath was first given for a Law by Moses. (5) And
being given was proper only to the Jews. (6) What moved the Lord to give the
Israelites a Sabbath. (7) Why the seventh day was rather chosen for the
Sabbath, then any other. (8) The seventh day not more honored by the Gentiles,
then the eighth or ninth. (9) The Attributes given by some Greek Poets to the
seventh day, no argument that they kept the Sabbath. (10) The Jews derided for
their Sabbath, by the Graecians, Romans, and Egyptians. (11) The division of
the year into weeks not generally used of old, amongst the Gentiles.

(1) THus have we shown you how Gods Church continued without any Sabbath,
the space of 2500. years and upwards; even till the children of Israel came
out of Egypt. And if the Saints of God, in the line of Seth, and the house of
Abraham; assigned not every seventh day for Gods public worship; it is not to
be thought that the posterity of Cain, and the sons of Canaan, were observant
of it. To proceed therefore in the history of the Lords own people, as they
observed no Sabbath when they were in Egypt, so neither did they presently
after their departure thence. The day of their deliverance thence, was the
seventh day, as some conceive it, which after was appointed for a Sabbath to
them. Torniellus I am sure is of that opinion: and so is Zanchie two, who
withal gives it for the reason, why the seventh day was rather chosen for the
Sabbath, In quarium p^acep. um.
then any other. Populus die septima liberatus fuit ex Aegypto; and tunc jussit
in hujus rei memoriam diem illam sanctificare. Which were it so, yet could not
that day be a Sabbath, or a day of rest, considering the ^udden and tumultuous
manner of their going thence: their sons and daughters, maid servants, and
men servants, the cattle and the strangers within their gates, being all put
hardly to it, and fain to fly away, for their life and ^afety. And if Saint
Austins note be true, and the note be his, S^rm. de temp. 154.
that on the first day of the week, transgressi sunt filii Israel mare rubrum
siccis pedibus, the Israelites went dry foot over the Red Sea, or Sea of Edom:
then must the day before, if any, be the Sabbath day; the next seventh day
after the day of their departure. But that day certainly was not kept, as a
Sabbath day. For it was wholly spent in murmuring and complaints against God
and Moses. Exodus 14. 11. and 12.
They cried unto the Lord, and they said to Moses, why have thou brought us out
of Egypt to die in the wilderness? Had it not been better far for us to
serve the Egyptians? Nothing in all this murmurings and seditious clamours,
that may denote it for a Sabbath, for an holy Festival. Nor do we find that
for the after times, they made any scruple of journying on that day, till the
Law was given unto the contrary, in Mount Sinai: which was the eleventh station
after their escape from Egypt. It was the fancy of Rabbi Solomon, that the
Sabbath was first given in Marah, and that the sacrifice of the red Co^
mentioned in the nineteenth of Numbers, was instituted at that time also. Exodus
15. 26.
This fancy founded on th^se words in the Book of Exodus, If thou wills
diligently hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, etc. then will I bring
none of those diseases upon thee, that I brought on the Egyptians. But
Torniellus, and Tostatus, and Lyra, though himself a Jew, count it no other
then a Jewish and Rabbinicall folly. Sure I am, that on the fifteenth day of
the second month after their departure out of Egypt* being that day
seven-night before the first Sabbath was discovered, in the fall of Mannah: we
find not any thing that implies either rest or worship. Exodus 16. 2.
We read indeed how all the Congregation murmured as they did before against
Moses and against Aar^^, wishing that they had died in the land of Egypt, where
they had bread their b^llies full, rather then be destroyed with Famine. So
eagerly they murmured, that to content them, God sent them Quails that night,
and rained down bread from Heaven next morning. Was this, think you the
sanctifying of a Sabbath to the Lord their God? Indeed the next seventh day
that followed, was by the Lord commended to them for a Sabbath* and ratified by
a great and signal miracle the day before: wherein it pleased him, to give
them double what they used togather on the former days, that they might rest
upon the seventh, with the greater comfort. This was a preamble or preparative
to the following Sabbath: for by this miracle, this rest of God from raining
(...) on the seventh day, the people came to know which was precisely the
seventh day from the Worlds Creation: whereof they were quite ignorant at that
present time. Philo assures us in his third Book (...) that the knowledge of
that day on which God rested from his works* had been quite forgotten, (...),
by reason of (...) which had (...) the (...) by this miracle, the Lord revived
again the remembrance of it. And in another place, De vita Mosis, l. 1.
when men had made a long enquiry after the birth day of the World, and were
yet to seek: (...), etc. God made it known to them by a special miracle,
which had so long been hidden from their Ancestors. The falling of a double
portion of Mannah on the sixth day, and the not putrefying of it on the seventh;
was the first light that Moses had to descry the Sabbath: which he accordingly
commended unto all the people, to be a day of rest unto them; that as God
ceased that day from sending, so they should rest from looking after their
daily bread. But what need Philo be produced, when we have such an ample
testimony from the word it self. For it is manifest in the story, that when
the people, on the sixth day, had gathered twice as much Mannah, as they used to
do; Exodus 16. 5.
according as the Lord had directed by his servant Moses: they understood not
what they did, Verse. 22.
at least why they did it. The Rulers of the Congregation, as the Text informs
us, came and told Moses of it: and he as God before had taught him, acquainted
them, Verse. 23.
that on the morrow should be the rest of the holy Sabbath unto the Lord; and
that they were to keep the overplus until the morning. Nay, so far were
the people from knowing any thing of the Sabbath, or of Gods rest upon that
day, that though the Prophet had thus preached unto them of a Sabbaths rest,
the people gave small credit to him. For it is said, that some of the people
went out to gather on the seventh day, Verse. 27.
(which was the seventh day after, or the second Sabbath as some think)
notwithstanding all that had been spoken, and that the Mannah stanke not, as on
other days. So that this resting of the people, was the first sanctifying of
the Sabbath mentioned in the Scriptures: and Gods great care to make provision
for his people on the day before, the blessing he bestowed upon it. And this is
that, which Solomon Iarehi tells us, as before we noted, Benedixit e^] i.e. in
Manna^, quia omnibus diebus septimanae descendit Om^r pro singuli^, C^. 1. n. 2.
and sexto pani^ duplex: and sanctificavit eum] i.e. in Mannah, quia non
descendit omnino. Nay, generally the Hebrew Doctors do affirm the same:
assuring us that the Commandment of the Sabbath is the foundation and ground
of all the rest, De ^est Iud^or. c. 3.
as being given before them all, at the fall of Mannah. Vnd^ dicunt Hebraei
sabbatum fundamentum esse aliorum praeceptorum, quod ante alia praecepta hoc
datum sit, quando Mannah acc^perunt. So Hospinia^ tells us. Therefore the
Sabbath was not given before, in their own confession. This happened on the two
and twentieth day of the second month after their coming out of Egypt; and of
the World^ Creation, Anno 2044. the people being then in the Wilderness of
Sin, which was their seventh station.

(2) The seventh day after, being the nine and twentieth of the second month,
is thought by some, I know not upon what authority, to be that day whereon
some of the people, distrusting all that Moses said, went out to gather Mannah,
as on other days: Number. 33.
but whether they were then in the Wilderness of Sin, or were encamped in
Dophkath, Alush, or Rephidim, which were their next removes, that the
Scriptures say not. Most likely that they were in the last station, considering
the great businesses there performed; the fight with Amalek, and the new
ordering of the Government by Iethroes counsel; and that upon the third day
of the third month which was Thursday following, they were advanced so far
as to the Wilde^nesse of Sinai. I say the third day of the third month* For
where the Text has it, Exodus 19. 1.
In the third month when the children of Israel were gone forth out of Egypt,
the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai* by the same ^ is meant
the same day of the month, which was the third day, being Thursday* after our
Account. Exodus 19. v. 3. 10, 11.
The morrow after went Moses up unto the Lord, and had commandment from him to
sanctify the people that day, and to morrow, and to make them ready against
the third day: God meaning on that day to come down in the eyes of all the
people in Mount Sinai, and to make known his will unto them. That day being
come, Verse. 17.
which was the Saturday or Sabbath, the people were brought out of the Camp to
meet with God, and placed by Moses at the nether part of the Mountain: Moses
ascending first to God, and descending after to the people, to charge them that
they did not pass their bounds before appointed. It seems the Sabbaths rest
was not so established, Verse. 21.
but that the people had been likely to take the pains to climb the Mountain,
and to behold the wonders which were done upon it; had they not had a special
charge unto the contrary. Things ordered thus, it pleased the Lord to publish
and proclaim his Law unto the people, in thunder, smoke, and lightnings, and
the noise of a Trumpet; using therein the Ministry of his holy Angels: which
Law we call the Decalogue, or the ten Commandments, and contains in it the
whole moral Law, or the Law of nature. This had before been naturally
imprinted in the minds of men; however that in tract of time, the character
thereof had been much defaced; so dimmed and darkened that Gods own people
stood in need of a new impression: and therefore was proclaimed in this solemn
manner, that so the letter of the Law might leave the cleerer stamp in their
affections. A law which in it self was general and universal, Romans 2. 1 4.
equally appertaining both to Jew and Gentile; the Gentiles whcih know not the
law, doing by nature the things contained in the Law, as Saint Paul has told
us: but as at this time published on Mount Sinai, and as delivered to the
people by the hand of Moses, they obliged only those of the house of Israel.
Zanchius has so resolved it amongst the Protestants. (not to say anything of
the Schoolmen who affirm the same:) ut Politi^ae and ceremoniales, sic etiam
morales leges quae Decalogi nomine significantur, De Redempti. l. 1. c. 11. Th.
1.
quatenus per Mosen traditae fuerunt Israeliti^, ad no^ Christi^^^ ni^il
pertinent, etc. As neither the Judicial nor the Ceremonial, so nor the Moral
Law contained in the Docalogue, does any way conc^^^^ us Christians, as given
by Moses to the Jews: but only so far forth, as it is consonant to the law
of nature, which binds all alike; and after was confirmed and ratified by
Christ, our King. His reason is, because that if the Decalogue as given by
Moses to the Jews, did concern the Gentiles; the Gentiles had been bound by
the fourth Commandment, to observe the Sabbath, in as strict a manner as the
Jews. Cum vero constet ad hujus diei sanctification (...) nunquam fuisse
Gentes obligatas, etc. Since therefore it is manifest that the Gentiles never
were obliged to observe the Sabbath, it follows that they neither were, nor
possibly could be bound to any of the residue, as given by Moses to the Jews.
We may conclude from hence, that had the fourth Commandment been merely
moral, it had no less concerned the Gentiles, then it did the Israelites.

(3) For that the fourth Commandment is not of the same condition with the
rest, is no new invention: The Fath^rs jointly so resolve it. Its true that
Iren^ns tel^ us, how God, the better to prepare us to eternal life, Decalogi
verba per somet ipsum omnibus fimiliter locutus est, Li^. 4. cap. 31.
did by himself proclaim the Decalogue to all people equally: which therefore
is to be in full force amongst (...), as having rather been enlarged then
diss^lued, by our S^viours coming in the flesh. Which word^ of Iren^us, if
considered rightly, must be referred to that part of the fourth Commandment
which indeed is Moral; or else the fourth Commandment must not be reckoned as
(...) part or member of the Decalogue: because it did receive no such
enlargement, as did the rest of the Commandments, by our Saviors preaching;
(whereof see Math. 5. 6, and 7. Chapters) but a dissolution rather by his
practice. (...) Try^^^^^
Justin the Martyr more expressly, in his dispu^^ with Trypl^^ a learned Jew,
maintain^^ the Sabbath to be only a Mosaicall Ordinance; as we shall see anon
more fully; and that it was imposed upon the Israelites, (...), because of
their hard-heartedn^sse, and irregularity. Contra Iudaeos.
Tertullian also in his Treatise against the Jews, ^aith that it was not
spiritale and aternum mandatum; sed temporale, quod quandoque cessaret, not a
spiritual and eternal institution, but a temporal only. Saint Austin yet
more fully, In Epistola ^d Ga^at.
that it is no part of the moral Law. For he divides the Law of Moses into
these two parts, Sacraments, and moral duties: accounting Circumcision, the
new Moo^es, Sabbath^, and the Sacrifices to appertain unto the first: ad mores
autem, non occides, etc. and these Commandments, Thou shall not kill, nor
commit adultery, nor bear false witness, and the rest, to be contained within
the second. Nay more, he tells us, De Spiritu and li^. c. 114
that Moses did receive a Law to be delivered to the people, writ in two Tables
made of stone by the Lords own finger: wherein was nothing to be found either
of Circumcision, or the Ie^ish Sacrifices. And then he adds, In illis igitur
december pr^ceptis, excepta Sabbati observatione, dicatur mihi quid non sit
observa^dum a Christiano: Tell me, says he, what is there in the Decalogue,
except the observation of the Sabbath day, which is not carefully to be
observed of a Christian man. To this we may refer all those several places,
wherein he calls the fourth Commandment, praeceptum figuratum, and i^ umbra
positum, a Sacrament, a shadow, and a figure: as Tract the third in Ioh. 1. and
Tract. 17. and 20. in Ioh. 5. ad Bonifac. l. 3. T. 7. contra Faust. Manich. l.
19. c. 18. the 14. Chapter of the Book de spiritu and lit. before remembered:
and finally, to go no further, Qu. in Exodus l. 2. qu. 173. where he speaks most
home, and to the purpose. Ex december praeceptis hoc solum figurate dictum est. Of
all the ten Commandments this only was delivered as a sign or figure. See
also what is said before out of Theodoret, and Sedulius, Chap. 1. n. 6.
Hesychius goes yet further, and will not have the fourth Commandment to be any
of the ten; Etsi december mandatis insertum sit, non tamen exiis esse; In Levit.
l. 6. ^. 26.
and howsoever it is placed amongst them, yet it is not of them. And therefore
to make up the number, divides the first Commandment in two, as those of Rome
have done the last, to exclude the second. But here Hesychius was deceived, in
taking this Commandment to be only ceremonial, whereas it is indeed of a
mixed or middle nature: for so the Schoolmen, and other learned Authors in
these later times, grounding themselves upon the Fathers, have resolved it
generally. Moral it is as to the duty, that there must be a time appointed
for the service of God: and Ceremonial, as unto the Day, to be one of seven,
and to continue that whole day, and to surcease that day from all kind of
work. As moral, placed amongst the ten Commandments, extending unto all
mankind, and written naturally in our hearts by the hand of nature: as
ceremonial, appertaining to the Law Leviticall, peculiar only to the Jews,
and to be reckoned with the rest of Moses institutes. Aquinas thus, 2. 2 ae,
qu, 122. art. 4. resp. ad primum. Tostatus thus in Exodus 20. qu. 11. So Petr.
Galatinus also lib. 11. cap. 9. and Bonaventure in his Sermon on the fourth
Commandment. And so diverse others.

(4) I say, the fourth Commandment, so far as it is ceremonial, in limiting
the Sabbath day to be one o^ seven, and to continue all that day, and thereon
to surcease from all kind of labor; which three ingredients are required in
the Law, unto the making of a Sabbath: is to be reckoned with the rest of Moses
institutes, and proper only to the Jews. For proof of this, we have the
Fathers very copious. And first that it was one of Moses institutes, Justin the
Martyr says expressly. Dial. cum Tryph^^e.
(...), etc. As Circumcision began from Abraham, and as the Sabbath,
Sacrifices, Feasts and Offerings, came in by Moses: so were they all to have an
end. And in another place of the same Discourse, seeing there was no use of
Circumcision until Abraham's time, (...), nor of the Sabbath until Moses: by
the same reason there is as little use now of them, as had been before. So does
Eusebius tell us, De Praeparat l. 7. c. 6.
(...), etc. that Moses was the first Lawgiver amongst the Jews, who did
appoint them to observe a certain Sabbath in memory of Gods rest from the
Worlds Creation, as also diverse anniversary Festivals, together with the
difference of clean and unclean creatures, and of other Ceremonies not a few.
Next Athanasius lets us know that in the Book of Exodus, Synopsis sacr^ Scripe.
we have the institution of the Passover, the sweetning of the bitter waters
of Marah, the sending down of Quails and Mannah, the waters issuing from the
rock: (...), what time the Sabbath took beginning, and the Law was published
by Moses on Mount Sin^i. Macarius a Contemporary of Athanasius does affirm as
much, Hom. 35.
viz. that in the Law (...) which was given by Moses, it was commanded, as in a
figure or a shadow that every man should rest on the Sabbath day from the
works of labor. In Ezech. ^0.
Saint Hierome also lets us know, though he name not Moses, that the
observation of the Sabbath, amongst other Ordinances, was given by God unto his
people in the Wilderness. Haec praecepta, and justificationes, and
observantiam Sabbati, Dominus dedit in deserto; which is as much, as if he had
expressly told us, that it was given unto them by the hand of Moses. Then
Epiphanius, God says he, rested on the seventh day from all his labors; De
Pond. and mensur* n. 22.
which day he blessed and sanctified, (...), and by his Angel made known the
same to his servant Moses. See more unto this purpose aduers. haeres. l. 1.
haer. 6. n. 5. And lastly, Damascen has assured us, that when there was no Law
nor Scripture, De ^ide Orth^d. lib. 4. c. 24.
that then there was no Sabbath neither: but when the Law was given by Moses,
(...), then was the Sabbath set apart for Gods public worship. Add here, that
(...) and I^stin refer the institution of the Sabb^th unto Moses only: of
which more hereafter.

(5) Next that the Sabbath was peculiar only to the Jews, or those, at least
that were of the house of Israel, the Fathers do affirm more fully, then they
did the other. For so Saint Basil, (...) the Sabbath was given unto the Jews,
in his first Homily of Fasting. Saint Austin so, Sabbatum datum est priori
populo in otio corporali, Epistola 119. and Sabbatum Iudaeis fuisse praeceptum
in numbra futuri, de Genesis ad lit. l* 4. c. 11. and in the 13. of the same
Book, ^num diem observan. dum mandavit populo Hebraeo: the like to which
occurres Epist. 86. ad Casulanum. The Jews, the Hebrews, and the former
people; all these three are one: and all do serve to show that Saint Austin
thought the Sabbath to be peculiar unto them only. That it was given unto the
Jews, exclusively of all other Nations, is the opinion and conceit also of the
Jews themselves. This Petrus Galatinus proves against them, on the anthority
of their best Authors. Sic enim legitur apud eos in Glossa, etc. We read,
Ch* 16. 29.
says he, in their Gloss on these words of Exodus, The Lord has given you
the Sabbath: what mean, say they, these words, he has given it you? Quia
vobis viz. Iudae is dedit, and non gentibu^ saeculi; because it was given unto
the Jews, and not unto the Gentiles. It is affirmed also, says he, by R.
Iohannan, that whatsoever statute God gave to Israel, he gave it to them
publicly, except the Sabbath; and that was given to them in secret: according
unto that of Exodus. Exodus 31. 17.
It is a sign between me and the children of Israel. Quod si ita est, non
obligantur gentes ad sabbatum. If ^o ^aith Galatinus, the Gentiles were not
bound to observe the Sabbath. A sign between me and the children of Israel? It
seems, Ains^^^th in Exodus 13. 9.
the Jews were all of the same opinion. For where they used on other days to
wear their Phylacteries on their arms or forehead^, to be a sign or taken to
them, as the Lord commanded; they laid them by upon the Sabbaths: because, say
they, the Sabbath was it self a sign. So truly said Procopius Gazaeus, In
Genesis 2.
It a Iudaeis imperavit supremum numen, ut segregarent a caeteris diebus diem
septimum, etc. God, says he, did command the Jews, to set apart the seventh
day to his holy worship; that if by chance they should forget the Lord their
God, that day might call him back unto their remembrances, where note, it was
commanded to the Jews alone. Add, that Josephus calls the Sabbath in many
places, a national or local custom, (...) a law peculiar to that people; as
Antiqu. l. 14. c. 18. and de bello l. 2. c. 16. as we shall see hereafter more
at large. Lastly, so given to the Jews alone, that it became a difference
between them, and all other people. In Ez^ch. 20.
Saint Cyrill has resolved it so. God, says be, gave the Jews a Sabbath,
not that the keeping of the same should be sufficient to conduct them to
eternal life: sed ut haec civilis administrationis ratio peculiaris a gentium
institutis distinguat eos; but that so different a form of civil government,
should put a difference between them, and all Nations else. Theodoret more
fully, that the Jews being in other things like to other people, in
observatione sabbati propriam videbantur obtinere rempublicam, In Ezech. 20.
seemed in keeping of the Sabbath to have a custom by themselves. And which is
more, says he, their Sabbath put a greater difference between the Jews, and
other people; then their Circumcision: For Circumcision had been used by the
Idumaeans, and Egyptians: sabbati vero observationens sola Iudaeorum natio
custodiebat, but the observation of the Sabbath, was peculiar only to the
Jews. Nay, even the very Gentiles took it for a Jewish Ceremony; sufficient
proof whereof we shall see ere long, But what need more be said in this,
either that this was one of the Laws of Moses, or that it was peculiar to the
Jews alone; seeing the same is testified by the holy Scripture? Thou came
down upon mount Sinai, says Nehemiah, Cap. 19. 13. and*
and spakest with them [the house of Israel) from Heaven: Verse. 14.
and gave them right judgments and true laws, good statutes and
commandments, what more? It follows, And made known unto them thy holy
Sabbaths, and commandedst them precepts, statutes and laws, by the hand of thy
servant Moses.

(6) Now on what motives God was pleased to prescribe a sabbath to the Jews,
more at this time then any of the former ages; the Fathers severally have told
us; yea and the Scriptures too in several places. Justin Martyr, as before we
noted, gives this general reason, because of their hard-heartednesse, and
irregular courses; wherein Saint Austin closes with him. Qu. ex N^v. Test. 69.
Cessarunt onera legis quae ad duritiem cordis Iudaici fuerunt data, ^nescis,
sabbatis, and neomenii^: where note how he has joined together, new-moones,
and sabbaths, and the Jewish difference between meat and meat. Particularly,
Gregory Nyssen makes the special motive to be this, Testim. adve^t^s D^i i^
carne.
ad sedandum nimium eorum pecuniae studium, so to restrain the people from the
love of money. For coming out of Egypt very poor and bare, and having almost
nothing but what they borrowed of the Egyptians; they gave themselves, says
he, unto continual and incessant labor, the sooner to attain to riches.
Therefore said God, that they should labor six days, and rest the
seventh.Damascen somewhat to this purpose, D^ ^ide Ort^ l. 4 ^. 24.
(...) etc. God, says he, seeing the carnal and the covetous disposition of
the Israelites, appo^nted them to keep a sabbath, that so their servants and
their cattle might partake of rest. And then he adds, (...), etc. as also,
that thus resting from their worldly businesses, they might repair unto the
Lord in Psalms, and Hymn^s and spiritual songs, and meditation of the
Scriptures. ^. 5. i^ lo^. c. 5.
Rupertu^ harps on the same string that the others did, save that he thinks
the sabbath given for no other cause, then that the laboring man being wearied
with his weekly toil, might have some time to refresh his spirits. Sabbatum
nihil ali^d est nisi requ^es, vel q^am ob ca^sam data est, nisi ut operarius
fessus caeteris septimanae diebus uno die requiesceret? Gaudentius Brixianus in
his twelfth Homily or Sermon, is of the same mind also, that the others were.
These seem to ground themselves on the fifth of Deutronomy, Verse. 14.
where God commands his people to observe his sabbaths, that thy manservant,
and thy maidservant may rest as well as thou. And then it follows, Verse. 1^.
Remember that thou wast a servant in the land of Egypt, and that the Lord thy
God brought thee out thence, though with a mighty hand and an outstretched
arm: therefore the Lord thy God commanded thee to keep the sabbath day. The
force of which illation is no more then this, that as God brought them out of
Egypt wherein they were servants, so he commands them to take pity on their
servants, and let them rest upon the sabbath: considering that they themselves
would willingly have had some time of rest, had they been permitted. A second
motive might be this, to make them always mindful of that spiritual rest,
which they were to keep from the acts of sin; and that eternal rest that
they did expect from all toil and misery. In reference unto this eternal
rest, Saint Augustine tells, De Genesis ad lit. l. 4* c. 11.
us that the Sabbath was commanded to the Jews, in umbra futuri, quae
spiritalem requiem figuraret; as a shadow of the things to come, in S. Paul's
language, which God does promise unto those that do the works of
righteousness. And in relation to the other, the Lord himself has told us,
that he had given his Sabbath unto the Jews, to be a sign between him and
them, that they might know, that he was the Lord that sanctified them. Exodus
31. 13. which is again repeated by Ezech. cap. 20. 12. That they may know that
I am the Lord which sanctifies them. For God, as Gregory Nyssen notes it,
seems only to propose this unto himself, that by all means he might at least
destroy in man, De re^urrect. Chr. Orat. 2.
his inbred corruption. (...). This was his aim in Circumcision, and in the
Sabbath, and in forbidding them some kind of meats: (...),for by the Sabbath
he informed them of a rest from (...) To cite more Fathers to this purpose were
a thing unnecessary* and indeed s^nsibile super sensum. This yet confirms us
further* that the Sabbath was intended for the Jews alone. For ^ad God given
the Sabbath to all other people, as he did to them, it must have also been a
^ig^e, that the Lord had sanctifi^d all people, as he did the Jews.

(7) There is another motive yet to be considered, and that concerne^ as well
the day* as the institution. God might have given the Jews a Sabbath, and yet
not tied the sabbath to one day of seven, or to the seventh precisely from the
World^ Creation. Constit^i potuisset, quod in die sabb^^i coloretur De^^* a^t
in die Mar^is, aut in altera die. God, In Exodus 20. qu. 11.
says T^st^tus, might have ordered it, to have his Sabbath on the Saturday, or
on the Tuesday, or any other day what ever, what any other of the week, and no
more then so; No, he might have appointed it, aut bis, aut semel tantum in
(...), aut in mense, once or twice a year, or every month; as he had listed.
And might not God as well exceed this number, as fall short thereof? yes say
the Protestant Doctors, that he might have done. He might have made each
third, or fourth, or fifth day a sabbath; In Exodus 20.
indeed as many as he pleased. Sivol^isset Deu^ absolut (...) suo, pot^itplures
dies imper are cultui suo impendendos: so faith Doctor Ry^et, one of the
Professors of Leiden, and a great Friend to the antiquity of the sabbath. What
was the principal motive then* why the seventh day was chosen for this
purpose, and ^one but that? Dial. cum Try. phone.
(...), to keep God always in their minds* so says Justin Martyr. But why
should that be rather do^^ by a seventh day Sabbath, then by any other? De
fest Paschal. ^om. 6.
Saint Cyrill answers to that point exceeding fully. The Jews, says he,
became infe^ted with the (...) of Egypt, worshipped the (...) host of Heaven:
which seems to be insinuated in the fourth of Deuteronomy. verse. 19. Therefore that
they might understand the Heavens to be Gods workmanship, ^os (...) suum (...)
jubet, he wills them that they imitate their Creator; that resting on the
sabbath day, they might the better understand the reason of the Festival.
Which if they did, says he, in case they rested on that day, whereon God had
rested, it was a plain confession that all things were made by him; and
consequently that there were no other Gods besides him. Et haec una ratio
sabbato indicte quietis; Indeed the one and only reason that is mentioned in
the body of the Commandment; which re^^ects only on Gods rest from all his
work which he had made, and leaves that as the absolute and sole occasion, why
the seventh day was rather chosen, for the sabbath, then the sixth, or eighth,
or any other. Which being so, it is the more to be admired, that Philo being a
learned Jew, or any learned Christian Writer, leaving the cause expressed in
the Law it self, should seek some secret reason for it, out of the nature of
the day, De Abrahamo.
or of the number. First, Philo tells us, that the Jews do call their seventh
day by the name of sabbath, which signifies repose and rest. Not because they
did rest that day from their weekly labors: (...), but because seven is found
to be, both in the world and man himself, the most quiet number, most free
from trouble, war, and all manner of contention. A strange conceit to take
beginning from a Jew: Problem. loc. 55.
yet that that follows of Aretius is as strange as this. Who thinks that day
was therefore consecrated unto rest, even amongst the Gentiles, quod putarent
civilibus, actionibus ineptum esse, fortasse propter frigus planetae,
contemplationibus vero idoneum: because they thought that day, by reason of the
dullness of the Planet Saturn, more fit for contemplation, then it was for
action. Some had, it seems, conceived so, in the former times, whom thereupon
To^tatus censures in his Comment on the fifth of Deutro^^^y. For where it was
Gods purpose, Qu. 3.
as before we noted out of Cyrill, to weane the people from Idolatry and
Superstition: to lay down such a reason for the observation of the sabbath, was
to reduce them to the worship of those Stars and Planets, from which he did
intend to weane them. I had almost omitted the conceit of Zan^hie, See ^. 1.
before remembered; who thinks that God made choice of this day the rather;
because that on the same day, he had brought his people out of Egypt. In case
the ground be true, that on this day the Lord wrought this deliverance for his
people Israel, then his conceit may probably be countenanced from the fifth of
Deuteronomy, where God recounting to his people, that with a mighty hand and an
outstretched arm he had delivered them from Egypt; has thereupon commanded
them that they should keep the sabbath day. Lay all that has been said
together, and it will come in all to this, that as the sabbath was not known
till Moses time; so being known, it was peculiar unto Israel only. Non nisi
Mosaicae legis temporibus in usu fuisse septimi diei cultum; Annal d 7.
nec postea nisi penes Hebraeos perdurasse, as Torniellus does conclude it.

(8) For that the Gentiles used to keep the seventh day sacred, as some give
it out, is no where to be found, I dare boldly say it, in all the Writings of
the Gentiles. The seventh day of the month indeed they hallowed, and so they
did the first, and fourth; as Hesiod tells us. Opera and die^.
(...). Not the first day, and the fourth, and seventh of every week, for then
they must have gone beyond the Jews: but as the Scholiast upon Hesiod notes
it, a noviluni^ exorsus laudat tres, the first, fourth, and seventh. And lest
it should be thought that the seventh day is to be counted holier then the
other two, because the attribute of (...) seems joined unto it: the Scholiast
takes away that scruple, a novilunio exorsus tres laudat, omnes sacras dicens,
septimam etiam ut Apollonis natalem celebrans; and tells us that all three are
accounted holy, and that the seventh was also celebrated as Apollos birthday.
For so it follows in the Poet, (...): from whence the Flamines or Gentile
Priests did use to call him (...), i. e. the God born on the seventh day. For
further proof hereof, Dies Geniales l. 3. c. 18.
we find in Alexander ab Alexandro, that the first day of every month was
consecrated to Apollo, the fourth to Mercury, the seventh again unto Apollo,
the eighth to Theseus. The like does Plutarch say of Theseus, that the
Athenians offered to him their greatest Sacrifice, upon the eighth day of
October, because of his arrival that day from Crete: and that they also
honored him, (...), on the eighth day of the other months, because he was
derived from Neptune; to whom, on the eighth day of every month, De D^calogo.
they did offer sacrifice. To make the matter yet more sure, Philo has put
this difference between the Gentiles, and the Jews, that diverse Cities of the
Gentiles did solemnize the seventh day, (...) once a month, beginning their
account with the New-moone: (...), but that the Jews did keep every seventh day
constantly. Its true that Philo tells us more then once or twice, how that the
sabbath was become a general Festival: but that was rather taken up in
imitation of the Jews, then practiced out of any instinct or light of nature,
as we shall see hereafter in a place more proper. Besides which days before
remembered, the second day was consecrate to the bonus Genius; Hospin. de orig.
Fest. cap. ^.
the third and fifteenth to Minerva; the ninth unto the Sun; the last to
Pluto; and every twentieth day kept holy by the Epicures. Now as the Greeks did
consecrate the New-moones and seventh day to Pho^bus, the fourth of every
month to Mercury, and the eighth to Neptune, and sic de c^teris: so every
ninth day in the year, was by the Romans anciently kept sacred unto Jupiter;
the Flamines or Priests upon that day, Satur^^l. l. 1* ^. 16.
offering a Ram unto him for a Sacrifice. Nundinas Iovis ferias esse, ait
Gra^ius Licinius: ^iquidem Flaminica omnibus nundinis [every ninth day] in
regia Iovi (...) as (...) Macrobius. So that we see the seventh day was no more
in honor, then either the first, fourth, or eighth; and not so much as was the
ninth: this being as it were a weekly Festival, and that a monthly. A thing
so clear and evident that Doctor Bo^^d could tell us, 2. Edit. p. 6^.
that the memory of Weeks and Sabbaths was altogether suppressed and buried
amongst the Gentiles. And in the former page. But how the memory of the seventh
day was taken away amongst the Romans, Ex veteri ^^ndinarum instit^^^ apparet,
says Beroaldus. And Satan did altogether take away from the Graecians, the
holy memory of the seve^th day, by obtruding on the wicked rites of
Superstition, which on the eighth day they did keep in honor of Neptune. So
that besides other holy days, the one of them observed the eighth day, and the
other the ninth, and neither of them both the seventh as the Church does now,
and has done always from the beginning. Its true, Diogenes the Grammarian,
did hold his disputations constantly upon the Saturday or (...). in Tiber. ^.
32.
Sabbath: and when Ti^erius at an extrordinary time came to hear his
exercises; in diem septimum distulerat, the Pedant put him off until the
Saturday next following. A right Di^genes indeed, and as rightly served. For
coming to attend upon Tiberius, being then made Emperor, he sent him word, ut
post annum septimum rediret, that he would have him come again the seve^th year
after. But then as true it is, which the same S^etoni^s tells us of Antonius
(...), De (...). Grammat.
a (...) too, that he taught Rhe^orick every day; declamaret vero non ni^i
^^^dinis, but declaimed o^^ly on the ninth. But then as true it is, which (...)
has told us of the Roman Rhetoricians, that they pronounced their Declamatio^s
on the sixth day chiefly. Nil sali^ Arcadico j^veni, (...)
cujus mihi sext^
Quaq^^ die, (...)
As the Poet has (...).

All days, it seems, alike to them; the first, fourth, sixth, eighth, ninth,
and indeed what not, as much in honor as the seventh: whether it were in
civil, or in sacred matters.

(9) I am not ignorant that many goodly Epithetes are by some ancient Po^ts
amongst the Grecians appropriated to this day: which we find gathered up
together, by Clemens Alexandrin^s, Clem Strom. l. 5. Eusebius. Praepar. l. 13. c.
12.
and E^sebius; but before either of them, by one Aristob^lns a learned Jew, who
lived about the time of Pt^lomie Philometor King of Egypt. Both Hesiod and
Homer, as they there are cited, give it the title of (...) or an holy day, and
so it was esteemed amongst them, as before is shown: but other days esteemed
as holy. From Homer they produce two Verses, wherein the Poet seems to be
acquainted with the Worlds Creation, and the perfection of it on the seventh
day. (...)
(...).
On the seventh day all things were fully done.
On that we left the waves of Acheron.
The like are cited out of Linus, as related by Eusebi^^, from the collections
of Aristobulus before remembered: but are by Clem^ns fathered on Callimachu^,
another of the old Greek Poets, who between them thus. (...)
(...).
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Which put together may be thus Englished, in the main, though not (...) On the
seventh day all things were made complete.
The birthday of the World, most good, most great.
Seven brought forth all things in the starrie Sky;
Keeping each year their courses constantly.


This Clemens, makes an argument that not the Jews only but the Gentiles also
knew that the seventh day had a privilege, yea, and was hallowed above other
days; on which the world, and all things in it were complete and finished. And
so we grant they did: but neither by the light of nature, nor any observation
of that day amongst themselves, more then any other. Not by the light of
nature. For Aristobulus, from whom Clemens probably might take his hint, speaks
plainly, that the Poet^ had consulted with the holy Bible, and from thence
sucked this knowledge: Ap. (...).
(...) as that Author says of Hesiod and Homer. Which well might be,
considering that Homer who was the oldest of them flourished about five hundred
years after Moses death; Callimachus who was the latest, above seven hundred
years after Homers time. Nor did they speak it out of any observation of that
day, more then any other amongst themselves. The general practice of the
Gentiles, before related, has thoroughly as we hope, removed that scruple. They
that from these words can collect a Sabbath, had need of as good eyes as
Clemens, Strom l. 5.
who out of Plato in his second d^ republ. conceives that he has found a
sufficient warrant for the observing of the Lords day, above a^l the rest:
because it is there said by Plato, that such as had for seven days solaced in
the pleasant Meadows, were to depart upon the eighth, and not return till
four days after. As much a Lords day in the one, as any Sabbath in the ^ther.
Indeed the argument is weak, that some of those that thought it of especial
weight, have now deserted it, as too light and trivial. Ryvet by name, who
cites most of these Verses in his notes on Genesis, to prove the Sabbath no
less ancient then the worlds Creation; does on the Decalogue, think them
utterly unable to conclude that point, nisi aliunde suffulciantur, unless they
be well backed with better arguments, and authorities out of other Authors.

(10) Nay, more then this, the Gentiles were so far from sanctifying the
Sabbath or seventh day, themselves; that they derided those that kept it. The
Circumcision of the Jews was not more ridic^lous amongst the Heathens, then
their Sabbath^ were; nor were they more extremely scoffed at for the one, Ap.
Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 6. c. 11.
then for the other, by all sorts of Writers. Seneca lays it to their charge,
that by occasion of their Sabbaths, septimam fere aetatis suae partem vacando
perdant, Hist* ^ 5.
they spent the seventh part of their their lives in sloth and idleness: and
Tacitus, that not the seventh day, but the seventh year also, was as
unprofitably wasted. Septimo quoque die otium placuisse ferunt; dein blandiente
inertia, septimum qu^que annum ignaviae datum. Moses, says he, had so
appointed, because that after a long six days march, the people became
quietly settled on the seventh. Iuvenal makes also the same objection, Sat. 14.
against the keeping of the Sabbath by the Jewish Nation. -- quod septima
quaeque fuit lux
Ignava, and partem vitae non attigit ullam.
And Ovid does not only call them peregrina sabbata, Reme. amor. l. ^.
as things with which the Romans had but small, and that late acquaintance: but
makes them a peculiar mark of the Jewish Religion. Quaque die redeunt, De Art
l. 1.
rebus minus apta gerendis,
Culta Palestino septima sacra viro.
The seventh day comes for business unfit;
Held sacred by the Jew, who halloweth it.
Where by the way Tostatus notes upon these words, In Exodus 20.
that sacra s^ptima are here ascribed unto the Jews, as their badge or
cognizance; which had been most improper, and indeed untrue, si gentes aliae
servarent sabbatum, if any other Nation, specially the Romans, had observed the
same. But to proceed, Persius hits them in the teeth with their recutita
sabbata: Sat. 5. ^. 4 ep. ^.
and Martial scornfully calls them Sabbatarians, in an Epigram of his to
Bassus, where reckoning up some things of an unsavory smell, he reckons
Sabbatariorum jejunia, Ap. Iosephum* An^iq. l. 12. 1.
amongst the principal. So Agacharcides who wrote the lives of Alexanders
successors accuses them of an unspeakable superstition; in that (...), they
suffered P^olomie to take their City of Jerusalem, on a sabbath day, rather
then stand upon their guard. But that of ^pi^n, the great Clerk of Alexandria,
Joseph. adv* Api^n l. 2.
is the most shameful and reproachful of all the rest: Who, to despite the
Jews the more, and lay the deeper stain upon their Sabbaths; relates in his
Egyptian story, that at their going out of Egypt, having traveled for the
space of six whole days, they became stricken with c^rtain inflammations in
the privy parts, which the Egyptians call by the name of Sabbo: (...), and for
that cause they were compelled to rest on the seventh day, which afterward
they called the Sabbath. Then which, what greater calumny could a malicious
Sycophant invent against them? Doubtless, those men that speak so ^^^picably
and reprochfully of the Jewish sabbath* had never any of their own: Nor did the
Greeks and L^tines, and Egyptians only out of the plenty, or the redunda^ce
rather of their wit, deride and scoff^ the Sabbaths celebrated by those of
Iewry: it was a (...) on them, Cap. (...).
when wit was not so (...) For so the Prophet Jeremiah in his Lamentations,
made on the death of King Josiah. (...) at her sabbaths. (...) this
observation. All nations else, both Gr^cian and Barbarian, had never so agreed
together, to deride them for it.

(11) Yet we deny not all this while, but that the fourth Commandment, so much
thereof as is agreeable to the law and light of nature, was not alone imprinted
in the minds of the Gentiles, but practiced by them. For they had stat^s dies,
some appointed times, appropriated to the worship of their several gods, as
before was showed: their h^lydayes, and half-holydayes, according to that
estimation which their gods had gotten in the World. And this as well to
comfort and refresh their spirits, which otherwise had bin spent and wasted
with continual labor; as to do service to those Deities which they chiefly
honored. De leg. l. ^.
Dii genus hominum laboribus natura pressum miserati, remissionem laborum
statuerunt solennia festa; was the re^olution once of Plato. But this concludes
not any thing that they kept the sabbath, or that they were obliged to keep it,
by the law of nature. Purch. Pilgr. l. ^ c. 4.
And where it is conceived by some, that the Gentiles by the light of nature
had their Wakes, which is supposed to be an argument that they kept the
sabbath, a week being only of seven days, and commonly so called both in
Greek, and Latin: we on the other side affirm, that by this very rule, the
Gentiles, many of them, if not the most, could observe no sabbath; because they
did observe no weeks. For first the Chaldees, and the Persians had no weeks at
all: but to the several days of each several month, appropriated a
particular name of some King or other: Emend. ^^mp l. 3.
as the P^ruvians do at this present time, and nomina dicbus mensis indunt, ut
prisci Persae, as Scaliger has noted of them. The Grecians also did the like
in the times of old: there being an old Attick Calendar to be seen in Scaliger,
wherein is no division of the m^neth into weeks at all. Then for the Romans,
they divided their account into eighths and eighths; as the Jews did by sevens
and sevens: the one reflecting on their nundinae, as the other did upon their
sabbath. Id. l. 4.
Ogdoas Romanorum in tributione dierum servabatur propter nundinas, ut hebdomas
apud Iudaeos propter sabbatum. For proof of which there are some ancient
Roman^Calendars to be seen as yet, one in the aforesaid S^aliger; the other in
the Roman Antiquities of John Rossinus: wherein the days are noted from A to H,
as in our common Almanacks from A to G. The Mexicans go a little further, Id.
l. 1. Edit. 2.
and they have 13. days to the week, as the same Scaliger has observed of
them. Nay even the Jews themselves were ignorant of this division of the year
into weeks, I^ Levit. 23. qu. 3.
as Tostatus thinks, till Moses learnt it of the Lord, in the fall of Mannah.
Nor were the Greeks and Romans destitute of this account, only whiles they
were rude and untrained people, as the Peruvians and the Mexicans at this
present time; but when they were in their greatest flourish for Arts and
Empire. Hist. l. 36.
Dion affirms it for the ancient Grecians, that they knew it not; (...),
N^tura^. 7.
for ought he could learn: and Seneca more punctually, that first they learnt
the motions of the Planets, of Eudoxus, who brought that knowledge out of
Egypt; and consequently could not know the w^^ke before. And for the Romans,
though they were well enough acquainted with the Planets in their latter times;
yet they divided not their Calendar into weeks, as now they do, till near
about the time of Dionysius Exiguus, who lived about the y^ere of Christ, 520^
Nor had they then received it in all probability, had they not long before
admitted Christianity throughout their Empire; and therewithal the knowledge
of the holy Scriptures, where the account by weeks was exceeding obvious.
Therefore according to this rule, the Chaldees, Per^ians, Greeks, and Romans,
all the four great Monarchies did observe no Sabbaths; because they did
observe no weeks. Which said in this place once for all, we resolve it thus:
that as the Israelites kept no Sabbath before the Law, so neither did the
Gentiles when the Law was given: which prooves it one of Moses Ordinances, no
prescript of nature.

CHAP. V.
The Practice of the Jews in such observances, as were annexed unto the
SABBATH.
(1) Of some particular adjuncts affixed unto the Jewish Sabbath. (2) The
Annual Festivals called Sabbaths in the Book of God, and reckoned as a part
of the fourth Commandment. (3) The Annual Sabbaths no less solemnly
observed and celebrated, the^ the weekly were; if not more solemnly. (4) Of
the Parasc^^e or Preparation to the Sabbath and the solemn Festivalls. (5) All
manner of work as well forbidden on the Annual, as the weekly Sabbaths. (6)
What things were lawful to be done on the Sabbath days. (7) To^ching the
prohibitions of not kindling fire, and not dressing meat. (8) What moved the
Gentiles generally to charge the Jews, with Fasting on the Sabbath day. (9)
Touching this Prohibition, Let no man go out of his place on the Sabbath day.
(10) All lawful recreations, as Dancing, Feasting, Man-like Exercises, allowed
and practiced by the Jews upon their Sabbaths.

(1) I Showed you in the former Chapter, the institution of the Sabbath, by
whom it was first published, and to whom prescribed. It now remaynes to see,
how it was observed; how far the people thought them^e^^es oblig^d by it, and
in what ^ases they were pleased to dispense th^rewith. Which that we may the
better do, we will take notice first of the Law it self, what is contained in
the same, what the Sabbath signifies: and then of such particular observances,
which by particular statutes were affixed by God to the fourth Commandment,
either by way of Comment on it, or addition to it; and after were misconstrued
by the Scribes and Pharisees to ensnare the people. And first, not to say any
thing in this place, of the quid nominis, or derivation of the word, which
Phil^ and Josephus, and the Seventy do often render by (...)* repose, or rest:
Sabbath is used in Scripture to signify some selected time by GOD himself
deputed unto rest and holiness. Most specially and (...), it points out unto
us the seventh day, as that which was first honored with the name of Sabbath,
Exodus* 16. 25. and in the second place those other Festivals, which were by God
prescribed to the house of Israel, and are called Sabbaths also, as the others
were. Of these the one was we^kly, and the others Ann^all: the New-moones not
being honored with this title in the Book of God, though in heathen Authors.
The we^kly Sabbath was that day, precisely, whereon God rest^d from the works
that he had made, which he commanded to be kept for a day of rest unto the
Jews that so they might the better meditate on the wondrous works, that he had
done every seventh day exactly, in a continual revolution, from time to time.
De^fide Orth^d. l. 4. c. 24.
Therefore, says Damasce^, when we have reckoned to seven days, (...), our
computation of the time runs round, and begins anew. These as in general,
and (...), as before I said, they were called Sabbaths: so were there some of
them that had particular adjuncts, whereby to know them from the rest: whereof
the one was constant and the other casual. The (...) adjunct is that of (...),
or (...) as the (...) tenders it: mention whereof is made in Saint Lukes
Gospel. Our English reads it, Cap 6. 1.
on the second Sabbath after the first. A place and passage that much exercised
men's wits in the former times, and brought forth many strange conceits: until
at last, this, and the (...), and super fluvious manare, font^s, Cas^ub. Exerc.
14. n. 1.
came to be reckoned in a Proverb as preposterous things. Scaliger has of
late untied the knot, and resolved it* thus, Eme^d. Temp. lib. 6.
that all the Weeks or Sabbaths from Pas^h to Pente^^st, did take their name
(...), from the second day of the Feast of Passover; that being the Ep^che, or
point of time, from which the fifty days were to be accounted by the Law: and
that the first Week or Sabbath after the said second day, was called (...),
the second, (...), the third, (...), and so the rest. According to which
reckoning, the second Sabbath after the first, as we translate it, must be the
first S^bbath (...), from the second day of the Passover. The casual adjunct
is, that sometimes there was a Sabbath that was called (...), the great
Sabbath, Cap. 19. 31.
or as it is in Saint John's Gospel (...), magnus ille dies Sabbati, as the
Latin has it. And is so called not for its own sake, Excerc. 16. n. 31.
for Casaubon has rightly noted, nunquameam appellationem Sabbato tributam
reperiri propter ipsum: but because then, as many other times it did, the
Passover did either fall, or else was celebrated on a Sabbath. Even as in
other cases, and at other times, when any of the greater and more solemn
Festivalls did fall upon the Sabbath day, they used to call it, Epist. 110* l.
3*
Sabbatum Sabbatorum, a Sabbath of Sabbaths. (...), as Isidore Pelusiotes notes
it.

(2) For that the Annual F^^sts were called Sabbaths too, is most apparent in
the Scriptures especially; Levit. 23. where both the Passover, the Feast of
Trampets, the Feast of Expiation, and the Feast of Tubernacles, are severally
entitled by the (...) of Sabbaths. The Fathers also note the same, (...),
says Saint Chysost^me: Hom. in M^th. 39.
and (...), says Isidore, in the place before remembered. Even the New-moones,
amongst the Gentiles had the same name also, as may appear by that of Horace,
who calls them in his Satyrs, Tricesima Sabbata, L. 1. Sat. 9.
because they were continually celebrated every thirtieth day. The like they
did by all the rest, Emend. Temp. lib. 3.
if Joseph Scaligers note be true, as I think it is; who has affirmed
expressly, Omnem festivitatem Iudaicam non s^lum Iudaeos sed and Gentiles
sabbatum vocare. Nay, as the weekly Sabbaths, some of them had their proper
adjuncts: De Sabbat. and Circumcis.
so had the annual. Saint Athanasius tells us of the Feast of Expiation, that
it was (...), or the principal Sabbath: for so I take it is his meaning: which
self same attribute is given by Origin, to the Feast of Trumpets. Clemens In
Number. 2^. him. 23.
of Alexandria 6. Stromat. brings in a difference of those Festivalls, out of a
supposed work of Saint Peter the Apostle: wherein, besides the New Mons and
Passover, which are there so named, they are distributed into (...), or the
first Sabbath, the Feast (...) so called, Exer. 14. ^. 1.
and the Great day. Casaubon for his part protests, ipsi obscurum esse quid
fit sabbatum primum, that he was yet to seek what should the meaning be of that
first Sabbath. But Scaliger conceives, and not improbably, that by this first
Subbath, ^^^nd. Temp. ^roleg Edit. 2.
or (...), was meant the Feast of Trumpets, because it was caput anni, or the
beginning of the civil year: the same which Origin calls Sabbatum sabbatorum,
as before we noted. As for the Feast (...) so named in Clemens, that he
conceives to be the Feast of Pentecost; and the great day in him remembered, the
Feast of Tabernacles: for the which last, he has a^thority in the Scriptures,
who tell of the Great day of this very Feast, Ioh. 7. 37. Not that the Feast of
Tabernacles was alone so called, but in a more especial manner: For there were
other days so named, besides the Sab^aths. (...)
Dies (...), says Tertullian, and sabbata ut opinor, and coenas puras, and
jej^nia, and dies magnos. Where sabbata and dies magni, are distinguished
plainly. Indeed it stood with reason that these annual Sabbaths, should have
the honor also of particular adjuncts as the weekly had: being all founded
upon one and the same Commandment. Philo affirms it for the Jews. De Decalog.
(...), etc. The fourth Command^^ent, ^aith he, is of the Sabbath, and the
Festivalls* of Vows, of Sacrifices, forms of purifying, and other parts of
divine worship. Which is made good by Zanchie for the Christian Writers, who in
his work upon the De^alogue does resolve it thus. In Ma^d^t. 4*
Sabbati nomine ad I^daeos quod attinebat, Deus intellexit non solum sabbatum
septem dierum, sed sabbata etiam annorum, item omnia festa, quae per Mosen
illis explicavit. It was the moral part of the fourth Commandment, that some
time should be set apart for Gods public service: and in the body of that Law
it is determined of that time, that it should be one day in seven. Yet not
exclusively, that there should be no other time appointed, either by God, or by
his Church, then the seventh day only. God therefore added other times, as to
him seemed best, the list whereof we may behold in the twenty third of
Leviti^us: and the Church too by Gods example, added also some, as namely the
Feast of Dedication, and that of Purim.

(3) Now as the Annual Festivalls ordained by God, had the name of Sabbath, as
the weekly had: ^o the observances in them were the ^ame; or not much
different, if in some things the weekly Sabbath* seemed to have pre-eminence,
the Annual Sabbaths went beyond the^ in some others also. For the continuance
of these Feasts, the weekly Sabbath was to be observed throughout their
generations, for a perpetual covenant; Exodus 31. 16. So for the Passover; you
shall observe it throughout your generations, by an ordinance for ever. Exodus
12. 14. The like of Pentecost, it shall be (...) for^ver throughout your
gen^rations; (...). 23. 21. So also for the Feast of Expiation, Levit. 23. 31.
and for the Feast of Tabernacles, Levit, 23. 41. Where note, that by these
words for^ver, and throughout their generations, it is not to be understood
that these I^wis^, Festivall^ were to be perpet^all, for then they would oblige
us now, as they did the Ie^es: but that they were to last as long, as the
Republic of the Jews should stand; and the Mosaicall Ordinances were to be in
force. Per generationes vestras, i.e. quam di^ Res^^b. Iudaica consta^^t, as
T^status notes upon this twenty third of Leviticus. For the solemnity o^ these
Feast, the presence of the high priests was as nece^^ary in the one as in the
other. bello l. 6. 6.
The high priests also (says ^^^ep^us) (...) with the priests into the Temple,
(...), and yet not always, but only on the Sabbaths, and New-moones, (...),
as also on those other Feasts, and solemn assemblies, which ye^^ely were to be
observed, according unto the (...) of the Country. And hitherto, we find no
difference at all: but in the manner of the rest, there appears a little,
between the weekly Sabbath, and some of the Annual. For of the weekly Sabbath
it is said expressly, that thou shall do no manner of work: as on the other
side of the Passover, the Pen^icost, the Feast of Trumpets* and of
Tabernacles, that they shall do no servile work: which being well examined will
be found the same in sense, i^. 23. 7, 21, 36.
though not in sound. But then again for sense and ^ound, it is expressly said
of the Expiation, that therein tho^ shall do no manner of work, as was affirmed
before of the weekly Sabbath. So that besides the seventh day Sabbath, there
were seven Sabbaths in the year, in six of which, viz. the first and seventh
of unleavened bread, the day of Pent^cost, the Feast of Trump^ts, and the first
and eighth day of the Feast of Tabernacles, they were to do no servile work^:
and on the Expiation d^y, no work at all. So that in thi^ respect the w^ekly
Sabbath and the day of Expiation were directly equal, according to the very
letter. In other things the day of Exp^at^^n seems to h^ve (...), the high
Priest, (...) indutus, attired in his (...) might go into the San^tum
sanctorum, or the holiest of all, to make a^^onement for the people; whereof
see Lev^^. 1^. And secondly, in that the sacrifices for this day (...) more,
and greater, then those appointed by the Lord for the weekly S^bbaths: which
last is also true of the other Festivals. For where the sacrif^c^ appointed for
the weekly Sabbath, con^isted only of two Lambs, over and above the daily
sacrifice; with a meat offering and a drink offering thereunto proportioned: on
the N^w-moones* and all the Annual Sabbaths before remembered, the sa^rifices
were enlarged, nay, more then trebled, as is expressed in the 28. and 29. of
the book of Numbers. Nay, if it happened any time as some times it did* that any
of these Festivals did fall upon the weekly Sabbath; or that two of them, as
the New-moones and the Feast of Trumpets fe^l upon the same: the ^ervice of the
weekly Sabbath lessened not at all, the sacrifices destinate to the Annual
Sabbath; but they were all performed in their several turns. The Text it self
affirms as much, in the two Chapters before specified: and for the practice of
it, that so it was, it is apparent to be seen in the Hebrew Calendars. Ap.
A^sw^rth. in Number. ^8.
Only the difference was this, as Rabbi^Maimony informs us, that the addition
of the Sabbath was first performed; and after, the addition of the New-moone,
and then the addition of the Good day, or other Festival. So that in case the
weekly sabbath had a privilege above the Annual, in that the Shewbread or
the loaves of proposition, were only set before the Lord on the weekly
Sabbaths: the ^nnuall Sabbaths, seem to have had amends, all of them in the
multiplicitie of their sacrific^s; and three of them in the great solemnity and
concourse of people: all Israel being bound to appear before the Lord on those
three great Festivals, the Passover, the Pentecost, and the Feast of
Tabernacles. As for the p^nalty inflicted on the breakers of these solemn
Fe^^^vals, it is expressly said of the weekly sabbath, that whosoever does any
w^rks (...) 31. 15. and in the Vers^ before, that whosoever does any work
therein, that soul shall be cut off (or as the Chaldee Paraphrase reads it,
that man shall be destroyed) from amongst his people. Which if it signify the
same, (...) by the Chaldee Paraphrase it seems to do; it is no more, then
what is elsewhere said of the Expiation, for so says the Text. Levi^. 23 30.
And whatsoever soul it be that does any w^rke in that same day, that s^^le
will I destroy from amongst his people. But if the phrase be different, as the
Rabbis say, the difference is no more, then this, that they that break the
weekly Sabbath; are to be put to death by the Civil Magistrate: and they that
work upon the Feast of Expiation, shall be cut off by God, by untimely deaths.
As for the other Annual Sa^baths, the Rabbis have determined thus, Ap.
Ainsworth. in Levit. 23. 7.
that whosoever does in any of them, such works as are not necessary for food,
as if he build, or pull down, or weave, and the like, he breaks a
Commandment, and transgresses against this prohibition, ye shall not do any
servile work; and if he do, and there be witnesses and evident proof, he is
by law to be beaten or scourged for it. So that we see, that whether we regard
the institution, or continuance of these several Sabbaths; or the solemnities
of the same, either in reference to the Priests, the Sacrifices, and concourse
of people; or finally the punishment inflicted on the breakers of them; the
difference is so little, it is scarce remarkable* considering especially, that
if the weekly Sabbaths do gain in one point, they loose as often in another.
For the particulars we shall speak of them hereafter, as occasion is.

(4) As for the time, when they began their Sabbaths, and when they ended them,
they took beginning on the evening of the day before, and so continued till
the evening of the Feast it self. The Scripture speaks it only, as I remember
of the Expiation; which is appointed by the Lord to be observed on the t^^th
day of the seventh month, Levit. 23. 27. yet ^o that it is ordered thus in the
31, It shall be unto you a Sabbath of rest, and ye shall afflict your souls
on the ninth day of the month, at even. And then it foll^weth, From even to
even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. But in the practice of the Jews, it was
so in all: either because they took those words for a general precept; or
else because they commonly did account their day from even to even. For where
the Romans and Egyptians began the day at midnight; Em^nd. Temp. l. ^.
the Chaldees and the Persians with the rising ^unne; and the Vmbri, an Italian
people, reckoned theirs from noone to noone: the Jews and the Athenians took
the beginning of their day, ab occasu solis, from Sunsetting, as Scaliger and
diverse others have observed. D^ imagi^^ (...)
Yet sure I am, Honorius Augustodunensis, who lived four hundred years ago
and upwards, places the Ie^es together with the Persians and Chaldeans, as men
that do begin their day at the Sunrising. However, in this case it is not to
be thought that the even was any part of the Sabbath following, (for the
addition^ll sacrifices were offered only on the morning and the evening of the
several Sabbaths) but a (...) or preparation thereunto: which preparation if
it were before the weekly Sabbath, it was called (...) if before any of the
Annual, it was called (...). In imitation of the Gentiles, the Latin Writers
call the^e Parasceve's or Evens of preparation, by the name of Coena pura, as
Augustine notes upon the nineteenth of Saint John; because of some resemblance
that was between them: Exer. 16. n. 106.
but yet they had a difference too. For Casaubon has taught us this, that in
the Coena pura amongst the Gentiles, a part of the ceremony did consist in the
choice of meats: where no such thing occurres at all in these preparations of
the Jews* Now these Parasceves, or preparation days, the Jews did afterward
divide into these four parts. The first was (...) a preparative, as it were,
to the preparation, which began in the morning, and held on till noone. The
second was (...). largely taken, from noone, u^till the evening-sacrifice of
the day: the third (...), or the approaching of the Sabbath, which began after
the evening Sacrifice, continued till Sunset, and was properly called the
(...), the fourth was the (...), or entrance of the Sabbath, which lasted from
Sunset unto the dawning of the day. They had amongst them a tradition, or a
custom rather, that one whole day, from the (...) till Sunset, they might not
travail abov^ twelve miles: left coming home too late, they might not have
sufficient leisure to prepare things before the Sabbath. Syn^g Iud. c. 10.
The time was, as Buxdor^^us tells us, qu^ corn^ vel inflata tuba daretur
signum, when there was public warning given by sound of Trumpet, that every
man should cease from work, and make all things ready for the Sabbath: though
in these days, the Clerk or Sexton goes about from door to door, to give
notice of it. De Bello l. 5 c.9
The time was so indeed, So Ioseph^^ tells us, that in Jerusalem one of the
Priests continually standing upon a Pillar, (...), made known upon the even
before by sound of ^rumpet, which time the sabbath did begin; and on the
evening of the Sabbath, at which time it ended: that ^o the people might be
certified both at what time to rest from labor, and at what time they might
again apply their minds and hands unto it. Now what Josephus says of the
weekly Sabbath the same was done, says Phil^, in the New-moones also: (...),
which is much alike. And consequently we may say the ^ame of the Annual
sabbaths, Number. 10. 10.
in which the sons of Aaron were to blow the Trumpets, as well as in the
New-moones or the weekly sabbaths. As for the works prohibited or permitted on
these days of preparation, whether before the weekly or the Annual sabbaths,
I find little difference. This I am sure of, that it was as much unlawful for
the Judges to sit on any (...) cri^^es, the day before the Annual Sabbath, as
before the weekly: and the reason was, because the morrow after, of which sort
soever, Ap. Casaub. Ex^. 10. n. 10.
was thought to be no fit day for execution. Iudices rerum Capitalium non
judicant in parasceve Sabbati, aut in parasceve diei sesti, quia non debet id
fieri; and r^us occidi postridie non potest. So says Rabbi Maimony. Of the
ridiculous nicety of the modern Jews in these Paras^eves, we shall speak
hereafter.

(5) To come unto the day it self, it is said expressly in the Law, that
therein thou shall do no manner of work. What, no work at all? How could
they eat and drink, and put on their clothes? The^e are some manner of works,
yet done every Sabbath: yea, by the Pharisees themselves, which were most
strict ob^ervers of the weekly Sabbaths. Quis Pharisaeorum, In Math. 1^.
says Saint Hierome, in die sabbati non extendit manum, portans cibum,
porrigens calicem, and caetera quae victui sunt necessaria: yet all all these
were works. How could they circumcise, and offer sacrifice, and set on the
Shewbread on the Sabbath? Surely all these are works too; some of them very
troublesome: yet commonly performed on the weekly Sabbath, of which more anon.
Therefore when all is done, we must expound these words of ordinary and servile
labors, such as are ^oylesome in themselves, and aim at profit. Zanchie, I am
sure, does expound them so. In Manda^. 4.
Nomen operis quod hic habet Moses, non significat opus simpliciter, sed opus
quod propter opes comparandas suscipitur: Tale autem opus est vere servile. In
Esa. 58. 13.
Saint Hierome also expounds it, Lege preceptum est ne in sabbatis opus servile
faciamus, etc, We are commanded in the Law to do no servile works on the
Sabbath days. And on the fifth of Amos he affirms the same; jubet ne quid in
eo operis servilis ^^at, etc. And so Tertullian; Nec dubi^m est eos opus
servile operatos, etc. in his second book against Marriage. If so, there is no
difference at all between the weekly and the Annual Sabbaths in this one
particular; because all servile works expressly are forbidden in them also, as
before we showed. But take it in the very words, no manner of work: and ask
the Hebre^ Doctors, what they meant thereby. They will then tell you first,
there must be n^ marketting, no not buying of victuals; for which they cite the
13 of Nehemiah, Verse 16, 17. nor n^ embalming of the dead, in which they vouch
Saint Lukes Gospel, Chapter 27. Verse 54, 56. This we acknowledge for a truth, but
then we say with all, that neither of these two were lawful on the Annual
Sabbaths. For when it happened any time, as sometimes it did, that a weekly
Sabbath and an Annual Sabbath came next days together; the Jews did commonly
in their later times, put ^ff the Annual Sabbath to a farther day. And this
they did, as themselves tell us, because of burials, and of meats which were
fit for eating: lest by deferring either the one or the other, the carcasses
should putrify, Ap C^s^ub* Exerc. 16. n. 20.
and the meats be spoiled. No^ facimus duo sabbata continua, propter olera, and
propter mortuos, ut Rabbini dictitant. Which need not be, in case they held it
lawful either to bury, or to buy, on the Annual Sabbaths. They tell us next,
that the Jews could not travail on the weekly Sabbath, and this from Exodus
16. 29. Whether that Text were so intended, we shall see anon. But sure I am,
that when the Jews began to reckon it an unlawful matter to travail on the
weekly Sabbath; Joseph. An iq. l. 13. c. 15.
they held it altogether as unlawful, to travail on the Annual Sabbaths.
Nic. Damascen reports (as Josephus tells us) how that Antiochus the great King
of Syria, erected a Trophee near the flood Lycus, and abode there two days at
the request of Hyrcanus the King of Iewrie, by reason of a solemn Feast at
that time, whereon it was not lawful for the Jews to travail. In which, he
was no wise mistaken. For (says Josephus) the Feast of Pentecost was that
year the morrow after the Sabbath (for at that troublesome time, the Pentecost
was not deferred) what then? It follows, (...), and unto us it is not
lawful, either upon our Sabbaths, or our Feasts, to journey any whither. They
tell us also, that it is not lawful to execute a malefactor on the weekly
Sabbath, although it be commanded that he must be punished; nor do they do
it on the Feasts or Annual Sabbaths, as before we noted. As also that it is
not lawful to marry on the Sabbath day, nor on the Even before the Sabbath,
nor the morrow after; lest they poll^te the Sabbath by dressing meat for the
Feast: and on the solemn Festivals or the Annual Sabbaths, they were not
suffered to be married, lest, Ap. Ainsw. in Levit. 23.
say the Rabbis, the joy of the Festival be forgotten through the joy of the
wedding. The many other trifling matters, which have been prohibited by the
Jewish Doctors, and are now practiced by that senseless and besotted people:
shall somewhere be presented to you toward the end of this first Book.

(6) Again, demand of these great Doctors, since it is said expressly, that we
shall do no manner of work, whether there be at all no case, in which it may
be lawful to do work on the Sabbath day: and then they have as many shifts to
put off the Sabbath; as they had niceties before, wherewith all to beautify
it. A woman is in travail on the Sabbath day; is it not lawful for the
Midwife to discharge her duty; although it be for gain, and her usual trade?
Pet. Gal^tin. l. 11. c. 10.
Yes, says that great Clerk Rabbi Simeon, propter puerum unius diei vivum,
solvunt sabbatum; to save a child alive we may break the Sabbath. This child
being borne, must needs be circumcised on the eighth day after, which is the
Sabbath: May not the Ministers do their office? yes, for the Rabbis have a
maxim, that Circumcisio pellit sabbatum. And what? does only Circumcision
drive away the Sabbath? No, any common danger does it: And then they change the
phrase a little, and periculum mortis pellit sabbatum. Nay more, the Priest
that waits at the Altar, does he do no work upon the Sabbath? yes more then
on the other days, and for that too they have a maxim, viz. Ap Casaub. Ex^.
10. n. 20.
qui observari jussit sabbatum, is profanari jussit sabbatum. We shall meet
with some of these again, hereafter. Therefore we must expound these words, n^
manner of work, i. e. no kind of servile work, as before we did: or else the
weekly Sabbath and the fourth Commandment, must be a n^se of wax, and a
Lesbian rule, fit only to be wrested and applied to whatsoever end and purpose
it shall please the Rabbi^s. More warily and more soundly have the Christian
Doctors, yea, and the very Heathens determined of it: who judge that all such
corporal labors, as tend unto the moral part of the fourth command, which
are rest and sanctity; are fit and lawful to be done on the Sabbath day. That
men should rest upon such times, as are designed and set apart for Gods public
service, and leave their daily labors till some other season; the Gentiles
knew full well by the light of nature. Therefore the Flamines were to take
especial care ne f^riis opus fieret, Ma^rob Sat. l. 1. c. 16.
that no work should be done on the solemn days; and to make it known by
proclamation, ne quid tale ageretur, that no man should pre^ume to do it. Which
done, if any one offended, he was forthwith mulcted, yet was not this enjoined
so strictly, that no work was permitted in what case soever. All things which
did concern the Gods, and their public worship, vel ad urgentem vitae
utilitatem respicerent, or were important any way to man's life and welfare,
were accounted lawful. More punctually Scevola, being then chief Pontifex.
Who being demanded what was lawful to be done on the Holy Days, made answer,
quod praetermissum n^c^ret, which would miscarry if it were left undone. He
therefore that did underprop a ruinous building, or raise the cattaile that was
fallen into the ditch; did not break the Holy Day in his opinion. No more did
he that washed his sheep, si hoc remedii causa fieret, were it not done to
cleanse the wool and make it ready for the sh^arers; but only for the cure of
some sore or other: according unto that of Virgil, Balantumque gregem fluvio
mersare salubri. Geo g^c.
Thus far the Gentiles have resolved it, agreeably to the Law of nature: and
so far do the Christian Doctors, yea, and our Lord and Savior determine of
it. The corporal labors of the Priest on the Sabbath day, as far as it
concerns Gods ser^ice: were accounted lawful: The Priests in the Temple
break the sabbath, and yet were blameless. So was the corporal labor of a
man, either to save his own life, or preserve another: Christ justified his
Disciples for gathering Corn upon the sabbath, being then an hungered, Math. 12.
Verse 1. and 3. and restored many unto health on the sabbath day, Math. 12. 13.
and in other places. Finally, corporal labors to preserve Gods creatures, as
to draw the sheep out of the pit, Math. 12. 11. and consequently to save their
Cattaile from the Thief; a ruinous house from being over-blown by tempest;
their Corn and Hay also from a sudden inundation; these and the like to these,
were all judged lawful on the sabbath. And thus you see, the practice of the
Gentiles governed by the light of nature, is every way conformable to our
Saviors doctrine: and the best Comment also on the fourth Commandment, as
far as it contains the law of nature.

(7) For such particular Ordinances, which have been severally affixed to the
fourth Commandment, either by way of Comment on it, or addition to it: that
which is most considerable is that prohibition in the 35 of Exodus viz. Verse.
12.
Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your habitations on the sabbath day. The
Rabbis, some of them, conceive, that hereby is meant that no man must be
beaten, or put to death upon the sabbath: and then it must be thus expounded,
ye shall kindle no fire, i. e. to burn a man upon the sabbath, who is
condemned by the Law to that kind of death; and consequently not to put him on
that day, unto any punishment at all. Others of late, refer that prohibition
unto the building of the Tabernacle, in that Chapter mentioned: and then the
meaning will be this, that they should make no fire on the sabbath, no, though
it were to hasten on the work of the holy Tabernacle. Philo restraines it
chiefly unto manual Trades, (...), such whereby men do get their livings: and
then it must be thus interpreted, ye shall not kindle any fire, that is, to
do any common ordinary and servile works, like as do common Bakers, Smiths,
and Brewers, by making it part of their usual trade. De vit. Mos. l. 3.
The later Rabbis, almost all, and many Christian Writers also taking the hint
from Vatablus, and Tremelius in their Annotations, refer it unto dressing of
meat, according to the latter custom. Nay, generally the Jews in the later
times, were more severe and rigid in the exposition of that Text; and would
allow no fire at all, except in sacred matters only. For whereas Rabbi Aben
Ezra had so expounded it, Tostat. in Iosu^, ^. q. 2.
quod liceat ignem accendere ad calefaciendum si urgeret frigus, that it was
lawful to make a fire wherewith to warm ones self, in the extremity of cold
weather; though not to dress meat with it for that days expense: the Rabbis
generally would have proceeded against him as an Heretic; and purposely writ
a Book in confutation of him which they called the Sabbath. How this
interpretation was thus generally received, I cannot say. But I am verily
persuaded that it was not so in the beginning: Ex. 16. 23.
and that those words of Moses, quae coquenda sunt, hodie coquite, bake that
which ye will bake to day, and sees what ye will sees, which words are
commonly produced to justify and confirm this fancy; do prove quite contrary
to what some would have them. The Text and Context both make it plain and
manifest that the Jews baked their Mannah on the Sabbath day. The people on
the sixth day had gathered twice as much as they used to do, whereof the Rulers
of the Congregation acquainted Moses. And Moses said, to morrow is the rest of
the holy Sabbath unto the Lord: bake that which ye will bake to day, and sees
what ye will sees, and that which remains over, lay up to be kept until
the morning. i. e. As much as you conceive will be sufficient for this present
day; that bake or boil, according as you use to do: and for the rest, let it
be laid by, to be baked or boiled to morrow, that you may have wherewith to
feed you, on the Sabbath day. That this interpretation is most true and proper,
I^e^se 24.
appears by that which follows in the holy Scripture: viz. They laid it up
as Moses bade, and it did not stink, neither was any worm therein; as that
which they had kept till morning, on some day before, Verse 20. This makes it
evident that the Mannah was laid up unbaked: for otherwise what wonder had it
been at all, that it did neither breed worm, nor stink, had it been baked the
day before. Things of that nature so preserved, are far enough from
putrefying in so short a time. This, I am verily persuaded was the practice
then: and for this light unto that practice, I must ingenuously confess my
self obliged to Theophilus Braborne, Cha^. ^.
the first that ever looked so near into Moses meaning. And this most likely,
was the practice of the Jews in after times, even till the Pharisees had
almost made the words of God of no effect, by their traditions: for then came
in those many rigid ordinances about this day, which made the day and them
ridiculous unto all the Heathens. Sure I am that the Scriptures call it a day
of gladness, for it was a Festival; and therefore probable it is, that they
had good cheer. And I am sure that D. Bo^nd, the Founder of these Sabbatarian
fancies, 2 Edit. p. 137. 138.
though he co^ceive that dressing meat upon the Sabbath, was by the words of
Moses, utterly unlawful in the time of Mannah: yet he conceives withal, that
that Commandment, was proper only unto the time of Mannah, in the
Wilderness, and so to be restrained unto that time only. Therefore, by his
confession, the Jews for after times might as well dress their meat on the
Sabbath day, as on any other: notwithstanding this injunction of not kindling
fire. Indeed why not as well dress meat, as serve it in: the attendance of the
servant at his Masters Table, being no less con^iderable on the Sabbath day,
then of the Cooks about the Kitchen: especially in those riotous and excessive
Feasts, which the Jews kept upon this day, however probably they might dress
their meat^ on the day before.

(8) I say those riotous and excessive Feasts which the Jews ^ept upon that
day; and I have good authority for what I say. Saint Augustine tells us of them
they kept the Sabbath, only Tract. 3. in Ioh.
ad luxuriam and ebrietatem; and that they rested only De 10. chordis c. 3.
ad nugas and luxurias suas; that they consumed the day, languide and luxurioso
otio; and finally did abuse the same, not only In Psalm 91.
deliciis Iudaicis, but ad nequitiam, In Psalm. 32.
even to sin and naughtiness. Put altogether, and we have luxury, and
drun^ennes^e, and sports and pleasures enough to manifest that they spared not
any dainties to set forth their Sabbath, though on a Pharisaicall prohibition
they forbear to dress their meats upon it. Nay, Sympo Isac l. 4.
Plutarch lays it to their charge, that they did feast it on their Sabbath,
with no small excess, but of wine e^pecially. Who thereupon conjectureth, that
the name of Sabbath had its original from the Orgies or Feasts of Bacchus;
whose Priests used often to ingeminate the word Sabbi, Sabbi, in their drunken
Ceremonies. Which being so, it is the more to be admired, that generally the
Romans did upbraid this people with their Sabbaths fast. Augustus having been
at the Bathes, Suet^n. in Octau. c. 76.
and fasting there a long time together; gives notice of it to Tiberius* thus:
ne Iuda^ns quide^ tam dilig^nter sabbatis jej^^ium (...), that (...) any I^w
^ad (...) more exactly on the Sabbaths then he did that day. (...) Martial
reckoning up some things of unsavory ^^ell, names amongst others, ^ejunia
sabbatariorum; for by that name he did con^emp^ously mean the Jews, as before
I noted. And where the R^mans in those times, began, some of them, to incline
to the Jewish Ceremonies, and were observant of the Sabbath, as we shall ^ee
hereafter in a p^ace more proper: Sat. 5.
Persius objects against them this, (...) a monent (...) i. e. that being
Romans as they were, they (...) out their Prayers as the Jews accustomed, and
by observing of the Fast on the Jewish Sabbaths, gr^w lean and pale for ^^ry
hunger. So says, Petroni^^ An^^er, that the Jews did celebrate their Sabbath,
jejunia lege, Hist. l. 36.
by a legal fast: and Justin yet more generally, septimum diem more gentis
sabbatum appellatum in omne aevum jejunto sacravit, Moses, that Moses did
ordain^ the ^abbath to be a fasting day for ever. that the Jews fasted very
often, sometimes twice a week, the Pharisee has told us in Saint Lukes
Gospel: and probably the jejunia sabbatariorum in the Poet Martial, might
reflect on this. But that they fasted on the Sabbath is a thing repugnant both
to the Scriptures, Fathers, and all good antiquity: except in one case only,
which was when their City was besieged, Ap. Baron. A. 34. n. 156.
as Rabbi Moses Aegyptius has resolved it. N^y, if a man had fasted any time
upon the Sabbath, they used to punish him in this sort, ut sequenti etiam die
jejunaret, to make him fast the next day after. Yet on the other side, I cannot
but conceive that those before remembered, had some ground or reason, why they
did charge the Jews with the Sabbaths Fast: for to suppose them ignorant of
the Jewish custom, consi^ering how thick they lived amongst them, even in Rome
it self, were a strange opinion. The rather since by Plutarch, who lived not
long after Sueton, if he lived not with him; the Jews are generally accused
for too much riot and excess upon that day. For my part, I conceive it thus. I
find in Nehemiah, Cap. 8. ^, 3.
that when the people were returned from the captivity, Ezra the Priest brought
forth the Law before the Congregation, and read it to them from the morning
until midday: which done, they were dismissed by Nehemiah to eat, Verse 10. 12.
and drink, and make great joy; which they did accordingly. This was upon the
first day ^f the Feast of Tabernacles, Verse 18.
one of the solemn Annual Sabbaths: and this they did for eight days
together, from the first day unto the last that the Feast continued. After when
as the Church was s^tled, and that the Law was read amongst them in their
Synagogu^s on the weekly Sabbaths, most probable it is, that (...) the same
custom; holding the Congregation from morn to noon: and that the Jews came
thither Fasting, (^s generally men do now unto the Sacrament) the better to
prepare themselves and their attention for that holy exercise. In vit. Mosi^.
Sure I am that Ios^phus tells us, that at midday they used to dismiss the
Assemblies, that being the ordinary hour for their repast: as also that
Buxdorfius says of the modern Jews, S^n. Iud. cap. 10.
that ultra tempus m^ridianum jejunare non licet, it is not lawful for them to
fast beyond the noontide on the Sabbath days. Besides they which found ^o
great fault with our Lords Di^ciples for eating a few ears of Corn on the
Sabbath day, are not unlikely, in my mind to have aimed at this. For neither
was the bodily labor of that nature, that it should any ways offend them, in
so high a measure: and the defense made by our Lord in their behalf, being
that of David's eating of the S^ew-bread, when he was an hungered; is more direct
and literal to justify his Disciples eating, then it was their working. This
abstinence of the I^wes, that lived amongst them; the R^mans noted; and being
good Trenchermen themselves at all times and seasons, they used to hit them in
the teeth with their Sabbaths fasting. But herein I submit my self to better
judgments.

(9) There was another prohibition given by God about the Sabbath, which being
misinterpreted became as great a snare unto the consciences of men, as that
before remembered of not kindling fire, (...). 16.
and dressing meat upon the Sabbath: viz. Let no man go out of his place on
the seventh day* Which pr^hibition, being a bridle only unto the people, to
keep them in, from seeking after Mannah, as before they did, upon the Sabbath:
was afterward extended to restrain them also, either from taking any journey,
or walking forth into the fields, on the Sabbath days. Nay, so precise were
some amongst them, that they accounted it unlawful to stir hand or foot upon
the Sabbath: ne leviter quispi^m se (...), quod s^ fecerit, legis trangressor
fit, (...). 5^. 13.
as Saint Hierom^ has it. Others more charitably, chalked them out a way, how
far they might advent^re, and how far they might not: though in this the
Doctors were divided. Some made the Sabbath days journey to be 2000. Cubits,
(...) Ep^. 151.
of whom Orig^n tells us: others restrained it to 2000. foot; of whom Hierom^
speaks; and some again enlarged it unto six furlongs, which is three quarters
of a mile. For where Ios^phus has informed us that Mount Olivet was six
furlongs from Jerusalem* and where the Scriptures tell us, that they were
distant about a Sabbath days journey: we may perceive by that, how much a
Sabbath days journey was accounted then. But of these things we may have
opportunity to speak hereafter. In the mean time, if the injunction be so
absolute and general, as they say it is, we may demand of these great Clerks,
as their Successors did of our Lord and Savior; by what authority they do
these things, and warrant that which is not warranted in the Text: if so the
Text be to be expounded. Certain I am that ab initio non fuit sic, from the
beginning was it neither so, nor so. The Scripture tells us, that when the
people were in the Wilderness, they found a man gathering sticks on the
Sabbath day. They found him, where? Not in the Camp; he was not so audacious
as to transgres^e the Law in the open view of all the people: knowing how great
a penalty was appointed for the Sabbath-breaker: but in some place far off,
where in he might offend without fear or danger. Therefore the people were
permitted to walk forth, on the Sabbath day; and to walk further then 2000.
foot, or 2000. Cubits: otherwise they had never found out this unlucky fellow.
And so says Philo, De vita Mosis l. 3.
that they did. (...), etc. Some of the people going out into the wilderness,
that they might find some quiet and retired place, in which to make their
Prayers to God; saw what they looked not for, that wretched and prohited
spectacle. So that the people were not stinted in their goings on the Sabbath
day, nor now, nor in a long time after: as by the course of the ensuing story
will at large appear. Even in the time of Mannah, they did not think
themselves obliged not to stir abroad upon the Sabbath, or not to travail
above such and such a compass: in case they did it not, out of a mere
distrust in God, as before they did, to gather Mannah; but either for their
meditation, or their recreation.

(10) What said I for their recreation? what was that permitted? yes, no doubt
it was. Though the Commandment did prohibit all manner of work; yet it
permitted, questionless, some manner of pleasures. The Sabbaths rest had
otherwise been more toylesome, then the week-dayes labor: and none had gained
more by it, then the Ox and Ass. Yea this injunction last related, Let none
g^ out of his place on the seventh day, had been a greater bondage to that
wretched people, then all the drudgeries of Egypt. Tostatus tells us on that
Text, non est simpliciter intelligendum, etc. It is not so to be conceived,
that on that day the people might not stir abroad, or go out of their doors
at all; but that they might not go to labor, or traffic about any wordly
businesses. Etenim die sa^bati ambulari possunt Hebraei ad solaciandum, etc.
For the Jews lawfully might walk forth on the Sabbath day, to recreate and
refresh themselves, so it be not in pursuit of profit. And this he says, on
the confession of the Jews themselves, Cop. 10.
ut ipsi communiter confitentur. Buxdorfius, in his Jewish Synagogue, informs
us further. Permissum est juvenibus ut tempore sabbati, currendo, spatiando,
saltando sese oblectent, etc. It is, says he, permitted, that their young men
may walk, and run, yea and dance also on the Sabbath day; and leap and jumpe,
and use other ma^like Exercises: in case they do it for the honor of the holy
Sabbath. This speaks he of the modern Jews, men as tenacious of their
Sabbath, and the rigours of it, as any of the Ancients were: save that the
Essees and the Pharisees had their private flings above the meaning of the Law.
Of manly Exercises on the Sabbath, we shall see more anon in the seventh
Chapter. And as for dancing, that used anciently to dance upon the ^ab^at^, is
a thing unquestionable. Saint Austine says, they used it, and rebukes them for
it: not that they danced upon the Sabbath, but that they spent and wasted the
whole day in dancing* There is, no question, an abuse even of lawful
pleasures. And this is that which he so often lays unto them. I^ P^al. 32.
Melius tota die foderent, quam tota die saltarent: better the (...) did dig
all day, then dance all day. And for the women, melius e^rum foeminae lanam
facerent, quam illo die [and] in neomeniis saltarent: ^roct 3. in Job. 1.
better the women spin, then waste all that day and the New-moones in dancing,
as they use to do. I have translated it all that day, agreeable unto the
Fathers words in another place; where it is said expressly in tota die. Melius
foeminae eorum die sabbati lanas facerent, quam tota die [and] in neomeniis
suis impudice saltarent. De december chordis, c. 3.
Where note, not dancing simply, but lascivio^s dancing; and dancing all day
long without respect to pious and religious duties; Ad Mag^esianos.
are by him disliked. Ignatius al^o says the same, where he exhorts the people
not to observe the Sabbath in a ^ewish fashion: walking a limited space, and
setting all their mind, (...), as they did in dancing, and in capering. They
used also on that day to make invitations, Feasts, and assemblies of good
neighborhood; to foster brotherly love and concord amongst one another: a
thing, even by the Pharisees themselves both allowed and practis^d. Saint Luke
has given an instance of it, Luk^ 14. ^.
how Christ went into the house of a chief Pharisee to eat bread on the
Sabbath day: In plainer terms the Pharisee invited him that day to dinner. We
may as^ure our selves so famous a Professor had not invited so great a
Prophet; nor had our Savior Christ accepted of the invitation: had they not
both esteemed it a lawful matter. It ^eemes it was a common practice for
friends to meet and feast together on the Sabbath* Finito cultu Dei solebant
amici convenire, and inter se convivia agitare, Harmon c. 119.
as Chemnitius notes upon the place. Lastly, they used upon this day, as to
invite their Friends and Neighbors, so to make them welcome: oy^ting their
heads with oil to refresh their bodies; and spending store of wine amongst
them, to make glad their hearts. In which regard, whereas all other marketting
was unlawful on the Sabbath days; there never was restraint of selling wine:
the Jews believing that therein they brake no Commandment. Hebraei faciunt
aliquid speciale in vino, viz. In Exodus 1^.
quod ^um in sabbato suo a caeteris venditionibus and emptionibus cessent,
solum vinum vendunt; credentes se non solvere sabbatum* as Tostatus has it.
How they abused this lawful custom of Feasting with their Friends and
Neighbors on the Sabbath day, into foul riot and excess; we have seen
already. So having spoken of the weekly and the Ann^all Sabbaths, the
differenc^ and agreement which was between the^, both in the institution, and
the observation: as also of such several observances as were annexed unto the
same; what things the Jews accounted lawf^ll to be done, and what unlawful,
and how far they declared the same in their constant practice* it is high
time that we continue on the story, ranking such special passages as occure
hereafter, in their place and order.

CHAP. VI.
Touching the obse^vation of the SABBATH, unto the time the people were
established in the Promised Land.
(1) The Sabbath not kept constantly during the time the people wandered in the
Wilderness. (2) Of him that gathered sticks on the Sabbath day. (3) Wherein
the sanctifying of the Sabbath did consist, in the time of Moses (4) The Law
not ordered to be read in the Congregation every Sabbath day. (5) The sack of
Hiericho and the destruction of that people was upon the Sabbath. (6) No
Sabbath, after this, without Circumcision; and how that Ceremony could consist
with the Sabbaths rest. (7) What moved the Jews, to prefer Circumcision
before the Sabbath. (8) The standing still of the Sun at the prayers of Io^uah,
etc. could not but make some alteration about the Sabbath. (9) What was the
Priests work on the Sabbath day; and whether it might stand with the Sabbaths
rest. (10) The scattering of the Levites over all the ^ribes, had no relation
unto the reading of the Law on the Sabbath days.

(1) WE left this people in the Wilderness, where ^he Law was given them: and
whether this Commandment were there kept, or not, has been made a question;
and that both by the Jewish Doctors, and by the Christian. Some have resolved
it negatively, that it was not kept in all that time, which was forty years:
and others, that it was at some times omitted, according to the stations or
removes of Israel; or other great and weighty businesses, which might intermit
it. It is affirmed by Rabbi Solomon, that there was only one Passover
observed, whiles they continued in the Deserts; notwithstanding that it was the
principal solemnity of all the year. Et si illud fuit omissum, multo fortius
alia minus principalia. If that, says he, then by an argument a majore ad
minus, much rather were the lesser Festivals omitted also. Ap. Galatin l. 11.
c. 10.
More punctually Rabbi Eleazar, who on those words of Exodus, and the people
rested the s^venth day, Chap. 16. 30. gives us to understand, that for the
space of forty years, whilst they were in the Wilderness, non fecerunt nisi
duntaxat primum sabbatum, they kept no more then that first Sabbath. According
unto that of the Prophet Amos* Have ye offered unto me sacrifices and
offerings in the wilderness forty years, O house of Israel? Chap. 5. 25.
On which authority, Ar^tius for the Christian Doctors does affirm the same:
Sabbata per annos 40. n^n observavit in deserto populus Dei. Amos 5. 25. Probl.
loc. 35.
The argument may be yet enforced by one more particular, that Circum^ision was
omitted for all that while, and yet it had precedence of the Sabbath, both in
the institution for the times before; and in the observation, for the times
that followed. If therefore neither Circumcision, nor the daily sacrifices, nor
the Feast of Passover, being the principal of the Annual Sabbaths, were
observed by them till they came to the land of Canaan: why may not one conclude
the same of the weekly Sabbaths? Others conceive not so, directly; but that it
was omitted at ^ometimes, and on some occasions. Omitted at some times, as when
the people journied in the Wilderness many days together, In Exodus 12*
nulla requi^ ^liquorum dierum habita, without rest or ceasing: and this the
Hebrew Doctors willingly confess, as Tostatus tells us* Omitted too on some
occasions, as when the spi^s were sent to discover the Land, what was the
strength thereof, and what the riches; in which discovery they spent fo^ty
days: it is not to be thought that they kept the Sabbath. It was a perilous
work that they went about, not to be discontinued and laid by so often, as
there were Sabbaths in that time. But not to stand upon conjectures, the Jewish
Doctors say expressly, that they did not keep it. Lib. 11. c. 10.
So Galatine reports from their own records, that in their latter exposition
on the Book of Numbers, upon those words, Chap. 13. 2.
send men that they may search the land of Canaan; they thus resolve it. Nuncio
praecepti licitum est, etc. A Messenger that goes upon Command, may travail
any day, at what time he will. And why? because he is a Messenger upon
command. Nuncius autem praecepti excludit sabbatu^. The phrase is somewhat
dark, but the meaning plain: that those which went upon that errand, did not
keep the Sabbath. Certain it also is, that for all that time, no nor for any
part thereof, the people did not keep the Sabbath, completely as the Law
appointed. For where there were two things concurring to make up the Sabbath,
first, rest from labor, and secondly, the sacrifices destinate unto the day:
however they might rest some Sabbaths from their daily labors; yet sacrifices
they had none until they came into the land of Canaan.

(2) Now that they rested, sometimes, on the Sabbath day, and perhaps did so,
generally, in those forty years, is manifest by that great and memorable
business, touching the man that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath. The case is
briefly this: Numb. 15. Verse. 32. ad 37.
the people being in the wilderness, found a man gathering sticks on the Sabbath
day, and brought him presently unto Moses. Moses consulted with the Lord, and
it was resolved that the offender should be stoned to death, which was done
accordingly. The Law before had ordered it, that he who so offended should be
put to death; but the particular manner of his death was not known till now.
The more remarkable is this case, because it was the only time that we can
hear of, that execution had been done upon any one, according as the Law
enacted: and thereupon the Fathers have took some pains, De vit. Mos. l. 3
to search into the reasons of so great severity. Philo accuses him of a
double crime, in one whereof he wa^ the principal, and an Accessar^ only in
the other. For where it was before commanded, that there should be no fire
kindled on the Sabbath day: this party did not only labor on the day of rest;
but also labored in the gathering of such materials, (...), which might
administer fuel to prohibited fire. Saint Basil seems a little to bemoan the
man, De judicio D^i.
in that he smarted so for his first offense; not having otherwise offended
either God or Man: and makes the motive of his death, neither to consist in the
multitude of his sins, or the greatness of them, (...), but only in his
disobedience to the will of God. But we must have a more particular motive yet
then this. And first Rupertus tells us, In locum.
per superbiam illud quod videbatur exiguum commisit, that he did sin
presumptuously with an high hand against the Lord: and therefore God decreed he
should die the death: God not regarding either what or how great it was, sed
qua mente fecerat, but with what mind it was committed. But this, is more, I
think, then Rupertus knew, being no searcher of the heart. Rather I shall
subscribe herein unto Saint Chrysostom. Hom. 39. in Math. 12.
Who makes this Quaere first, seeing the Sabbath, as Christ says, was made for
man, why was he put to death that gathered sticks upon the Sabbath. And then
returns this answer to his own demand, (...), etc. because, in case God had
permitted that the Law should have been slighted in the first beginning, none
would have kept it for the future. Qu 31. ^n Number.
Theodoret to that purpose also, ne author fieret leges transgrediendi, lest
other men encouraged by his example should have done the like: the punishment
of this one man, striking a terror unto all. No question but it made the
people far more observant of the Sabbath, then they would have been: who
were at first but backwards in the keeping of it, as is apparent by that
passage in the sixteenth of Exodus v. 27. And therefore stood the more in need,
not only of a watchword or Memento, even in the very front of the Law it
self; but of some sharper course to stir up their memory. Therefore this
execution was the more reqvisite at this instant, as well because the Jews by
reason of their long abode in a place of continual servile toil, could not be
suddenly drawn unto contrary offices without some strong impression of
terror: as also because nothing is ^ore needful then with extremity to punish
the first transgressors of those Laws, that do require a more exact
observation for the times to come. What time this Tragedy was acted, is not
known for certain. By Torniellus it is placed in the year 2548. of the Worlds
Creation; which was some four years after the Law was given. More then this
is not extant in the Scripture touching the keeping of the Sabbath, all the
life of Moses. What was done after, we shall see in the land of Promise.

(3) In the mean time, it is most proper to this place, to take a little notice
of those several duties, wherein the sanctifying of the Sabbath did consist
especially: that we may know the better what we are to look for at the peoples
hands, when we bring them thither. Two things the Lord commanded in his holy
Scripture, that concern the Sabbath, the keeping holy of the same: one in
relation to the people; the other in reference to the Priest. In re^erence to
the people, he commanded only rest from labor, that they should do no manner
of work; and that's contained expressly in the Law it self. In reference to the
Priest, Numb. 28.
he commanded sacrifice, that on the Sabbath day, over and above the daily
sacrifice, there should be offered to the Lord two Lambs of an year old,
without blemish, one in the morning, and the other in the evening: as also to
prepare first, and then place the Shewbread, being twelve loaves, one for every
Tribe, continually before the Lorde^very Sabbath day. These several references
so divided, the Priest might do his part, without the people, and contrary the
people do their part without the Priest. Of any Sabbath duties, which were to
be performed between them; wherein the Priest and people were to join
together: the Scriptures are directly silent. As for these several duties,
that of the Priest, the Shewbread, and the sacrifice, was not in practice till
they came to the Land of Canaan: and then, though the Priest offered for the
people; yet he did not, with them. So that for forty years together, all the
life of Moses, the sanctifying of the Sabbath did consist only, for ought we
find, in a bodily rest, a ceasing from the works of their weekly labors: and
afterward in that, and in the sacrifices which the Priest made for them. Which
as they seem to be the greater of the two, so was there nothing at all
therein, in which the people were to do; no not so much, except some few, as
to be spectatours: the sacrifices being offered only in the Tabernacle, as in
the Temple after; when they had a Temple, the people being scattered over all
the Country in their Towns and Villages. Of any reading of the Law, or
exposition of the same unto the people; or public form of prayers to be
presented to the Lord, in the Congregation; we find no footstep now, nor a
long time after. None in the time of Moses, for he had hardly perfected the
Law before his death: the book of De^teronomy being dedicated by him, a very
little before God took him. None in a long time after, no not till Nehemiahs
days, as we shall see hereafter in that place and time. The resting of the
people was the thing commanded, in imitation of Gods rest when his works were
finished: that as he rested from the works which he had created, so they
might al^o rest in memorial of it. But the employment of this rest to
parti^ular purposes either of contemplation or dev^tion; than not declared unto
us in the Word of God: but left at large, either unto the liberty of the
people, or the Authority of the Church. Now what the people did, how they
employed this rest of theirs, that Philo tells us in his third Book of the life
of Moses. Moses, says he, ordained, that since the World was finished on the
seventh day, all of his Commonwealth following therein the course of nature
should spend the seventh day, (...), in Festival delights, resting therein
from all their works: yet not to spend it as some do in laughter, childish
sports, or (as the Romans did their time, of public Feastings) in beholding
the activity either of the Iester or common Dancers; but (...), and a little
after, (...), in the study of true philosophy, and in the contemplation of the
works of nature. And in another place, De Dec^log.
He did command, says he, that as in other things so in this also they should
imitate the Lord their God, working six days, and resting on the seventh,
(...), and spending it in meditation of the works of nature, as before is said.
And not so only, but that upon that day they should consider of their actions
in the week before, if happily they had offended against the Law: (...), etc.
that so they might correct what was done amiss, and be the better armed to
offend no more. So in his book de mundi opificio, he affirms the ^ame, that
they employed that day in divine Philosophy, (...), even for the bettering of
their manners, and reckoning with their consciences. That thus the Jews did
spend the day, or some part thereof, is very probable; and we may take it well
enough upon Philo's word: but that they spent it thus, by the direction or
command of Moses is not so easily proved, as it is affirmed; though for my
part, I willingly durst assent unto it. For be it Moses so appointed, yet this
concerns only the behavior of particular persons; and reflects nothing upon
the public duties, in the Congregation.

(4) It Is true that Philo tells us in a book not extant, how Moses also did
ordain these public meetings. (...), Ap. Eusebius. Praepar. l. 8 7.
What then did Moses order to be done on the Sabbath day? He did appoint, says
he, that we should meet all in some place together, and there set down with
modesty and a general silence, (...), to hear the Law, that none plead
ignorance of the same. Which custom we continue sti^l, harkening with
wonderful silence to the Law of God, unless perhaps we give some joyful
acclamation at the hearing of it: some of the Priests, if any present, or
otherwise some of the Elders, reading the Law, and then expounding it unto us,
till the night come on. Which done, the people are dismissed, full of divine
instruction, and true piety. So he, or rather out of him, Eusebius. But here
by Philo's leave, we must pau^e a while. This was indeed the custom in our
Saviors time, and when Philo lived: and he was willing, as it seems, to fetch
the pedigree thereof as far as possibly he could. So Salianus tells him on
the like occasion. Videtur Philo Iudaeorum morem in synagogis disserendi
antiquitate donare voluisse, quem a Christo and Apostolis observatum legimus.
Annals. An. 2546. n. 10
The same reply we make to Josephus also, who tells us of their lawmaker, that
he appointed not, that they should only hear the Law once or twice a year:
(...), Cont. Ap. 2. Deuteronomy. 6. 7.
but that once every week we should come together to hear the laws, that we
might perfectly learn the same. Which thing, says he, all other Lawmakers did
omit. And so did Moses too, by Josephus leave, unless we make a day and a
year all one. For being now to take his farewell of that people, and having
often advised them in his exhortation to meditate on the words that he had
spoken, even when they tarried in their houses, and walked by the way, when
they rose up, and when they went to bed: he called the Priests unto him, and
gave the Law into their hands, and into the hands of all the Elders of Israel.
Verse 31. 9.
And he commanded them and said, Verse 10.
At the end of every seven years, in the solemnity of the year of release, at
the Feast of Tabernacles; Verse. 11.
when all Israel is come to appear before the Lord their God in the place that
thou shall choose, thou shall read this Law before Israel in their hearing:
that they may hear, and that they may le^rne and fear the Lord your God, and
observe all the words of this Law to do them. Verse. 12.
This was the thing decreed by Moses; and had been needless, if not worse* in
case he had before provided that they should have ^he Law read openly unto
them every Sabbath day. So then, by Moses order, the Law was to be read
publicly, every seventh year only: in the year of release, because then
servants being manumitted from their bondage, and Debtours from their
Credi^ours, all sorts of men might hear the Law with the greater
cheerfulness: and in the Feast of Tabernacles, because it lasted longer then
the other Festivals, and so it might be read with the greater leisure, and
heard with more attention: and then it was but this Law too, the book of
De^teronomy. This to be done only in the place which the Lord shall choose to
be the seat and receptacle of his holy Tabernacle; not in inferior Towns;
much les^e petite Villages: and yet this thought sufficient to instruct the
people in the true knowledge of Gods Law, and keeping of his testimonies. And
indeed happy had they been, had they observed this order and decree of Moses;
and every seventh year read the Law as he appointed: they had then
questionless escaped many of those great afflictions, which afterward God
brought upon them for contempt thereof. That in the after times, the Law was
read unto them every Sabbath, in their several Synagogues, is most clear and
manifest: as by the testimony of Philo and Iosephu^, before related; and by
sufficient evidence from the holy Gospel. But in these times, and after for a
thousand years, there were no Synagogues, no public reading of the Law in the
Congregation, excepting every seventh year only, and that not often: Sure I
am, not so often as it should have been. So that in reference to the people,
we have but one thing only to regard, as yet, touching the keeping of the
Sabbath, which is rest from labor, rest from all manner of work, as the ^aw
commanded: and how far this was kept, and how far dispensed with, we shall
see plainly by the story. The private meditations and devotions of particular
men, stand not upon record at all: and therefore we must only judge by
external actions.

(5) This said and shown, we will pass over Iorda^, with the house of Israel,
and trace their footsteps in that country. Ios. 4. 19.
This happened on the tenth day of the first month, or the month of Nisan,
forty days after the death of Moses Ann. 2584. That day they pitched their
tents in Gilgal. And the first thing they did, was to erect an Altar in
memorial of it: that done to circumcise the people, who all the time that they
continued in the wilderness, (as many as were borne that time) were
uncircumcised. The 14. of the same month did they keep the Passover: 5. 10.
12.
and on the morrow after God did cease from raining Mannah; the people eating
of the fruits of the land of Canaan. And here, the first Sabbath which they
kept, as I conjecture, was the day before the siege of Hiericho: Ios. 5.
which ^abbath, probably was that very day, whereon the Lord appeared to
Iosuah; and gave him order how he should proceed in that great business. The
morrow after, being the first da^ of the week, they began to compass it, as
the Lord commanded, the Priests some of them bearing the Arc, Ios. 6.
some going before with Trumpets; and the residue of the people, some before
the Trumpetters, some behind the Arc. This did they once a day, for six
days together. But when the seventh day came, which was the Sabbath, they
compassed the Town about seven times, and the Priests blew the Trumpets, and
the people shouted, and they took the City: destroying in it young and old,
man, woman, and children. I said it was the Sabbath day, for so it is agreed on
generally, both by Jews and Christians. One of the seven days; be it which it
will, must needs be the Sabbath day; and be it which it will, there had been
work enough done on it: but the seventh day whereon they went about seven times,
and destroyed it finally, was indeed the Sabbath. For first the Jews expr^sly
say it, that the overthrow of Jericho fell upon the Sabbath; and that from
thence did come the saying, Qui sanctificari jussit sabbatum, is
profanarijussit sabbatum. So R. Kimchi has resolved on the 6. of Iosuah. In
Ios. 6. qu. ^.
The like Tostatus tells us, is affirmed by R. Solomon, who adds that both the
falling of the wall, and slaughter of that wicked people, was purposely
deferred, In honorem sabbati, to add the greater luster unto the sabbath.
Galatine prooves the same out of diverse Rabbines, L. 11. c. 10.
this Solomon before remembered, and R. Ioses in the Book called Sedar Ole^; and
many of them joined togeth^^ (...) Beresith ketanna, or lesser exposition on
the (...) Genesis they all agreeing upon this, Dies sabba^^er^^, cum fuit
praeli^m in Hiericho; and again, Non capta fuit Hiericho nisi in sabbato; That
certainly both the battle and the execution fell upon the sabbath. So for the
Christian writers, Adv. Marc. l. 2.
Tertullian says not only in the general, that one of those seven days was
the Sabbath day: but makes that day to be the Sabbath, wherein the Priests of
God did not only work, Sed and in ore gladii praedata sit civitas ab omni
populo, but all the people sacked the City, and put it to the sword. Nec
dubium est eos opus servile operatos, etc. Qu. 61. ex. n. Test.
And certainly, says he, they did much servile work that day, when they
destro^ed so great a City, by the Lords commandment. Procopius Cazaeus does
affirm the same. In Exodus 10.
Sabbato Ie^us expugnavit and cepit Hiericho. Austin thus, Primus Jesus nunc
divino praecepto sabbatum non servavit, quo facto muri Hiericho ultro
ceciderunt. So lastly, Lyra on the place, who says, that dies septimus, in quo
^apta Hiericho, sabbatum erat: and ^et they did not sin, says he, because
they did it on that day by Gods own appointment. This does indeed excuse the
parties, both from the guilt of sin, and from the penalty of the law: but
then it shows withal, that this Commandment i^ of a different quality from
the other nine, and that it is no part of the law of nature. God never has
commanded any thing contrary to the law of nature, unless it were tentandi
causa, as in the case of Abraham and Isaac. As for the spoiling of the
Egyptians, that could be no theft, considering the Egyptians owed them more,
than they lent unto them, in recompense of the service they had done them, in
the former times.

(6) But was the Sabbath broken or neglected only on the Lords Commandment;
in some especial case, and extraordinary occasion? I think none will say it.
Nay, was there ever any Sabbath, which was not broken publicly, by common
appprobation, and of common course: Surely not one. In such a numer^^^
Commonwealth as that of Iewry, it is not to be (...) that each day was
fruitful in the works o^ (...) borne every Sabbath day, as well as others:
(...) to be circumcised on the same day also. And so they were continually,
Sabbath by Sabbath, Feast by Feast, not one day free in all the year from that
solemnity; and this by no especial order and command from God, but merely to
observe an ancient custom. In case it was deferred some time, as sometimes it
was, it was not sure in conscience to observe the Sabbath* but only on a
tender care to preserve the Infant, which was perchance infirm and weak, not
able to abide the torment. No question, but the Sabbath following the sack of
Hiericho, was in this kind broken: and so were all that followed after Nullum
enim Sabbatum praeteribat, quin multi in Iudaea infantes circumciderentur. In
Io^ 7. 21.
It is Calvin's note: Broken, I say, For Circumcision, though a Sacrament, was
no such easy Ministry, but that it did require much labor, and many hands
to go through with it. Buxdor^ius thus describes it in his Synagoga. Lib 2.
Tempore diei octavi matutino, ea quae ad circumcisionem opus sunt tempestive
parantur, etc. In the morning of the eight day all things were made ready. And
first two seats are placed, or else one so framed, that two may set apart in
it; adorned with costly Carpets answerable unto the quality of the party.
Then comes the surety for the child, and places himself in the same seat,
and near to him the Circumciser. Next follows one bringing a great torch, in
which were lighted twelve waxe-candles, to represent the twelve Tribes of
Israel: after, two boys carrying two cups full of red-wine, to wash the
Circumcisers mouth when the work is done; another bearing the Circumcisers
knife; a third a dish of sand, wher^into the fore-skinne must be cast, being
once cut off; a fourth, a dish of oil wherein are linen clouts to be applied
unto the wound: some others, spices and strong wines, to refresh those that
faint, if any should. All this is necessarily required as preparations to the
Act of Circumcision; nor is the Act less troublesome, then the preparations
make show of: which I would now describe, but that I am persuaded I have said
enough, to make it known how much ado was like to be used about it. And
though perhaps some of these ceremonies were not used in thi^ present time,
whereof we speak: yet they grew up, and became ordinary many of them, before
the Jewish commonalty was destroyed and ruinated. Hom. de Sem^nte*
(...) Where there is circumcision, there must be knives, and sponges to
receive the blood, and such other necessaries, said A^hanasius. And not ^uch
other only as concern the work, but such as app^^t^ine also to the following
cure. I^ Ioh. l. 4. ^ 50:
Circumciditur and cur^tur homo circumcisus in Sabbato, as Saint Cyrill note^
it. Which argument our Savior used in his own defense, viz* that he as well
might make a man every whit whole on the Sabbath day; I^^. 7.
as they, one part. Now that this Act of circumcision was a plain breaking of
the Sabbath (besides the troublesomenesse of the work) is affirmed by many of
the Fathers. L. 1. h^res. 30. n. 32.
By Epiphanius expressly, (...). If a child was borne upon the Sabbath, the
circumcision of that child took away the Sabbath. And Saint Chrysostom
speaks more home then he, Hom 49 in Ioh.
(...). The Sabbath, says the Father, was broke many ways among the Jews; but
in no one thing more, then in circumcision.

(7) Now what should move the Jews to prefer circumcision before the Sabbath,
unless it were because that circumcision was the older ceremony, I would
gladly learn: especially considering the resemblance that was between them in
all manner of circumstances. Was circumcision made to be a token of the
Covenant between the Lord of heaven, and the seed of Abraham? Genes. 17. 11.
So was the Sabbath between God and the house of Israel, Exodus 31. 17. Was
circumcision a perpetual covenant with the seed of Abraham in their
generations? Genesis 17. 7. So was the Sabbath to be kept throughout their
generations, for a perpetual covenant also. Exodus 31. 16. Was circumcision so
exacted, that whosoever was not circumcised, that soul should be cut off from
the people of God? Genesis 17. 14. So God has said it of his Sabbath, that
whosoever breaks it, or does any manner of work therein, that soul shall be
cut off from among the people. Exodus 31. 14. In all these points there was a
just and plain equality between them: but had the Sabbath been a part of
the Moral law, it must have infinitely gone before Circumcision. What then
should move the Jews to prefer the one before the other: but that conceiving
both alike, they thought it best to give precedencie to the ^lder, and rather
break the Sabbath, then put of circumcision to a further day. Hence grew it
into a common maxim amongst that people, Circumcisio pellit Sabbatum, that
Circumcision drives away the Sabbath; as before I noted. Nor could it be that
they conceived a greater or more strict necessity to be in circumcision, then
in the Sabbath; the penalty and danger, as before we showed you, being alike
in both: for in the Wilderness, by the space of 40. years together, when in
some sort they kept the Sabbath; most certain that they circumcised not one,
not one of many hundred thousands that were borne in so long a time. Again,
had God intended Circumcision to have been so necessary, that there was no
deferring of it for a day or two: he either had not made the Sabbaths rest so
exact and rigid; or else out of that general rule had made exception in this
case. And on the other side, had he intended that the Sabbaths rest should have
been literally observed, and that no manner of work should be done therein:
Just. Mar^yn. cont. Tryph.
he had not so precisely limited circumcision to the eight day only, (...),
yea though it fell upon the Sabbath; but would have respited the same till
another day. The Act of circumcision was not restrained unto the eight day so
precisely, but that it might be, as it was sometimes, deferred upon occasion;
as in the case of Moses children, and the whole people in the Wilderness,
before remembered. Indeed it was not to be hastened, and performed before. Not
out of any myst^rie in the number, which might adapt it for that busi^esse, as
some Rabbis thought; but because children till that time are hardly purged of
that blood and slime, which they bring with them into the world. Upon which
ground the Lord appointed thus in the law Leviticall. Levit. 22. v. 27.
When a bullock, or a sheep, or a goat is brought forth, it shall be seven
days under the damme: and from the eighth day, and thence-forth, it shall be
accepted for an offering to the Lord. This makes it manifest, that the Jews
thought the Sabbath to be no part of the Moral law; and therefore gave
precedencie to circumcision as the older ceremony: Not because it was of Moses,
but of the Fathers; that is, says Cyrill on that place, L. 4. in I^^. c. 49
because they thought not fit to lay aside an ancient custom of their
ancestors, for the Sabbaths sake. Quia non putabant consuetudinem patrum
propter honorem Sabbati contemnendam esse; as the Father has it. Nay so far
did they prize the one before the other, that by this breaking of the Sabbath,
they were persuaded verily that they kept the law. Moses, says Christ our
Savior, gave you circumcision, Ioh. 7. 22.
and you on the Sabbath day circum^^se a man, that the law of Moses should not
be broken. It seems that circumcision was much like Terminus and Iuventus in
the Roman story, who would not stir nor give the place, not to Jove himself.
More of this point, see Chrysostom. hom. 49. in Ioh.

(8) But to proceed, the next great action that occurres in holy Scripture,
reducible unto the business now in hand, is that so famous miracle of the
Sunne's standing still at the prayers of Iosuah: Ios. 10. 13.
when as the Sun stood still in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go
down about a whole day, Cap. 4^. 4.
as the text has it. Or as it is in Ecclesiast. Did not the S^nne go back by
his mean^s, and was not one day as long as two? The like, to take them both
together in this place, was that great miracle of mercy showed to Hezekiah, 2
King 20.
by bringing of the shadow ten degrees backward, by which it had gone down in
the dial of Ahaz. In each of these there was a signal alteration in the
course of nature, and the succession of time: so notable, that it were very
difficult to find out the seventh day precisely from the worlds creation; or
to proceed in that account since the late giving of the law. So that in this
respect, the Jews must needs be at a loss in their calculation: and though
they might hereafter set apart one day in seven, for rest and meditation; yet
that this day so set apart, could be precisely the seventh day from the first
creation, is not so easy to be proved. The Author of the Practice of Piety, as
zealously as he pleads for the morality of the sabbath, confesses, that in
these regards the sabbath could not be observed, precisely, on the day
appointed. And to speak properly, says he, as we take a day for the
distinction of time, called either a day natural consisting of 24. hours, or
a day artificial, consisting of 12. hours from Sunne-rising to Sunne-setting:
And withal consider the Sun standing still at noone, the space of an whole
day in the time of Iosuah; and the Sun going back ten degrees (viz. five
hours which is almost half an artificial day) in Hezekiahs time: the Jews
themselves could not keep their Sabbath, on that precise and just distinction
of time, called at the first, the seventh day from the creation. If so, if they
observed it not at the punctual time, according as the law commanded: it
follows then, on his confession, that from the time of Iosuah, till the
destruction of the Temple, there was no Sabbath kept by the Jews at all;
because not on the day precisely, which the law appointed.

(9) This miracle, as it advantaged those of the house of Israel in the present
slaughter of their enemies: so could it not but infinitely astonish all the
Canaanites; and make them faint, and fly before the conquerours. Insomuch that
in the compass of five years, as Josephus tells us, there was not any left to
make head against them. So that the victory being assured, and many of the
Tribes invested in their new possessions: Ios. 8. 1.
it pleased the Congregation of Israel to come together at Shilo, there to set
up the Tabernacle of the Congregation. And they made choice thereof, Antiqu.
Iud. l 5. c. 1.
as Josephus says, because it seemed to be a very convenient place, by reason
of the beauty of the place. Rather because it sorted best with Iosuahs liking,
who being of the Tribe of Ephraim, within whose lot that City stood, was
perhaps willing to confer that honor on it. But whatsoever was the motive,
here was the Taber^acle erected, and hitherto the Tribes resorted; and finally
here the legal ceremonies were to take beginning: God having told them many
times, these and these things ye are to do, when ye are come into the land that
I shall give you. viz. Levit. 14. and 23. Numb. 15. Deuteronomy. 12. That G^lgal was
the standing lamp, and that the Levites there laid down the Tabernacle, as in
a place of strength and safety; i^ plain in Scripture: but that they there
erected it, or performed and legal Ministry therein, has no such evidence.
Though God had brought them then into the Land of Promise, yet all this while
they were unsettled. The Land was given after, when they had possession. So that
the next Sabbath which ensued on the removal of the Tabernacle unto Shil^; was
the first Sabbath which was celebrated with its Legal Ceremonies: and this was
Anno Mundi 2589. In which if we consider as well the toylesomenesse as
multiplicity of the Priest like-offices: we shall soon see, that though the
people rested then, yet the Priest worked hardest. First, for the Loaves of
Proposition, Antiqu. Iud. l 3. c. 10.
or the Shewbread, however Iosephu^ tell us, that they were baked (...), the
day before the Sabbath; and probably in his time it might be so: yet it is
otherwise in the scriptures. The Kohathites, 1. Chron. 9.
says the Text, were over the Shewbread, for to prepare it every Sabbath.
These loaves were twelve in number, one for every Tribe, each of them two tenth
deals, or half a peck; so the Scriptures say: every Cake square, ten
hand-breadthes long, five square, and seven fingers high; so the Rabbis teach
us. The kneading, baking, and disposing of these Cakes must require some
labor. A^han^s. hom. de semente.
(...), etc. Where there is baking, says the Father, then must be heating of
the Oven, and carrying in of faggots, and whatsoever work is necessary in the
Bakers trade. Then for the Sacrifices of the day, the labor of the Priest,
when it was left, was double what it was on the other days. (...). as
Chrysostom has rightly noted. Concio 1. de Lazaro.
The daily sacrifice was of two lambs, the supernumerary of the Sabbath was two
more. If the New-moone fell on the Sabbath, as it often did, there was besides
these named already, an offering of two Bullocks, a Ram, seven Lambs: and if
that New-moone were the Feast of Trumpets also, as it sometimes was, there was
a further offering of seven Lambs, one Ram, on Bullock. And which is more,
each of these had their several Meat Offerings, and Drink Offerings, Persumes,
and Frankincense, proportionable to attend upon them. By that time all was
done, so many beasts killed, skinned, washed, quartered, and made ready for the
Altar; so many fires kindled, meat and drink offerings in a readiness; and
the sweet Odours fitted for the work in hand: no question but the Priest had
small cause to boast himself of his Sabbaths rest; or to take joy in any thing
but his larger fees, and that he had discharged his duty. As for the people
though they might all partake of the fruits hereof: yet none but those that
dwelt in Shilo, or near unto it at the least, could behold the sight; or note
what pains the Priests took for them, whilst they themselves sat still and
stirred not. Had the Commandment been moral, and every part thereof of the
same condition: the Priests had never done so many manners of work, as that
day they did. However, as it was, our blessed Savior did account these works
of theirs, to be a public profanation of the Sabbath day. Math. 12. 5.
Read ye not in the Law, says he, how that upon the Sabbath days, the
Priests in the Temple do profane the Sabb^th? yet he declared withal that
the Priests were blameless, in that they did it by direction from the God of
Heaven. The Sabbath then was daily broken, but the Priest excusable. For
Fathers that affirm the same, See Justin Martyr* dial and qu. 27. ad Orthod.
Epiphan. l. 1. haer. 19. n. 5. Hierom. in Psalm. 92. Athanas. de Sabb. and
Circumcis. Austin. Qu. ex N. Test. 61. Isidore Pelusiot. Epl. 72. l. 1. and
diverse others.

(10) These were the Offices of the Priest, on the Sabbath day; and
questionless they were sufficient to take up the time. Of any other Sabbath
duties by them performed, at this present time, there is no Constat in the
Scripture: no nor of any place, as yet, designed for the performance of such
other duties, as some conceive to pertain unto the Levites. That they were
scattered and dispersed over all the Tribes, is indeed most true. The Curse of
Jacob, now was become a blessing to them. Forty eight Cities had they given
them for their inheritance (whereof thirteen were proper only to the Priests:)
besides their several sorts of ^ithes, and what accrewed unto them from the
public Sacrifices, to an infinite value. Yet was not this dispersion of the
Tribe of Levi, in reference to any Sabbath duties, that so they might the
better assist the people in the solemnities and sanctifyng of that day. The
Scripture tells us no such matter. The reasons manifested in the word were these
two especially. First, that they might be near at hand to instruct the people,
and teach them all the statutes, Levit. 10. 10, 11
which the Lord had spoken by the hand of Moses: as also to let them know the
difference between the holy and unholy, the unclean and clean. Many
particular things there were in the Law Leviticall, touching pollutions,
purifyings, and the like legal Ordinances, which were not necessary to be
ordered by the Priests, above, those that attended at the Altar, and were
resorted too in most difficult cases: Therefore both for the peoples ease, and
that the Priests, above, might not be troubled every day in matters of
inferior moment; the Priests and Levites were thus mingled amongst the Tribes.
A second reason was, that there might be as well some nursery to train up the
Levites, until they were of age fit for the service of the Tabernacle; as also
some retirement unto the which they might repair, when by the Law they were
dismissed from their attendance. The number of the Tribe of Levi, in the first
general muster of them, from a month old and upwards, was 22000. just: out of
which number, all from 30 years of age to 50, being in all 8580 persons, were
taken to attend the public Ministry. The residue with their wives and
daughters, were to be severally disposed of in the Cities allotted to them:
therein to rest themselves with their goods and cattaile, and do those other
Offices above remembered. Which Offices as they were the works of every day: so
if the people came unto them upon the Sabbaths or New-moones, 2. King 4 23.
as they did on both, to be instructed by them in particular cases of the Law;
no doubt but they informed them answerably unto their knowledge. But this was
but occasional only, no constant duty. Indeed it is conceived by Master
Samuel Purchase, Pilg^. l. 2. c. 3.
on the authority of Cornelius Bertram, almost as modern as himself, That the
forty eight Cities of the Levites had their fit places for Assemblies; and that
thence the Synagogues had their beginnings: which were it so, it would be no
good argument, that in those places of Assemblies, the Priests and Levites
publicly did expound the Law unto the people on the Sabbath days, as after in
the Synagogues. For where those Cities were but four in every Tribe, one with
another, the people must needs travail further then six Furlongs, which was a
Sabbath days journey of the largest measure, as before we noted; or else that
nice restriction was not then in use. And were it that they took the pains to
go up unto them, yet were not those few Cities able to co^tain the multitudes.
When Ioab not long after this, 2 S^m. ^4.
did muster Israel at the command of David; he found no fewer then thirteen
hundred thousand fighting men. Suppose we then, that unto every one fighting
man, there were three old men, women and children, fit to hear the Law, as no
doubt there were. Put these together, and it will amount in all to two and
fifty hundred thousand. Now out of these set by four hundred thousand for
Jerusalem, and the service there; and then there will remain one hundred
thousand just, which must owe suite and service every Sabbath day, to each
several City of the Levites. Too vast a number to be entertained, in any of
their Cities; and much less in their Synagogues, had each house been one. So
that we may resolve for certain, that the dispersion of the Levites over all
the Tribes, had no relation, hitherto, unto the reading of the Law, or any
public Sabbath duties.

CHAP. VII.
Touching the keeping of the SABBATH, from the time of David to the Maccabees.
(1) Particular necessities must give place to the Law of Nature. (2) That
David's flight from Saul was upon the Sabbath. (3) What David did being King of
Israel, in ordering things about the Sabbath. (4) Elijahs flight upon the
Sabbath; and what else happened on the Sabbath, in Elijahs time. (5) The
limitation of a Sabbaths days journey, not known amongst the Jews, when
Elisha lived. (6) The Lord becomes offended with the Jewish Sabbaths; and on
what occasion. (7) The Sabbath entertained by the Samaritans; and their strange
niceties therein. (8) Whether the Sabbaths were observed during the Captivity.
(9) The special care of Nehemiah to reform the Sabbath. (10) The weekly
reading of the Law on the Sabbath days, began by Ezra. (11) No Synagogues nor
weekly reading of the Law, during the Government of the Kings. (12) The Scribes
and Doctors of the Law, impose new rigours on the people about their Sabbaths.

(1) THus have we traced the Sabbath from the Mount, to Silo, the space of
forty five years or thereabouts, wherein it was observed sometimes, and
sometimes broken: broken by public order from the Lord himself* and broken by
the public practice both of Priest and people. No precept in the Decalogue so
controuled, and justled by the Legal Ceremonies, forced to give place to
Circumcision, because the younger; and to the Legal Sacrifices, though it was
their Elders. t and all this while, no blame or imputation to be laid on them,
that so profaned it. Men durst not thus have dallied with the other nine; no
no^ with this neither, had it been a part of the Law of nature. Yet had the
Sabbath been laid by in such cases only, wherein the Lord had specially
declared his will and pleasure, that these and these things should be done upon
it, or preferred before it: there was less reason of complaint. But we shall
see in that which followed, that the poor Sabbath was enforced to yield up the
place, even to the several necessities and occasions of particular men: and
that without Injunction or Command from the Court of Heaven. This further
proves the fourth Commandment as far as it concerns the time, one whole day
of seven, Ryvet. in Deca.
to be no part nor parcel of the Law of Nature, for if it were the Law of
Nature, it were not dispensable, no not in any exigent or distress what ever.
Nullum poriculum suadet, ut qua ad legem nature alem direct pertinent
infringamus. No danger, says a modern Writer, is to occasion us to break
those bonds, wherewith we are obliged by the Law of Nature. Aquinas 1. 2 ae*
qu. 100. art 9.
Nor is this only Protest^nt Divinity, for that Praecepta decalogi omnino
sint indispensabilia, is a noted maxim of the Schoolmen. And yet it is not
only School Divinity, Qu. (...). N. Test. 6^.
for the Fathers taught it. It is a principle of Saint Austins, Illud quod
omnino non licet semper non licet; nec aliqua necessitate mitigatur, ut
admissum, non obsit: est enim semper illicitum, quod legibus, quia criminosum
est, prohibetur. That, says the Father, which is unlawful in it self, is
unlawful always; nor is there any exigent or extremity, that can so excuse
it, being done, but that it makes a man obnoxiou^ unto Gods displeasure. For
that is always to be reckoned an unlawful thing, which is forbidden by the
Law because simply evil. So that in case this rule be true, as no doubt it is;
and that the fourth Commandment prohibiting all manner of work on the Sabbath
day, as simply evil, be to be reckoned part of the Moral Law: they that
transgress this Law, in what case soever, are in the self-same state with
those, who to preserve their lives or fortunes, renounce their Faith in God,
and worship Idols: which no man ought to do, no though it were to gain the
world. For what will it profit a man to gain the world, and to lose his soul?

(2) But sure the Jews accounted not the Sabbath of so high a nature; as not
to venture the transgressing of that Law, if occasion were. Whereof, or of the
keeping it, we have no monument in Scripture, till we come to David. The
residue of Iosuah, and the Book of Judges, give us nothing of it. Nor have we
much in the whole story of the Kings: but what we have we shall present unto
you in due place and order. And first for David, we read in Scripture how he
stood in fear of Saul his Master, 1. Sam. 20.
how in the Festival of the New Mood his place was empty, how Saul became
offended at it, and publicly declared his malicious purpose, which in his
heart he had before conceived against him. On the next morning, Jonathan takes
his bow and arrows, goes forth a shooting, takes a boy with him to bring back
his arrows: and by a signal formerly agreed between them, gives David notice
that his Father did seek his life. David on this makes haste, and came to Nob
unto Abimelech the Priest; and being an hungry, desires some sustenance at his
hands. The Priest not having ought else in readiness, sets the Shewbread
before him, which was not lawful for any man to eat, but the Priest alone. Now
if we ask the Fathers of the Christian Church, what day this was, on which
poor David fled from the face of Saul, they answer that it was the Sabbath.
Saint Athanasius doubtingly, Him d^ sem^n^^.
with a peradventure, (...), most likely that it was the Sabbath. His reason
makes the matter surer, than his resolution. The Jews, says he, upbraid our
Savior, that his Disciples plucked the ears of Corn on the Sabbath day: to
satisfy which doubt, he tells them what was done by David, on a Sabbath also.
(...). as that Father has it. Saint Hierome tells us that the day whereon he
fled away from Saul, was both a Sabbath and New-moone; In Ma^h. 12.
and ad sabbati solennitatem accedebant neomeniarum dies. Indeed the story
makes it plain, it could be no other. The Shewbread was changed every
Sabbath, in the morning early: that which was brought in new, not to be stirred
off from the Table till the Week was out: the other which was taken away, being
appropriated to the Priests, and to be eaten by them only. Being so stale
before, we may the easier think it lay not long upon their hands: and had not
David come, as he did, that morning; perhaps he had not found the Priest so
well provided, in the afternoon. Had David thought that breaking of the Sabbath
in what case soever, had been a sin against the eternal Law of Nature: he
would, no doubt, have hid himself that day in the field, 1. Sam. 20. Verse 19,
24,
by the stone Ezel, as he had done two days before; rather then so have run
away, as well from God, as from the King. Especially considering that on the
Sabbath day he might have lurked there with more safety, then before he did:
none being permitted, as some say, by the Law of God, to walk abroad that day,
if occasion were. Neither had David passed it over in so light a manner, had he
done contrary to the Law. That heart of his which smote him for his murder and
adultery, and for his numbering of the people would sure have taken some
impression, upon the breaking of the Sabbath; had he conceived that Law to be
like the rest. But David knew of no such matter: neither did Jonathan, as it
seems. For howsoever David's fact might be excused by reason of the imminent
peril; yet surely Ionathans walking forth with his bow and arrows, was of a
very different nature. Nor did he do it fearfully, and by way of stealth, as
if he were afraid to avow the action: but took his Page with him to bring
back his arrows, and called aloud unto him to do thus and thus, according as
he was directed; as if it were his usual custom. Jonathan might have thought
of some other way to give advertisement unto David, of his Fathers anger:
rather then by a public breaking of the Sabbath, to provoke the Lords. But
then, as may from hence be gathered, shooting and such like manlike exercises,
were not accounted things unlawful on the Sabbath day.

(3) This act and flight of David's from the face of Saul, happened in Torniellus
computation, Anno 2974: and forty six years after that, being 3020 of the
Worlds Creation, and the last year of David's life, he made a new division of
the sons of Levi. For where the Levites were appointed in the times before,
to bear about the Tabernacle, as occasion was: the Tabernacle now being fixed
and settled in Jerusalem, there was no further use of the Levites service, 1.
Chron 23. 4, 5
in that kind. Therefore King David thought it good to set them to some new
employments; and so he did: some of them to assist the Priests, in the public
Ministry; some to be Overseers and Judges of the people, some to be Porters
also in the house of God, and finally, some others to be singers to praise the
Lord with instruments that he had made, with Harps, with Viols and with
Cymballs. Of these the most considerable were the first and last. The first
appointed to assist at the daily Sacrifices: Verse. 31.
as also at the Offering of all burnt Offerings unto the Lord, in the Sabbaths,
in the months, and at the appointed times according to the number and
according to their custom continually before the Lord. The other were
instructed in the songs of the Lord. Chap. 25. 7.
The other chiefly which were made for the Sabbath days, and the other
Festivals: and one he made himself, of his own enditing, entitled a Song or
Psalm for the Sabbath day. Calvin upon the 92 Psalm is of opinion, Psalm. 92.
that he made many for that purpose; as no doubt he did; and so he did for
the Feasts also. Antiq Iud. l. 7. c. 10.
Josephus tells us, that he composed Odes and Hymns to the praise of God, as
also that he made diverse kinds of instruments, and that he taught the Levites
to praise Gods Name upon the Sabbath days, (...), and the other Festivals: as
well upon the Annual, as the weekly Sabbath. Where note, that in the
distribution of the Levites into several Offices, there was then no such
Office thought of, as to be Readers of the Law; which prooves sufficiently that
the Law was not yet read publicly unto the people on the Sabbath day. Nor did
he only appoint them their Songs and Instruments, but so exact and punctual
was he, that he prescribed what habit they should wear, in the discharging of
their Ministry, in singing praises to the Lord; which was a white linen
raiment, such as the Surplice, 2. Chron. 5. 12, 13.
now in use, in the Church of England. Also the Levites, says the Text, which
were the singers, being arrayed in white linen, having Cymbals and Psalteries
and Harps, stood at the East end of the Altar, etc. praising and thanking God,
for his Grace and mercies. And this he did not by commandment from above, or
any warrant but his own as we find, and that he thought it fit, and decent.
David the Prophet of the Lord knew well, what did belong to David the King of
Israel, in ordering matters of the Church, and settling things about the
Sabbath. Nor can it be but worth the notice, that the first King whom God
raised up to be a nursing Father unto his Church, should exercise his regal
power in dictating what he would have done on the Sabbath day, in reference to
Gods public worship. As if in him, the Lord did mean to teach all others of
the same condition, as no doubt he did, that it pertaines to them to vindicate
the day of his public service, as well from superstitious fancies, as
profane contempts: and to take special order that his name be glorified, as
well in the performances of the Priests, as the devotions of the people. This
special care we shall find verified in Constantine, the first Christian
Emperor, of whom more hereafter in the next Book, and third Chapter. Now what
was there ordained by David, was afterward confirmed by Solomon (whereof see 2.
Chron. 8 14) Who as he built a Temple for Gods public worship; for the
New-moones, and weekly Sabbaths, and the solemn Feasts, as the Scripture tells
us: so he, or some of his Successors, built a fair seat within the Porch
thereof, wherein the Kings did use to set, both on the Sabbaths and the annual
Festivals. The Scripture calls it tegmen sabbati, the covert for the Sabbath; 2
Kings 16.
that is, says Rabbi Solomon, locus quidam in porticu templi gratiose
coopertus, in quo Rex sedebat die sabbati, and in magnis festivitatibus, as
before was said. So that in this too, both were equal.

(4) From David pass we to Elijah, from one great Prophet to another: both
persecuted, and both feign to fly, and both to fly upon the Sabbath. Elijah
had made havoc of the Priests of Baal, and Iezebel sent a message to him, that
he should arm himself to expect the like. The Prophet warned hereof, arose,
and being encouraged by an Angel, 2. K^ng^ 19. 8*
he did eat and drink, and walked in the strength of that meat forty days and
forty nights, until he came to Horeb the Mount of God. What, walked he forty
days and as many nights without rest, or ceasing? So it is resolved on. Elijah
as we read in Damascen, De fide O^th^d l. 4. c. 24.
(...) disquieting himself not only by continual fasting, but by his
travailing on the Sabbath, even for the space of forty days, (...) did without
question break the Sabbath: yet God who made that Law was not at all offended
with him, but rather to reward his virtue, appeared to him in Mount Horeb. So
Thomas Aquinas speaking of some men, (...) qu. 122. 2. (...) 4.
in the old Testament, qui transgredientes observantiam sabbati, non
peccabant, who did transgress against the Sabbath, and yet did not ^inne;
makes instance of Elijah, and of his journey: wherein, says he, it must needs
be granted, that he did travail on the Sabbath. And where a question might be
made, how possibly Elijah, could spend forty days and forty nights in so small
a journey: Tostatus makes reply, that he went not directly forwards, but
wandered up and down, and from place to place; ex timore and inquietudine
mentis, partly for fear of being found, I^ lo^um.
and partly out of a disquieted and afflicted mind. Now whiles Elijah was in
exile, Benhadad King of Syria invaded Israel, and encamped near Aphek; where
Ahab also followed him, and sat down by him with his army. And, says the
Text, they pitched one over against the other seven days, 1. Kings 20. 29.
and so it was that in the seventh day the battle was joined, and the
children of Israel sl^e of the Syrians an hundred thousand footmen in one day.
Ask Zanchius what this seventh day was; and he will tell you plainly that it
was the Sabbath. In 4 Ma^dat.
For showing us that any servile works may be done lawfully on the Sabbath, if
either charity, or unauoydable necessity do so require: he brings this
History in, for the proof thereof. And then he adds, Illi die ipso sabbati,
quia necessitas postulabat, pugnam cum hostibus commiserunt, etc. The
Israelites, says he, fighting against their enemies on the Sabbath day,
necessity enforcing them thereunto, prevailed against them with a great and
mighty slaughter. Neither is he only one that so conceived it. Loci. Com. l 7.
cl. 2.
Peter Martyr says as much, and collects from hence, die sabbati militaria
munia obijsse eos, that military matters were performed on the Sabbath day.
This field was fought, Anno Mundi 3135: and was eleven years after Elijahs
flight.

(5) Proceed we to Elisha next. Of whom though nothing be recorded that
concerns this business; yet on occasion of his piety and zeal to God, there
is a passage in the Scripture, which gives light unto it. 2. Kings 4.
The Shunamite having received a Child at Elisha's hands, and finding that it
was deceased, called to her husband, and said, send with me I pray thee, one of
the young men and one of the Asses, Verse. 2^.
for I will have to the man of God, and come again. And he said, wherefore will thou go to him to day? Verse 2^.
It is neither New Mood, nor Sabbath day. Had it been either of the two, it
seems she might have gone and sought out the Prophet: and more then so, she
used to do it at those times, else what need the question? It was their
custom, as before we noted, to travail on the Sabbath days, and the other
Festivals, to have some conference with the Levites, if occasion were; and to
repair unto the Prophets at the same times also, as well as any day what ever.
In illis diebus festivis frequentius ib^nt ad Prophetas ad audiendum verbum
Dei, as Lyra has it on the place. And this they did without regard unto that
nicety of a Sabbath days journey; which came not up till long after: sure I am
was not now in use. Elisha, at this time, was retired to Carmel, which from the
Shunamites City was ten miles at lest: as is apparent both by Adrichomius Map
of Aser, and all other Tables that I have met with. And so the limitation of
2000 foot, or 2000 Cubits, or the six Furlongs, at the most, which some require
to be allotted for the utmost travail on the Sabbath; is vanished suddenly
into nothing. Nay, it is evident by the story that the journey was not very
short: the woman calling to her servant to drive on, and go forwards, and not
to slack his riding unless she bid him: Which needed not, in case the journey
had not been above six Furlongs. Neither New-moone nor Sabbath day, It seems
the times were both alike in this respect: the Prophets to be sought unto, and
they to publish and make known the will of God, as well at one time, as the
other. ^^ Number 28. qu. 29.
Quasi Sabbatum and Calendae aequalis essent solennitatis, as Tostatus has it.
If so, if the New-moones, in this respect, were as solemn as the weekly
Sabbath: no question but the Annual Sabbaths were as solemn also. And not in
this respect alone, but in many others. Markets prohibited in the New-moones,
as in the Sabbath; When will the New-moone be gone, that we may sell our Corn?
in the eighth of Amos; the Sacrifices more in these then in the other, of which
last we^ have spoke already. So when the Scriptures prophecy of those
spiritual Feasts, which should be celebrated by Gods Saints, in the times to
come: they specify the New-moones as particularly, Esaias 66 23.
as they do the Sabbaths. From one New-moone to another, and from one Sabbath
to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, says the Lord. See the
like Prophecy in Ezech. Chapter 46. Verse. 1. 3. Upon which last Saint Hierome tells
us, In Ezech. 46.
Quod privilegium habet dies septimus in hebdomada, hoc habet privilegium*
mensis exordium, the New-moones and the Sabbath have the like Prerogatives.

(6) Nay, when the Jews began to set at naught the Lord, and to forget that
God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt; when they began to loath his
Sabbaths, and profane his Festivals, as they did too often: the Lord
expostulates the matter with them, as well for one as for the other. When they
were weary of the New-moone, Am^ ^ 8. 5.
and wished it gone, that they might sell corn; and of the Sabbath, because it
went not fast enough away, that they might set forth wheat to sale: the Lord
objects against them, both the one and the other, by his Prophet Amos; that
they preferred their profit, before his pleasure. In locum.
Et Deisolennitates turpis lucri gratia, in sua verterent compendia, as Saint
Hierome has it. When on the other side they did profane his Sabbaths, and the
holy Festivals with excess and furfeiting, carowsing wine in bowls, (...) 6.
stretching themselves upon their couches, and oynting of themselves with the
chief ointments: the Lord made known unto them by his servant Esaiah, how
much he did dislike their courses. The New-moones and Sabbaths, Chap. ^. ^4*
the calling of Assemblies I cannot away with; it is iniquity even the solemn
meeting. It seems they had exceedingly forgot themselves, when now their very
Festivals were become a sin. Nay, God goes further yet, your New-moones and
your appointed F^asts my soul hates, Chap. 1. 14.
they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them. Your New-moones, and your
Feasts, says God, are not mine. Non enim mea sunt quae geritis, they are no
Feasts of mine, Sermo 12.
which you so abuse. How so? Iudaei enim neglectis spiritualibus negotjis quae
pro animae salute agenda deus praeceperat, omnia legitima sabbati, ad ocium
luxuriaemque contulere. So said Gaudentius Brixianus. The Jews, says he,
neglecting those spiritual duties which God commanded on that day, abused the
Sabbaths rest unto ease and luxury. Cyrill. in Amos 8.
For whereas being free from temporal cares, they ought to have employed that
day to spiritual uses, and to have spent the same in modesty and temperan^e,
(...), and in the repetition and commemoration of Gods holy Word: they on the
other side did the contrary, (...), wasting the day in gluttony, and
drunkenness, and idle delicacies. How far Saint Augustiue* charge them
with the self-same crimes, we have seen before. Thus did the house of Israel
rebel against the Lord, and prophaene his Sabbaths. And therefore God did
threaten them by the Prophet Hosea, Hos. 2. 1^.
that he would cause their mirth to cease, their Feast days, their New-moones
and Sabbaths, and their solemn Festivals: that so they might be punished in
the want of that, which formerly they had abused.

(7) And so indeed he did, beginning first with those of the revolted Tribes,
whom he gave over to the hand of Salmanassar the Affyrian, by whom they were
lead Captive unto parts unknown, and never suffered to return. Those which
were planted in their places, as they desired in tract of time, to know the
manner of the God of the Land: so for the better means to attain that
knowledge, they entertained the Pentateuch, or five Books of Moses; and with
them, the Sabbath. They were beholding to the Lions which God sent amongst
them. Otherwise they had never known the Sabbath, nor the Lord who made it.
Themselves acknowledge this in an Epistle to Antiochus Epiphanes, when he made
havoc of the Jews. The Epistle thus. (...), etc. To King Antiochus Epiphanes,
Joseph. Antiq. li. ^. 2. c. 7.
the mighty God, the suggestion of the Sidonians that dwell at Sichem. Our
Ancestors enforced by a continual plague which destroyed their Country (this
was the Lions before spoken of) and induced by an ancient superstition, (...),
took up a custom to observe that day as holy, which the Jews call the
Sabbath. So that it seems by this Epistle that when the A^^yrian sent back
one of the Priests of Israel, to teach this people what was the manner of the
God of the Land; that at that time they did receive the Sabbath also: which was
about the year of the Worlds Creation, 3315. The Priest so sent, is said to
have been called Dosthai; and as the word is mollified in the Greek, Orig
(...) l. 4.
it is the same with Dositheus: who as he taught these new Samaritans, the
observation of the Sabbath; so as some say, he mingled with the same, some nea^
devises o^ his own. For whereas it is said in the Book of Exodus, Let no man
go out of his place on the sabbath day: this Dositheus, if at lest this were
he, keeping the letter of the Text, did affirm and teach, that in what ever
posture any man was found, (...), in the beginning of the sabbat^; in the
self-same he was to be (...), even until the evening. I say if this were he,
and as some say, because there was another Dositheus, a Samaritan too, that
lived more near unto the time of Origin, and is most like to be the man.
However, we may take it for a Samaritan device, as indeed it was; though not so
ancient as to take beginning with the first entertainment of the Sabbath, in
that place and people.

(8) This transportation of the ten Tribes, for their many sins, was a fair
warning unto those of the house of Judah, to turn unto the Lord, and amend
their lives, and observe his Sabbaths: his sabbata annorum, Sabbaths of years,
as well as either his weekly or his yearly Sabbaths. The Jews had been
regardlesse of them all, and for neglect of all, God resolved to punish them.
First, for the weekly Sabbath, that God avenged himself upon them for the
breach thereof, is evident by that one place of Nehemiah. Did not your Fathers
thus, Chapter 13. v. 18
says he, and our God brought this plague upon us, and upon our City? yet ye
increase the wrath upon Israel, in breaking the Sabbath. Next for the Annual
Sabbaths, God threatened that he would deprive them of them, by his Prophet
Hosea; as before was said. And lastly, for his Sabbaths of years, they had
been long neglected and almost forgotten; if observed at all. Torniellus finds
three only kept in all the Scripture. Nor are more specified in particular,
but sure more were kept: the certain number of the which may easily be found by
the proportion of the punishment. God tells them that they should remayn in
bondage, 2. Chron. 36. (...)
until the land had enjoyed her Sabbaths: for so long as she lay desolate,
she kept sabbath, to fulfill threescore and ten years. So that as many years
as they were in bondage, so many sabbaths of years they had neglected. Now
from the year 2593 which was the seventh year after their possession of the
Land of Canaan, unto the year 3450, which was the year of their Captivity:
there passed in all 857 years just; of which 122 were years Sabbaticall. By
which account it is apparent, that they had kept in all that time, but fifty
two sabbaticall years: and for the seventy sabbaths of years which they had
neglected, God made himself amends, by laying desolate the whole Country,
seventy years together, till the earth had enjoyed her sabbaths. Not that the
earth lay still all that while, and was never tilled; for those that did
remain behind, and inhabit there, must have means to live: but that the
tillage was so little, and the crop so small, the people being few in numbers;
that in comparison of formertimes, it might seem to rest. But whatsoever
Sabb^ths the earth enjoyed, the people kept not much themselves. The solemn
Feasts of Pentecost, the Passover, and the Feast of Tabernacles, they could
not celebrate at all, because they had no Temple to repair unto: In H^s 2.
nor did they celebrate the New-moones and the weekly sabb^th, as they ought to
do. Non neomeniae non sabbati exercere laetitiam, n^c omnes festivitates quas
uno nomine comprehendit, as Saint Hierome has it. For that they used to work
on the sabbath day, both in the Harvest and the Vintage, during the Captivity,
we have just reason to suspect con^idering what great difficulty Nehemiah found
to redress those errors. So little had that people profited in the school of
Piety: that though they felt Gods heavy anger for the breach thereof, yet could
they hardly be induced to amend their follies.

(9) But presently on their return from Babylon, Ez^a 3. 4, 5.
they reared up the Altar, and kept the Feast of Tabernacles, and the burnt
offerings day by day, and afterward the continual burnt-offering, both in the
New-moones, and the solemn Feast-dayes that had been consecrate unto the
Lord. This the first work that was endeavored by the Zorobabel, and other
Rulers of the people: and it was somewhat that they went so far in the
reformation, as to revive the sabbaths and the public Festivals. I say the
sabbaths, amongst others; for so Josephus does express it, They celebrated at
that time, says he, the feast of Tabernacles, according as their Lawmakers had
ordained: and afterward they offered oblations and continual Sacrifices,
observing their sabbaths, and all holy solemnities. Yet they observed them not
so truly, but that some evil customs which had crept amongst them, during the
Captivity, were as yet continued: Markets permitted on the sabbath, and the
public Festivals; Burdens brought in, and out; the Vintage no less followed
on those days, than on any other. And so continued till the year 3610, which
was some ninety years after they were returned from Babel: what time they
celebrated that great Feast of Tabernacles; and Ezra publicly read the Law
before all the people. Upon which Act, this good ensued, that both the Priests
and Princes, and many others of the people, did enter covenant with the Lord,
that If the people of the Land brought ware, Ne^. 10. v. 31.
or any victuals, to sell them on the sabbath day, that we would not buy it
of them on the sabbath, or on the holy days, and that we would leave the
seventh year free, and the exaction of every debt. Where still observe, that
they had no less care of the annual sabbaths, yea, of the sabbaths of years,
then of the weekly: and marketting not more restrained on the weekly sabbaths,
then on the Annual. A covenant not so well performed, as it was agreed. For
Nehemiah who was principal on the peoples part, being gone for Babylon; at his
return, found all things contrary to what he looked for. I saw, Chap* 13. 15.
says he, in Judah, them that trod Wine-presses on the sabbath, and that
brought in sheafes, and which laded Asses also with Wine, Grapes, and Figs,
and brought them into Jerusalem on the sabbath day; and others, Verse 16.
men of Tyrus that brought fish and all manner of ware, and sold it on the
sabbath unto the children of Judah: a most strange disorder. So general was
the crime become, that the chief Rulers of the people were most guilty of it.
So that to rectify this misrule, Nehemiah was not only forced to shut up the
Gates, upon the Even before the sabbath, yea, and to keep them shut all the
sabbath day; whereby the Merchants were compelled, to rest with their
commodities, without the walls: but to use threatening words unto them, that if
from that time forwards, they came with Merchandise on the sabbath, he would
forbear no longer, but lay hands upon them. A course not more severe, then
necessary, as the case then stood. Nor had those mischiefs been redressed,
being now countenanced by custom, and some chief men among the people: had
they not met a man, both resolved and constant; one that both knew his work,
and had a will to see it finished. This reformation of the sabbath, or rather
of those foul abuses which had of late defiled it, and even made it
despicable; is placed by Torniellus, An. 3629: which was above an hundred
years after the restitution of this people to their Native Country. So
difficult a thing it is to overcome an evil custom.

(10) Things ordered thus, and all those public scandals being thus remooved:
there followed a more strict observance of the Sabbath day, then ever had been
kept before. The rather since about these times, began the reading of the Law
in the Congregation. Not every seventh year only, and on the Feast of
Tabernacles, as before it was, or should have been at the least, by the law of
Moses; but every sabbath day, and each solemn meeting: nor only in the Temple
of Jerusalem, as it used to be; but in the Towns and principal places of
each several Tribe. Ezra first set this course on foot, a Priest by calling,
one very skillful in the Laws of Moses: who having took great pains to seek
out the Law, and other Oracles of God; disgested and disposed them into that
form and method, in which we have them at this present. Of this see Iren. l.
3. 25. Tertullian de habitu mulierum, Cle^. Alexandr. l. 1. Strom. Chrysostom.
hom. 8. ad Hebraeos, and diverse others. This done, and all the people met
together at the Feast of Tabernacles, Anno 3610, which was some ninety years
after the return from Babylon, as before was said: he took that opportunity
to make known the Law unto the people. Nelem. 8. 4.
For this cause he provided a Pulpit of wood, that so he might be heard the
better; and round about him stood the Priests, Verse. 4. 7.
and Levites, learned men; of purpose to expound the Text, and to give the
sense thereof, Verse. 8.
that so the people might the better understand the reading. Verse ^ 8.
And this they did eight days together, from the first day until the last,
when the Feast was ended. Now in this Act of Ezraes, there was nothing common,
nothing according to the custom of the former times, neither in time, or
place, or any other circumstance. For the time, although it was the Feast of
Tabernacles, yet it was the seventh year as Moses ordered it: that year, Neh.
8. ^, ^
which was the first of Nehemiahs coming unto Jerusalem, not being the
sabbaticall year, but the third year after, as Torniellus does compute it.
Then for the place it should have been performed in the Temple only, as both
by Moses Ordinance, and Iosiahs practice, does at large appear: but now they
did it in the street before the Water-gates, as the Text informs us. So for
manner of the reading, it was not only published, as it had been formerly,
but expounded also. Whereof, as of a thing never known before, this reason is
laid down by Torniellus, quod lingua Hebraica desierat jam v^ lgaris esse,
Chaldaico seu Syriaco idiomate in ejus locu^^ surrogato, An. 3610. n. ^.
because the Hebrew tongue wherein the Scriptures were first written, was now
grown strange unto the people; the Chaldee or the Syriack being generally
received in the place thereof. And last of all, for the continuance of this
exercise, it held out eight days, all the whole time the Feast continued:
whereas it was appointed by the Law of Moses, that only the first and last
days of the Feast of Tabernacles should be esteemed and solemnized, as holy
convocations to the Lord their God. Levit. 23 35. and 36. Here was a total
alteration of the ancient custom; and a fair overture to the Priests, who
were then Rulers of the people to begin a new: a fair instruction to them
all, that reading of the Law of God was not confined to place, or time; but
that all times, and places were alike to his holy word. Every seventh day as
fit for so good a duty, as every seventh year was acounted in the former
times: the Villages and Towns as capable of the Word of God, as was the great
and glorious Temple of Jerusalem: and what prerogative had the Feast of
Tabernacles, but that the Word of God might be as necessary to be heard on the
other Festivals, as it was on that? The law had first been given them on a
Sabbath day, and therefore might be read unto them every Sabbath day. This might
be pleaded in behalf of this alteration, and that great change which followed
after, in the weekly Sabbaths; whereon the Law of God was not only read unto
the people, such of them as inhabited over all Judea; but publicly made known
unto them, in all the Provinces and Towns abroad, where they had either
Synagogues or habitations. God certainly had so disposed it, in his heavenly
counsels, that so his holy Word might be more generally known throughout the
World; and a more easy way laid open, for the admittance and receipt of the
Messiah, whom he meant to send: that so Jerusalem and the Temple, might by
degrees be lesned in their reputation; John 4. ^0.
and men might know that neither of them was the only place, where they ought
to worship. This I am sure of, that by this breaking of the custom, although
an institute of Moses, the Law was read more frequently, then in times of old:
there being one other reading of it, publicly and before the people related in
the thirteenth of Nehemiah, when it was neither Feast of Tabernacles, nor
Sabbaticall year, for ought we find in holy Scripture. Therefore most like it
is that it was the Sabbath, which, much about those times, began to be
ennobled with the constant reading of the Word in the Congregation, First in
Jerusalem, and after by degrees, in most places else, as men could fit
themselves with convenient Synagogues, houses selected for that purpose, to
hear the Word of God, and observe the same. Of which times, and of none
before, Chap. 6. n 4.
those passages of Phil^ and Josephus before remembered, touching the weekly
reading of the Law, and the behavior of the people in the public places of
assemblies; are to be understood and verified, as there we noted.

(11) For that there was no Synagogue nor weekly reading of the Law, before
these times; (beside^ what has been said already) we will now make manifest.
No Synagogu^ before these times, for there is neither mention of them in all
the body of the old Testament; nor any use of them in those days, wherein
there were no Congregations in particular places. And first there is no mention
of them in the old Testament. For where it is supposed by some, that there were
Synagogues in the time of David; and for the proof thereof they produce these
words, Psalm 74. ^.
they have burnt up all the Synagogues of God in the Land: the supposition and
the proof are alike in firm. For not to quarrel the Translation, which is
directly different from the Greek, and vulgar Latin, and somewhat from the
former English: this Psalm, if writ by David, was not composed in reference to
any present misery which befell the Church. There had been no such havoc made
thereof in all David's time, as is there complained of. Therefore if David writ
that Psalm, he writ it as inspired with the spirit of prophecy, and in the
spirit of prophecy did reflect on those wretched times, wherein Antiochus laid
waste the Church of God, and ransacked his inheritance. To those most probably
must it be refer^ed: the miseries which are there bemoned, not being so exactly
true in any other time of trouble, as it was in this. In Psalm. 74.
Magis probabilis est conjectura, ad tempus Antiochi referri has querimonias,
as Calvin notes it. And secondly, there was no use of them before, because no
reading of the Law in the Congregation, of ordinary course, and on the Sabbath
days. For had the Law been read unto the people every Sabbath day, we either
should have found some Commandment for it, or some practice of it: but we meet
with neither. Rather we find strong arguments to persuade the contrary. We read
it of Iehosaphat, 2. Chron. 17. 7.
that in the third year of his reign he sent his Princes, Ben-hail, and
Obadiah, and Zechariah, and Nathaneel, and Micaiah, to teach in the Cities of
Judah. These were the principal in Commission; and unto them he joined nine
Levites, and two Priests to bear them company; and to assist them. It
follows, Verse 9.
And they taught in Judah, and had the book of the Law of the Lord with them,
and they went about throughout all the Cities of Judah, and taught the people.
And they taught in Judah, and had the Book of the Law with them? This must
needs be an needless labor, in case the people had been taught every Sabbath
day: or that the Book of the Law had as then been extant, and extant must it
be, if it had been read) in every Town and Village over all Iudaea. Therefore
there was no Synagogue, no reading of the Law every Sabbath day, in Ie^^sophats
time. 2. Kings 22.
But that which follows of Josiah, is more full then this. That godly Prince
intended to repair the Temple, and in pursuit of that intendment, Hilkiah the
Priest, to whom the ordering of the work had been committed; found hidden an
old Copy of the Law of God, which had been given unto them by the hand of
Moses. This Book is brought unto the King, and read unto him; And when the
King had heard the words of the Law, Verse 11.
he rent his clothes. And not so only, but he gathered together all the
Elders of Judah and Hi^rusalem, Chap. 23. 1, 2.
and read in their ears all the words o^ the Book of the Covenant, which was
found in the house of the Lord. Had it been formerly the custom, to read the
Law each Sabbath unto all the people: it is not to be thought that this good
King I^siah, could possibly have been such a stranger to the Law, of God; or
that the finding of the Book had been related for so strange an accident,
when there was scarce a Town in Judah, but was funished with them. Or what
need such a sudden calling of all the Elders, and on an extraordinary time, to
hear the Law; if they had heard it every Sabbath, and that of ordinary course?
Nay, so far were they at this time, from having the Law read amongst them
every weekly Sabbath, that as it seems, it was not read amongst them in the
sabbath of years, as Moses had before appointed. For if it had been read unto
them once in seven years only; that virtuous Prince had not so soon
forgotten the content^ thereof. Therefore there was no synagogue, no weekly
reading of the law, in Iosiahs days. And if not then, and not before, then not
at all till Ezras time. The finding of the book of God before remembered, is
said to happen in the year 3412. of the worlds creation: not forty years
before the people were led Captives into Babylon; in which short space, the
Princes being careless, and the times distracted, there could be nothing done
that concerned this business. Now from this reading of the Law in the time of
Ezra, unto the Council holden in Jerusalem, there passed 490. years, or
thereabouts. Antiquity sufficient to give just cause to the Apostle, there to
affirm, that Moses in old time in every City had them that preached him, Act.
15. ^1.
being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day. So that we may conclude for
certain, that till these times wherein we are, there was no reading of the Law
unto the people on the Sabbath days: and in these times, when it was taken up
amongst them, it was by Ecclesiastical institution only, no divine authority.

(12) But being taken up, on what ground soever, it did continue afterward,
though perhaps sometimes interrupted, until the final dissolution of that
Church and State: and therewithal grew up a liberty of interpretation of the
holy words, which did at last divide the people into sects and factions. Petrus
Cunaeus does affirm, that howsoever the Law was read amongst them in the
former times, De republ. l. 2. ca. 17.
either in public or in private; yet the bare text was only read, without
gloss or descant. Interpretatio magistrorum, commentatio nulla. But in the
second Temple, when there were no Prophets, then did the Scribes and Doctors
begin to comment, and make their several expositions on the holy Text: Ex quo
natae disputationes and sententiae contrariae; from whence, says he, sprung up
debates, and doubtful disputations. Most probable it is, that from this
liberty of interpretation, sprung up diversity of judgments, from whence arose
the several sects of Pharisees, Essees and Sadduces, who by their difference
of opinions did distract the multitude, and condemn each other. Of whom, and
what they taught about the Sabbath, we shall see next Chapter. Nor is it to be
doubted, but as the reading of the Law, did make the people more observant of
the Sabbath, then they were before: so that libertas prophetandi, which they
had amongst them, occasioned many of those rigours, which were brought in
after. The people had before neglected the sabbaticall years, but now they
carefully observed them. I^seph. Ant li. ^1. ca ul^.
So carefully that when Alexander the Great being in Jerusalem anno 3721,
commanded them to ask some boon, wherein he might express his favor and
love unto them: the high Priest answered for them all, that they desired but
leave to exercise the ordinances of their forefathers, (...), and that each
seventh year might be free from tribute; because their lands lay then
untilled. But then again, the liberty and variety of interpretation, bredde
no little mischief. For where in former times, according to Gods own
appointment, the Sabbath was conceived to be a day of rest, whereon both man
and beast might refresh themselves, and be the more enabled for their ordinary
labors: by canvassing some Texts of Scripture, and wringing blood from thence
instead of comfort, they made the Sabbath such an yoke, as was insupportable.
Nor were these weeds of doctrine very long in growing. Within an hundred
years, and less, after Nehemiah, the people were so far from working on the
Sabbath day; (as in his time we see they did, and hardly could be weaned from
so great a sin:) but thought it utterly unlawful to take sword in hand, yea
though it were to save their liberty, and defend Religion. A folly, which
their neighbor Ptolomie, I^s^ph. Ant. li. 12. c. 1.
the great King of Egypt, made especial use of. For having notice of this
humor, as it was no better, he entered the City on the Sabbath day, under
pretense to offer sacrifice; and presently without resistance surprised the
same: the people, (...), not laying hand on any weapon, or doing any thing in
defense thereof; but sitting still, (...) in an idle slothfulness, suffered
themselves to be subdued by a Tyrant Conqueror. This happened Ann. M. 3730.
And many more such fruits of so bad a doctrine, did there happen afterward: to
which now we hasten.

CHAP. VIII.
What does occur about the Sabbath from the Maccabees, to the destruction of
the Temple.
(1) The Jews refuse to fight in their own defense upon the Sabbath; and what
was ordered thereupon. (2) The Pharisees, about these times, had made the
Sabbath burdensome by their Traditions. (3) Jerusalem twice taken by the
Romans, on the Sabbath day. (4) The Romans, many of them, Iudaize, and take up
the Sabbath: as other Nations did by the Jews example. (5) Augustus Caesar very
gracious to the Jews, in matters that concerned their Sabbath. (6) What our
Redeemer ta^ght, and did, to rectify the abuses of, and in the Sabbath. (7)
The final ruin of the Temple, and the Jewish ceremonies on a Sabbath day. (8)
The Sabbath abrogated with the other Ceremonies (9) Wherein consists the
Christian Sabbath, mentioned in the Scriptures and amongst the Fathers. (10)
The idle and ridiculous niceties of the modern Jews, in their Parasceues, and
their Sabbaths conclude the first part.

(1) We showed you in the former Chapter, how strange an alteration had been
made in an hundred years, touching the keeping of the Sabbath. The people
hardly at the first restrained from working, when there was no need; and after
easily induced to abstain from fighting, though tending to the necessary
defense both of their liberty and Religion. Of so much swi^ter growth is
superstition, then true piety. Nor was this only for a fit, as easily laid
aside, as taken up; but it continued a long time, yea and was every day
improved: it being judged, at last, unlawful to defend themselves, in case
they were assaulted on the Sabbath day. Antiochus Epiphanes the great King of
Syria, intending utterly to subvert the Church and Commonwealth of Judah, 1.
Mac. 1.
did not alone defile the Sanctuary, by shedding innocent blood therein: but
absolutely prohibited the burnt-offerings and the sacrifices, commanding also
that they should profane the Sabbaths, and the festival days. So that the
Sanctuary was laid waste, the holy days turned into mourning, and the Sabbath
into a reproach, as the story tells us: some of the people so far yielding
through fear and faintness, that they both offered unto Idols, and profaned
the Sabbaths, as the King commanded. But others, who preferred their piety,
before their fortunes, went down into the wilderness, and there hid
themselves in caves and other secret places. Thither the enemies pursued them,
and finding where they were in covert, assailed them on the Sabbath day, the
Jews not making any the least resistance, Joseph. li. 12. ca 8.
no not so much as stopping up the mouths of the Caves, (...), a^ m^n resolved
not to offend against the honor of the Sabbath, in what extremity soever.
These men were certainly more persuaded of the morality of the sabbath, then
David or Elijah in the former times: and being so persuaded, thought it not fit
to fly or fight upon that day; no, though the supreme law of nature, which was
the saving of their lives did call them to it. Tantum religio p^tuit suadere
malorum, in the Po^ts language. Bu^ ^attathias, one of the Priests, a man that
durst as much ^s any in the cause of God, and had not been infected with those
dangerous fancies; taught those that were about him a more saving doctrine:
Assuring them that they were bound to fight upon the sabbath, if they were
assaulted. For otherwise, if that they scrupulously observed the law, in such
necessities: (...), they would be enemies to themselves, and finally be
destroyed both they and their Religion. It was concluded thereupon, ^. Macc. 2.
that whosoever came to make battle with them on the Sabbath day, they would
fight against him: and afterward it held for current, as Josephus tells us,
that if n^cessitie required they made no scruple, (...), to fight against their
enemies on the Sabbath day. Yet by Josephus leave, it held not long, as he
himself shall tell us in another place: what time, the purpose of this
resolution was perverted quite, by the nice vanities of those men, who took
upon them to declare the meaning of it. But howsoever it was with those of
Iewrie, such of their Countrymen as dwelt abroad amongst other Nations, made
no such scruple of the Sabbath, but that they were prepared, if occasion were,
as well to bid the battle, as to* expect it: as may appear by this short
story, which I shall here present in brief, leaving the Reader to Josephus for
the whole at large. Two brethren, Asinaeus, and Anilaeus, borne in Nearda, in
the territory of Babylon, began to fortify themselves, and commit great
outrages: which known, the Governor of Babylon prepares his forces to
suppress them. Having drawn up his Army, he lays in ambush near a marish:
and the next day, which was the Sabbath, (wherein the Jews did use to rest from
all manner of work) making account that without stroke stricken, they would
yield themselves, he marched against them ^aire and softly, to come upon them
unawares. But being discovered by the scouts of Asinaeus, it was resolved
amongst them to be far more safe, valiantly to behave themselves in that
necessity, yea though it were a breaking of the very Law; then to submit
themselves, and make proud the enemy. Whereupon all of them at once marched
forth, and slaughtered a great many of the enemies; the residue being
constrained to save themselves by a speedy flight. The like did Anilaeus,
after; being provoked by Mithridates, another Chiefetaine of those parts. This
happened much about the year 3957. that of the Maccabees before remembered,
Ann. 3887. or thereabouts. Happy it was these brethren lived not in Indaea; for
had they done so there, the Scribes and Pharisees would have took an ord^r
with them, and cast them out of the Synagogues, if not used them worse.

(2) For by this time those Sects which before we spoke of, began to show
themselves, and disperse their doctrines. Josephus speaks not of them till the
time of Jonathan, who entered on the Government of the Jewish Nation, Ann. 3894.
Questionless they were known and followed in the former times; though
probably not so much in credit, their dictates not so much adored, as in the
ages that came after. Of those the Pharisees were of most authority, being
most active in their courses, severe professors of the Law, and such as by a
seeming sanctity had gained exceedingly on the affections of the common
people. The Sadduces were of less repute, (though otherwise they had their
dependants) as men that questioned some of the common principles: denying the
resurrection of the dead, the hope of immortality. As for the Essees or
Essens, they were a kind of Monkish men, retired and private; of far more
honesty then the Pharisees, but of far less cunning: therefore their
tendries not so generally received, or hearkened after, as the others were. In
matters of the Sabbath they were strict alike; but with some difference in the
points wherein their strictness did consist. In this the Essee seems to go
beyond the Pharisee, (...)
that they not only did abstain from dressing meat, and kindling fire upon
the Sabbath, as probably the others did: (...). But unto them it was unlawful
to remove a dish or any other vessel out of the place, wherein they found it,
yea or to go aside to ease nature. And on the other side, the Pharisee in the
multiplicitie of his Sabbath-speculations, went beyond the Essee: all which
were thrust upon the people, as prescribed by God, and grounded in his holy
Law; the perfect keeping of the which seemed their utmost industry. There is a
dictate in the Scripture, Exodus 16.
that No ^an go out of his place on the Sabbath day. This was impossible to be
kept, according to the words and letter: therefore there must be some device to
expound this Text, and make the matter feasible. Hereupon Achiba, Simeon, and
Hillel, three principal Rabbis of these times, found out a shift to satisfy
the Text, and yet not bind the people to impossible burdens. This was to limit
out the Sabbaths journey, allowing them 2000. foot to stir up and down, for
the ease and comfort of the body: by which devise they thought the matter well
made up, the people happily contented, and the Law ^bserved. This was the
refuge of the Jews, when afterward the Christians pressed them with the not
keeping of this. Text, R. A^hiba, Simeon, and Hillel magistri nostri
tradiderunt nobis, ut bis mill pedes ambularemus in sabbato, Ad Algasium.
as Saint Hierome tells us. But this being somewhat of the least, they
afterward improved it to 2000. Cubits, then to three quarters of a mile, as
before we noted: and this, with this enlargement too, that in their Towns and
Cities they might walk as much and as far as they listed, though as big as
Nineveh. This Rab. Hillel above named, lived in the year 3928. which was some
fifteen years after Ionathans death: and therefore to be reckoned of these
times in the which we are. The other two, for ought we know, were his
Coaetanei, and lived about the same times also. So for the other Text, Thou
shall not kindle fire on the Sabbath day, this also must be literally
understood: and then comparing this with that in Exodus, Bake that which ye
will bake to day; it needs must follow that no meat must be made ready on the
Sabbath. We showed before, that generally the people did use to fast on the
Sabbath day, till they came from Church, that so they might be more attent unto
the reading of the Law: this might suggest a plausible pretense unto the
Pharisee, to teach the people that they should forbear from dressing meat,
that so their servants also might be present, when the Law was read. Hence came
the saying used amongst them, Qui parat in parasceve, vescetur in Sabbato; he
that does cook it on the Eve, may cate upon the Sabbath. There is a Tex^ in
Jeremy, Chapter 17. v. (...).
expressly against bearing of burdens on the Sabbath day. This by the Christian
Fathers is interpreted of the burden of sin. Custodit animam suam qui non
portat pondera peccatorum in die quietis, and sabbati, as Saint Hierome has it
on the place. See the same Father also on the 58 of Esaias; and Basil, on the
first of the same Prophet. And certainly had Gods intent been plain and
peremptory, that whosoever did bear any burden on the Sabbath day, should
never enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: our Savior never had commanded the
poor lame man, to take up his bed upon the Sabbath. But for the Pharisees,
they have so dallied with this Text, that they have made both it and themselves
ridiculous. For finding it impossible that men should carry nothing at all
about them, to salve the matter they devised some nice absurdities. A man might
wear no nailed shooe^ on the Sabbath day, (...)
because the nails would be a burden: (...). that which a man did carry on one
shoulder only was a burden to him; not what he carried upon both, as Origin
informs us of them. So where they fonnd it in the Law, that thou shall do no
manner of work, they would have no work done, at all, no though it were to
save ones life: neither to heal the wounded, or to cure the sick, both which
they did object against Christ our Savior; nor finally to take sword in hand,
for the defense either of men's persons or their Country. And though their
rigor herein had been overruled by Mattathias, and that it was concluded
lawful to fight against their enemies on the Sabbath day; yet they f^und out a
way to elude this order: teaching the people this, that they might fight that
day against their enemies, if they were assaulted; but not molest them in their
preparations, for assault and battery. This is now made the meaning of the
former law, and this cost them dear. As good no Law at all, as so bad a
Comment.

(3) For when that Pompey warred against them, and besieged their Temple, he
quickly found on what foot they halted; and did accordingly make use of the
occasions, which they gave unto him. Had not the Ordinance of the Country, as
Josephus tells it, commanded us to keep the Sabbath, Antiq. Iud. l. 14. c. 8.
and do no labor on that day: the Romans never had been able to have raised
their Bulwarks. How so? (...) Because the Law permits us to defend our selves,
in case at any time we are assailed, and urged to fight; but not to set upon
them or disturb them, when they have other work in hand. Which when the
Romans found, says he, they neither gave assault, or proferd any skirmish on
the Sabbath days, but built their Towers and Bulwarks, and planted Engines
thereupon: and the next day put them in use against the Jews. It seems they
were not well resolved on the former point, whether they might defend
themselves on the Sabbath day, Hist. l. 56.
though they were assault^d. For on that day it was, that Pompey took the
City, and enslaved the people. So Dio tells us touching the use the Romans made
of that advantage; adds for the close of all, (...), that at the last they
were surprised upon the Saturday, not doing any thing in their own defense.
Strabo therein concurres with Dio, (...)
in making Saturday the day, but takes it for a solemn fast, (...), wherein it
is not lawful to do any work. And so it was a Fast indeed, but such a Fast as
fell that time upon the Sabbath. Josephus tells us only that the Temple was
taken in the third month, on a fasting day: Exerc. 16. 108.
which C^saubon conceives to be the seventh, and Scaliger the seventeenth of
the month called Tamur; Em. Temp. edit. 2. l. 3.
but both agree upon it, that it was the Sabbath. As for their fasting on that
day, it was permitted in this case, and in this case only, when as their City
was besieged; as before we showed. Yet could not this unfortunate rigor be
any warning to the Jews; but needs they must offend again in the self-same
kind. For just upon the same day seven and twenty years, the City was again
brought under by Sosius and Herod, who had then besieged it: in the same
month, and on the same day, L. 14.^ 24. l 49.
as Ios^phus t^ls it; (...), and on the day called Saturday, as Dion has it.
So fatal was it to the Jews, to perish in the folly of their superstitions.
The first of these two actions, is placed in Anno 3991. therefore the last,
being just 27 years after, must be 4018 of the Worlds Creation, Augustus Caesar
being then in the Triumvirate.

(4) By means of these two victories, the Jews being tributary to the Romans,
began to find admittance into their Dominions; in many places of the which
they began to plant, and filled at last whole Townships with their numerous
Families. Scarce any City of good note in Syria, and the lesser Asia, wherein
the Jews were not considerable for their numbers; and in the which, they had
not Synagogues for their devotions. So that the manner of their lives, and
forms of their Religion being once observed: the Roman people, many of them,
became affected to the rites of the Jewish worship, and amongst other
Ceremonies, to the Sabbath also. It was the custom of the Romans to
incorporate all Religions into their own; and worship those Gods whom before
they conquered: Et quos post cladem triumphatos colere co^perunt, in Minutius
words. Therefore the marveile is the less, that they were fond of something in
the Jews religion; though of all others they most hated that, as most rep^gnant
to their own. Yet many of them out of wantonness, and a love to novelties,
began to stand upon the Sabbath; some would be also circumcised; and abstain
from Swines flesh; others use Candlesticks and Tapers, as they saw the Jews.
(...)
The Satyrist thus scoffs them for it. Quidam sortiti metuentem Sabbata patrem,
Nil praeter nubes and coeli numen adorant,
Nec distare putant humana carne suillam,
Qua pater abstinust: mox and praeputia ponunt.
Some following him, the Sabbaths who devised,
Only the Clouds and Sky, for Gods adore;
Hating Swines flesh, as they did man's before
Cause he forbear it; and are circumcised.
Remember Persius taunteth them with their Sabbat^ recutita, as before we
noted. Now as the Poet did upbraid them with Circumcision, and forbearing
Swines flesh: Epist. 95.
so Seneca derides them for the Sabbaths, and their burning Tapers on the same,
as a thing unnecessary; neither the Gods being destitute of light, nor mortal
men in love with smoke. Accondere aliquam lucernam sabb^^^^ praecipiamus,
quoniam nec lumine dii egent, and ne homines quidem delectantur fuligine. Nay,
some of them bewail the same, and wish their Empire never had extended so
far as Iewrie, that so the Romans might not have been acqu^i^ted with these
superstitions of their Sabbaths. O utinam nunquam Iudaea subacta f^isset
Pompeii bellis, (...).
Imperioque ^iti.
Latius excisae gentis contagia serpunt,
Vict^resque suos nati^ victa pre^it.
O would Iudaea never had been won
By Pompeys armies, or Vespasians son.
Their superstition spreads it self so far,
That they give Laws unto the Conqueror.


Nor were the Sabbaths entertaind only in Rome it self. Some, in almost all
places of their Empire, were that way inclined; as Seneca most rightly noted.
Eo usque sceleratissimae gentis consuetudo invaluit, ut per omnes jam tarras
recepta sit, and victi victoribus leges dederunt. Saint Augustine so reports
him in his sixth Book de civitate. Cap. 1^.
And this is that, De mund. opi^.
which Philo means when as he calls the Sabbath (...), the general Festival
of all people: when he sots up this challenge against all the World, De vita
Mos. l. 2.
(...); etc. What man is there in all the World, who does not reverence this
our holy Sabbath, which brings rest and ease to all sorts of Men, Masters and
Servants, bond and free, yea, to the very brute beasts also. Not that they
knew the Sabbath by the light of nature, or had observed the same in all ages
past; but that they had admitted it in Philos time, as a Jewish ceremony. For
let Josephus be the Comment upon Philo's Text, and he will thus unfold his
meaning. The Laws, says he, established amongst us, have been imitated of
all other Nations: (...). Yea, L. 2. cont. Ap^on
and the common people did long since imitate our piety. Neither is there any
Nation Greek or Barbarous, to which our use of resting on the seventh day has
not spread it self: who also keep not Fasting days, and Lamps with lights;
and many of those Ordinances about meats and drinks, which are enjoynd us by
the Law. So far Josephus.

(5) These Romans, and what other Nations they were soever which did thus
Iudaize about the Sabbath; were many of them Proselytes, of the Jews, such as
had been admitted into that Religion: for it appears that they did also
worship the God of Heaven, and were circumci^^ cumcised, and abstained from
Swines flesh. Otherwise we may well believe that of their own accord they had
not bound themselves so generally to observe the Sabbath, being no parts nor
members of the Jewish state: considering that such strangers as lived amongst
them, not being circumcised nor within the Covenant, were not obliged so to do.
In Exodus ^0. qu. 14.
Tostatus tells us of two sorts of strangers amongst the Jews. The first, qui
adveniebat de Gentilitate and convertebatur ad Iudaismum, etc. who being
originally of the Gentiles had been converted to the religion of the Jews, and
was circumcised, and lived amongst them: and such were bound, says he, to
observe the Sabbath, and omnes observantias legis, and all other rites of the
Law of Moses. This is evident by that in the twelfth of Exodus, where it is
said, that every manservant bought with money, when he was circumcised should
eat the passover: but that the forreiner and hired servant (conceive it not
being circumcised) might not eat thereof. The other sort of strangers, were
such as lived amongst them only for a certain time, to trade and traffic or
upon any other business of what sort soever. And they, says he, were not
obliged by the Commandment to keep the Sabbath, quia non poterant cogi ad
aliquam observantiam l^galem, nisi vellent accipere circumcisionem: because
they could not be constrained to any legal ordinance, except they would be
circumcised, which was the door unto the rest. Finally, he resolves it thus,
that by the stranger within their gates, which by the Law were bound to observe
the Sabbath, were only meant such strangers de gentilitate ad Iudaismum
conversi, which had renounced their Gentilisme, and embraced the Religion of
the Jews. And he resolved it so, no doubt, according to the practice of the
Jews, amongst whom he lived; and to the doctrine of their Rabbis, amongst
whose writings he was very conversant. Lyra himself a Jew, and therefore one
who knew their customs as well as any, does affirm as much, and tells us that
the stranger, in the Law intended, Gentilis est conversus ad ritum Iudaeorum,
is such a stranger as had been converted to the Jewish Church. And this may yet
appear, in part, by the present practice of that people, who though themselves
milk not their Kine on the Sabbath day, Buxdo^f. Sy^agog. c. 1^.
permissum est and iis ut die Sabbatino dicant Christiano, etc. Yet they may
give a Chris^ian leave to perform that office; and then to buy the milk of
him for a toy, or trifle. Add here what formerly w^^ noted of their Servants.
Of whom we told you out of Rabbi Maimony, Chapter 3. n. 1.
that if they were not circumcised or baptiz^d, they were as sojourning
strangers, and may do work for themselves openly on the Sabbath, as any of
the Israelites might on a working day. By which it seems that strangers, yea,
and servants too, in case they were not circumcised, or otherwise initiated
into their Churches were not obliged to keep the Sabbath* Which plainly shows
that by the Jews themselves, the keeping of the Sabbath was not taken for a
moral Law; or to concern any but themselves and those of their religion
only. For had they took it for a part of the Law of Nature, as universally to
be observed as any other; they had not suffered it to be broke amongst them,
before their faces, and that without control or censure: no more, then they
would have p^rmitted a sojourning stranger to blaspheme their God, or publicly
to set up Idolatry, or without punishment to steal their goods, or destroy
their persons. The rather since their Sabbath had prevailed to far, as to be
taken up with other parts of their religion, in many principal Cities of the
Roman Empire: or otherwise by way of imitation, so much in use among the
Gentiles* And this I have the rather noted in this place and time, because that
in these times the Country of the Jews was most resorted to by all sorts of
strangers; and they themselves in favor with the Roman Emperors.

(5) Indeed these customs of the Jews did fly about the Roman Empire with a
swifter wing, by reason of that countenance which great Augustus Caesar did
show both to the men, P^^^lo, leg ad Caium.
and unto their Sabbath. First, for the men, he did not only suffer them to
enjoy the liberty of conscience in their own Country, and there to have their
Synagogues and public places of assembly, as before they had: but he
permitted them to inhabit a great part of Rome, and there to live according to
their Country laws* (...) and yet, says he, he knew that they had their
Prose^chas, or Oratories; that they assembled in the same, especially on the
holy Sabbaths; and finally, that there they were instructed in their own
religion. Then for the Sabbath, the Jews had anciently been accustomed, not to
appear in judgment either upon the Sabbath day, or the Eve before. Augustus
does confirm this pri^iledge, Ios. Antiq l. 16. c 10.
bestows upon their Sy^ag^g^es, the prerogative of Sanct^ary, enables them to
live according to the Laws of their own Country; and finally threatens severe
punishment on those, which should presume to do any thing against his Edict.
The tenor of which Edict is as follows. C^^sar Augustus Pont. Max. Trib.
Pleb. (...) gens semper ^^da and grata fuit populo Romans etc placet mihi de
(...) Senatus sententia, eos propriis uti legibus and ritibus, quibus utebantur
tempore Hyr^ani Pontifici^ Dei ma^im^* and eorum ^anis jus Asyli maner^, etc.
^eque cogi ad pr^standa v^dimonia sabbatis, aut pridie sabbatorum, post h^ram
nonam in Parasceve. Q^id si quis contra decretum ^^sus fuerit, gravi poena
m^^ctabitur. This Edict was set forth Anno 4045. and after many of that kind
were published in several Provinces, by Mark Agrippa, Prov^st General under
C^^sar: as also by Norbanus ^laccus, and Julius Antonius, Proconsuls at that
time; whereof see Josephus. Nay, Phil. legate* ad C^i^m.
when the Jews were grown so strict, that it was thought unlawful either to
give, or take an alms on the Sabbath day: Augustus* ^or his part, was willing
not to break them of it* yet so to order and dispose his bounties, that they
might be no loosers by so fond a strictness. For whereas he did use to
distribute monthly a certain donative, either in money or in corn: this
distribution sometimes happened on the Sabbath days, (...), as Philo has it,
whereon the Jews might neither give nor take, neither indeed do any thing that
did tend to sustenance. Therefore, says he, it was provided that their
proportion should be given them (...), on the next day after, that so they
might be made partakers of the public benefit. Not give nor take an Alms on
the Sabbath day? Their superstition sure was now very vehement; seeing it would
not suffer men to do the works of mercy, on the day of mercy. And therefore it
was more then time, they should be sent to school again, to learn this
lesson; I will have mercy and not sacrifice.

(6) And so indeed they were sent unto School to him, who in himself was both
the teacher and the truth. For at this time our Savior came into the world.
And had there been no other business for him to do: this only might have
seemed to require his presence; viz. to rectify those dangerous errors, which
had been spread abroad in these latter times, about the Sabbath. The service
of the Sabbath, in the congregation, he found full enough. The custom was, to
read a Section of the law, out of the Pentate^ch or five books of Moses; and
after to illustrate, or confirm the same, out of some parallel place amongst
the Prophets. That ended, if occasion were, and that the Rulers of the
Synagogue did consent unto it, there was a word of exhortation made unto the
people, conducing to obedience and the works of piety. So far it is apparent
by that passage in the Acts of the Apostles touching Paul, Ch^p. 13. 1^.
and Bar^abas: that being at Antioch in Pisidia, on the Sabbath day, after the
reading of the Law and Prophets* the Rulers of the Synagogue fent unto them,
saying, Ye men and brethr^n, if ye have any word of exhortation to speak unto
the people, dicite, say on. As for the Law (I note th^s only by the way) they
had divided it into 54* Sections, which they read over in the two and fifty
sabbaths: joining two of the shortest, twice, together, that so it might be
all read over within the year; beginning on the sabbath which next followed,
the feast of Tabernacles, ending on that which came before it. So far our
Savior found no fault, but rather countenanced and confirmed the custom, by
his gracious presence, and example. But in these rigid vanities, and absurd
traditions, by which the Scribes and Pharisees had abused the sabbath, and made
it of an ease to become a drudgerie; in those he thought it requisite to detect
their follies, and ease the people of that bondage, which they in their proud
humors had imposed upon them. The Pharisees had taught that it was unlawful
on the sabbath day, either to heal the impotent, or relieve the sick, or feed
the hungry: but he confutes them in them all, both by his Acts, and by his
disputations. Whatever ^e maintained by argument, he made good by practice. Did
they accuse his followers of gathering corn upon the Sabbath, being then an
hungered? he lets them know what David did in the same extremity. Their eating,
or their gathering on the Sabbath day, take you which you will, was not more
blameable, nay not so blameable by the law; as David's eating of the shewbread;
which plainly was not to be eat by any, but the Priest alone. The ^ures he did
upon the Sabbath, what were they more then which themselves did daily do, in
laying salves unto those Infants, whom on the Sabbath day they had circumcised.
His bidding of the impotent man to take up his bed, and get him gone, which
seemed so odious in their eyes* was it so great a toil, as to walk round the
walls of Hiericho, and bear the Arc upon their shoulders? or any greater
burden to their idle backs, then to lift up the ^xe, and set him free out of
that dangerous ditch, into the which the hasty ^east might fall as well upon the
Sabbath, as the other days? Should men take care of oxen and not God of man?
Not so. The Sabbath was not made for a lazy idol, which all the Nations of
the world should fall down, and worship: but for the ease and comfort of the
laboring man, that he might have some time to refresh his spirits. Sabbatum
propter hominem factum est, the Sabbath, says our Savior, was made for man;
man was not made to serve the Sabbath. Nor had God so irrevocablie spoke the
word, touching the sanctifying of the Sabbath, that he had left himself no
power to repeal that Law; in case he saw the purpose of the Law perverted: the
Son of man, even he that was the Son both of God and Man, being Lord also
of the Sabbath. Nay it is rightly marked by some, that Christ our Savior did
more works of charity on the Sabbath day, then all days else. Zanchius
observes it out of Irenaeus, In Mandat ^.
Saepius multo Christum in die Sabbati praestitisse opera charitatis, quam in
aliis diebus; and his note is good. Not that there was some urgent and extreme
necessity; either the Cures to be performed that day, or the man to perish.
For if we look into the story of our Saviors actions, we find no such
matter. It Is true, that the Centurions son, and Peter's mother in law, were
even sick to death: and there might be some reason in it, why he should haste
unto their Cures on the Sabbath day. But on the other side, the man that had
the withered hand, Matthew. 13. and the woman with her flux of blood eighteen
years together, Luke 13. he that was troubled with the dropsy, Luke 14. and
the poor wretch which was afflicted with the palsy, Ioh. 5. in none of these
was found any such necessity, but that the cure might have been respited to
another day. What then? Shall it be thought our Savior came to destroy the
Law? No. God forbid. Himself has told us, that he came to fulfill it rather.
He came to let them understand the right meaning of it, that for the residue of
time wherein it was to be in force, they might no longer be misled by the
Scribes and Pharisees, and such blind guides as did abuse them. Thus have I
briefly summed together, what I find scattered in the writings of the ancient
Fathers: which who desires to find at large, may look into Ire^aeus, li. 4.
ca. 19. and 20. Origin. in Number* hom. 23. Tertull. li. 4. contr. Marcion.
Athanas. hom. de Semente. p. 10^1. and 1072. edit. gr. lat. Victor Antioch*
cap. 3. in Mar^um. Chrysostom. hom. 39. in Matthew. 12. Epiphan. li. 1. haeres. 30.
n. 32. Hierom. in Matthew. 12. Ambros. in cap. 3. Luke li. 3. Augustine. cont.
Faustum. li. 16. ca. 28. and lib. 19. ca 9. to descend no lower. With one of
which last Fathers sayings, Cont. Adimant. ca. 2.
we conclude this list, Non ergo Dominus rescindit Scripturam Vet. Test, sed
cogit intelligi. Our Saviors purpose, says the Father, was not to take away
the Law, but to expound it.

(7) Not then to take away the Law; it was to last a little longer. He had not
yet pronounced, Consummatum est, that the Law was abrogated. Nor might it seem
so proper for him, to take away one Sabbath from us, which was rest from
labor; until he had provided us of another, which was rest from sin. And to
provide us such a Sabbath was to cost him dearer, then words and arguments. He
healed us by his word before. Now he must heal us by his stripes, or else no
entrance into his rest, the eternal Sabbath. Besides the Temple stood as yet,
and whilst that stood, or was in hope to be rebuilt, there was no end to be
expected of the legal ceremonies. The Sabbath, and the Temple did both end
together; and which is more remarkable, on a Sabbath day. The Jews were still
sick of their old disease, and would not stir a foot on the Sabbath day,
beyond their compass: no, though it were to save their Temple, and in that
their Sabbath. or whatsoever else was most dear unto them. Nay they were more
superstitious now, then they were before. For whereas in the former times it
had been thought unlawful, to take arms and make war on the Sabbath day,
Ios^ph. de bello. li. 4. ca 4.
unless they were assaulted and their lives danger: now (...) it was
pronounced unlawful even to treat of peace. A fine contradiction. Agrippa
laid this home unto them, when first they entertained a rebellious purpose
against the Romans, (...), etc. Id. li. 2. c. 1^.
If you observe the custom of the Sabbaths, and in them do nothing, it will be
no hard matter to bring you under: for so your Ancestors found in their wars
with Pompey, who ever deferred his works until that day, wherein his enemies
were idle and made no resistance. (...), etc. If on the other side you take
arms that day, then you transgress your country laws, your selves* and so I
see no cause why you should rebel. Where note, Agrippa calls the sabbath, a
custom, and their Country law; which makes it evident that they thought it
not any L^w of Nature. Now what Agrippa said, did in fine fall out: the City
being taken on the sabbath day, as Ios. Scaliger computes it; or the Parasc^ve
of the sabbath, as Rab. Ioses has determined. Most likely that it was on the
sabbath day it self. For Dion speaking of this war, and of this taking of
the City, Lib 65.
conclud^s it thus. Lib 65.
(...). Jerusalem, says he, was taken on the Saturday, which the Jews most
reverence till this day. Thus fell the Temple of the Jews, and with it all the
ceremonies of the Law of Moses. Demonst. l. 1. c. 6
Since when, according as Eusebius tells us, (...), etc. It is not lawful for
that people, either to sacrifice according to the law, or to build a Temple, or
erect an Altar, to consecrate their Priests, or anoint their Kings: (...), or
finally to hold their solemn assemblies, or any of their Festivals ordained by
Moses.

(8) For that the sabbath was to end with other legal ceremonies, is by this
apparent, first that it was an institute of Mosos, and secondlly an institute
peculiar to the Jewish Nation; both which we have already proved: and therefore
was to end with the law of Moses, and the state of Iewrie. Fathers there be
good store, which affirm as much: some of the which shall be produced to
express themselves, that we may see what they conceived of the abrogation of
the Sabbath. And first for Justin Martyr, it is his chief scope and purpose in
his conference with Trypho; Dial. cum Tryp^on.
to make it manifest and unquestionable, that as there was no use of
circumcision before Abraham's time, nor of the Sabbath until Moses, (...), ^o
neither is there any use of them at this present time: that as it took
beginning then, so it was now to have an end. T^rtullian in his argument
against the Marci^^^^es, draws out this conclusion, Adv. Marc. l 2.
Ad ^empus and praesentis cause nec^ssitatem convaluisse, non ad perpetui
temporis observationem; that God ordained the Sabbath upon spe^iall reasons,
and as the times did then require, not that it should continue always. Hom. de
Sab. and circum.
S. Atha^^si^s thus discourses. When God, says he, had finished the first
creation, he did betake himself to rest, (...), etc. and therefore those of
that creation did celebrate their Sabbath on the seventh day. But the
accomplishment of the new creature has no end at all, and therefore God still
works, as the Gospel teaches. Hence is it, that we keep no Sabbath, as the
ancients did, expecting an eternal Sabbath, which shall have no end. That of
S. Ambrose, Synagoga diem observat; ecclesia immortalitatem, comes most near
to this. Epist. 72. l. 9.
But he that speaks most fully to this point, is the great S. Austin, what he
says, shall be delivered under three several heads. First, that the Sabbath
is quite abrogated; Tempore gratiae revelatae, observatio illa Sabbati, quae
unius di^i vacatione figurabatur, ablata est ab observatione fidelium: The
keeping of the Sabbath is taken utterly away in this time of Grace. De Genesis ad
lit. l. 4. c. 13. See the like, ad Boni^ac. l. 3. Tom. 7. contr. Faust. Man. l.
6. c. 4. Qu. ex N. Test 69. Secondly, that the Sabbath was not kept in the
Church of Christ; In illis december praeceptis, excepta sabbati observatione,
dicatur mihi quid non sit observandum a Christiano. de sp. and lit. c. 14. What
is there (says the Father) in all the Decalogue, except the keeping of the
sabbath, which is not punctually to be observed of every Christian. More of the
like occurres ^e Genesi contr. Manich. l. 1. c* 22. contr. Adimant. ca 2. Qu.
in Exodus l. 2 qu. 173. And thirdly, that it i^ not lawful for a Christian to
observe the sabbath. De V^^. (...) c. 3.
For speaking of the law, how it was a p^edagogue to bring us unto the
knowledge of Christ, he adds, that in those institutes and ordinances, Quibus
Christianis uti fas non est, quale est sab^atum, circumcisio, sacrificia, etc.
which are not lawful to be used by any Christian, such as are the sabbath,
circumcision, sacrifices, and such other things; many great mysteries were
contained. And in another place, Quisquis diem illum observat, sicut litera
fonat, D^ Sp. and l. ^. c. 14.
carnaliter sapit. Sapere autem secundum carnem mors est. He that does
literally* keep the sabbath, savours of the flesh: but to savor of the flesh
is death: Therefore no sabbath to be kept by the sons of life.

(9) No Sabbath to be kept at all? We affirm not so. We know there is a
Christian Sabbath, a Sabbath figured out unto us in the fourth Commandment,
which every Christian man must keep, that does desire to enter into the rest
of God. This is that Sabbath which the Proph^t Isaiah has commended to us.
Blessed is the man that keeps the sabbath from polluting it. Quid autem
sabbatum est quod praecipit observandum, etc. What sabbath is it, says S.
Hierome, that is here commanded. The following words, says he, will inform us
that, keeping our hands from doing evil. This is the sabbath here commanded,
Si bona faciens quiescat a malis, if doing what is good we do rest from sin.
Nor was this his conceit alone; the later writers of expound it. The Prophet in
this place, says Ryvet, In D^^^log.
thus prophecies of the Chruch of Christ, Blessed is the man that keeps the
sabbath from polluting it, and keeps his hands from doing any evil. Vbi
custodire sabbatum in Ecclesia Christiana, est custodire manus suo^ a malo. And
in these words, says he, to keep a sabbath in a Christian Church, is only to
preserve our hands from doing evil. The like spiritual sabbath does the man
of God prescribe unto us, in the 58. Chapter of his book. If thou turn away
thy foot from the sabbath, Verse ^3. 14.
from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, etc. not doing thine own way, nor
finding thine own pleasure, nor speaking thine own words: then shall thou
delight thy self in the Lord, and I will cause thee to ride upon the high
places of the earth, etc. What says S. Hierome unto this? It must be
understood, says he, spiritually. Ali^quin si haec tantum prohibentur in
sabbato, In lo^^m*
ergo in aliis sex diebus tribuit ur nobis libertas delinque^di. For otherwise,
if those things above remembered, are prohibited only on the sabbaths, then
were it lawful for us on the other days, to follow our own sinful courses,
speak our own idle words, and pursue our own voluptuous pleasures; which
were most foolish to imagine. And so says Ryvet too for the modern writers,
Perpetuam ab omnibus operibus nostris vitiosis cessationem, etc. In Decalog.
That everlasting rest from all sinful works, which is begun in this life,
here; and finished in the life to come; is signified and represented by those
words of Isaiah, ca. 58. They therefore much mistake these Texts, and the
meaning of them, who grounding thereupon, forbid all manner of recreations and
lawful pleasures, on their supposed sabbath day; as being utterly prohibited
by Gods holy Prophet. M ^^mon. ap. Ai^s. in Ex* 20.
The Jews did thus abuse this Scripture, in the times before: and made it an
unlawful matter, for any man to walk into the fields, or to see his gardens
on the sabbath day; either to mark what things they wanted, or how well they
prospered: because this was to do his own pleasure, and so forbidden by the
Prophet. But those that understand the true Christian sabbath, apply them to a
better purpose; as was showed before. And for the Christian sabbath, what it
is, and in what things it does consist, besides what has been said already,
we shall add something more from the ancient Fathers. If any man, says
Justin Martyr, that has been formerly a perjured person, Dial. ^um T^yphon.
a deceiver of his Neighbors, an incontinent liver, repents him of his sins,
and amends his life: (...), that man does keep a true and holy Sabbath to the
Lord his God. See to this purpose also, Clemens of Alexandria, Strom. l. 4. So
Origin, Tr^ct 19 in Math.
Omnis qui vivit in Christo semper in sabbatis vivit; That man, whose life is
hid with Christ in God, keeps a daily Sabbath. See to that purpose, Hom. 23. in
Numbers. Him. ^5.
Macarius tells us also that the Sabbath given from God by Moses, was a Type
only and a shadow of that real Sabbath, Hom. 39. in Math. 12.
(...), given by the Lord unto the soul. More fully Chrysostom, (...), etc.
What use, says he, is there of a Sabbath to him whose conscience is a
continual feast, to him whose conversation is in Heaven. For now we feast it
every day, doing no manner of wickedness, but keeping a spiritual rest,
holding our hands from covetousness, our bodies from uncleanness. What need
we more? The Law of righteousness contains ten Commandments. The first, to
know one God; the second to abstain from Idols; the third not to profane Gods
Name; Hom 49. in Ma^h. 24.
the fourth Sabbatum celebrare spirituale, to keep the true spiritual
Sabbath, etc. So he that made the Opus imperfectum, on Saint Matthews Gospel.
Saint Augustine finally makes the fourth Commandment, De conven. 10. p^aec and
10. p^a^arum.
so far as it concerns us Christians to be no more then requies cordis, and
tranquillitas mentis quam facit bona conscientia, the quiet of the heart, and
the peace of mind, occasioned by a good conscience. Of any other Sabbath to
be looked for now, the Fathers utterly are silent: and therefore we may well
resolve, there is no such thing.

(10) Yet notwithstanding this, the Jews still dote upon their Sabbath, and
that more sottishly, and with more superstition far then they ever did. A
view whereof I shall present, and so conclude the first part of this present
argument. And first for the Parasceves or their Eues, Buxdorfius thus informs
us of their vain behavior. Die Veneris singuli ungues de digitis abscindunt,
etc. On Friday in the afternoon they pare their nails, and whet their knives,
Synag. Iu^^. c. 10
and lay their holyday-clothes in readiness for the reception of Queen
Sabbath, for so they call it: and after lay the cloth, and set on their meat,
that nothing be to be done upon the morrow. About the evening goes the Sexton
from door to door, commanding all the people to abstain from work, and to make
ready for the Sabbath. That done they take no work in hand. Only the women,
when the Sun is near its setting, light up their Sabbath-lamps in their
dining rooms; and stretching out their hands toward them, give them their
blessing and depart. To morrow they begin their Sabbath very early, and for
entrance thereunto, array themselves in their best clothes, and their ri^hest
jewels: it being the conceit of Rabbi Solomon, that the memento in the front of
the fourth Commandment was placed there especially, to put the Jews in mind
of their holy day Garments. Nay so precise they are in these preparations, and
the following rest, that if a Jew go forth on Friday, and on the night falls
short of home more then is lawful to be travailed on the Sabbath day, there
must he set him down, and there keep his Sabbath; though in a Wood, or in the
Field, or the highway side; without all fear of wind or weather, of Thieves
or Robbers; without all care also of meat and drink. Periculo la^ronum
praedonumque omni, penuria item omni cibi potusque neglectis, as that Author
has it. For their behavior on the Sabbath, and the strange niceties where
with they abuse themselves, he describes it thus. Id. cap. 11.
Equus aut asinus Domini ipsius stabulo exiens, froenum aut capistrum non aliud
quicquam portabit, etc. An horse may have a bridle or an halter to lead, not a
saddle to lead him: and he that leads him must not let it hang so loose,
that it may seem he rather carries the bridle, then leads the Horse. An
Hen must not wear her hose sowed about her leg. They may not milk their
Kine, nor eat any of the milk though they have procured some Christian to do
that work, unless they buy it. A Taylour may not wear his Needle sticking on
his sleeve. The lame may use a staff, but the blind may not. They may not
burden themselves with Clogges or Pattens, to keep their feet out of the
dirt: nor rub their Shoes, if foul, against the ground; but against a wall:
nor wipe their durtie hands with a cloth or Towell; but with a Cowes or Horses
tail they may do it lawfully. A wounded man may wear a plaster on his sore,
that formerly was applied unto it: but if it fall off, he may not lay it on
anew, or bind up any wound that day, nor carry money in their purses, or about
their clothes. They may not carry a fan or flap to drive away the Flies. If a
Flea bite, they may remoove it, but not kill it; but a Lowse they may: yet
Rabbi Eliezer thinks one may as lawfully kill a Camel. They must not fling
more Corn unto their Poultry then will serve that day: lest it may grow by
lying still, and they be said to sow their Corn upon the Sabbath. To whistle
a tune with ones mouth, or play it on an instrument, is unlawful utterly: as
also to knock with the ring or hammer of a door; or knock ones hand upon a
table, though it be only to still a child. So likewise, to draw letters
either in dust or ashes, or on a wet board is prohibited; but not to fancy
them in the air. With many other infinite absurdities of the like poor
nature; wherewith the Rabbis have been pleased to afflict their brethren, and
make good sport to all the World, which are not either Jews, or Iewis^ly
affected. Nay, to despite our Savior, as Buxdorfius tells us, they have
determined since, that it is unlawful to lift the Ox or Ass out of the
ditch; which in the strictest time of the Pharisaicall rigours, was accounted
lawful. Indeed the marvel is the less, that they are so uncharitable to
poor Brut^ creatures; when as they take such little pity upon themselves.
Crantzi^^ reports a story of a Jew of Magdeburg, who falling on the Saturday
into a Prioy, would not be taken out, because it was the Sabbath day: and that
the Bishop gave command, that there he should continue on the Sunday also, so
that between both the poor Jew was poisoned with the very stink. The like
our Annals do relate of a Jew of Tewkesbury, whose story being cast into three
riming Verses, according to the Poetry of those times. I have here presented
and translated; Dialog^ewise, as they first made it. Tend manus Solomon, ut te
de stercore tollam.
Sabbata nostra colo, de stercore surgere nolo.
Sabbata nostra quidem, Solomon celebrabis ibidem.
Friend Solomon, thy hands up-reare,
And from the jakes I will thee bear.
Our Sabbath I so highly prize,
That from the place I will not rise.
Then Solomon, without more ado,
Our Sabbath thou shall keep there too.
For the continuance of their sabbath, as they begin it early on the day
before; so they prolong it on the day till late at night. And this they do in
pity to the souls in Hell; w^o all the while the Sabbath lasts, have free
leave to play. For as they tell us silly wretches, upon the Eve before the
Sabbath, it is proclaimed in Hell, that every one may go his way, and take his
pleasure: and when the Sabbath is concluded, they are recalled again to the
house of torments. I am ashamed to meddle longer in these trifles, these
dreams and dotages of infatuated men, given over to a reprobate sense. Nor had
I stood so long upon them, but that in this Anatomy of the Jewish follies, I
might let some amongst us see into what dangers they are falling. For there are
some, indeed too many, who taking this for granted, which they cannot prove,
that the Lords Day succeeds into the place and rights of the Jewish sabbath,
and is to be observed by virtue of the fourth Commandment: have trenched too
near upon the Rabbis, in binding men to nice and scrupulous observances;
which neither we nor our Forefathers were ever able to endure. But with what
warrant they have made a sabbath day, in the Christian Church, where there was
never any known in all times before; or upon what authority they have
presumed to lay heavy burdens upon the consciences of poor men, which are
free in Christ: we shall the better see by tracing down the story from our
Saviors time, unto the times in which we live. But I will here set down and
rest, beseeching God, who enabled me thus far, to guide me onwards to the
end. Tu qui principio medium, medio adjice finem.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.

The second Book.

From the first preaching of the Gospel, to these present times.

By Pet. Heylyn.

COLOSS. 2. 16, 17.

Let no man judge you in meat or in drink, or in respect of an holy day, or
of the new Moon, or of the SABBATH days: which are a shadow of things to
come, but the body is of Christ.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper, for Henry Seyle, at the Tigers head in Saint
Paul's Churchyard. 1636.

To the Christian Reader.
ANd such I hope to meet with, in this point especially: which treating of the
affairs of the Christian Church, cannot but be displeasing unto t^em, which
are not Christianly affected. Our former Book we destinated to the Jewish part
of this enquiry: wherein, though long it was before we found it, yet at the
last we found a Sabbath. A Sabbath which began with that state and Church, and
ended also when they were no longer to be called a Nation; but a dispersed and
scattered ruin of what once they were. In that which follows, our inquiry
must be more diffused, of the same latitude with the Church; a Church not
limited and confined to some Tribes and Kindreds, but generally spreading over
all the world. We may affirm it of the Gospel, what Florus sometimes said of
the state of Rome. Ita late per orbem terrarum arma circumtulit, ut quires ejus
legunt, non unius populi, sed generis humani facta discunt. The history of the
Church, and of the World, are of like extent. So that the search herein, as
unto me it was more painf^ll in the doing* so unto thee will it be more
pleasing being done; because of that variety which it will afford thee. And
this Part we have called the History of the Sabbath too: although the
institution of the Lords Day, and entertainment of the same in all times and
Ages since that insti^ution, be the chief thing whereof it treats. For being
it is said by some that the Lords Day succeeded, by the Lords appointment, into
the place and rights of the Jewish Sabbath; so to be ca^^ed, and so to be
observed, as the Sabbath was: this book was wholly to b^ spent in the search
thereof, whether in all, or any Ages of the Church, either such doctrine had
bin preached, or such practice pressed upon the conscience of Gods people. And
search indeed we did with all care and diligence, to see if we could find a
Sabbath, in any evidence of Scripture, or writings of the holy Fathers, or
Edicts of Emperors, or Decrees of Councels: or finally in any of the public
Acts and Monuments of the Christian Church. But after serverall searches made
upon the alias, and the pluries, we still return, Non est inventus: and
thereupon resolve in the Poets language, Et quod invenis usquam, esse putes
nusquam; that which is no where to be found, may very strongly be concluded not
to be at all Buxdorfius in the 11. Chapter of his Synagoga Iudaica, out of
Antonius Margarita, tells us of the Jews, quod die sabbatino, praeter animam
consu^tam, praediti sunt and alia; that on the Sabbath day, they have an
extraordinary soul infused into them, which does enlarge their hearts, and
rowze up their spirits, Vt Sabbatum multo honorabilius peragere possint, that
they may celebrate the Sabbath with the greater honor. And though this
sabbatarie soul, may by a Pythagoricall (...), seem to have transmigrated
from the Jews, into the bodies of some Christians in these later days: yet I
am apt to give my self good hopes, that by presenting to their view, the
constant practice of Gods Church in all times before, and the consent of all
Gods Churches at this present; they may be dispossessed thereof without great
difficulty. It is but anima superflua, as Buxdorfius calls it; and may be better
spared, then kept, because superfluous. However I shall easily persuade my
self, that by this general representation of the estate and practice of the
Church of Christ, I may confirm the wavering, in a right persuasion; and
assure such as are already well affected, by showing them the perfect harmony
and agreement, which is between this Church and the purest times. It is our
constant prayer to almighty God, as well that he would strengthen such as do
stand, and confirm the weak, as to raise up those men which are fallen into
sin and error. As are our prayers, such should be also our endeavors; as
universal to all sorts of men, as charitable to them in their several cases
and distresses. Happy those men, who do aright discharge their duties, both in
their prayers, and their performance. The blessing of our labors we must leave
to him, who is all in all: without whom all Paul's planting, and Apollos
watering, will yield poor increase. In which of these three states soever thou
art, good Christian Reader, let me be seech thee kindly to accept his pains;
which for thy sake were undertaken: that so be might, in some poor measure, be
an instrument, to strengthen or confirm, or raise thee, as thy case requires.
This is the most that I desire, and less then this thou could not do, did I
not desire it. And so fare thee well.

THE HISTORY OF THE SABBATH.
The second Book.
CHAP. I.
That there is nothing found in Scripture, touching the keeping of the LORDS
DAY.
(1) The Sabbath not intended for a perpetual ordinance. (2) Preparatives unto
the dissolution of the Sabbath, by our Savior Christ. (3) The Lords day not
enjoined in the place thereof, either by Christ, or his Apostles: but
instituted by the authority of the Church. (4) Our Saviors resurrection on the
first day of the week and apparitions on the same, make it not a Sabbath. (5)
The coming down of the Holy Ghost upon the first day of the week, makes it
not a Sabbath. (6) The first day of the week not made a Sabbath, more than
others, by Saint Peter, Saint Paul, or any other of the Apostles. (7) Saint
Paul frequents the Synagogue, on the Jewish Sabbath; and upon what reasons. (8)
What was concluded against the Sabbath, in the Council holden in Hieru^alem.
(9) The preaching of Saint Paul at Troas, upon the first day of the week, no
argument, that then that day was set apart by the Apostles, for religious
exercises. (10) Collections, on the first day of the week, 1. Cor. 16. conclude
as little for that purpose. (11) Those places of Saint Paul, Galat. 4. 10.
Coloss. 2. 16. do prove invincibly, that there is no Sabbath to be looked for.
(12) The first day of the week not called the Lords day, until the end of this
first age: and what that title adds unto it.

(1) We showed you in the former book what did occur about the Sabbath, from
the Creation of the World to the destruction of the Temple: which comprehended
the full time of 4000 years and upwards, in the opinion of the most and best
Chronologers. Now for five parts of eight, of the time computed, from the
Creation to the Law, being in all 2540 years and somewhat more; there was no
Sabbath known at all. And for the fifteen hundred, being the remainder, it
was not so observed by the Jews themselves, as if it had been any part of the
Law of Nature: but sometimes kept, and sometimes broken; either according as
men's private businesses, or the affairs of the republicke, would give way unto
it. Never such conscience made thereof, as of adultery, murder, blasphemy, or
idolatry; no not when as the Scribes and Pharisees had most made it
burdensome: there being many casus reservati, wherein they could dispense with
the fourth Commandment, though not with any of the other. Had they been all
alike, equally natural and moral, as it is conceived; they had been all alike
observed, all alike immutable: no jot nor syllable of that law, which was
ingraft by nature in the soul of man, being to fall unto the ground, Luk 16.
17.
till heaven and earth shall pass away, and decay together; till the whole
frame of Nature, for preservation of the which that Law was given, be dissolved
for ever. The Abrogation of the Sabbath which before we spoke of, shows plainly
that it was no part of the Moral law, or Law of Nature: there being no law
natural, Contr. Marc. l. 2
which is not perpetual. Tertullian takes it for confessed, or at least makes it
plain and evident, Temporale fuisse mandatum quod quand^que cessaret, that it
was only a temporary constitution, which was in time to have an end. c. 16.
And after him, Procopius Gaz^eus, in his notes on Exodus, lays down two
several sorts of laws, whereof some were to be perpetual, and some were not:
of which last sort were Circumcision, and the Sabbath, Quae d^raverunt usque in
adventum Christi, which lasted till our Saviors coming; and he being come, I^
Col. 2 16.
went out insensibly of themselves. For as S. Ambrose rightly tells us, Absente
imperatore imag^ ejus habet autoritatem, praesente non habet, etc. What time
the Emperor is absent, we give some honor to his State, or representation;
but none at all, when he is present. And so, says he, the Sabbaths, and
new-moones, and the other festivals, before our Saviors coming, had a time of
honor, during the which they were observed: but he being present once, they
became neglected. But he^eof we have spoke more fully in our former book.

(2) Neglected, not at once, and upon the sudden; but leasurely and by degrees.
There were preparatives unto the sabbath, as before we showed, before it was
proclaimed, as a Law, by Moses: and there were some preparatives required,
before that law of Moses was to be repealed. These we shall easiliest discover,
if we shall please to look on our Saviors actions: who gave the first hint
unto his disciples, for the abolishing of the sabbath, amongst other
ceremonies. It Is true, that he did frequently repair unto the synagogues on
the sabbath days; and on those days, did frequently both read and expound
the Law unto the people. Luke 4. 16.
And he came to Nazareth, says the Text, where he had been brought up, and as
his custom was, he went into the Synagogue on the sabbath day, and stood up to
read. It was his custom so to do, both when he lived a private life, to
frequent the Synagogue; that other men might do the like, by his good example:
and after when he undertook the ministry, to expound the Law unto them,
there; that they might be the better by his good instructions. Yet did not be
conceive that teaching or expounding the word of God, was annexed only to the
Synagogue, or to the sabbath. That most divine and heavenly Sermon, which takes
up three whole Chapters of S. Matthews Gospel, was questionless a week days
work: and so were most of those delivered to us in S. John; as also that,
which he did preach unto them from the ship-side, and diverse others. Nay the
text tells us, Luk 8. 1.
that he went through every City and Village, preaching, and showing the glad
tidings of God. Too great a task to be performed only on the sabbath days:
and therefore doubt we not, but that all days equally were taken up, for so
great a business. So when he sent out his Apostles to prea^h the kingdom of
God, he bound them not to days and times, but left all at libertie^ that they
might take their best advantages, as occasion was; and lose no time in the
advancing of their Masters service. Now as in this, he seemed to give all days
the like prerogative, with the sabbath; so many other ways, did he abate that
estimation, which generally the people had conceived of the sabbath day. And
howsoever the opinion which the people generally had conceived thereof, was
grounded, as the times then were, on superstition rather, then true sense of
piety: yet that opinion once abated, it was more easily prepared for a
dissolution; and went away at last, with less noise and clamor. Particulars
of this nature we will take along, as they l^e in order. His casting out the
unclean spirit out of a man, in the Synagogue of Capernaum, on the Sabbath
day, his curing of Peter's wives mother, and healing many which were sick of
diverse diseases on the self same day: being all works of mavelous mercy, and
effected only by his word, brought no clamor with them. But when he cured the
impotent man at the poole of Bethesda; Ioh. 5.
and had commanded him to take up his bed and walk; then did the Jews begin to
persecute him, and seek to slay him. And how did he excuse the matter? Hom.
23. in Numer.
My Father works hitherto, says he, and I also work: O^tendens per haec in
nullo seculi hujus Sabbate requiescere Deum, a dispensationibus mundi, and
provisionibus generis humani. Whereby, says Origin, he let them understand,
that there was never any Sabbath wherein God rested or left off, from having a
due care of mankind: and therefore neither would he intermit such a weighty
business, in any reference to the Sabbath. Which answer when it pleased them
not, but that they sought their times to kill him; he then remembers them how
they upon the sabbath used to circumcise a man, Ioh. 7.
and that as lawfully he might do the one, as they the other. This precedent
made his disciples a little bolder, then otherwise perhaps they would have
been; Matthew. 12.
Pulling the ears of corn, and rubbing them with their hands, and eating them
to satisfy and allay their hunger: Li 1. ^ae^es. 30. n. 32.
which Epiphanius thinks they would not have done, though they were an hungered,
had they not found both by his doctrine and example, that the Sabbath did begin
to be in it is declination. For which, when he, and they, were jointly
questioned by the Pharisees, he choaks them with the instances of what David
did in the same extremity, when he eat the shewbread; and what the Priests
did every sabbath, when they slew the sacrifices. In which it is to be
considered, that in these several defenses, our Savior goes no higher then
the legal ceremonies, the sacrifice, the shewbread, and the Circumcision. No
argument or parallel case drawn for his justification, from the moral law;
or any such neglect thereof on the like occasions. Which plainly shows, that he
conceived the sabbath to be no part or member of the moral law; but only to
be ranked amongst the Mosaicall ordinances. Luke 6. ^.
It happened on another Sabbath, that in the synagogue he beheld a man with a
withered hand; Hom de Semente.
and called him forth, and made him come into the midst, and stretch out his
hand, and then restored it. Hereupon Athan* notes, (...), that Christ reserved
his greatest miracles for the Sabbath day: and that he bade the man stand
forth, in de^iance as it were of all their malice, and informing humor. His
healing of the woman which had been crooked 18. years, and of the man that
had the dropsy; one in the synagogue, the other in the house of a principal
Pharisee, are proof sufficient that he feared not their accusatio^s. Ioh. 9.
But that great cure he wrought on him that was born blind, is most remarkable
to this purpose. First in relation to our Savior, who had before healed others
with his word alone; but here he spit upon the ground, and made clay thereof,
and anointed the eyes of the blind man with the clay: (...), L. 1. H^^res. 30.
^. ^2.
but to mould clay and make a plaster, was questionless a work, so says
Epiphanius. Next in relation to the patient, whom he commanded to go into the
poole of Siloam, and then wash himself: which certainly could not be done
without bodily labor. These words and actions of our Savior, as before we
said, gave the first hint to his disciples for the abolishing of the Sabbath,
amongst other ceremonies; which were to have an end, with our Saviors
sufferings; to be nailed with him, to his Cross, and buried with him, in his
grave, for ever. Now where it was objected in S. Austins time, why Christians
did not keep the Sabbath, since Christ affirms it of himself, that he came
not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it: the Father thereto makes reply, that
therefore they observed it not, Co^t. Faust. l. 19. c. 9.
Quia quod ea figura profitebatur, jam Christus implevit, because our Savior
had fulfilled what ever was intended in that Law, by calling us to a spiritual
rest, Lib. 1 ^aer 30* ^. 32.
in his own great mercy. For as it is most truly said by Epiphanius, (...),
etc. He was the great and everlasting Sabbath, whereof the less (and
temporal) Sabbath was a type and figure, which had continued till his coming:
by him commanded in the law; in him destroyed, and yet by him fulfilled in the
holy Gospel. So Epiphanius.

(3) Neither did he, or his disciples, ordain another Sabbath in the place of
this, as if they had intended only to shift the day; and to transfer this
honor to some other time. Their doctrine and their practice are directly
contrary, to so new a fancy. It Is true, that in some tract of time, the Church
in honor of his resurrection, did set apart that day on the which he rose, to
holy exercises: but this upon their own authority, and without warrant from
above, that we can hear of; more then the general warrant which God gave his
Church, that all things in it be done decently, Hom. de Seme^^re.
and in comely order. This is that which is told us by Athanasius, (...), we
honor the Lords day for the resurrection. Hom. 3. de Pente^os^.
So Maximus Taurinensis, Dominicum diem ideo solen^em esse, quiain eo salvatur,
velut soloriens, discussis infernorum tenebris, luce resurrectionis emicueri^;
That the Lords day is therefore solemnly observed, because thereon our
^aviour, like the rising Sun, dispelled the clouds of hellish darkness, by
the light of his most glorious resurrection. ^p 119.
The like S. Austin, Dies Dominica^ Christianis resurrectione Domini declaratus
est, and ex (...) cepit habere festivitatem suam. The Lords day was made
known, says he, unto us Christians, by the resurrection; and from that began
to be accounted holy. See the like, lib. 22. de Civit. Dei. c. 30. and sermon.
15. de Verbis A^stoli. But then it is withal to be observed, that this was
only done on the authority of the Church, and not by any precept of our Lord
and Savior, or any one of his Apostles. And first, besides that there is no
such prece^^ extant at all in holy Scripture, Li 5 C. 22.
Socrates has affirmed it in the general, (...), etc. that the designs of
the Apostles was not to busy themselves in prescribing festival days, but to
instruct the people in the ways of godliness. Now lest it should be said,
that Socrates being a Nov^tian, was a professed enemy to all the orders of the
Church: we have the same, De Sabb. and ^ (...).
almost verbatim, in Nicephorus, li. 12. cap. 32. of his Ecclesiastical
History. S. Athanas^us says as much, for the particular of the Lords day, that
it was taken up by a voluntary usage in the Church of God, without any
commandment from above. (...), etc. As, says the Father, it was commanded at
the first, that the Sabbath day should be observed, in memory of the
accomplishment of the world: (...), so do we celebrate the Lords day, as a
memorial of the beginning of a new creation. Where note the difference here
delivered by that Reverend Prelate. Of the Jews Sabbath it is said, (...), that
it was commanded to be kept: but of the Lords day there is no commandment,
only a positive (...), an honor voluntarily afforded it by consent of men
Therefore whereas we find it in the Homily, entitled De Semente, (...), that
Christ transferred the Sabbath to the Lords day; this must be understood, not
as if done by his commandment, but on his occasion: the resurrection of our
Lord upon that day, being the principal motive, which did induce his Church to
make choice thereof, for the assemblies of the people. For otherwise it would
plainly cross what formerly had been said by Atha^asius, in his (...); and not
him only, but the whole cloud of witnesses, all the Catholic Fathers, in whom
there is not any words which reflects that way; but much in affirmation of the
contrary. For besides what is said before, and elsewhere shall be said in its
proper place. The Council held at Paris, An. 829 ascribes the keeping of the
Lords Day at most to Apostolical tradition, confirmed by the a^tority of the
Church. Cap. 50.
For so the Council, Christianoru^ religiosae devotionis, quae ut creditur
Apostolorum traditione immo Ecclesiae autoritate descendit, mos ^inolevit, ut
Dominicum diem, ob Dominicae resurrectionis memoriam, honorabiliter colat. And
last of all Tostatus puts this difference, between the Festivals of the old
testament, and those now solemnized in the new: that in the Old Testament God
appointed all the Festivals that were to be observed in the Jewish Church: in
novo nulla festivitas a Christo legislatore determinata est, sed in Ecclesia
Praelati ista statuunt* but in the new, there were no Festivals at all
prescribed by Christ, as being left unto the Prelates of the Church, by them to
be appointed, as occasion was. What others of the ancient writers, Cap. 24. V.
10*
and what the Protestant ^ivines have affirm^d herein; we shall hereafter see in
their proper places. As for these words of our Redeemer, in S. Matthews Gospel,
Pray that your flight be not in the winter, neither on the Sabbath day; they
have indeed been much alleged, to prove that Christ did intimate, at the
least* unto his Apostles and the rest, that there was a particular day by him
appoointed, where of he willed them to be c^refull: which being not the Jewish
Sabbath, must of necess^^^, as they think, be the Lords Day But certainly the
F^^^ers t^ll us no such matter, nay, they say the contra^y: and make these
words apart of our Rede^m^rs adm^^i^ion to the Jews, In Math* ^4.
not to the Apostles. ^aint Ch^ysost^^e has it so expressly. (...), etc.
Behold, says he, how he addresseth his discourse unto the Jews, and tells them
of the evils which should fall upon the^: for neither were the Apostles bound to
observe the Sabbath; nor were they there, when those calamities fell upon the
Jewish Nation. Not in the winter nor on the Sabbath, and why so says he?
Because their flight being so quick and sudden, (...), neither the Jews would
dare to fly on the Sabbath, [for such their superstition was in the later
times] nor would the winter but be very troublesome, in such distresses. In
Math 24.
Theophilact does affirm expressly, that this was spoke unto the Jews, and
spoke upon the self^ame reasons: adding withal, (...), that before any of
those miseries fell upon that Nation, the Apos^les were all departed from out
Jerusalem. S. Hierom says as much, as unto the time, that those calamities
which by our Savior were foretold, were generally referred unto the wars of
Titus and Vespasian: and that both in his Comment on S. Mathews Gospel; and his
Epistle to Algasia. Qu. 4.
And for the thing, that the Apostles and the rest of the Disciples, were al
departed from Jerusalem, before that heavy war began, is no less evident in
story. For the Apostles long before that time, were either martyred; or
dispersed in several places for the enlargment of the Gospel; not any of them
resident in Jerusalem after the martyrdom of S. James, who was Bishop there.
And for the residue of the Disciples they had forsook the Country also before
the wars: being admonished so to do by an heavenly vision, which warned them
to withdraw from thence and repair to Pella, beyond Jordan, as Eusebius tells
us. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 5
So that these words of our Redeemer could not be spoke as to the Apostles, and
in them unto all the rest of the Disciples which should follow after; but to
the people of the Jews. To whom our Savior gave this ca^tion, not that he
did not think it lawful for them to f^ie upon the Sabbath day: but that as
things then were, and as their consciences were entangled by the Scribes and
Pharisees, he found that they would count it a most grievous misery, to be put
unto it. To return then unto our story, as the chief reason, why the
Christians of the primitive times, did set apart this day to religious uses,
was because Christ, that day, did rise again from death to life, for our
justification: so there was some analogy or proportion, which this day seemed
to hold with the former Sabbath, which might more easily induce^ them to
observe the same. For as God rested on the Sabbath from all the works which he
had done in the Creation: so did the Son of God rest also on the day of his
resurrection, from all the works which he had done in our Redemption. (...). as
Gregory Nyssen notes it for us. Orat. in sanct. P^scha.
Yet so that as the Father rested not on the former Sabbath, from the works of
preservation; so neither does our Savior rest at any time, from perfecting
this work of our redemption, by a perpetual application of the benefit and
effects thereof. This was the cause, and these the motives, which did induce
the Church in some tract of time, to solemnize the day of Christ's resurrection,
as a weekly Festival* though not to keep it as a Sabbath.

(4) I say in tract of time, for ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so in the
beginning. The very day it self was not so observed: though it was known to
the Apostles in the morning early, that the Lord was risen. We find not on the
news, that they came together, for the performance of divine and religious
exercises; much less that they intended it for a Sabbath day: or that our
Savior came amongst them until late at night, as in likelihood he would have
done had any such performance been thought necessary, as was required unto the
making of a Sabbath. Nay, which is more, our blessed Savior, on that d^y, and
two of the Disciples, whatsoever the others did, were other wise employed then
in Sabbath duties. For from Jerusalem to Emaus, Luke 24. 13.
whether the two Disciples went, was sixty furlongs, which is seven miles and
an half, and so much back again unto Jerusalem, which is fifteeene miles. And
Christ who went the journey with them, at least, part thereof and left them not
until they came unto (...) was back again that night, and put himself into
the midst of the Apostles. Had he intended it for a Sabbath day, doubtless
he would have rather joined himself with the Apostles, as it is most likely,
kept themselves together in expectation of the issue, and so were most prepared
and fitted to begin the new Christian Sabbath; then with those men, who
contrary to the nature of a Sabbaths rest, were now engaged in a journey, and
that for ought we know, about worldly businesses. Nor may we think, but that
our Savior would have told them of so great a fa^lt, as violating the new
Christian Sabbath, even in the first beginning of it; had any Sabbath been
intended. As for the being of the eleven in a place together, that could not
have relation to any Sabbath duties, or religious exercises; being none such
were yet commanded: but only to those cares and fears, wherewith, poor men,
they were distracted, which made them loath to part asunder, till they were
settled in their hopes, or otherwise resolved on somewhat whereunto to trust.
And where it is conceiv^d by some, that our most blessed Savior showed
himself oftener unto the Apostles upon the first day of the week, then on any
other; and therefore by his own appearings did sanctify that day, instead of
the Jewish Sabbath: neither the premises are true, nor the sequel necessary.
The premises not true, for it is no where to be found that he appeared oftener
on the first day, then any other of the week: it being said in holy Scripture,
that he was seen of them by the space of forty days; Act^ 1. 3.
as much on one, as on another. His first appearing, after the night following
his resurrection, which is particularly specified in the book of God, was when
he showed himself to Thomas, who before was absent. I^b^ 20. 26*
That the text tells us, was after eight days from the time before remembered:
which some co^ceive to be the eighth day after, or the next first day of the
week; and thereupon conclude that day to be most proper for the Congregations,
I^ John l. ^7. cap. 18.
or public meetings of the Church. Diem oct^^vum Christus Thomae* apparuit,
Do^inicum diem esse necesse est, as Saint Cyril has it: Iure igitur sanctae
congregationes die octauo in Ecclesia fiunt. But where the Greek Text reads it,
(...), post octo dies in the vulgar Latin, after eight days according to our
English Bibles: that should be rather understood of the ninth or tenth, then
the eighth day after; and therefore could not be upon the first day of the
week, as it is imagined. Now as the premises are untrue, so the Conclusion is
unfirme. For if our Saviors apparition unto his Disciples, were of it self
sufficient to create a Sabbath: then must that day, whereon Saint Peter went on
fishing, John 21. ^
be a Sabbath also; and so must holy Thursday too; it being most evident that
Christ appeared on those days unto his Apostles. So that as yet, from our
Redeemers resurrection unto his ascension, we find not any word or Item of a
new Christian Sabbath to be kept amongst them: or any evidence for the Lords
Day in the four Evangelists, either in precept or in practice.

(5) The first particular passage which does occur in holy Scripture,
touching the first day of the week, is that upon that day, the Holy Ghost did
first come down on the Apostles: and that upon the same Saint Peter preached
his first Sermon unto the Jews, and baptized such of them as believed: there
being add^d to the Church, that day, three thousand souls. This happened on the
Feast of Pentecost, which fell that year upon the Sunday, or first day of the
week, as elsewhere the Scripture calls it: but as it was a special and a
casual thing, so can it yield but little proof, if it yield us any, that the
Lords Day was then observed; or that the Holy Ghost did by selecting of that
day for his descent on the Apostles, intend to dignifie it for Sabbath. For
first it was a casual thing, that Pentecost should fall that year upon the
Sunday. It was a moveable Feast as unto the day, such as did change and shift
it self, according to the position of the Feast of Passover: the rule being
this, that on what day ^oever, the second of the Passover did fall; upon that
also fell the great Feast of Pentecost. ^mend. Temp. l. 2.
Nam (...) semper eadem est fer^a, quae (...)* Scaliger has rightly noted. So
that as often as the Passover did fall upon the Saturday or Sabbath, as this
year it did; then Pentocost ^ell upon the Sunday: but when the Passover did
chance to fall upon the Tewsday, the Pentecost fell that year, upon the
Wednesday: and sic de coeteris. And if the rule be true, as I think it is,
that no sufficient argument can be drawn from a casual fact; and that the
falling of the Pentecost, that year, upon the first day of the week, be
merely casual: the coming of the Holy Ghost upon that day, will be no
argument nor authority, to state the first day of the week, in the place and
honor of the Jewish sabbath. There may be other reasons given, why God made
choice of that time, rather then of any other: as first because about that very
time before, he had proclaimed the Law upon Mount Sinai; and secondly, that so
he might the better countenance and grace the Gospel, in the sight of men, and
add the more authority unto the doctrine of the Apostles. The Feast of
Pentecost was a great and famous Festival, at which the Jews, all of them,
were to come unto Jerusalem, there to appear before the Lord: and amongst
others, those which had their hands in our Saviors ^^^ud. And therefore as S.
Chrysostom notes it, did God send down the Holy Ghost, at that time of
Pentecost; In Act. 2.
because those men that did consent to our Saviors death, might publicly
receive rebuke for that bloody Act; and so bear record to the power of our
Saviors Gospel, before all the World* (...), as that Father has it. So that
the thing being casual, as unto the day; and special, as unto the business
then by God intended: it will afforde us little proof, as before I said,
either that the Lords Day was, as then, observed; or that the Holy Ghost did
select that day for so great a work, to dignifie it for a sabbath.

(6) As for Saint Peter's preaching upon that day, and the baptizing of so many,
as were converted to the faith, upon the same: it might have been some proof,
that now at lest, if not before, the first day of the week was set apart by
the Apostles for religious exercises: had they not honored all days with the
same performances. But if we search the Scriptures we shall easily find that
all days were alike to them, in that respect: no day, in which they did not
preach the word of life, and administer the Sacraments of their Lord and
Savior, to such as either wanted it, or did desire it. Or were it that the
Scriptures had not told us of it, yet natural reason would inform us, that
those who were employed in so great a work, as the conversion of the World,
could not confine themselves unto times and seasons; but must take all
advantages, whensoere they came. But for the Scripture, it is said in terms
express, first generally, that the Lord added daily to the Church, such as
should be saved; Act^ 2. 47.
and therefore without doubt, the means of their salvation were daily
ministered unto them: Vers^ 42.
and in the fifth Chapter of the Acts, that daily in the Temple, and in every
house they ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ. Acts 8.
So for particulars, when Philip did baptize the Eunuch, either he did it on a
working day, as we now distinguish them, and not upon the first day of the
week; and so it was no Lords day duty: or else it was not held unlawful, to
take a journey on that day, as some think it is. Saint Peter's preaching to
Corne^ius, and his baptizing of that house, was a week days work, as may be
gathered from Saint Hierome. That Father tells us, that the day whereon the
vision appeared to Peter, was probably the Sabbath, or the Lords Day, as we
call it now; fieri p^tuit ut vel sabbatum ess^t, vel dies Dominicus, Adv^rs
Iovini. an. l. 2.
as the ^ather has it: and (...) you which you will, we shall find little in
it, (...) Sabbath. In case it was on the Sabbath, then Peter (...) keep the
Lords day, holy, as he should have done, in case, that day was then selected
for Gods worship; for the Text tells us that the next day, he did begin his
journey to Cornelius house. In case it was upon the Lords day* as we call it
now, then neither did Saint Peter sanctify that day in the Congregation, Acts
10 24.
as he ought to do, had that day then been made the Sabbath, and his conversion
of Corne^elius, being three days after, must of necessity be done on the
Wednesday following. So that we find no Lords day Sabbath, either of S. Peter's
keeping, or of S. Philips: or els^ the preaching of the Word, and the
administering the Sacraments, were not affixed at all unto the first day of the
week, as the peculiar marks and characters thereof. So for Saint Paul, the
Doctor of the Gentiles, who labored more abundantly then the other Apostles,
besides what shall be said particularly in the following section, it may
appear in general, that he observed no Lords-day-sabbath* but taught on all
days, travailed on all days; and wrought according to his Trade, upon all
days too, when he had no employment in the Congregation. That he did teach on
all days, is not to be questioned, by any that considers how great a work he
had to do; and how little time. That he did travail upon all days, is no
less notorious, to all that look upon his life, which was still in motion.
And howsoever he might rest sometimes on the Lords Day, as questionless he did
on others, as often as upon that day he preached the Gospel: yet when he was a
Prisoner in the hands of the Roman soldiers, th^re is no doubt, but that he
travailed as they did Lords Days, and sabbaths, all days equally, many days
together. In Dominica^^ 17. post. Tri^it.
Of this see what Saint Luke has written in the last Chapters of the Acts.
Lastly, for working at his Trade (which was Tent-making) on the Lords D^y, as
well as others, Conradu^ Diatericus proves it out of Hierome, that when he had
none unto whom to preach in the Congregation; he followed on the Lords Day,
the works of his Occupation. Hieronymus colligit ex Act. 18. verse. 3. and 4.
quod die etiam Dominica, quando, quibus in publico conventu concionaretur, non
habebat, manibus suis laboravit. So Dietericus, speaking of our Apostle. Now
what is proved of these Apostles, and of S. Philip the Evangelist; may be
affirmed of all the rest, whose lives and actions are not left upon record in
holy Scripture. Their Ministry being the same, and their work as great; no
question but their liberty was correspondent: and that they took all times to
be alike, in the advancing of the business which they went about, and
cherished all occasions presented to them, on what day soever. What further may
be said hereof, in reference to Saint John who lived longest of them, and saw
the Church established, and her public meetings in some (...) we shall see
hereafter in his own place and time. Mean* while we may conclude for certain,
that in the (...) of the Church he used all days equally, kept (...) holy then
another: and after, when the Church was settled, how ever he might keep this
holy, and honor it for the use which was made thereof; yet he kept other days,
so used, as holy, but never any like a sabbath.

(7) Proceed we next unto Saint Paul, in his particular; of whom the Scripture
tells us more, then of all the rest: and we shall find, that he no sooner
was converted, Act^ ^ 2^.
but that forthwith he preached in the Synagogues, that Jesus was the Christ.
If in the Synagogues, most likely that it was on the Jewish sabbath: the
Synagogues being destinate especially to the ^abba^h days. So after he was
called to the public Mi^ist^rie, he came to Antiochia, and went into the
Synagogue on the sab^ath day, and there preached the Word. What was the issue
of his sermon? That the Text in^^rmes us. (...)
And when the I^wes were gone out of the (...) the Gentiles besought that these
words might be preached again the next sabbath. Vers^ (...).
Saint Paul assented thereunto, and the next sabbath day, as the Text tells us,
came almost the whole City together, to hear the Word of God. Verse. 44.
It seems the Lords day was not grown as yet into any credit, especially not
into the repute of the Jewish sabbath: for if it had, Saint Paul might easily
have told these Gentiles, (that is, such Gentiles as had been converted to the
Jewish Church) that the next day would be a more convenient time, and indeed
opus diei in die suo, the doctrine of the resurrection on the day thereof. This
happened in the forty sixth year of Christ's Nativity; some twelve years after
his Passion and Resurrection: and often, after this, did the Apostle show
himself in the Jewish Synagogues, on the sabbath days; which I shall speak
of here together, that so we may go on unto the rest of this discourse, with
less interruption. And first it was upon the Sabbath, that he did preach to
the Philippians, and baptized Lydia with her household. Acts 16. Amongst the
Thessalonians, he reasoned three sabbath days together out of the Scriptures;
Acts 17. At Corinth every sabba^h day, with the Jews and Greeks; Acts 18.
besides those many texts of Scripture, when it is said of him that he went into
the Synagogues, and therefore probably that it was upon the Sabbath, as before
we said. Not that Saint Paul was so affected to the Sabbath, as to prefer
that day before any other: but that he found the people at those times
assembled, and so might preach the Word, with the greater profit. In Acts 13.
14.
Saint Chrysostom, for the Ancients has resolved it so; (...), as the Father
has it. So Calvin, for the modern Writers, makes this the special cause of
Saint Paul's resort unto the places of assembly, on the Sabbath day, quod
profectum aliquem sperabat; In Acts 16. 13.
because in such concourse of people, he hoped the Word of God would find the
better entertainment. Any thing rather to be thought, then that S. Paul who had
withstood so stoutly those false Apostles, who would have circumcision and the
law observed; when there was nothing publicly determined of it: would, after
the decision of so great a Council, wherein the Law of Moses was for ever
abrogated, either himself observe the sabbath, for the sabb^ths sake; or by
his own example teach the Gentiles how to Iudaize, which he so blamed in S.
Peter. The sabbath with the legal ceremonies did receive their doom, as they
related to the Gentiles, in that great Council holden in Jerusalem: which
though it was not until after he had preached at Antiochia, on the sabbath
day* yet was it certainly before he had done the like, either at Philippos,
Thessalonica, or at Corinth.

(8) For the occasion of that Council, it was briefly this. Amongst those
which had joined themselves with the Apostles, there was one Cerinthus; a
f^llow of a turbulent and unquiet spirit, and a most eager enemy of all those
counsels, whereof himself was not the Author. This man had first begun a
faction against S. Peter, for going to Cornelius, and preaching life eternal
unto the Gentiles: and finding ill success in that, goes down to Antiochia,
and there begins another against Saint Paul. This Epiphanius tells us of him,
Lib. l. baet. 28. n. 1.
(...) etc. (...). The like Philaster does affirm, De haeres. i^ Cerin^ha.
Seditionem sub Apostolis commovisse, that he had raised a faction against the
Apostles, which was not to be crushed but by an Apostolical and general
Council. This man and those that came down with him, were so inamoured on the
ceremonies and rites of Moses, that though they entertained the Gospel, yet
they were loath to leave the Law: and therefore did resolve, it seems, to make
a mixture out of both. Hence taught they, that except all men were circumcised
after the manner of Moses, they could not be saved. Act 15. ^.
Where note, that though they spoke only of circumcision, ^et they intended
all the law^^ sabbaths and other legal ordinances of what sort soever. Docuit
Cerinthus observationem legis Mosaisae necessariam esse, circumcs^^nem, and
Sabbata observanda, as Philaster has it. The like ^aith Calvin on the place,
Sola quidem circumcisio hic nominatur, sed ex contextu facile patet, ^os detota
lege movisse controversiam. The like Lori^us also amongst the Jesuits; Nomine
circumcisionis reliqua lex tot^intelligitur. Indeed the Text affirms as much,
where it is said in terms express, Acts 15. 5.
that they did hold it needful to circumcise the people, and to command them
to keep the Law of Moses; whereof the Sabbath was a part. For the decision of
this point, and the appeasing of those controversies which did thence arise, it
pleased the Church directed by the holy Ghost, to determine thus; that such
amongst the Gentiles as were converted to the ^aith, should not at all be
burdened with the laws of Moses; but only should observe some necessary
things, viz. that they abstain from things offered unto idols, Verse. 29.
and from blood, and that which is strangled* and from f^r^ication. And here it
is to be observed, that the decree or Canon of this Council did only reach
unto the Gentiles: as is apparent out of the proeme to the Decretall, which is
directed to the brethren which are of the Gentiles; and from the 21* Chapter of
the Acts, where it is said, that as concerning the Gentiles which believe, we
have written and determined, that they observe no such thing, as the law of
Moses So that for all that was determined in this Council, those of the Jews
which had embraced the faith of Christ, were not prohibited, as yet, to observe
the Sabbath, and other parts of Moses law, as before they did: in which regard,
S. Paul caused Timothy to be circumcised, Act. ^6. 3.
because he would not scandalize and offend the Jews. The Jews were very much
affected to their ancient ceremonies: and Calvin rightly has affirmed, In Act.
(...).
Corr^ctionem, ut difficilis ^ra^, ita subitam esse non potuisse, that a full
reformation of that zeal of theirs, as it was full of difficulty, so could it
not be done upon the s^dden. Therefore it pleased the (...), as it is
co^ceived, Concil^ To^^ ^ (...)
in their fo^rth Council hol^^^^^ Jerusalem, mention whereof is made in the
21. of the Acts, to make it lawful for the Jews to retain circumcision and
such legal rites, together with the faith in Christ: Quamdiu templum and
sacrifi^ia legis in Hier^salem stabant, as long as the Jewish Temple, and the
legal sacrifices in Jerusalem, should continue standing. Not that the faith
of Christ was not sufficient of it self, for their salvation: Sed ^t matter*
Synagoga paulatim ^um honor s^p^liretur, but that the Synogogue might be laid
to ^^eepe, with the greater honor. But this, if so it was, was for no long
time. For when the third Council holden in Jerusalem against Cerinthus and
his party, was held in Ann. 51. and this which now we speak of, Ann. 58. the
final ruin of the Temple was in 72. So that there was but one and twenty
years in the largest reckoning, wherein the Christian Jews were suff^red to
observe their Sabbath: and yet not (as before they did) as if it were a
necessary duty; but as a thing indifferent only. But that time come, the
Temple finally destroyed, and the legal ceremonies therein buri^d: it was
accounted afterward both dangerous and heretical, to observe the Sabbath; or
mingle any of the Jewish leaven, with the bread of life. S. Hierome roundly so
proclaims it, Ceremonias Iudae^rum and perniciosus and pestiferas esse
Christianis: that all the Ceremonies of the Jews, whereof before he named the
Sabbath to be one, were dangerous, yea and deadly too, to a Christian man; Sive
e^ Iudaeis esset, sive ex Gentibus, whether he were originally of the Jews, or
Gentiles. To which S. Austin gives allowance, Eg^ ha^c vocem tuam omnino
confirmo, in his reply unto Saint Hierome. That it was also deemed heretical,
to celebrate a sabbath in the Christian Church, we shall see hereafter.

(9) In the mean time, we must proceed in search of the Lords day, and of the
duties then performed: whereof we can find nothing yet, by that name at least.
The Scripture tells us somewhat, that S. Paul did at Troas, upon the first day
of the week: Which happening much about this time, comes in this place to be
considered. The passage in the Text stands thus: Upon the first day of the
week when the disciples came together to break bread, Act. 20. 7.
Paul preached unto them ready to depart on the morrow, and continued his
speech until midnight. Take notice here, that Paul had tarried there, seven
days, before this happened. Now in this Text there are two things to be
considered; first what was done upon that day; and secondly what day it was,
that is there remembered. First for the action, it is said to be breaking of
bread: which some conclude, to be administering the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper; and Paul's discourse which followed on it, to be a Sermon. But sure I am
Saint Chrysost^me tells us plainly otherwise: I^ locum.
who relates it thus. (...), etc. Their meeting at that time, says he, was not
especially to receive instruction from Saint Paul, but to eat bread with him:
and there, upon occasion given, he discoursed unto them. See, says the Father,
how they all made bold with S. Paul's table, as it had been common to them all:
and as it seems to me, says he, Paul sitting at the table did discourse thus
with them. Therefore it seems by him, that as the meeting was at an ordinary
supper; so the discourse there happening was no Sermon properly, but an
occasional dispute. Lyra affirms the same, and does gloss it thus. They came
together to break bread, i. e. says he, Pro refectione corporali, for the
refection and support of their bodies only: and being there, Paul preached
unto them, or as the Greek and Latin have it, he disputed with them; prius
eos reficiens pane verbi divini, refreshing of them first with the bread of
life. This also seems to be the meaning of the Church of England, (...) 80.
who in the margin of the Bible, allowed by Canon, does refer us unto the
second of the Acts, verse. 46. where it is said of the disciples, that they did
break their bread from house to house, and eat their meat together with joy
and singleness of heart: which plainly must be meant of ordinary and common
meats. Calvin not only so affirms it, but censures those who take it for the
holy Supper. Nam quod hic fractionem panis nonnulli interpretantur sacram
coenam, I^ Act. (...)
al^enum mihi videtur a mente Lucae, etc. as he there discourses. Then for the
time, our English reads it upon the first day of the week, agreeablie unto
the (...) exposition of most ancient Writers, and the vulgar Latin, which here
as in the four Evangelists, does call the first day of the week, una Sabbati.
Yet since the Greek phrase is not so perspicuous but that it may admit of a
various exposition, Erasmus renders it by uno die sabbatorum, and quodam die
sabbatorum; that is, upon a certain Sabbath: and so does Calvin too, and
Pelican, and Gualter, all of them noted men, in their translations of that
Text. Nor do they only so translate it, but frame their expositions also unto
that translation; and make the day there mentioned, to be the Sabbath. I^ lo^um.
Calvin takes notice of both readings, Vel proximum sabbat^ diem intelligit,
vel unum quodpiam sabbatum, but approves the last, Quod dies ille ad habendum
conventum aptior fuerit, because the Sabbath day was then most used, for the
like assemblies. Gualter does so conceive it also, that they assembled at this
time on the Sabbath day, Qui propter veterem morem haud dubie tunc temporis
celebrior habebatur, Hom.
as that which questionless was then of most repute, and name amongst them. So
that the matter is not clear, as unto the day, if they may j^dge it. But take
it for the first day of the week, as the English reade^ it: yet does S. Austin
put a scruple, which may perhaps disturb the whole expectation; though
otherwise he be of opinion, that the breaking of the bread there mentioned,
might have some reference or resemblance to the Lords Supper. Now this is that
which S. Austin tells us. Aut post peractum diem Sabbat^, ^p. 86.
nocti^ initio fuerunt congregati, quae utique nox ad diem Dominicum, h^e. ad
unu^ Sabbat^ pertin^bat, etc. Either, says he, they were assembled on the
beginning of the night, which did immediately follow the Sabbath day, and was
to be accounted as a part of the Lords day, or first day of the week, and
breaking bread that night, as it is broken in the Sacrament of the Lords body,
continued his discourse till midnight, Vt lucescente proficisceretur Dominico
die, that so he might begin his journey, with the first dawning of the Lords
day, which was then at hand* Or if they did not meet till the day it self,
since it is there expressed that he preached unto them being to depart upon the
morrow; we have the reason why he continued his discourse so long: viz. because
he was to leave them, Et eos sufficienter instruere cupiebat, and he desired to
lesson them sufficiently, before he left them. So far S. Austin. Choose which
of these you will, and there will be but little found for sanctifying the Lords
day, by Saint Paul, at Troas. For if this meeting were upon Saturday night;
then made Saint Paul no scruple of travailing upon the Sunday: or if it were on
the Sunday, and that the breaking bread there mentioned were the celebration of
the Sacrament, (which yet Saint Augustine says not in terms express but with
a sicut) yet neither that, nor the discourse or sermon which was joined unto it
were otherwise then occasional only, by reason of S. Paul's departure on the
morrow after. Therefore no Sabbath or established day of public meeting to be
hence collected.

(10) This action of Saint Paul, at Troas, is placed by our Chronologers in
Anno 57 of our Saviors birth; and tha^ year also did he write his first
Epistle to the Corinthians: wherein amongst many other things, he gives them
this direction, touching collections for the poorer brethern at Jerusalem. C.
16. v 1.
Concerning the gathering for the Saints, says he, as I have ordained in the
Churches of Galatia, so do ye also. And how was that? Every first day of the
week let every one of you s^t aside, by himself, and lay up as God has
prospered him, that there be no gatherings when I come. This some have made a
principal argument, to prove the institution of the Lords day to be
Apostolical: and Apostolical though should we grant it, yet certainly it
never can be proved so, from this Text of Scripture* For what has this to do
with a Lord's Day duty, or how may it appear from hence, that the Lords day
was ordered by the Apostles to be weekly celebrated, instead of the now
antiquated Jewish Sabbath: being an intimation only of Saint Paul's desire, to
the particular Churches of the Galatians and Corinthians, what he would have
them do in a particular and present case. Agabus had signified by the Spirit,
Act. 11. 28. 29.
that there should be a great dearth over all the world: and thereupon the
Antiochians purposed to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Iu daea.
It is not to be thought that they made this collection, on the Sunday only;
but sent their common bounties to them when and as often as they pleased
Collections for the poor, in themselves considered, are no Lords day duties;
no duties proper to the day: and therefore are not here appointed to be made in
the congregation, but every man is ordered to lay up somewhat by himself, as
it were in store, that when it came to a full round sum, it might be sent
away unto Jerusalem: which being but a particular case, and such a case as was
to end with the occasion; can be no general rule for a perpet^ity. For might
it not fall out, in time, that there might be no poor, nay no Saints at a^l,
in all Jerusalem; as when the Town was razed by Adrian, or after peopled by
the Saracens? Surely if not before, yet then this duty was to ^ease, and no
collection to ^e made by those of Corinth: and consequently no Lords day to be
k^pt amongst them, because no coll^ction; in case collections for the ^aints,
as some do ga^her from this place, were a sufficient argument to (...) the
Lords d^y (...) ^y divine authority. (...) us take the (...) observations, as
have been made upon it by the Fathers. Upon the first day of the week, i. e.
as generally they conceive it, on the Lords day. I^ locum.
And why on that? Chrysostom gives this reason of it, that so the very day
might prompt them to be bountiful to their poor brethren, as being that day
whereon they had received such inestimable bounties at the hands of God, in the
resurrection of our Savior. (...): as that Father has it. What to be done on
that day? V^usquisque apud se reponat, Let every man lay by himself, says the
Apostle. (...). He says not, says S. Chrysostom, let every man bring it to
the Church* And why? (...), for fear lest some might be ashamed at the
smallness of their offering: but let them lay it by, says he, and add unto
it week, by week, that at my coming it may grow to a fit proportion. That
there be no gathering when I come* but that the money may be ready to be sent
away, immediately upon my coming: and being thus raised up by little and
little, they might not be so sensible thereof, as if upon his coming to them,
it were to be collected all at once, and upon the sudden. Vt Paulatim
reservantes non una hora gravari se putent, In locum.
as S. Hierome has it. Now as it is most clear, that this makes nothing for
the Lords day, or the translation of the sabbath thereunto, by any Apostolical
precept: so is it not so clear, that this was done upon the first day of the
week, but that some learned men have made doubt ther^of. Calvin upon the
place, takes notice how S. Chrysostom expounds the (...) of the Apostle, by
primo sabbati, the first day of the week, as the English reads it: but likes
it not, Cui ego non assentior, as his phrase is, conceiving rather this to be
the meaning of S. Paul, that on some sabbath day or other, until his coming,
every man should lay up somewhat toward the collection. And in the second of
his Institutes, he affirms expressly, that the day destinate by Saint Paul to
these Collections, C^p. 8. ^. 3^.
was the Sabbath day. The like do Victorinus, Strigelius, Hunnius, and Aretius,
Protestant Writers all, note upon the place. Singulis sabbatis, says
Strigelius; per singula sabbata, so Aretius; diebus sabbatorum, says Egidius
Hunnius: all rendering (...), on the Sabbath days. More largely yet, Hemingius,
who in his Comment on the place, takes it indefinitely for any day in the week,
so they fixed on one. Vult enim ut quilibet certum diem, in septimana,
constituat, in quo apud se seponat, quod irrogaturus est in pauper^s. Take
which you will, either of the Fathers, or the Modernes, and we shall find no
Lords Day instituted by any Apostolical Mandate, no Sabbath set on foot by
them upon the first day of the week, as some would have it: much less that
any such Ordinance should be henc^ collected, out of these words of the Apostle.

(11) Indeed it is not probable, that he who so opposed himself against the
old Sabbath, would erect a new. This had not been to abrogate the ceremony, but
to change the day: whereas he labored, what he could to beat down all the
difference of days and times, which had been formerly observed. In his Epistle
to the Galatia^s, written in Anno 59, he lays it home unto their charge, that
they oberued days and months, Cap. 4 v. 10.
and times, and years; and seems a little to bewail his own misfortune, as if
he had bestowed his labor in vain amongst them. I know it is conceived by
some, that Saint Paul spoke it of the observation of those days and times,
that had been used among the Gentiles; and so had no relation to the Jewish
Sabbath, or any difference of times observed amongst them. Saint Ambrose so
conceived it, and so did Saint Augustine. In lo^um.
Dies observant, qui dicunt crastino non est pro^iciscendum, etc. They observe
days, who say, I will not go abroad to morrow, or begin any work upon such a
day, because of some unfortunate aspect, as Saint Ambrose has it, it seem^,
Saint A^gustine learnt it, who in his ^19 Epistle directly falls upon the very
same expression, E^s inculpat qui dicunt, non proficiscor quia posterus dies
est, aut quia l^na sic fertur; vel proficiscar ut prospere cedat, quia ita se
habet positio syderum, etc. The like conceit he has in his Ench^i^idi^n, ad
Laurentium, cap. 79. But whatsoever S. Ambrose did* Saint Augustine lived, I am
sure to correct his error: observing very rightly that his former doctrine
could not consist with Saint Paul's purpose in that place, which was to beat
down that esteem which the Jews had amongst them of the Mosaicall Ordinances,
their New Mons and Sabbaths. I shall report the place at large for the better
clearing of the point. Vulgatissimu^ est Gentilium error, nt vel in agendis
rebus* vel expectandis eventibus vitae ac negotiorum su^rum ab Astrologis and
Chalda^is notatos dies observent. This was the ground whereon he built his
former error. Then follows the correction of it; Fortass^ tamen non ^pus est
ut haec de Gentilium errore intelligamus, ne intentionem ca^sae (mark that)
quam ab exordio susceptam ad fi^em usque perducit, ^ubit^ in aliud temere
detorquere velle videamur; sed de his (...) de quibus ^avendis ^um agere per
t^tam Epistolam app^^et. Nam and Iudae iserviliter observant dies and menses
and annos and tempora, in carnali observatione sabbati, and ne^meniae, etc. But
yet perhaps, says he, it is not necessary that we should understand this of
the Gentiles lest so we vary from the scope and purpose o^ the Apostl^; but
rather of those men, of the avoiding of whose Doctrines he seems to treat in
all this Epistle, which were the Jews: who in their carnal keeping of
New-moones and Sabbaths, did observe days and years, Cap. 8. n. 33.
and times, as he here objecteth. Compare this with Saint Hieromes preface to
the Galathians, and then the matter will be clear; that Saint Paul meant not
this of any Heathenish, but of the Jewish observation of days and times. So in
the Epistle to the Colossia^s, writ in the six^teth year after Christ's
Nativity, he lays it positively down, that the Sabbath was now abrogated with
the other ceremonies, which were to vanish at Christ's coming. Co^o^^. 2. 16.
Let no man judge you, says the Apostle, in meat and drink, or in respect of
an holy day, or of the New Mood, or of the Sabbath days, which are a shadow of
things to come; but the body is of Christ. In which the Sabbath is well matched
with meats and drinks, new-mones and holy days, which were all temporary
ordinances, and to go off the stage at our Saviors entrance. Now whereas some,
that would be thought great sticklers for the Sabbath, conceive that this was
spoken, not of the weekly moral Sabbath, as they call it, which must be
perpetual; but of the annual ceremonial Sabbaths, which they acknowledge to
be abrogated: this new devise directly crosses the whole current of the
ancient Fathers who do apply this Text to the weekly Sabbath. It is sufficient
in this point, to note the places. The Reader may peruse them, as leisure is,
and look on Epiphan. lib. 1. h^^res. 33. n. 11. Ambrose upon this place.
Hieromes Epistle ad Algas. qu. 10. Chrysostom. hom. 13, in Hebr. 7. August. cont.
Iudaeos cap. 2. and cont. Faust, Manich. l. 16. c. 28. I end this list with
that of Hierome, Praefat. in Gala^ Apocal. 10.
Nullus Apostoli ser^o est vel per Epistolam vel prae^entis, in quo non laboret
docere antiquae legis onera deposita, and omnia illa quae in typis and
imaginibus praecessere, i. e. otium Sabbati, circumcisionis injuriam,
Kalendarum, and trium per annum solennitatum recursus, etc. gratia Evangelii
subrepente, cessasse. There is says he, no Sermon of the Apostles, either
delivered by Epistle, or by word of mouth, wherein he labors not to prove,
that all the burdens of the Law, are now laid away; that all those things which
were before in types and figures, namely, the Sabbath, Circumcision, the
New-moones, and the three solemn Festivals, did cease upon the preaching of
the Gospel.

(12) And cease it did upon the preaching of the Gospel; insensibly and by
degrees, as before we fore we said: not being afterward observed as it had
bin formerly, or counted any necess^ry part of Gods public worship. Only some
use was made thereof for the enlargement of Gods Church; by reason that the
people had been accustomed to meet together on that day, for the performance of
religious spiritual duties. This made it more regarded then it would have
been, especially in the Eastern parts of Greece and A sia, where the
Provincial Jews were somewhat thick dispersed: and being a great accession to
the Gospel, could not so suddenly forsake their ancient customs. Yet so, that
the first day of the week, began to grow into some credit, toward the ending
of this Age: especially after the final desolation of Hi^rusalem and the
Temple, which happened Anno 72 of Christ's Nativity. So that the religious
observation of this day beginning in the Age of the Apostles, no doubt but with
their approbation and authority, and since con^^nuing in the same respect for
so many Ages; may be very well accounted amongst those Apostolical traditions,
which have been universally received in the Church of God. For being it was the
day which our Redeemer hono^^^d with his resurrection, it easily might attain
unto that esteem, as to be honored by the Christians, with the public
meetings: that so they might with greater comfort preserve and cherish the
memorial of so great a mercy; in reference unto which the Worlds Creation
seemed not so considerable. By reason of which work wrought on it, it came, in
time, to be entitled, (...)* the Lords day: Apocal* 10.
which attribute is first found in the Revelation, writ by Saint John, about
the 94 ye^re of our Saviors birth. So long it was before we find the Church
took notice of it by a proper name. For I persuade my self, that had that day
been destm^te, at that time, to religious duties; or honored with the name of
the Lords day, when Paul preached at Troas or write to the Corinthi^ns, which
as before we showed was in the fifty ^eventh, neither Saint Luke, nor the
Apostle had so passed it over, and called it only the first day of the week,
as they both have done. And when it had this attribute affixed unto it, it
only was (...), as before we said, by reason, of our Saviors resurrection
performed upon it: and that the Congregation might not be assembled, as well on
them, as on the other. For first it was not called the Lords Day exclusively,
but by way of eminency, in reference to the resurrection only: all other
days being the Lords, In Psalm. 23.
as well as this. Prima sabbati significat diem Dominicum, quo Dominus
resurrexit, and resurgendo isti seculo subvenit, mu^dumque ipso die creavit qui
ob excellentiam tanti miraculi propri^ dies Dominica appellatur, i.e. dies
Domini; quamvis omnes sunt Domini. So Bruno Herbipolensis has resoluted it.
And next, it was not so designed for the public meetings of the Church, as if
they might not be assembled, as well on every day, as this. For as Saint
Hierome has determined, In Gal. ^
omnes dies aequales sunt, nec per parasceven tantum Christum cruci^igi, and
die Dominica resurgere, sed semper sanctum resurrectionis esse diem, and semper
^um ca^rne vesci Dominica, etc. All days, are equal in themselves, as the
Father tells us. Christ was not crucified on the Friday only, nor did he rise
only upon the Lords Day: but that we may make every day, the holy day of his
resurrection; and every day eat his blessed body, in the Sacrament. When
therefore certain days were publicly assigned by Godly men, for the assemblies
of the Church, this was done only for their sakes, qui magis seculo vacant
quam Deo, who had more mind unto the World, then to him that made it, and
therefore either could not, or rather would not, every day assemble in the
Church of God. Upon which ground, as they made choice of this, (even in the Age
of the Apostles) for one, because our Savior rose that day, from amongst the
dead: so chose they Friday for another, by reason of our Saviors passi^n; and
Wednesday, on the which he had been betrayed: the Saturday, or ancient
Sabbath, being meanwhile retained in the Eastern Churches. Nay, in the
primitive times, excepting in the heat of persecution, they met together every
day, for the receiving of the Sacrament: that being fortified with that
viaticum, they might with greater courage encounter death, if they chanced to
meet him. So that the greatest honor, which in this Age was given the first
day of the week, or Sunday, is that about the close th^^of, they did begin to
honor it with the name or title of the Lords Day; and made it one of those set
days, whereon the people met together for religious exercises. Which their
religious exercises when they were performed, or if the times were such that
their assemblies were prohibited, and so none were performed at all: it was not
held unlawful to apply themselves unto their ordinary labors* as we shall see
annon in the following Ages. For whereas some have gathered from this Text of
the Revelation, from S. Ioh^^ being in the spirit on the Lords Day, as the
phrase there is; that the Lords Day is wholly to be spent in spiritual
exercises: that their conceit might probably have had some show of likelihood,
had it been said by the Apostle, that he had been in the spirit every Lords
Day. But being, as it is, a particular case, it can make no rule, unless it be
that every man on the Lords Day, should have dreams and visions, and be
inspired that day with the spirit of prophecy: no more then if it had been
told us upon what day Saint Paul had been rapt up into the third Heaven; every
man should upon that day expect the like celestial raptures. Add here, how it
is thought by some, that the Lords Day here mentioned, is not to be
interpreted of the first d^y of the week, (...)
as we use to take it; but of the day of his last coming, of the day of
judgment, wherein all flesh shall come together to receive their sentence:
which being called the Lords Day too, in holy Scripture (that so the spirit may
be saved in the day of the Lord, 1. Cor. 5. 5.) S. John might see it, being
rapt in spirit, as if come already. But touching this we will not meddle; let
them that own it, look unto it: the rather since S. John has generally been
expounded in the other sense, by Aretas and Andra^as Caesariensis upon the
place, by Bid, de rat. temp. c. 6. and by the suffrage of the Church the best
expositour of Gods Word; wherein this day, has constantly since the time of
that Apostle, been honored with that name above other days. Which day, how
it was afterward observed, and how far different it was thought from a
Sabbath day; the prosecution of this story will make clear and evident.

CHAP. II.
In what estate the Lords day stood, from the death of the Apostles, to the
reign of Constantine.
(1) Touching the orders settled by the Apostles, for the Congregation. (2) The
Lords day and the Saturday, both festivals, and both alike observed in the
East, in Ignatius time. (3) The Saturday not without great difficulty, made a
fasting day. (4) The Controversy about keeping Easter; and how much it
conduces to the present business. (5) The feast of Easter not affixed to the
Lords day, without much opposition of the Eastern Churches. (6) What Justin
Martyr, and Dionysius of Corinth, have left (...) of the Lords day; Clemens of
Alexandria, his dislike thereof. (7) Upon what grounds, the Christians of the
former times, used to pray, standing, on the Lords day, and the time of
Pentecost. (8) What is recorded by Tertullian, of the Lords day; and the
assemblies of the Church. (9) Origin, as his master Clemens had done before,
dislikes set days for the assembly. (10) S. Cyprian what he tells us of the
Lords day: and of the reading of the Scriptures in S. Cyprians time. (11) Of
other holy days, established in these three first ages; and that they were
observed as solemnly as the Lords day was. (12) The name of Sunday often used
for the Lords day, by the primitive Christians; but the Sabbath never.

(1) WE showed you in the former Chapter, what ever does occur in the Acts
and Monuments of the Apostles, touching the Lords day, and the Sabbath: how
that the one of them was abrogated, as a part of the Law of Moses; the other
rising by degrees from the ruins of it, not by authority divine, for ought
appears, but by authority of the Church. As for the duties of that day, they
were most likely such, as formerly had been used in the Jewish Synagog^es:
reading the Law and Prophets openly, to the Congregation, and afterward
expounding part thereof, as occasion was; calling upon the Lord their God, for
the continuance of his mercies; and singing Psalms and Hymns unto him, as by
way of thankfulness. These the Apostles found in the Jewish Church, and well
approving of the same, as they could not otherwise, commended them unto the
care of the disciples; by them to be observed, as often as they met together,
on what day soever. First for the reading of the law, In* Ios. hom 15.
Origin says expressly that it was ordered so by the Apostles, Iu^aicarum
histooriarum libri traditi sunt ab Apostolis legendi in Ecclesiis, as he there
informs us. To this was joined in tract of time, the reading of the holy
Gospel, and other Evangelicall writings: it being ordered by S. Peter, that S.
Marks Gospel should be read in the Congregation, Hist l. 2. 15.
as Eusebius tells us: and by S. Paul, 1. These. ca. ul^. v. 17.
that his Epistle to the Thessalonians should be read unto all the holy
brethren; and also, that to the Colossians, to be read in the Church of the
Laodiceans; as that from Laodicea, Ca ul^. v. 16.
in the Church of the Colossians. By which example, not only all the writings
of the Apostles, but many of the writings of Apostolical men, were publicly
read unto the people: and for that purpose one appointed, to exercise the
ministry of a Reader, in the congregation. So ancient is the reading of the
Scriptures in the Church of God. To this by way of Comment or application, was
added as we find by S. Paul's dir^ctions, the use of prophecy or preaching, 1
Cor. 14. ^ 3.
interpretation of the ^criptures, to edifying, and to exhortation, and to
comfort: this exercise to be performed with the head uncovered, 1. Co^. 11. 4.
as well the Preacher, as the hearer, Every man praying or prophesying with his
head covered, dishonors his head, as the Apostle has informed us. Where we
have public prayers also for the Congregation: the Priest to offer to the
Lord, the prayers and supplications of the people; and they to say Amen unto
those prayers, which the Priest made for them. These to contain in them all
things necessary for the Church of God, which are the subject of all
supplications, 1. Tim. 2.
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks: and to extend to all men also,
especially unto Kings and such as be in authority, that under them we may be
godly and quietly governed, leading a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty. For the performance of which last duties, with the greater comfort,
it was disposed that Psalms and Hymns should be intermingled with the rest of
the public service: which comprehending whatsoever is most excellent in the
book of God, and being so many notable forms of praise and prayer, were
cheerfully and unanimously to be sung amongst them. And thereupon. S Paul
reprehended those of Corinth, 1. Cor. 14. 26.
in that they joined not with the assembly, but had their psalms unto
themselves. Whereby it seems that they had left the true use of psalms, which
being so many acclamations, exultations, and holy provocations, to give God the
glory; were to be sung together by the whole assembly: their singing at that
time, being little more then a melodious kind of pronuntiation, such as is
commonly now used in singing of the ordinary psalms and prayers in Cathedral
Churches. And so it stood, till in the entrance of this age, Ignatius Bishop of
Antiochia, one who was conversant with the Apostles, brought in the use of
singing alternatim, course by course, according as it still continues in our
public Quires, where one side answers to another: some show whereof is left
in Parochial Churches, in which the Minister and the people ans^er one
another, in their several turns. To him does Socrates refer it, Hist. li.
6. ^ 8.
and withal affirms that he first learned it of the Angels, whom in a vision
he had heard to sing the praise of God after such a manner: (...), as that
Author has it. And where Theodoret does refer it to Flavianus and Diodorus
Priests of Antiochia, Hist. l. 2* c. 24.
during the bustlings of the Arian Heretics; In D^maso.
and Platina unto Damasus Pope of Rome: Theodoret is to be interpreted of the
restitution of this custom, having been left off; and Platina, of the
bringing of it into the Western Churches. For that it was in use in Ignatius
time, (who suffered in the time of Trajan) and therefore probably began by
him, as is said by Socrates; is evident by that which Pliny signified to the
self same Trajan; where he informs him of the Christians, Quod soliti essent
stato die ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo, tanquam Deo, dioere, secum
invicem, etc. Their greatest crime, said he, was this, that at a certain day,
(but what that day was that he tells not) they did meet together before
daylight; and there sing hymmes to Christ as unto a God, one with another in
their courses: and after bind themselves together by a common Sacrament, not
unto any wicked or unjust attempt, but to live orderly without committing
robbery, theft, adultery, or the like offenses.

(2) Now for the day there meant by Pliny, it must be Saturday or Sunday, if
it were not both: both of them being in those time^, and in those parts where
Pliny lived, in especial honor; as may be gathered from Ignatius who at that
time flourished. For demonstration of the which, we must first take notice, how
that the world as then, was very full of dangerous fancies, and heretical
dotages: whereby the Church was much disquieted, and Gods worship hindered. The
Ebionites, they stood hard for the Jewish Sabbath, and would by all meane^ have
it celebrated, as it had been formerly: observing yet the Lords day, as the
Christians did, in honor of the resurrection of our Lord and Savior. (...),
as Eusebius tells. His^. l. 3 c. ^ 3.
The like says Epipha^ius of them, l. 1. Haeres. 30. n. 2. And on the other
side, there was a sort of Heretics in the Easter^e parts, (whereof see
Irenaeus li. 1. ca. 20. 21. 22. 23. 24. and 25.) who thought that this world
being corruptible, could not be made but by a very evil Author. Therefore as
the Jews did by the festival solemniti^ of their Sabbath, rejoice in God that
created the world, as in the Author of of all goodness; so they in hatred of
the maker of the world, sorrowed, and wept, and fasted on that day, as being
the birthday of all evil. And whereas Christi^^^ men of sound heleefe, did
solemnize the Sunday in a joyful memory of Christ's resurrection: so likewise
at the self same time, such Heretics as denied the resurrection, did contrary
to them that held it; and fasted, when the rest rejoiced. For the expressing of
which two last heresies, Ignat.
it was, that he affirmed with such zeal and earnestness, (...). If any one
did fast either upon the Lords day or the sabbath, except one sabbath in the
year, (which was Easter Eve) he was a murderer of Christ* So he in his Epistle
ad Philippenses. The Canons attributed to the Apostles, Can. 65.
take notice of the misdemeanour, though they condemn it not, with so high a
censure: it being in them only ordered, that if a Clergie-man offended in that
kind, he should be degraded; (...), if any of the Laity, they should be
excommunicated. Which makes me marvel, by the way, that those which take such
pains to justify Ignatius, as Baroniu^ does, in Ann. 57. of his Grand
Annals: should yet condemn this Canon, of imposture, which is not so severe
as Ignatius is, only because it speaks against the Saturdayes fast. Whereof
consult the Annals Ann. 102. Now as Ignatius labors here, to advance the
sabbath, in opposition of those heretics before remembered, making it equally a
festival with the Lords day: so being to deal with those, which too much
magnified the sabbath, and thought the Christians bound unto it, as the Jews
had been; he bends himself another way, and resolves it thus. (...), etc. Let
us not keep the Sabbath in a Jewish manner, in sloth and idleness, for it is
written, that he that will not labor shall not eat, and in the sweat of thy
brows shall thou eat thy bread. But let us keep it after a spiritual
fashion, not in bodily ease, but in the study of the law: not eating meat
dressed yesterday, or drinking lukewarm drinks, or walking out a limited space,
or settling our delights, as they did, on dancing; but in the contemplation of
the works of God. (...), etc. And after we have so kept the sabbath, let every
one that loves Christ, keep the Lords day festival, the resurrection day, the
Queen and Empress of all days; in which our life was raised again, and
death was overcome by our Lord and Savior. So that we see, that he would have
both days observed: the Sabbath first, though not as would the Ebionites, in a
Jewish sort; and after that the Lords day, which he so much magnifieth, the
better to abate that high esteem, which some had cast upon the Sabbath.
Agreeable unto this we find that in the Constitutions of the Apostles, for by
that name they pass, though not made by them, both days are ordered to be
kept holy, one in memorial of the Creation, the other of the Resurrection.
(...) See the like l. 8. c. 33. of which more hereafter.

(3) And so it was observed in the Eastern parts, where those of the
dispersion had took up their seats; and having long time had their meetings on
the Sabbath day, co^ld not so easily be persuaded from it. But in the Western
Churches, in the which the Jews were not so considerable, and where those^
heretics before remembered, had been hardly heard of, it was plainly
otherwise: that day not only not being honored with their public meetings,
but destinate to a settled or a constant fast. Some which have looked more
nearely into the reasons of this difference, conceive that they appointed this
day for fasting, in memory of Saint Peter's conflict with Simon Magus, which
being to be done on a Sunday following, the Church of Rome ordained a solemn
fast on the day before, the better to obtain Gods blessing in so great a
business: which falling out as they desired, they kept it for a fasting day
for ever after. Saint Austin so relates it, as a general and received opinion,
but then he adde^, Quod eam esse falsam perhibeant plerique Romani; That very
many of the Romans did take it only for a fable. As for Saint Austin, he
conceives the reason of it, to be the several uses which men made of our
Saviors resting in the grave, the whole Sabbath day. For thence it came to
pass, says he, that some, especially the Eastern people, Adrequiem
significandam mallent relaxare jejunium, to signify and denote that rest, did
not use to fast: where on the other side, those of the Church of Rome and some
Western Churches, kept it always fasting, Propter humilitatem mortis Domini,
by reason that our Lord, that day, lay buried in the sleep of death. But as
the Father comes not home unto the reason of this usage, in the Eastern
countries; so in my mind, Pope Innocent gives a likelier reason for the
contrary custom, in the Western, For in a Decretall by him made touching the
keeping of this Fast, Council. Tom. ^.
he gives this reason of it unto Decentius Eugubinus who desired it of him;
because that day and the day before, were spent by the Apostles in grief and
heaviness. Nam constat Apostolos biduo isto and in moerore fuisse, and propter
metum I^daeorum se occul^isse, as his words there are. The like says Platina,
that Innocentius did o^daine the Saturday or Sabbath to be always fasted, Quod
tali die Christus in sepulchro jacuisset, and quod discipuli ejus jejunassent,
In Innocent.
Because our Savior lay in the grave that day, and it was fasted by his
disciples. Not that it was not fasted before Innocents time, as some vainly
think: but that being formerly an arbitrary practi^e only, it was by him
intended for a binding Law. Now as the African and the Western Churches were
severally devoted either to the Church of Rome, or other Churches in the East:
so did they follow in this matter, of the Sabbaths fast, the practice of those
parts, to which they did most adhere. Millaine though near to Rome, followed
the practice of the East: which shows how little power the Popes then had even
within Italy it self. Paulinus tells us also of S. Ambrose, Inv^ta Amb^os.
that he did never use to dine, nisi die sabbati and Dominic^, etc. but on the
Sabbath, the Lords day, and on the Anniversaries of the Saints and Martyrs. Yet
so, that when he was at Rome, he used to do as they there did, submitting to
the orders of the Church in the which he was. Whence that so celebrated speech
of his, Cum hi^ sum, nonjejuno sabbato; cum Romae sum jejuno sabbato: at Rome
he did; at Millaine he did not fast the Sabbath. Nay, which is more, Saint
Augustine tells us, that many times in Africa, one and the self Church, Epi^t.
85.
at least the several Churches in the self-^ame Province, had some that dined
upon the Sabbath; and some that fasted. And in this difference it stood a long
time together, till in the end the Roman Church obtained the cause, and
Saturday became a fast, almost through all the parts of the Western world. I
say the Western world, and of that alone: The Eastern Churches being so far
from altering their ancient custom, that in the ^ixt Council of
Constantinople, Anno 692, they did admonish those of Rome to forbear fasting
on that day, upon pain of censures. Which I have noted here, in its proper
place, that we might know the better how the matter stood between the Lords
Day, and the Sabbath; how hard a thing it was for one to get the mastery of the
other: both days being in themselves indifferent for sacred uses; and holding
by no other tenure, then by the courtesy of the Church.

(4) Much of this kind was that great conflict between the East and Western
Churches, about keeping Easter: and much like conduced, as it was maintained,
unto the honor of the Lords Day, or neglect thereof, The Pass^over of the
Jews, was changed in the Apostles times, to the Feast of Easter; the
anniversary memorial of our Saviors resurrection: and not changed only in
their times, but by their authority. Certain it is that they observed it, for
Polycarpus kept it, (...), both with Saint John, and with the rest of the
Apostles, as Irenaeus tells us in Eusebius History. The like Polycrates affirms
of Saint Philip also; Lib. 5. c. 26*
whereof see Eusebius. l. 5. c. 14. Nor was the difference which arose in the
times succeeding, about the Festival it self; but for the time, wherein it
was to be observed. The Eastern Churches following the custom of Jerusalem,
kept it directly at the same time, the Jews did their Passover: and at
Jerusalem they so kept it (the Bishops there for fifteen several
iuccessions, being of the Circumcision) the better to content the Jews, their
brethren, and to win upon them. But in the Churches of the West, they did not
celebrate this Feast decima quarta luna, upon what day soever it was, as the
others did; but on some Sunday following after: partly in honor of the day;
and partly ^o express some difference, between Jews and Christians. A thing
of great importance in the present case. For the Christians of the East
reflected not upon the Sunday in the Annual return of so great a Feast; but
kept it on the fourteenth day of the month, be it what it will: it may be very
strongly gathered, that they regarded not the Lords Day so highly, which was
the weekly memory of the resurrection, as to prefer that day before any
other, in their public meetings. And thereupon Baronius pleads it very well,
that certainly Saint John was not the Author of the contrary practice, as some
gave it out. Nam quaenam potu^t esse ratio, Annal* An. 159.
etc. For what, says he, might be the reason, why in the Revelation; he should
make mention of the Lords Day, as a day of note, and of good credit in the
Church, had it not got that name in reference to the resurrection. And if it
were thought fit by the Apostles, to celebrate the weekly memory thereof, upon
the Sunday: then to what purpose should they keep the Anniversary, on another
day? And so far questionless we may join issue with the Cardinal, that
either Sunday is not meant in the Revelation; or else Saint John was not the
Author of keeping Easter* with the Jews, on what day soever. Rather we may
conceive that Saint John gave way unto the current of the times, which in those
places, as is said, were much intent upon the customs of the Jews: most of
the Christians of those parts, being Jews originally.

(5) For the composing of this difference, and bringing of the Church to an
uniformity, the Popes of Rome bestirred themselves; and ^o did many others
also. And first Pope Pius publishes a declaration, Com. Tom 1.
Pas^ha domini die dominica, annuis solennitatibus celebrandum esse, that
Easter was to be solemnized on the Lords day only. In Chronic.
And ^here, although I take the words of the letter directory; yet I rely
rather upon Eus^bius for the authority of the fact, then on the Decretall it
self, which is neither the substance probable, and the date stark false, not
to be t^usted; there being no such Consuls, it is Crabbes own note, as are
there set down. But the Authority of Pope Pius did not reach so far as th
Asian Churches: and therefore it produced an effect accordingly. This was 159.
and seven years after, Polycarpus, Bishop of Smyrna, a Reverend and an holy
man, made away to Rome; (...), Eusebius* hist* l 14. c. 13.
then to confer with Anicetus, then the Roman Prelate, about this business.
And though one could not woo the other to desert the cause; yet they
communicated together, and so parted Friends. But when that Blastus afterward
had made it necessary, which before was arbitrary; and taught it to be utterly
unlawful, to hold this Feast at any other time, then the Jewish Pass^over,
becoming so the Author of the Quart^ decimani, as they used to call them:
then did both Eleuth^rius publish a Decree, that it was only to be kept upon
the Sunday; and Irenaeus, though otherwise a peaceable man, write a Discourse
entitled, De schismate contra Blastum, now not extant. A little before this
time (this happened Anno 1^0) the controversy had took place in Laodicea; L. 4.
c. 25.
(...), as Eusebius has it: which moved Melito* Bishop of Sardis, a man of
special eminence, to write two Books de Paschate, and one de die Dominico,
(...). But to what side he took, it is hard to say. Were those discourses
extant, as they both are lost, we might, no doubt, find much that would
conduce to our present business. Two years before the clo^e of this second
century, Eu^eb. l 5. c. 23, 24.
Pope Victor, presuming probably on his name, sends abroad his Mandat^,
touching the keeping of this Feast on the Lords Day only: against the which,
when as Polycrat^s and other Asian Prelates had set out their Manifests, he
presently without more ado, declares them all for excomm^^icate. But when this
rather hindered, then advanced the cause, the Asian Bishops caring little for
those Brut a sublumina; and Irenaeus, who held the same side with him, having
persuaded him to milder courses: he went anotherway to work* by practicing with
the Prelates of several Churches, to end the matter in particular Councels, Of
these, was one held at Osro^na, another by Bachyllus Bishop of Corinth, a third
in Ga^l by Irenaeus, a fourth in P^ntus, a fifth in Rome, a sixth in Palestine
by Theophilus Bishop of Caesaria; the Canons of all which were extant in
E^febi^^ time: and in all which it was concluded for the Sunday. By means of
these Synodicall determinations, the Asian Prelates by degrees let fall their
rigor; and yielded to the stronger and the ^^rer side. Yet wa^eringly and with
some relap^es, till the great Council of Nice, backed with the authority of as
great an Emperor, settled it better then before: none but some scattered
Schismatics, now and then appearing, that durst oppose the resolution of that
famous Synod. So that you see, that whether you look upon the day appointed
for the Jewish Sabbath, or on the day appointed for the Jewish Passover; the
Lords day found it no small matter to obtain the victory. And when it had
prevailed so far, that both the Feast of Easter was restrained unto it; and
that it had the honor of the public meetings of the Congregation: yet was not
this, I mean this last, exclusively of all other days; the former Sabbath, the
fourth and sixth days of the week, having some share therein for a long time
after, as we shall see more plainly in the following Centuries.

(6) But first to make an end of this: this Centurie affords us three
particular writers that have made mention of this day. First, Justin Martyr,
who then lived in Rome, does thus relate, Apolog ^.
(...), etc. Upon the Sunday all of us assemble in the Congregation: as being
that first day wherein God separating the light and darkness, did create the
world; and Jesus Christ our Savior rose again from the dead. This for the
day; then for the service of the day, he describes it thus. Upon the day called
Sunday, all that abide within the Cities or about the fields, do^ meet together
in some place, where the records of the Apostles, and writings of the Prophets,
as much as is appointed, are read unto us. The Reader having done, the Priest
or Prelate ministers a word of exhortation, that we do imitate those good
things which are there repeated. Then standing up together, we send up our
prayers unto the Lord; which ended, there is delivered unto every one of us,
bread, and wine with water. After all this the Priest or Prelate offers up our
prayers and thanksgiving as much as in him is, to God; and all the (...)
Clemens Alexandrinus, S^rom. l. 7.
(he flourished in the year 190:) who though he fetch the pedigree of the
Lords Day, even as far^e as Plat^ which before we noted; yet he seems well
enough contented, that the Lords Day should not be observed at all. (...), We
ought, says he, to honor and to reverence him, whom we are verily persuaded
to be the word, our Savior, and our Captain; and in him the Father: (...),
not in selected times, as some do amongst us, but alwa^es during our whole
lives, and on all occasions. The Royal Prophet tells us that he praised God
seven times a da^. Whence he that understands himself, stands not upon
determinate places, or appointed Temples, (...), much less on any Festivals,
or days assigned; but in all places honors God, though he be alone. And a
little after, (...), etc. making our whole lives a continual Festival, and
knowing God to be every where, we praise him sometimes in the fields, and
sometimes sailing on the Seas, and finally in all the times of our life what
ever. So in another place of the self-same book, (...), etc. He that does lead
his life according to the ordinances of the Gospel, (...), then keeps the Lords
Day, when he casts away every evil thought, and doing things with knowledge
and understanding, does glorify the Lord in his resurrection. By which it
seems, that whatsoever estimation the Lords Day had attained unto, at Rome,
and Corinth: yet either it was not so much esteemed at Alexandria, or else this
Clemens did not think so rightly of it, as he should have done.

(7) Now in the place of Justin Martyr before remembered, there is one special
circumstance to be consired in reference to our present search: for I say
nothing here of mingling water with the Wine, in the holy Sacrament, as not
conducinng to the business which we have in hand. This is, that in their
Sundays service, they did use to stand, during the time they made their
prayers unto the Lord: (...), as his words there are. Such was the custom of
this time, and a long time after; that though they kneeled on other days, yet
on the Lords day they prayed always standing. Yet not upon the Lords day
only, but every day from Easter unto Pentecost. The reason is thus given by
him who made the Responsions ascribed to Justin; that so says he, we might
take notice, as of our fall by sin, so of our restitution by the grace of
Christ. Resp^ad qu* 105
Six days we pray upon our knees, and that's in token of our fall: (...), etc.
But on the Lords Day we bow not the knee in token of the Resurrection; by
which according to the Grace of Christ, we are set free from sin, and the
powers of death. The like says he, is to be said of the days of Pentecost,
which custom as he tells us, and cites Irenaus for his Author, did take
beginning even in the times of the Apostles. Rather we may conceive that they
used this Ceremony, to testify their faith in the resurrection of our Lord and
Savior: which many Heretick^ of those times did publicly gainsay, as before
we noted, and shall speak more thereof hereafter. But whatsoever was the
reason, it continued long; and was confirmed particularly by the great Synod of
Nice, what time so^e people had begun to neglect this custom. The Synod
therefore thus determined, (...), C^n. 20.
etc. that forasmuch as some did use to kneel on the Lords Day, and the time
of Pentecost, that all things, in all places, might be done with an uniformity,
it pleased the holy Synod to decree it thus; (...), that men should stand, at
those times, when they made their prayers. For Fathers which avow this custom,
consult Tertullian, lib. de corona mil. S. Basil. l. de Sp. S. c. 27. S.
Hierom. adv. Luciferian. S. Austin. Epist. 118. S. Hilaries Praefat, in Psalm.
Ambros. Sermon. 62* and diverse others. What time this custom was laid by, I can
hardly say: but sure I am it was not laid aside in a long time after; Decret.
l. 2. tit. 9. c. 2.
not till the time of Pope Alexander the third, who lived about the year 1160*
For in a Decretall of his, confirmatorie of the former custom; it was
prohibited to kneel on the times remembered; Nisi aliquis ex devotione id velit
facere in secreto, unless some out of poor devotion, did it secretly. Which
dispensation probably occasioned the neglect thereof, in the times succeeding:
the rather since those heretics who formerly had denied the resurrection, were
now quite exterminated. This circumstance we have considered the more at large,
as being the most especial difference, whereby the Sundays service was
distinguished from the weeke-dayes worship, in these present times whereof we
write. And yet the difference was not such, but that it was proper to the Lords
day only: but, if it were a badge of honor, communicated unto more then forty
other days: of which more anon. But being it was an Ecclesiastical and
occasional custom; the Church which first ordained it, let it fall again by
the same authority.

(8) In the third Centurie, the first we meet with is Tertullian, who
flourished in the very first beginnings of it: by whom this day is called by
three several names. For first he calls it Dies solis, Sunday, as commonly we
now call it; and says, that they did dedicate the same unto mirth and
gladness; not to devotion altogether: Cap. 16.
Diem solis laetitiae indulgemus, in his Apologetick. The same name is used by
Justin Martyr in the passages before remembered: partly because being to write
to an heathen Magistrate, it had not been so proper, to call it by the name of
the Lords day, which name they knew not; and partly that delivering the form
and substance of their service done upon that day, they might the better quit
themselves, from being worshippers of the Sun, as the Gentiles thought. For
by their meetings on this day for religious exercises, in greater numbers, then
on others, in Afric and the West especially; and by their use of turning
toward the East, when they made their prayers, the world was sometimes so
persuaded. Inde suspic^o, quod innotuerit nos ad Orientis regionem precari, as
he there informed us. Whereby we may perceive of what great antiquity that
custom is, which is retained in the Church of England, of bowing, kneeling,
and adoring toward the Eastern parts. The second name by which Tertullian
calls this day, De Idolat. c 14.
is the eight day simply; Ethnic is semel annuus dies quisquis festus est, tibi
octavo quoque die. The third i^, De (...) mil. c. 3.
Dies Dominicus, or the Lords day, which is frequent in him, as, Die Dominico
jej^nium nefas duci^us, we hold it utterly unlawful to fast the Lords day, of
which more hereafter. For their performances in their public meetings he
describes them thus* Coimus in coetum and congregati^nem, etc. Apol. c. 39.
We come together into the assembly or congregation, to our common prayers,
that being banded as it were in a troop or Army, we may besiege God with our
petitions. To him such violence is exceeding grateful. It follows, Cogimur
ad sacrarum lit. commemorationem, etc. We meet to hear the holy Scriptures
rehearsed unto us, that so according to the quality of the times, we may
either be premonished, or corrected by them. Questionless by these holy
speeches our faith is nourished, our hopes erected, our assurance settled: and
notwithstanding by inculcating the same, we are the better stablished in our
obedience to Gods precepts. A little after, Praesident probati quique seniores,
etc. Now at these general meetings, some Priests or Elders do preside, which
have attained unto that honor not by money, but by the good report that they
have gotten in the Church. And if there be a poore-mans Box, every one cast in
somewhat menstrua die, at least once a month, according as they would, and as
they were able. Thus he describes the form of their public meetings: but
that such meetings were then used amongst them, on the Sunday only, that he
does not say. Nor can we learn by him or by Justin Martyr, who describes them
also either how long those meetings lasted, or wheth^r they assembled more then
once a day, or what they did after the meetings were dissolved. But sure it is,
that their Assemblies held no longer then our Morning service; that they met
only before noone, for Justin says, that when they met they used to receive
the Sacrament; and that the service being done, every man went again to his
daily labors. Of all these I shall speak hereafter. In Cant. Sol. hom. 30.
Only I note it out of Beza, that hitherto the people used not to forbear
their labors, but while they were assembled in the Congregation: there being
no such duty enjoined amongst them, neither in the times of the Apostles, nor
after, many years, not till the Emperors had embraced the Gospel, and
therewith published their Edicts to enforce men to it. But take his words at
large for the more assurance. Vt autem Christiani eo die a suis quotidianis
laboribus abstiner^nt, praeter idtemporis quod in coetu ponebatur, idneque
illis Apostolicis temporibus mandatum, neque pri^s fuit observatum, quam id a
Christianis Imperatoribus, ne quis a rerum sacrarum meditatione abstraharetur,
and quidem non it a praecise observatum. Which makes it manifest that the Lords
day was not taken for a Sabbath day in these three first Ages. But for
Tertullian where I left, note that I rendered seniores, by Priests or Elders,
because I think his meaning was to render the Greek Presbyter, by the Latin
senior. For that he should there mean lay elders, as some men would have it,
is a thing impossible: considering that he tells us in another place, that they
received the Sacrament at the hands of those, that did preside in the
assemblies. De coron. milit. c. 3.
Eucharistiae Sacramentum non de aliorum manu, quam de Praesidentium sumimus;
and therefore sure they must be Priests, that so presided.

(9) Proceed we next to Origin, who flourished at the ^ame time also. He being
an Auditor of Clemens, in the schools of Alexandria, became of his opinions
too in many things: and amongst others in dislike of those selected festivals
which by the Church were set apart, for Gods public service. In Gen hom. 10.
Cont* Cells. l. 8.
Dicite mihi vos qui festis tantum diebus ad Eccles. convenitis, coeteri dies
non sunt festi, non suntdies Domini? Indaeor^^ est dies certos and raros
observare solennes etc. Christiani omni die carnes agni comedunt, i.e. carnes
verbi Dei quotidie sumu^t. Tell me, says he, you that frequent the Church on
the feast days only, are not all days festival? are not all the Lords? It
appertains unto the Jews to observe days, and festivals: the Christians every
day eat the flesh of the Lamb, i.e. they every day do hear the Word of God.
And in another place, Cent. 2 C. 6.
(...) etc. He truly keeps the festivals, that performs his duty, praying
continually, and offering every day the unbloudy sacrifice in his prayers to
God. Which whosoever does, and is upright in thought, word, and deed, adhering
always unto God, our natural Lord; (...), Every day is to him a Lords day. It
seems too, that he had his desire, in part: it being noted by the
Mandeburgians, that every day there were assemblies in Alexandria, where he
lived, for hearing of the word of God. Et de collectis quotidie celebratis in
quibus praedicatum sit verbum Dei, Hom. 9. in Isa. significare videtur, as they
note it from him. Indeed the Proem to his several Homilies, seem to intimate,
that if they met not every day, to hear his Lectures; they met very often. But
being a learned man, and one that had a good conceit of his own abilities, he
grew offended that there was not as great resort of people every day, to hear
him; as upon the Festivals. Of Sunday there is little doubt, but that it was
observed amongst them: and so was Saturday also, as we shall see hereafter out
of Athanasius. Of Wednesday and Friday it is positively said by S^crates, Hist.
l. 5, c. 21.
that on them both the Scriptures were read openly, and afterward expounded by
the Doctors of the Church; and all things done appointed by the public
Liturgy, save that they did not use to receive the sacrament. (...), And this,
says he, was the old in Alexandria: which he confirms by the practi^e of
Origin, who was accustomed, as he tells us, to preach upon these days to the
Congreg^^ion. Tertullian too takes special notice of these two days, whereof
consult him in his book adv. Psychicos.

(10) About the middle of this Centurie, did Saint Cyprian live, another
Af^ican: and he has left us somewhat, although not much, which concerns this
business. Aurelius, Lib. 2. Epist. 5.
one of excellent part^, was made a Reader in the Church, I think of Carthage:
which being very welcome news to the common people, Saint Cyprian makes it
^^wne unto them; and withal lets them understand, that Sunday was the day
appointed for him to begin his Ministry. Et quoni^m semper gaudium properat,
nec mera far potest laetitia, dominico legit. So that as Sunday was a day,
which they used to meet on; so reading of the Scripture, was a special part of
the Sundays exercise. Not as an exercise to spend the time, when one does wait
for another coming, till the assembly be complete; and that without or
choice or stint appointed by determinate order; as is now used both in the
French and Belgicke Churches: for what need such an eminent man, as Aurelius
was, be taken out with so much expectation, to exercise the Clarks, or the
Sextons duty. But it was used amongst them then, as a chief portion of the
service which they did to God; in hearkening reverently unto his voice: It
being so ordered in the Church, that the whole Bible or the greatest part
thereof, Preface to (...) Common prayer.
should be read over once a year. And this, that so the Ministers of the
congregation, by often reading and meditation of Gods Word, be stirred up to
godliness themselves, and be the more able to^ exhort other; by wholesome
doctrine, and to conf^te them that were Adversaries to the truth: as that the
people by daily hearing of the Scriptures, should profit more and more in the
knowledge of God, and be the more inflamed with the love of his true Religion.
Nor for the duties of the people, on this day, in the Congregation, as they
used formerly to hear the Word, and receive the Sacraments, and to power forth
their souls to God in affectionate prayers: Decret. l. 5. C 7.
so much about these times, viz. in Ann. 237. it had been appointed by Pope
Fabian, that every man and woman should on the Lords day bring a quantity of
bread and wine, first to be offered on the Altar, and then distributed in the
Sacrament. A thing that had been done before, as of common course; but now
exacted as a duty: for the neglect whereof Saint Cyprian chides with a rich
widow of his time, who neither brought her offering, nor otherwise gave any
thing to the poore-mans Box, and therefore did not keep the Lords day, D^
pietat. and Eleemos.
as she should have done. Locuples and dives dominicum celebrarete credis, quae
Corbonam omnino non respicis, quae in Dominicum (here he means the Church)
sine sacrificio venis, quae partem de sacrificio, quod pauper obtulit, sumis.
In after times this custom went away by little and little; instead of which it
was appointed by the Church, and retained in ours, that Bread and Wine for the
Communion, shall be provided by the Churchwardens at the charge of the Parish.
I should now leave Saint Cyprian here, V. l. 3 Epi 8.
but that I am to tell you first, that he conceives the Lords day to have been
prefigured in the eight day, destinate to circum^ision. Which being but a
private opinion of his own; I rather shall refer the Reader unto the place,
then repeat the words. And this is all, this Age affords me in the present
search.

(11) For other holy days by the Church, for Gods public service, those
three Centuries precedent; besides the Lords day, or the Sunday, which came
every week, Origin names the Good Friday as we call it now, Cont. Cells. l 8.
the Parasceve, as he calls it there; the feast of Easter and of Pente^ost. Of
Easter we have spoke already. For Pentecost or Whitsontide, as it began with
the Apostles, so it continues till this present, but not in that solemnity
which before it had. For anciently not that day only, which we call
Whitsunday, or Pentecost (...), but all the fifty days, from Easter,
forwards, were accounted holy; and solemnized with no less observation, then
the sundays were: no kneeling on the one, nor upon the other; no fasting on
the one, nor upon the other. Of which days, that of the Ascension, or
Holy-Thursday being one; became in little time to be more highly reckoned of
then all the rest: as we shall prove hereafter out of Saint Austin. But for
these 50. days aforesaid, De Coron. (...). c^. 3.
Tertullian tells us of them, thus: Die Dominico jejunium nefas ducimus, vel de
geniculis adorare; Eadem immunitate a die Pasehae in Pente^osten gaudemus:
which makes both alike. Which words if any think too short, to reach the
point, he tells us in another place, that all the Festivals of the Gentiles,
contained not so many days as did that one. De Id^ c. 14.
Excerpe singulas solennitates nationum, and in ordinem texe, Pentecosten
implere non poterunt. The like he has also in his book adv. Psychicos: the
like Saint Hierom. ad Lucinum; the like Saint Ambrose, or Maximus Taurinens.
which of the two soever it was, that made those Sermons, Sermon. 60. 61. In which
last it is said expressly of those fifty days, that every one of them, was
instar Dominicae, and qualis est Dominica, in all respects nothing inferior to
the Lords day. And in the Comment on Saint Luke (which questionless was writ
by Ambrose) cap. 17. l. 8. it is said expressly, Et sunt omnes dies tanquam
Dominica, that every day of all ^he fifty, was to be reckoned of no otherwise,
in that regard* especially, then the Sunday was. Some footsteps of this custom
yet remain amongst us, in that we fast not either on S. Marks Eve, or on the
Eve of Philip and Jacob, happening within the time. The fast of the Rogation
week^ was after instituted, on a particular, and extraordinary occasion. Now
as these festivals of Easter and of Whitsontide, were instituted in the first
age or Centurie, and with them those two days attendant, which we still
retain; whereof see Austin de Civit. Dei, li. 22. ca. 8. and Myssen in his
first Hom. de Paschate, where Easter is expressly called (...), or the
three-dayes-^east: so was the feast of Christ's nativitie ordained or instituted
in the second, that of his incarnation in the third. For this we have an
Homily of Gregory surnamed Tha^maturg^s, who lived in An. 230, entitled De
annunciatione B. Virginis, as we call it now. But being it is questionable
among the learned, whether that Homily be his, or not: there is an Homily of
Athanasius on the self same argument, (he lived in the beginning of the
following Centurie) whereof there is no question to be made at all. That of the
Lords nativitie, began if not before, in the second Age. Theophilus C^sariens.
who lived about the times of Commodus and Severus the Roman Emperors, makes
mention of it; and sixeth it upon the 25. of December. as we now observe it.
Natalem Domini, quocunq^e die 8. Calend. Ianuar. venerit, celebrare debemus, as
his own words are. And after, in the time of Maximinus which was one of the
last great persecutours, L. 7. C. 6.
Nicephor^s tells us, that In ipso natalis Dominici die, Christianos Nicemediae
festivitatem celebrantes, succens^ templ^ concremavit; even in the very day of
the Lords nativitie, he caused the Christians to be burnt at Nicomedia, whilst
they were solemnizing this great feast within their Temple. I say this Great
Feast, and I call it so on the authority of Beda, who reckons Christmas,
Orat. de Philog^n.
Easter, and Whitsontide, for majora solennia, as they still are counted. But
before Bid it was so thought over all the Church: Chrysostom calls it, (...),
the mother or metropolis of all other feasts. And before him Pope Fabian, Se^
Binius Conc. T. 1.
whom but now we spoke of, ordained that all laymen should communicate at
least thrice a year, which, was these three festivals. Etsi non frequentius,
saltem ter in Anno Laici homines communicent, etc. in Pascha and Pentecoste,
and Natali Domini. So quickly had the Annual got the better, of the weekly
Festivalls. According to which ancient Canon, the Church of England has
appointed that every man communicate at lest thrice a year; of which times,
Easter to be one.

(12) Before we end this Chapter, there is one thing yet to be considered,
which is the name whereby the Christians of these first Ages, did use to call
the day of the resurrection; and consequently the other days of the week,
according as they found the time divided. The rather because some are become
oftended, that we retain those names amongst us, which were to us commended
by our Ancestors, and to them, by theirs. Where first we must take notice,
that the Jews in honor of their Sabbath, used to refer their times to that;
distinguishing their days by Prima Sabbati, Secunda Sabbati, and so until
they came to the Sabbath it self: as on the other side the Gentiles, following
the motions of the Planets, gave to each day the name of that particular
Planet, by which the first hour of the day was governed, as their Astrologers
had taught them, Now the Apostles being Jews, retained the custom of the
Jews; and for that reason called that day on which our Savior rose, (...),
una sabbati, the first day of the week, as our English reads it. The Fathers,
many of them followed their example. Saint Austin thereupon calls Thursday, by
the name of quintum sabbati, Epist. 118, and so does venerable Beda, hist. lib.
4. c. 25. Saint Hierome, Tuesday, tertium sabbati, in Epitaph. Paulae;
Tertullian Friday, by the old name, parasceve l. 4. advers. Marcion. Saturday
they called generally the Sabbath; and Sunday, sometimes dies solis, and is
sometimes Dominicus. De invent. rerum l. 5, 6.
Pope Silvester, as Polydore Virgil is of opinion, va^orum deorum memoriam
abhorrens, hating the name and memory of the Gentile-Gods, gave order that the
days should be called by the name of F^riae; and the distinction to be made by
Prima feria, secunda feria, etc. the Sabbath and the Lords day holding their
names, and places, as before they did. Hence that of H^norius Augustodunensis;
Hebraeinominant dies suos, una vel prima sabbati, De im^gine mundi, cap 2^.
etc. Pagani sic, dies solis, Lunae, etc. Christiani vero sic dies nominant,
viz. Dies Dominicus, feria prima, etc. Sabbat^m. But by their leaves, this is
no universal rule; the Writers of the Christian Church no^ tying up their
hands so strictly, as to give the days what names they pleased: Save that the
Saturday is called amongst the^ by no other name, then that which formerly it
had, the Sabbath. So that when ever, for a thousand years, and upwards, we
meet with sabbatum, in any Writer of what name soever it must be und^rstood of
no day but Saturday. As for the other day, the day of the resurrection, all the
Evangelists, and Saint Paul, take notice of no other name, then of the first
day of the week. S. John, and after him Ignatius, call it (...), the Lords
Day. But then again, Justin Martyr for the second Century does in two several
passages call it no otherwise then (...), Sunday, as then the Gentiles called
it, and we call it now: and so Ter^^ullian for the third, who uses both, and
calls it sometimes diemsolis, and sometimes Dominicum, as before was said.
Which questionless neither of them would have done, on what respect soever,
had it been ^ither contrary to the Word of God, or scandalous unto his Church.
So for the after ages* in the Edicts of Constantine, V^lentinian, Valens,
Gratian, Honorius, Arcadius, Thendosius, Christian Princes all, it has no
other name then Sunday, or dies solis: and m^^y fair years after them, the
Synod held at Dingulafinum in the lower Bavaria, Anno 772, calls it plainly
Sunday; Festo die solis

CHAP. III.
That in the fourth Age from the time of Constantine to Saint Austine, the
Lords day was not taken for a Sabbath day.
(1) The Lords day first established by the Emperor Constantine. (2) What
labors were permitted, and what restrained on the Lords day, by this Emperors
Edict. (3) Of other holy days, and Saints days, instituted in the time of
Constantine. (4) That weekly other days, particularly the Wednesday and the
Friday, were in this Age, and those before appointed for the meetings of the
Congregation. (5) The Saturday as highly honored in the Eastern Churches, as
the Lords day was. (6) The Fathers of the Eastern Churches, cry down the
Jewish Sabbath, though they held the Saturday. (7) The Lords day not spent
wholly in religious exercises; and what was done with that part of it, which was
left at large. (8) The Lords day, in this Age, a day of feasting: and that it
has been always deemed haereticall, to hold fasts thereon (9) Of recreation
on the Lords day: and of what kind those dancings were, against the which the
Fathers enveigh so sharply. (10) Other Imperial Edicts about the keeping of
the Lords day, and the other holy days. (11) The Orders, at this time in use,
on the Lords day, and other days, of public meeting, in the Congregation.
(12) The infinite differences between the Lords day, and the Sabbath.

(1) HItherto have we spoken of the Lords day, as taken up by the common
consent of the Church: not instituted or established by any text of Scripture,
or Edict of Emperor, or decree of council; save that some few particular
Counsels did reflect upon it, in the point of Easter. In that which follows,
we shall find both Emperors and Co^ncels very frequent, in ordering things
about this day, and the service of it. And first we have the Emperor
Constantine, who being the first Christian Prince that publickely professed the
Gospel; was the first also that made any law about the keeping of the Lords
day or Sunday. De vit. constable. lib. 4. ^. 18.
Of him E^sebi^s tells us, that thinking that the chiefest and most proper day,
for the devotion of his subjects, he presently declared his pleasure, (...),
that every one who lived in the Roman Empire, should take their ease, or rest,
in that day weekly, which is instituted to our Savior. Now where the
soldiers in his camp were partly Christians, and partly the Gentiles: it was
permitted unto them who professed the Gospel, upon the Sunday, so he calls it,
freely to go unto the Churches, and there offer up their prayers to Almighty
God. But such as had continued still in their ancient errors, were ordered to
assemble in the open fields, upon those days and on a signal given, to make
their prayers unto the Lord, after a form by him prescribed. The form being
in the Latin tongue, was this that follows. Te solum Deum agnoscimus, Cap.
20.
te regem profitemur, te adjutorem invocamus, per te victorias consecuti sumus,
per te hosts superavimus, a te and praesentem felicitatem consecutos fatemur,
and futuram adepturos speramus: tui omnes supplices sumus, a tepetimus, ut
Constantinum Imperatoren no strum una cum piis ejus liberis, quam diutissime
nobis salvum and victorem `conserves. In English, thus. We do acknowledge thee
to be the only God, we confess thee to be the King, we call upon thee as our
helper and defender: by thee alone it is that we have got the victory, and
subdued our enemies, to thee as we refer all our present happiness, so from
thee also do we expect our future. Thee therefore we beseech, that thou
would please to keep in all health and safety, our noble Emperor
Constantine, with his hopeful progeny. Nor was this only to be done in the
fields of Rome, in patentibus suburbiorum campis, as the Edict ran: but after
by another proclamation he did command the same over all the Provinces of the
Empire. Cap. 23.
(...), as Eusebius has it. So natural a power it is in a Christian Prince,
to order things about religion; that he not only took upon him to command the
day, but also ^o prescribe the service; to those I mean who had no ^ublicke
Liturgy, or set form of Prayer.

(2) Nor did he only take upon him to command or appoint the day, as to all
his subjects; and to prescribe ^ form of prayer, as unto the Gentiles: but to
decree what works should be allowed upon it, and what intermitted. In former
times, though the Lords day, had got the credit, as to be honored with the
public meetings of the Congregation; yet was it not so strictly kept, no not
in time of Divine service, but that the public magistrates, Judges and other
Ministers of state, were to attend those great employments they were called
unto, without relation to this day, or cessation on it, and so did other men
that had less employments, and those not so necessary. These things this pious
Emperor taking into consideration, and finding no necessity, but that his
Judges and other public ministers might attend Gods service on that day; at
least not be a means to keep others from it: and knowing that such as dwelt
in Cities had sufficient leisure to frequent the Church, and that Artificers
without any public discommodity, might for that time forbear their ordinary
labors: he ordered and appointed, that all of them, in their several places
should this day lay aside their own business, to attend the Lords. But then
withal con^idering, that such as followed husbandry, could not so well neglect
the times of seed and harvest, but that they were to take advantage of the
fairest and most seasonable weather, as God pleased to send it; he left it free
to them to follow their affairs on what day soever: lest otherwise they might
lose those blessings, which God in his great bounty had bestowed upon them.
This mentioned in the very Edict he set forth about it. First for his Judges,
Citizens or inhabitants of the greater towns, and all Artificers therein
dwelling. Omnes Iudices, L. Omnes cap. ^e feri^s.
urbanaeque plebes, and cunctarum artium officia, venerabili die Solis
quiescant. Next for the people of the Country, Rure tamen positi, libere
licenterque agrorum culturae inserviant, quoniam frequenter evenit, ut non
aptius alio die, frumenta sulcis, vinea scrobibus mandentur. And then the
reason of this follows* Ne occasion moment^, pereat commoditas (...)
provisione concessa. This Edict did bear date, in the Nones of March, Anno
321, being the 11 year of that Princes Empire: and long it did not stand, till
he himself was feign to explain his meaning in the first part of it. For
whereas he intended only to restrain lawsuites, and contentious pleadings,
as being unfit for such a day: his Judges and like officers finding a general
restraint in the law or Edict, durst not engage themselves in the Cognizance of
any evil cause what ever; no not so much as in the Manumission of a Bondslave.
This coming to the Emperors notice, who was a friend of liberty, and could
not but well understand, how acceptable a thing it was to God, that works of
charity and mercy should not be restrained on any days: it pleased him to send
out a second Edict, in the July following, directed to Elpidius, who was then
Praefectus Praetorio, as I take it; wherein he authorized his Ministers to
perform that Office, any thing in the former Law, unto the contrary
notwithstanding. For so it remains, Ibid.
Sicut indignissimum videbatur diem Solis venerationis suae celebrem,
altercantibus jurgijs and noxijs partium contentionibus occupari; ita gratum
est and jucundum eo die, quae sunt maxim votiva, compleri. Atque ideo
emancipandi and manumittendi, die festo, cuncti licentiam habeant, and super
his rebus Acta non prohibeantur. So that not only husbandry was permitted, in
small Towns and Villages; but manumission being a mere civil Act and of no
small care, many was by him suffered and allowed in the greater Cities. The
first great work done by the first great Christian Prince, was to declare his
royal pleasure about this day; what things he thought most proper to permit,
and what to disallow upon it, teaching all other Kings and Princes which have
since succeeded, what they should also do on the same occasion.

(3) Nor did this pious Prince confirm and regulate the Lords day only: but
unto him we are indebted for many of these other Festivalls, which have been
fince obferved in the Church of God. It had been formerly a custom in the
Christian Church, carefully to observe the times and days of their departure,
who had preferred the Gospel before their lives, and suffered many torments,
and at last death it self, for the faith of Christ. Eus^^. hist. l. 4. c. 14.
The Church of Smyrna (and that is the highest we need go) testifies in an
Epistle writ ad Philomelienses, that they did celebrate the day, wherein their
Reverend Bishop Polycarp did suffer Martyrdom with joy and gladness, and an
holy Convocation. This was in Anno 170. or there abouts. And in the following
Age, S. Cyprian taking notice of such men as were imprisoned for the testimony
of a good conscience, appointed that the days of their decease should be
precisely noted, that so their memories might be celebrated with the holy
Martyrs. Epl. 8. l. 3.
Denique and dies eorum quibus excedunt, annotate, ut commemorationes eorum
inter memorias martyrum celebrare possimus, as there he has it. But hitherto
they were only bare memorialls, (for more they durst not do in those times of
trouble) their sufferings only ^ignified to the Congregation: and that they
did unto this end, that by exhibiting the people their infinite indurances for
the truth and testimony of Religion, they also might be nourished in an equal
constancy. After, when as the Church was in perfect peace, it pleased the
Emperor Constantine to signify to all his Deputies and Leivtenants in the
Roman Empire, Eusebius. l 4. cap. 23.
that they should have a care to see those the memorialls of the Martyrs duly
honored; and solemn times or Festivalls to be appointed in the Churches, to
that end and purpose. (...). And though these Festivalls and Saints days
became not forthwith common over all the world; but were observed in those
parts chiefly, wherein the memory of the Saint or Martyr, was in most esteem;
in which respect Saint Hierome calls them, In Gal. 41*
tempora in honor Martyrum pro diversa regionum varietate constituta: yet in a
little tract of time, such of them as had been most eminent, as the Apostles
and Evangelists, were universally received and celebrated, even as now they
are. I say as now they are, as they are now observed in the Church of England;
De Martyr. l* 8.
and this I say upon the credit and authority of Theodoret. Who, though he
gives another reason and original of these institutions, informs us of these
Festivalls that they were modestae, castae, temperantia plenae, performed with
modesty, chastity and sobriety: not as the Festivalls of the Gentiles were,
in excess and riot. And not so only, but he affirms this of them, divinis
canticis personantis, sacrisque sermonibus audiendis intentae, that they were
solemnized with spiritual Hymns, and religious Sermons: and that the people
used to empty out their souls to God in fervent and affectionate Prayers, non
sine lachrymis and suspirijs, even with sighs and tears. As for Theodoret, he
lived and flourished in the year 420. and speaks of these Festivalls (S.
Peter and S. Thomas and S. Paul, with others which he names particularly) as
things which had been settled and established a long time before: and therefore
could not be much after the time of Constantine, who dyed not till the up year
341. or thereabouts. As for the eighth book de Martyrib. Where this passage
is, it is the 12. of those entitled de curandis Graec. affect. And howsoever
some exception has been made against them, as that they were not his, whose
names they carry: yet find I no just proof thereof amongst our Critics.

(4) Now as the Emperor Constantine did add the Annual Festivalls of the
Saints unto those other Anniversarie feasts, which formerly had been observed
in the Christian Church: so by his royal edict did he settle and confirm
those public meetings, which had been formerly observed on each Friday
weekly; the Wednesday standing on the same Basis, as before it did, which was
the custom of the Church. De vit Constable. l. 4. c. 18.
Eusebius having told us of this Emperors Edict about the honoring of the
Sunday, adds, that he also made the like about the Friday: (...) as that
Author has it. Sozomen adds, that he enjoined also the like rest upon it, the
like cessation both from judicature, Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
and all other businesses: and after gives this reason of it. (...). He
honored the one, says he, as being the day of our Redeemers resurrection, the
other, as the^ day of our Saviors passion. So for the practice of the Church
in the following times, that they used other days besides the Sundays, is
evident by many passages of Cyrill of Jerusalem, where he makes mention of
the Sermon preached the day before, (...) in his own Language; Catech. orat.
7. and (...), the morrow after the Lords day, Cat. 14. and (...), Catech.
Mystag. 2. The like is very frequent in S. Ambrose also. Hesterno die de font
disputavimus, De Sacram. lib. 3. cap. 1. Hesternus noster sermo ad sancti
altaris sacramentum deductus est. lib. 5. cap. 1. and in other places. The like
in Crysostome as in many other places; too many to be pointed at in this place
and time; so in his 18. Hom. on the 3. of Genesis (...) etc. But this perhaps was
only in respect of Lectures, or Expositions of the Scriptures, such as were
often used in the greater Cities, where there was much people, and but little
business: for I conceive not that they met every day in these times to receive
the Sacraments. Of Wednesday and of Friday, it is plain they did, (not to say
any thing of the Saturday till the next Section.) Epl. 289.
S. Basil names them all together. (...),and. It is says he, a profitable and
pious thing, every day to communicate and to participate of the blessed body
and blood of Christ our Savior; he having told us in plain terms, that
Whosoever eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, has eternal life. We
notwithstanding do communicate but four times weekly, (...), viz. on the
Lords day, the Wednesday, the Friday and the Saturday, unless on any other
days the memory of some Martyr be perhaps observed. E^pos. ^^d. ^ath. 11. 22.
Epiphanius goes a little further, and he deriveth the Wednesdayes and the
Fridayes Service even from the Apostles, ranking them in the same Antiquity,
and grounding them upon the same authority, that he does the Sunday. (...).
Only it seems the differenc^ was, that whereas formerly it had been the
custom not to administer the Sacrament on these two days (being both of them
fasting days, and so accounted long before) until toward evening: It had
been changed of late and they did celebrate in the mornings (...), as on the
Lords day was accustomed. Whether the meetings on these days were of such
antiquity as Epiphanius says they were, I will not meddle. Certain it is that
they were very ancient in the Church of God; as may appear by that of Origin
and Tertullian before remembered. So that if we consider either the preaching
of the word, the ministration of the Sacraments, or the public Prayers: the
Sunday in the Eastern Churches had no great prerogative above other days,
especially above the Wednesday and the Friday, save that the meetings were more
solemn, and the concourse of people greater than at other times, as it is most
likely. The footesteps of this ancient custom are yet to be observed in this
Church of England; by which it is appointed that no Wednesdayes and Fridayes
weekly, Can. 25.
though they be not holy days, the Minister at the accustomed hours of
Service s^all resort to Church, and say the Letanie prescribed in the Book of
Common prayer.

(5) As for the Saturday, that retained its wounted credit in the Eastern
Church; little inferior to the Lords day, if not plainly equal: not as a
Sabbath, think not so; but as a day designed unto sacred meetings. The
Constitutions of the Apostles, said to be writ by Clemens, one of Saint Peter's
first successors in the Church of Rome, appoint both days to be observed as
solemn Festivalls; both of them to be days of rest: that so the servant might
have time to repair unto the Church, for his education. Lib 8. c. 3^*
(...)* So the Constitution. Not that they should denote them wholly unto rest
from labor; but only those se^ times of both, which were appointed for the
meetings of the Congregation: Yet this had an exception too, the Saturday
before Easter day, Lib. 5* cap. 19.
whereupon Christ rested in the Grave, being exempt from these assemblies, and
destinated only unto grief and fasting. And though these constitutions in all
likelihood were not writ by Clemens, there being many things therein, which
could not be in use of a long time after: yet ancient sure they were, as being
mentioned in Epiphanius; De Scrip. Ecc. in Clemente.
and as the Cardinal confesses, a Graecis veteribus magni factos, much made
of by the ancient Graecians, though not of such authority in the Church of
Rome. How their authority in this point is countenanced by Ignatius, we have
seen already: and we shall see the same more fully, throughout all this Age.
And first, beginning with the Synod, held in Laodicea, Can* 16.
a town of Phrygia, Anno 314. there passed a Canon, (...), touching the
reading of the Gospels, with the other Scriptures upon the Saturday, or
Sabbath: that in the time of Lent, Canon 49.
there should be no oblation made (...), but on the Saturday, and the Lords day
only; neither that any Festival should be then observed in memory of any
Martyrs, Canon 51.
but that their names only should be commemorated, (...), upon the Lords day
and the Sabbaths. Nor was this only the particular will of those two and
thirty Prelates that there assembled; it was the practice too of the
Alexandrians. S. Athanasius Patriarch there, affirms that they assembled on
the Sabbath days, not that they were infected any whit with Iudaisius, which
was far from them; H^mi^ de Seme^te.
but that they came together on the Sabbath day, to worship Jesus Christ the
Lord of the Sabbath* (...), as the Father has it. So for the Church of
Millaine, which as before I said, in some certain things followed the Churches
of the East; it seems the Saturday was held in a far esteem, and joined
together with the Sunday. Crastino die and Sabbato, De Sacrament. Lib 4. cap. 6.
and dominico, de orationis ordine dicemus, as S. Ambrose has it. And
probably his often mention of hesternus dies remembered in the former Section,
may have relation to the joint observance of these two days: and so may that
which is reported then out of S. Chrysostom. and S. Cyril, Eastern Doctors both.
Hist. Eccles. Lib. 6. cap. 8.
Sure I am Socrates counts both days for weekly Festivalls, (...), and adds
(...), that on them both the Congregation used to be assembled, and the whole
Liturgy performed. Which plainly shows, that in the practice of those
Churches they were both regarded, both alike observed. Gregory Nyssen speaks
more home and unto the purpose. Some of the people had neglected to come unto
the Church upon the Saturday; and on the Sunday he thus chides and rebukes them
for it. (...), De Cast^g^tione.
etc. with what face, says the Father, will thou look upon the Lords day,
which have dishonored the Sabbath, know thou not that these days are
sisters, and that who ever does despise the one, does affront the other?
Sisters indeed, and so accounted in those Churches, not only in regard of the
public meetings, but in this also that they were both exempt from the Lenten
Fast; of which, more annon. In the mean time, we may remember how Saturday i^
by S. Basil made one of those four times, whereon the Christians of those
parts did assemble weekly to receive the Sacrament, as before we noted. And
finally it is said by Epiphanius, that howsoever it was not so in the Isle of
Cyprus, which it seems held more correspondence with the Church of Rome, than
those of Asia; Expos. fidei Cathol. 24.
Yet in some places, (...)* they used to celebrate the holy Sacrament, and hold
their public meetings on the Sabbath day: So as the difference was but this,
that whereas in the Eastern and Western Churches several days were in
commission for Gods public service: the Lords day, in both places, was of the
Quorum, and therefore had the greater worship, because more business.

(6) They held their public meetings on the Sabbath day, yet did not keep it
like a Sabbath. The Fathers of this learned age knew that Sabbath had been
abrogated, and professed as much. The Council of Laodicea before remembered,
though it ascribe much to this day, in reference to the Congregations then held
upon it: yet it condemns the Romish observations of the same. (...) etc. It is
not fit for Christians, ^aith the 29. Canon, to Iudaize, and do no manner of
work on the Sabbath days, but to pursue their ordinary labors on it.
Conceive it so far forth, as they were no impediment to the public meetings
then appointed. And in the close of all, (...), If any should be found so to
play the Jews, let them be Anathema. So Athanasius, though he defend the
public meetings on this day, stands strongly notwithstanding for the
abrogation of the Jewish Sabbath. Not on the by, but in a whole discourse, writ
and continued especially for that end and purpose, entitled De Sabbato and
circumcisione. One might conjecture by the title, by coupling of these two
together, what his meaning was; that he conceived them both, to be of the same
condition. And in his homily De semente, he tells us of the New-moones and
Sabbaths, that they were vshers unto Christ, and to be in authority till the
master came. (...). The Master being come, the Vs^er grew out of all
employment, the Sun once risen, the lamp was darkened. V* p. 1. chapt. 8.
Two other of the Fathers which have said as much, and whereof we have spoken
in a place more proper; add Nanianz. Orat. 43. S. Cyril of Jerusalem, Cat. 4.
and Epiphanius in the confutation of those several heretics, that held the
Sabbath for a necessary part of Gods public worship; and to be now observed,
as before it was. Of which kind, over and above the Ebionites and Cerinthians,
which before we spoke of, were the Nazaraei, in the second Century, who, as
this Epiphanius tells us, differed both from the Jew and Christian. First, from
the Jew, in that they did believe in Christ, next from the Christian, (...), in
that they still retain the law, as Circumcision, and the Sabbath, and such
things as those. And these I have the rather noted in this place and time, as
being, so Saint Austine tells us, Cont. Cresconium l. 8.
the Ancestors or Original of the Symmachiani, who held out till this very
Age, and stood as much for Sabbaths and legal ceremonies, as their founders
did: whereof consult S. Ambrose preface to the Galatians. Now as these Nazarens
or Symmachiani, had made a mixed religion of Jew and Christian; Narianz. Orat.
19.
so did another sort of heretics in these present times, contrive a
miscellanie of the Jew and Gentile: Idols and sacrifices they would not have,
and yet they worshipped the fire and candle. (...), etc. The Sabbath also they
much reverenced, and stood upon the difference of unclean and clean, yet by
no means would be enduced to like of Circumcision. These they called
Hypsistarij; or rather so those doughty fellows pleased to call themselves.
Add here that it was counted one of the great dotages of Appollinaris, and
afterward of all his sect, viz. that after the last resurrection every thing
should be done again, Ba^il. epl. 74.
according to the former law: (...), etc. That we should be circumcised, and
observe the Sabbath, and abstain from meats, and offer sacrifice, and finally
of Christians become Jews again. Then which says Basil, who reports it, what
can be more absurd, or more repugnant to the Gospel. By which it is most
plain and certain, that though the Christians of the East, retained the
Saturday for a day of public meeting; yet they did never mean it to be a
Sabbath; reckoning them all for heretics that so observed it.

(7) Next let us look upon the Sunday, what they did on that. For though it
pleased the Emperor, by his royal edict to permit works of husbandry in the
Country and manumissions in the Cities, on that sacred day: yet probably there
were some pure and pious souls, who would not take the benefit of the
declaration; or think themselves beholding to him for so injurious and profane
a dispensation. This we will search into exactly, that so the truth may be
discovered. And first beginning with the Council of Eliberis, (a Town of
Spain) in the beginning of this Age, it was thus decreed. Si quis in civitate
positus, Can. 21.
per tres dominicas ecclesiam non accesserit tanto tempore abstineat, ut
correptus esse videatur. If any inhabitant of the Cities absent himself from
Church, three Lords days together, let him be kept as long from the holy
Sacrament, that he may seem corrected for it. Where note, Si quis in civitate
positus, the Cannon reaches, unto such only, as dwelt in Cities, near the
Church, and had no great business: those of the Country being left unto their
husbandry, and the like affairs; no otherwise than in the Emperors Edict,
which came after this. And in the Council of Laodicea, not long after, Can. 29.
which clearly gave the Lords day place before the Sabbath; it is commanded
that the Christians should not Iudai^e on the Sabbath day, but that they should
prefer the Lords day before it, and rest thereon from labor, if at least
they could, but as Christans still. The Canon is imperfect as it stands in the
Greek text of Binius edition; no sense to be collected from it. But the
translation of Dionysius Exiguus, which he acknowledges to be more near the
Greek, then the other two, makes the meaning up. Diem dominicum praeferentes
ociari oportet, si mod^ possint. And this agreeably both unto Zonar as and
Balsamon, who do so expound it, and saw no doubt the truest and most perfect
copies. Thus then says Zonaras. It is appointed by this Canon, that none
abstain from labor on the Sabbath day, which plainly was a Jewish custom;
and an anathema laid on those who offend herein. In Canon. Conc. Lao^^
(...), etc but they are willed to rest from labor on the Lords day, in honor
of the resurrection of our Lord and Savior. But here we must observe that the
Cannon adds, (...), in case they may. For by the civil law, it is precisely
ordered, that every man shall rest that day, (...) the hindes and husbandmen
excepted. His reason is the very same, with that expressed before in the
Emperors Edict. (...), etc. For unto them it is permitted to work and
travail on that day, because perhaps if they neglect it, they may not find
another day so fit and serviceable for their occasions. The like says
Balsamon, and more: but him we will reserve for the 12 Century at what time he
lived. ad Eu^tochium.
S. Hierome long time after this, tells us of his Egyptian Monks, diebus
dominicis orationi tantum and lectionibus vacare, that they designed the Lords
day, wholly, unto prayer and reading of the holy Scriptures, and that they did
the like upon other days, completis opusculis, when their task was finished.
This plainly shows that it was otherwise with the common people. For what
need Hierome have observed it, as a thing notable in his Monks, and peculiar
to them; that they spent all the Lords day in religious exercises, had other
men so done, as well as they. But Hierome tells us more than this of Paula, a
most devout and pious woman, who lived in Bethlehem, accompanied with many
Virgins and poor Widows, in manner of a Nunnery. Of whom he says that every
Lords day they repared to the Church of God: Et inde pariter revertentes
instabant operi distributo, and vel sibi vel coeteris vestimenta faciebant, and
after their return from thence they set themselves unto their taskes which was
the making garments for themselves or others: A thing which questionless so
good a woman had not done, and much less ordered it to be done by others; had
it been then accounted an unlawful Act. And finally S. Chrysostom, though in
his popular di^courses he seem to intimate to the people, that God from the
beginning did insinuate to them, that they should set apart (...), one day in
every week to his public worship, Hom. 10. in Genesis and that he calls upon
them often (...), to destinate that one day, and that day wholly unto those
employments, Sa. Hom. 3. in Ioh. 3.
as Hom. 5. in Mat. 1. yet he confesses at the last, that after the
dismission of the Congregation, every man might apply himself to his lawful
business. Only he seems offended with them, that they went presently to the
works of their vocations as soon as they came out of the Church of God; and
did not meditate on the Word delivered to them. Therefore he wooeth them unto
this, that presently upon their coming home, they would take the Bible into
their hands, and recapitulate with their wives and children, that which had
been delivered from the Word of God: (...) and afterward to go about their
worldly businesses. As for the time appointed to these public exercises, Hom.
5 in Math. 1.
it seems not to be very long. Chrysostom in the place before remembered says
that it was (...) a very small portion of the day: Origin more precisely has
l^yd it out, and limited the same, ad unam aut duas horas ex die integro, but
to an hour, or two at most; In Numer. Hom. 2.
no great space of time. Nor indeed could they hold them long, the Sermons
being most times exceeding short, as may appear by those of the ancient
Fathers, which are still extant in our hands, and the Liturgy not so full as
now it is.

(8) Let it then go for granted, that such as dwelt in populous Cities (for
of the Husbandman there is no question to be made) might lawfully apply
themselves to their several businesses, the exercises being ended, and the
assembly broken up: may we conceive it lawful also for any man to follow his
honest pleasures on the remainder of that day; to feast it with his friends and
neighbors, to dance, or sport, or to be merry in a civil manner. There is a
little question of it; For feasting, first we must take notice, how execrable a
thing it was always held, to fast the Sunday: though some now place a great
part of their piety in their fond abstinence on that day. In this respect
Tertullian tells us touching the Christians of his time, De Co^ona mil. c. 3.
that they did hold it an impiety to fast the Lords day: die dominico jejunium
nefas esse ducimus, as before we noted. Such an impiety that the very
Montanists, though otherwise frequent in their fasts, did yet except this day
and the former Sabbath, out of their austerities: Cap. 15.
as the same Author does inform us adv. Psychicos. What was Ignatius censure
of the Sundays Fast, we have seen already. In the declining of the third age
arose the Manichees, and they revived the former dotage. Dominica jejunare non
possumus, qui^ Manichaeos ob istius diei jejunia, merito damnamus. We fast not
on the Lords day, says S. Ambrose, but rather do condemn the Manichees for
fasting on it; Now what this Father said, he made good by practice. Anna^^.
Anno 374.
Baronius tells us out of Paulinus, that he did never dine but on the Saturday,
the Sunday, or the memorial of some Martyr: and that upon those days he did
not only cherish and relieve the poor* sed and viri clarissimi exciperentur,
but enterteined great persons, men of special eminence. Vincentius Deputy of
Gaul, and Count Arbogastis, are there said by name to have been often at his
table upon those days before remembered: and doubt we not, but they had all
things fit for such eminent persons. The like has been affirmed by S. Austin
also: Epl. 86.
Die dominica jejunare scandalum est magnum, etc. It is a great offense or
scandal to fast upon the Lords day, in these times especially, since the most
damnable heresy of the Manichees came into the world* who have imposed it on
their followers, as the Law of God, and thereby made the Lords day fast the
more abominable. Now for an instance of his entertainements also upon this
day, see l. 22 de civitate dei. c. 8. This probably occasioned Pope Meltiades,
who lived in the beginning of this present Centurie, to publish a decree, Ne
dominica, neve feria quinta jejunaretur, that no man should presume to fast
upon the Sunday, or the Thursday, Not on the Sunday, as the day of the
Resurr^^tion, to cry down the Manichees: nor on the Thursday, as a day of
special credit amongst the Gentiles, the better to comply with them in those
perilous times. Anno 319.
After arose up one E^tactus (for so I rather choose to call him with the
learned Cardinal, than yield to Socrates, who falsely does impute these follies
unto E^stathius:) and he would fast the Sunday too; but on another ground, or
pretense of abstinence. Conc. Tom. 2. Can. 18.
A folly presently condemned in a Provincial Synod held at Gangra of
Paphlagonia; wherein it was determined thus (...), if any fasted on the Lords
day on pretense of abstinence, he should be anathema. Next sprung up one
Aerius, no good Sundays man, but one that went not on so good a ground, as
Eutactus did. He stood, good man, upon his Christian liberty, and needs must
fast upon the Lords day, only because the Church had determined otherwise. De
haeres. ^. 53.
Of him S. Austin tells us in the general, that he cried down all settled and
appointed fasts, and taught his fellows this, that every man might fast as he
saw occasion; ne videatur sub lege, lest else he should be thought to be under
the Law. More punctually Epiphanius tells us, Haeres 75. n. 3.
that to express this liberty, they used to fast upon the Sunday, and feast it
(as some do of late) upon the Wednesday and the Friday, ancient fasting days.
(...) as that Author has it. Add that S. Austin tells us of this Aerius, that
amongst other of his heresies, he taught this for one, Presbyterum ab Episcopo
nulla differentia discerni debere, that there should be no difference between
Priests and Bis^ops; A pregnant evidence, that those who set themselves against
the Hi^rarchie of the Church are the most likely men of all to overthrow all
orders, in the civil state. Now as the Manichees did use to fast the Sunday,
so were they therein imitated by the Priscillianists, manichaeorum simillimos,
the very pictures of the Manichees, Epl. 86.
as S. Austin calls them, save that these last did use to fast on the
Christmasse also, and therein went beyond their pattern. And this they did as
Pope Leo tells us quia Christum dominum in vera hominis natura natum esse non
credunt, Epl. 93. c. 4.
because they would not be persuaded that Christ the Lord had took upon him
our humane nature. To meet with these proud sectaries, for such they were,
there was a council called at Saragossa, Caesarea Augusta the Latins call it:
wherein the Fathers censured, and anathematized all such as fasted on the Lords
day, causa temporis, aut persuasionis, aut superstitionis; whether it were in
reference unto any time, Con. Tom. 1. can. 2.
or misperswasion, or superstition. In reference unto any times, this seems to
make the Sundays fast unlawful in the time of Lent, and so it was accounted
without all question. For this look Epiphanius Expos. fid. Cathol. Number. 22. S.
Ambr. de Elia and jejunio, cap. 10. S. Hierome epl. ad Lucinum. S. Chrysostom
Hom. 11. in Genesis 2. In two of which Foure-fathers, Chrysostom and Ambrose, the
Saturday is excepted also. S, Austin Epl. 86. Council. Agathens* can. 12.
Aurelianens. 4. can. 2. Humberti Resp. ad libellum Nicetae, and last of all
Rupertus, who lived in the beginning of the 12. De divinis Offic. l. 4. c. 9.
Centurie, to descend no lower; who withal tells us, that from the first
Sunday in Lent unto Easter day, are 42. days just, whereof the Church fasteth
only the 36. it being prohibited by the Canon to fast upon the day of the
Resurrection. Vt igitur nostri solennit as jejunij dominico magis coaptetur
exemplo, quatuor dies qui hanc d^minicam proecedunt, superadditi sunt.
Therefore, says he* that the solemnity of our fast might come more near the
Lords example; the 4 days which occur between Shrovetuesday and the first
Sunday in Lent, were added to make up the number. But to come back unto the
times where before we left, partly in detestation of the heretics before
remembered, but principally in honor of the resurrection, the council held at
Carthage Anno 398 did decree it thus. Can. 64.
Qui die dominico studiose jejunat, non credatur Catholicus, that he which of
set purpose did fast the Sunday, should be held no Catholic.

(9) For honest recreations next, I find not any thing to persuade me that
they were not lawful* since those which in themselves were of no good name, no
otherwise were prohibited in this present Age; then as they were an hindrance
to the public service of the Church, Can. 88.
For so it was adjudged in the Council of Carthage, before remembered Qui die
solenni, praetermisso ecclesiae solenni conventu, ad spectacula vadit,
excommunicetur. He that upon a solemn day shall leave the service of the
Church, to go unto the common shows, be he excommunicate: where by the way,
this Canon ^eacheth unto those also who are offenders in this kind, as well on
any of the other f^stivalls, and solemn days, as upon the Sunday: and
therefore both alike considerable in the present business. But hereof, and the
spectacula here prohibited, we shall have better opportunity to speak in the
following Age. And here it is to be observed, that as Saint Chrysostom before
confessed it to be lawful for a man to look unto his worldly business, on
the Lords day, after the congregation was dismissed: so here the Fathers seem
to dispense with those, who went unto the common shows, being worldly
pleasures, though otherwise of no good name, as before we said, in case they
did not pretermit Gods public service. Therefore we safely may conclude,
that they conceived it not unlawful for any man to follow his honest
plea^ures, such as were harmless in themselves and of good report, after the
breaking up of the congregation. Of this sort questionless, were shooting and
all m^nly exercises, walking abroad, or riding forth to take the air, civil
discourse, good company, and ingenuous mirth: by any of which the spirits may
be qui^kned, and the body strengthened. Whether that dancing was allowed is a
thing more questionable; and probably as the dauncings were in the former
times, it might not be suffered: nay, which is more, it had been infinite
scandal to the Church, if they had permitted it. For we may please to know,
that in the dancings used of old, throughout the principal Cities of the
Roman Empire, there was much impurity and immodesty; such as was not to be
beheld by a Christian eye. Some times they danced stark naked, and that not
privately alone, Orat. in Pis. Art. 3. in verrem.
but in public feasts. This Cicero objects against Lucius Piso, quod in
convivio saltaret nudus; the same he also casts in the teeth of verres: and
Deiotarus was accused of the like immodesty, whereof perhaps he was not guilty.
As for the Women they had armed themselves with the like strange impudency and
though they daunced not naked in the open streets, yet would be hired to
attend naked at public feasts, and after prostitute themselves unto those
guests, for enterteinment of the which, they were thither brought, whereof see
Athenaeus Dipnos. l. 12. and Sueton. in Tiberio, cap 42. 43. And for their
dancings in the public, they studied all those cunning and provoking Arts* by
which they might entice young men to wantonness, and inflame their lusts;
using lascivious gestures, and mingling with their dances most immodest songs:
nay, which is more than this, sometimes of purpose laying open to the eye and
view of the spectatour, those parts which womanhood and common honesty would
not have uncovered. Saint Ambrose so describes them, and from him we take it.
An quicquam est tam pronum ad libidines, quam inconditis m^tibus, De virginib.
lib. 3.
ea qua natura abscondit, vel disciplina nudavit, membrorum operta nudare,
ludere oculis, rotare cervicem, comam spargere? And in another place he is more
particular. Mulieres in plateis inverecundos sub conspectu adolesc^ntulorum
intemperantium choros ducunt, jactantes comam, tra^entes tunicas, scissae
amictus, (...) l^certos, De Elia and jeiunio. c. 18.
plaudentes manibus, personantes vocibus, saltantes pedibus, irritantes inse
juvenum libidines motu histrionico, petulanti oculo, dedecoroso ludibrio. The
women, says the father, even in the sight of wanton and lascivious youths,
da^nce immodest dances, tossing about their hair, drawing aside their coats
that so they might lay open what should not be seen; their garments open in
many places for that purpose also, their arms quite bare: clapping their
hands, capering with their feet, chanting obscene and filthy songs (for
afterward he speaks de obscoenis cantibus) finally stirring up the lusts of
ungoverned men, by those uncomely motions, wanton looks, and shameful
spectacles. Saint Basil in his tract de luxi^ and ebrietate* describes them
much after the same manner; whereof see that father. Yet think not that all
women were so lewdly given, or so immodest in their dancings: but only common
women which most used those arts to increase their custom, such as were
mustered up by Athen. Dipnos. l. 12. c 13.
Struto King of the Sdonians, to attend his banquetings; or such loose trulls
as Messalina, and others mentioned in the Iuvenal. Sat. 6. and 11.
Poet, who practiced those lascivious dances, to inflame their paramou^s. Now
to these common public dancings, the people in the Roman Empire had been
much accustomed, especially in their height of fortune, wherein they were
extremely riotous and luxurions. And unto these too many innocent souls both
young men and women, in the first ages of the Church used to repare sometimes
for their recreation, only to look upon the sport: and seeing those uncomely
gestures, and uncivil sights, went back sometimes possessed with unchaste
desires and loose affections, which might perhaps break out at last in
dishonest actions. This made the Fathers of this Age, and of some that
followed, inveigh, as generally against all dancings, as most unlawful in
themselves; so more particularly, against the sport it self, and beholding of
the same, upon those days which were appointed to Gods worship. And to these
kind of dancings and to none but these, must we refer those declamations
which are so frequent in their writings, whether in reference to the thing, or
unto the times. Two only in this Centurie, have spoke of dancing* as it
reflects upon the day: S. Chrysostom, and Ephrem Syrus. Saint Chrysostom
though last in time shall be first in place, (...), etc. Therefore, says he,
De ele^mos. orat. 2. T. 6.
we ought to solemnise, this day with spiritual honor, not making riotous
feasts thereon, swimming in wine, (...), drinking to drunkenness, or in wanton
dancings; but in releeving of our poor and distressed brethren. Where note
that I have rendered (...), not simply, dancing, but wanton dancing, according
to the nature of the word, which signifies such dancings, as was mixed with
Songs, according to the fashion at this time in use, Stephan. in (...).
(...), choros agito, salto, tripudio, proprie cum cantu, as in the Lexicon:
and for the quality of the songs, which in those times they used in dancing,
that is shown before, so that not dancing, simply, but immodest dancing, such
as was then in use, is by him prohibited. And to that purpose Ephrem Syrus, if
the work be his; Sermon. de dieb. Festis.
Festivitates dominicas honorare contendite, etc. Endeavor earnestly, says
he, to honor the Lords day, not in a wordly sort, but after a spiritual
manner; not as the Gentiles keep their feasts, but as Christians should.
Amongst which customs of the Gentiles that are there forbidden, one and the
principal is this, non choreas ducamus, that we use no dance^, tha^ is no such
immodest and unseemely dancings, as were most practiced by the Gentiles, and
could not stand with that discreet, which pertained to Christians. This
evident by that which Saint Ambrose tell's us, De Elia and jei^nioc. 18.
Notum est omnibus, nugaces and turpes saltationes ab episcopis solere
compesci: it is well known, says he, how carefully the Bishops do restrain
all toying, light, and beastly kind of dances. So that in case the dauncings
be not toying, light, nor beastly, as were the daunces of the Gentiles whom
they reprehended; neither the fathers did intend them, nor the rulers of the
Church restrain them.

(10) For the Imperial constitutions of this present Age, they strike all of
them upon one and the self same string, with that of Constantine, before
remembered: save that the Emperor Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius, Cod.
Theod.
who were all partners in the Empire, set out an edict to prohibit all public
shows upon the Sunday. Nullus die Soli^ spectaculum praebeat, nec divinam
venerationem, confecta solennitate, confundat. Such was the Letter of the Law:
which being afterward enlarged by Theodosius the younger, who lived in the
next Centurie, we shall meet with their. The other Edicts which concern the
business that is now in hand, were only explanations and additions, unto that
of Constantine: one in relation to the matter, the other in reference to the
time. First in relation to the matter, whereas all Judges were restrained by
the law of Constantine, Cod. Theodos.
from sitting on that day, in the open Court, there was a clause, now added
touching Arbitrators, that none should arbitrate any litigious cause, or take
cognizance of any pee^uniary business on the Sunday; Debi^um publicum,
privatumue nullus efflagitet: nec apud ipsos quidem arbitros, vel in judicijs
flagitatos, vel sponte delectos, ^lla sit agnitio jurgiorum: a penalty being
in^^icted upon them that transgressed herein. This published by the same three
Emperors, Honorius and Evodius, Cod. Theodos. ^ 8. (...). 8.
being that year consulls, which was in Anno 384; as the former was.
Afterward Valentinian and Valens Emperors were pleased to add, neminem
christianum ab exactoribus conveniri volumus; that they would have no
Christians brought upon that day, before the officers of the Exchequer. In
reference to the time, it was thought good by Valentinian, Theodosius and
Arcadius, all three Emperors together, to make some other Festivalls capable
of the same exemption. For whereas formerly all the time of harvest and of
Autumn, was exempt from pleadings; as that the Calends of January or the
newyeares day, as now we call it, had anciently been honored with the same
immunitie: these added thereunto, the days on which the two great Cities of
Rome and Constantinople had been built; Cod Theodos. l. 2. ^it. 8.
the seven days before Easter day and the seven that followed; together with
every Sunday in its course; yea and the birth-dayes of themselves, with those
on which each of them had began his Empire: Sanctos quoque Paschae dies qui
septeno vel praecedunt numero vel sequuntur in eadem observatione numeramus:
nec non and dies Solis (so they call it all) qui repetito inter se calculo
revolvuntur. Parem necesse est haberi reverentiam etiam nostris diebus, qui vel
lucis auspicia, vel imperi^ ortus protulere. Dated VII Id. Aug. Timasius and
Promotus Consuls, which was 389. So that in this regard, the sacred day had no
more privilege than the civil, but were all alike; the Emperors day as much
respected as the Lords.

(11) Now as the days were thus established, so was the form of worship on
those days established, brought unto more perfection than it had been
formerly, when their assemblies were prohibited, and their meetings dangerous,
or at least not so safe and free as in this fourth Centurie. For in these
times, if not before, the Priests that waited at the Altar, attired themselves
in distinct habit at the ministration, from what they were on other days: the
color white, and the significancie thereof to denote that holiness wherewith
the Priests of God ought to be apparelled; such as the Surplices now in use in
the Church of England. Witness S. Hierome for the W^st, that in the
ministration they used a different habit from that of ordinary times. In Ezech.
44.
Religio divina alterum habitum habet in ministerio, alterum in usu vitaque
communi: So for the general he informs us. For the particular next in a reply
unto Pelagius, Adv. Pelag. lib. 1.
who it seems disliked it, he asks him what offense it could be to God, that
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, or those of any other inferior order, in
administratione sacrificiorum candida vest processerixt, did in the
ministration of the Eucharist bestirre themselves in a white Vesture. And so S.
Chrysostom for the East, telling the Priest of Antioch, unto how high a
calling the Lord had called them; and how great power they had to repel
unworthy men from the Lords Table: adds, that they were to reckon that for
their Crown and glory, and not that they were privileged to go about the
Church in a white garment. (...). Nor did the Priests only thus avow his
calling. Hom. 83 in Math 26.
The people wanted not some outward signs and ceremonies, wherewith to honor
their Redeemer; and testify unto the world that they were his servants: and
that by bowing of the knee, which in those parts and times was the greatest
sign, both of humility and subjection. Bowing the knee, in honor of their
Savior, at the name of Jesus; and reverendly kneeling on their knees, when
they received the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. S. Ambrose tells us of the
first, Cap. 9.
in his sixth Book de opere Hexaemeri, where speaking of the office of each
several member, he makes the bowing of the knee at the name of Jesus, the
proper duty of that part. Flexibile genu quo prae coeteris domini mitigatur
offensa, etc. The knee says he, is flexible, by which especially the anger of
the Lord is mitigated, his displeasure pacified, and his grace obtained. Hoc.
enim patris summi erga filium donum est ut in nomine IESV omne genu curvetur.
For this, says he, did the most mighty father give as a special gift to his
only son, that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow. This makes the
matter plain enough, we need go no further, yet somewhat to this purpose may
be seen also in S. Hi^rom^ in his Comment on the 46. of Esaias; For kneeling or
adoring at the instant of receiving the holy Sacrament, the same S. Ambrose on
those words Adore his footestoole, does expound it thus. Per scabellum terra
intelligitur, De (...) lib. 3. cap. 1^.
per terram autem caro Christi, quam ^odie quoque in mysterijs adoramus. By the
footes^oole here, we are to understand the Easter, and by the Earth the flesh
of Christ, which we adore in the holy mysteries: which plainly shows what
was the custom of these times. Hom. 3 in Ephesians.
And so S. Chrysostom tells his Audience, that the great King has made ready
his Table, [(...)] the Angels ministering at the same, the King himself in
presence, why then stand they still? In case they are provided of a w^dding
garment, why do they not fall down, and then communicate, (...)* Adora and
communica as the Latin renders it. Where that the word adoration seem a little
strange, we may take notice that it is so used by Bishop Jewel. The Sacrament,
Desenc. Art. 8.
says he, in that sort i. e. in respect of that which they signify, and not
in respect of that which they are in themselves, are the flesh of Christ and
are so understood, and believed and adored. And in another place of the same 8.
Article, Nor do we only adore Christ, as very God; but we do also worship
and reverence the Sacrament, and holy mysteries of Christ's body: yet so that we
adore them not with godly honor, as we do Christ himself: ^0 more hereof in
Cyrill, Bishop of Jerusalem, Catich. 5. where adora. is expressly mentioned:
and for the close of all, that which is told us by S. Austin, how in his time
the Gentiles charged it on the Christians, that they did worship Ceres and
Bacchus; which was occasioned questionless by reason of their kneeling or
adoring, when they received the bread and wine in the holy Sacrament. Cont.
Faust. Mani^h. lib. 20. cap. 13.
Not that this use of kneeling or adoring, was not more ancient in the Church,
for such a custom may be gathered both out of Origin and Tertullian, in the
age before: but that this age affords us the most clear and perfect evidence,
for the proof thereof. So for the music used in the Congregation, it grew
more exquisite in these times than it had been formerly: that which before was
only a melodious kind of pronunciation, being now ordered into a more exact
and artificial harmony. This change was principally occasioned by a Canon of
the Council of Laodicea, in the first entrance of this age* For where before
it was permitted unto all promiscuously to sing in the Church; it was observed
that in such dissonancie of voices, and most of them unskilful in the notes of
music, there was no small jarring and unpleasant sounds. This Council
thereupon ordained, (...), etc. (...)* Conc. Laodic. Can. 15.
that none should sing hereafter in the Congregation, but such as were
Canonically appointed to it, and skillful in it. By means whereof before the
shutting up of this fourth Centurie the music of the Church, became very
perfect and harmonious; Confess. l. 10. cap. 33.
suavi and artificiosa voce cantata, as S. Austin tells us. So perfect and
harmonious, that it did work exceedingly on the affections of the hearers, and
did movere animos ardentius in flammam pietatis, inflame their minds with a
more lively flame of piety; taking them prisoners by the ears, and so
conducting them unto the glories of Gods kingdom. Ibid.
S. Austin attributes a great cause of conversion, to the powers thereof,
calling to mind those frequent tears quas fudi ad ^antus ecclesiae ^uae,
which had been drawn from him by this sacred music; by which his soul was
humbled, and his affections raised to an height of godliness. The like he also
tells us, in his ninth Book of Confessions, and sixth Chapter. Nor doubt we
but it did produce the same effect on diverse others; who coming to the
Churches, as he then did, to be partaker of the music returned prepared in
mind, and well disposed in their intentions, to be converted unto God. Now
that the Church might be frequented at the times appointed, and so all secret
Conventicles stopped, in these divided times wherein so many heresies did
domineare; and that the ^^ching ears of men might not persuade them to such
Churches where God had not placed them, so to discourage their own proper
minister: it pleased the Fathers in the Council of Saragossa, Anno 368. or
thereabouts to decree it thus. First, Can. 2.
Ne latibulis cubiculorum and montium habitent qui in suspicionibus
perseverent; that none who were suspected (of Priscillianisme, which was the
humor that then reigned) should lurk in secret corners, either in houses or
in hills; but follows the example and direction of the Priests of God. And
secondly ad alienas villas agendorum conventuum causa, non conveniant; that
none should go to other places, under pretense of joining there to the
assembly, but keep themselves unto their own. Which prudent Constitutions,
upon the self same pious grounds are still preserved amongst us in the Church
of England.

(12) Thus do we see upon what grounds the Lords day stands; on custom
first, and voluntary consecration of it to religious meetings; that custom
countenanced by the authority of the Church of God, which tacitly approved the
same; and finally confirmed and ratified by Christian Princes throughout their
Empires. And as the day, so rest from labors and restraint from business upon
that day, received its greatest strength from the supreme magistrate, as long
as he retained that power which to him belonged, as after from the Canons and
decrees of Counsels, the Decretalls of Popes, and orders of particular
Prelates, when the sole managing of Ecclesiastical affairs was committed to
them. I hope it was not so with the former Sabbath, which neither took
original from custom, that people being not so forward to give God a day; nor
required any countenance or authority from the Kings of Israel to confirm and
ratify it. The Lord had spoke the word, that he would have one day in seven,
precisely the seventh day from the worlds creation, to be a day of rest unto
all his people: which said, there was no more to do, but gladly to submit and
obey his pleasure; nec qui^quam reliquum erat praeter obsequij gloriam, in the
greatest Prince. And this done all at once, not by degrees, by little and
little, as he could see the people affected to it, or as he found it fittest
for them; like a probation Law made to continue till the next session, and then
on further liking, to hold good for ever; but by a plain and peremptory order
that it should be so, without further trial. But thus it was not done in our
present business. The Lords day had no such command that it should be
sanctified, but was left plainly to Gods people, to pitch on this, or any
other, for the public use. And being taken up amongst them, and made a day of
meeting in the congregation for religious exercises; yet for 300. years there
was neither Law to bind them to it, nor any rest from labor or from worldly
businesses required upon it. And when it seemed good unto Christian Princes,
the nursing Fathers of Gods Church, to lay restraints upon their people, yet at
the first they were not general: but only thus, that certain men in certain
places should lay aside their ordinary and daily works, to attend Gods service
in the Church; those whose employments were most toylesome, and most repugnant
to the true nature of a Sabbath, being allowed to follow and pursue their
labors, because most necessary to the Commonwealth. And in the following
times, when as the Prince and Prelate, in their several places, endeavored to
restrain them from that also, which formerly they had permitted, and
interdicted almost all kind of bodily labor upon that day; it was not brought
about without much struggling, and on opposition of the people: more than a
thousand years being past, after Christ's ascension, before the Lords day had
attained that state in which now it stands; as will appear at full in the
following story. And being brought unto that state, wherein now it stands, it
does not stand so firmly and on such sure grounds but that those powers which
raised it up, may take it lower if they please* yea take it quite away, as unto
the time, and settle it on any other day, as to them seems best, which is the
doctrine of some School men, and diverse Protestant writers of great name and
credit in the world? A power which no man will presume to say was ever
challenged by the Jews over the Sabbath. Besides, all things are plainly
contrary in these two days, as to the purpose and intent of the institution.
For in the Sabbath, that which was principally aimed at, was rest from labor,
that neither they nor any that belonged unto them, should do any manner of
work upon that day, but sit still, and rest themselves. Their meditating on
Gods Word, or on his goodness, manifested in the worlds Creation, was to that an
accessory: and as for reading of the Law in the Congregation, that was not
taken up in more than 1000. years after the Law was given; and being taken up
came in by ecclesiastical ordinance only, no divine authority. But in the
institution of the Lords day, that which was principally aimed at, was the
performance of religious and Christian duties hearing the Word, receiving of
the Sacraments, praising the lord for all his mercies, and praying to him
jointly with the Congregation, for the continuance of the same Rest and
cessation from the works of labor, came not in till afterward; and then but
as an accessory to the former duties, and that not settled and established in a
1000. year, as before was said* when all the proper and peculiar duties of the
day, had been at their perfection along time before. So that if we regard
either institutions, or the authority by which they were so instituted; the end
and purpose at the which they principally aimed, or the proceedings in the
settling and confirming of them: the difference will be* found so great, that of
the Lords day, no man can affirm in sense and reason, that it is a Sabbath, or
so to be observed, as the Sabbath was.

CHAP. IV.
The great improvement of the Lords day, in the fifth and sixth Ages, make it not
a Sabbath.
(1) In what estate the Lords day stood in S. Austins time. (2) Stage Plays,
and public shows prohibited on the Lords day, and the other holy days, by
Imperial Edicts. (3) The base and beastly nature of the Stage Plays, at those
times in use. (4) The barbarous and bloody quality of the Spectacula, or shows
at this time prohibited. (5) Neither all civil business, nor all kind of
pleasure, restrained on the Lords day, by the Emperor Leo; as some give it
out, The so much cited Canon of the Council of Mascon, proves no Lords day
Sabbath. (6) The French and Spaniards in the sixth Age, begin to Iudaize about
the Lords day, and of restraint of husbandry on that day, in that age first
thought of. (7) The so much cited Canon of the Council of Mascon proves no
Lords day Sabbath. (8) Of public honors done in these Ages, to the Lords
day, by Prince and Prelate. (9) No evening service on the Lords day, till these
present ages. (10) Of public orders now established, for the better
regulating of the Lords day-meetings. (11) The Lords day not more reckoned of,
than the great^r festivalls: and of the other holy days, in these ages
instituted. (12) All business and recreation not by Law prohibited, are in
themselves as lawful on the Lords day, as on any other.

(1) We are now come unto the times, wherein the Church began to settle;
having with much ado got the better hand of Gentilisme, and mastered those
stiff heresies of the Arians, Macedonians, and such others as descended from
them: Unto those times wherein the troubles which before distracted her peace
and quiet, being well appeased; all things began to grow together in a perfect
harmony: what time the faithful being united, better than before in points of
judgment, became more uniforme in matters of devotion, and in that uniformitie
did agree together, to give the Lords day all the honor of an holy festival.
Yet was not this done all at once, but by degrees: the fifth and sixth Centuries
being well nigh spent, before it came unto that height, which has since
continued. The Emperors and the Prelates in these times had the same
affections; both earnest to advance this day above all others, and to the
Edicts of the one, and Ecclesiastical constitutions of the other, it stands
indebted for many of those privileges and exemptions, which it still enjoys.
But by degrees, as now I said, and not all at once: For in S. Austins time, who
lived in the beginning of this fifth Century, it was no otherwise with the Lords
day then as it was before, in the former Age; accounted one of those set days,
and probably the principal which was designed, and set apart for Gods public
worship. Amongst the writings of that Father, which are his unquestionably, we
find not much that does conduce to our present business: but what we find,
we shall communicate, with as much brevity as we can. The Sundays fast he does
abhominate, as a public scandal. Epi. 86.
Quis deum non offendit, si velit cum scandalo totius ecclesiae, die dominico
jejunare. The exercise of the day, he describes in brief, D^civitat. l. 22. c.
8.
in this form that follows. Venit Pascha at que ipso die dominico mane,
frequens populus praesens erat. Facto silentio, divinarum Scripturarum lecta
sunt solennia, etc. Easter was come, and on the Lords day in the morning the
people had assembled themselves together. All being silent and attent, those
lessons out of holy Scripture, which were appointed for the time were read unto
them, when we were come unto that part of the public service, which was
allotted for the Sermon, I spoke unto them what was proper for the present
festival, and most agreeable to the time. Service being done* I took the man
along to dinner, (a man he means, that had recovered very strangely in the
Church that morning) who told us all the story of those sad calamities, which
had befallen him. This is not much but in this little there are two things
worth our observation. First, that the Sermon in those times was not accounted
either the only, or the principal part of Gods public service; but only
had a place in the Common Liturgy: which place was probably the same, which it
still retains, post Scripturarum solennia, after the reading of the Gospel.
Next that it was not thought unlawful in this Fathers time to talk of secular
and humane affairs upon this day, as some now imagine; or to call friends or
strangers to our Table, as it is supposed: S. Austin being one of so strict a
life, that he would rather have put off the invitation and the story both to
another day; had he so conceived it. Nor does the Father speak of Sunday, as
if it were the only festival that was to be observed of a Christian man.
Cont. Adimant. c. ^6.
Other festivities there were which he tells us of. First generally, Nos quoque
and dominicum diem, and Pascha, solenniter celebramus, and quaslibet alias
Christianas dierum festivitates. The Lords day, Easter, and all other Christian
festivalls were alike to him* And he enumerates some particulars too, Epi. 118.
the resurrection, passion, and ascension of our Lord and Savior, together
with the coming of the holy Ghost: which constantly were celebrated,
anniversaria solennitate. Not that there were no other festivalls then observed
in the Christian Church, but that those four were reckoned to be Apostolical*
and had been generally received in all ages past. As for the Sacrament, it was
not tied to any day, but was administered indifferently, upon all alike, except
it were in some few places, where it had been restrained to this day alone.
Alij quotidie communicant corpori and sanguini dominico, alij certis diebus
accipiunt: alibi Sabbato tantum and dominico, alibi tantum dominico, as he then
informs us. As for those works ascribed unto him, which either are not his,
or at least are questionable; they inform us thus: The tract de rectitudine
Cathol* conversationis, advises us to be attent and silent all the time of
Divine Service, not telling tales, nor falling into jarres and quarrels, as
being to answer such of us as offend therein, for a double fault: Dum nec ipse
verbum Dei audit, nec alios audire permittit, as neither hearkening to the Word
of God our selves, nor permitting others. In the 251. Sermon, inscribed De
tempore, we are commanded to lay aside all worldly businesses, in
solennitatibus sanctorum, and maxim in dominicis diebus, upon the festivalls
of the Saints, but the Lords day specially: that we may be the readier for
divine employments: Where note, that whosoever made the Sermon, it was his
purpose, that on the Saints days men were to forbear all worldly businesses;
and not upon the Lords day only, though on that especially. And in the same it
is affirmed, that the Lords day was instituted by the Doctors of the Church,
Apostles and Apostolical men; the honors of the Jewish Sabbath, being by them
transferred unto it. Sanctieccle^^^ Doctores omnem Iudaici Sabbatismi gloriam
in illam transfer decreverunt. It seems some used to hunt on the Lords day
then; for there it is prohibited as a devilish exercise: Nullus [in die
dominico] in venatione se occupet, and diabolico mancipetur officio, with
command enough. Nay in the 244. of those de tempore, it is enjoined above all
things, with an ante omnia, that no man meddle with his wife, either upon the
Lords day, or the other holy days. Ante omnia quoties dies dominicus, aut
aliae festivitates veniunt, vxorem suam nullus agnoscat; which ^ the rather
note, though not worth the noting, that those who are pressed with so poor a
fancy, (and some such there be) would please to be as careful of the holy
days, as of the Sundays, being alike expressed in the Prohibition: One may
conjecture easily both by the style, and by the state of things then being, in
the Christian Church, that neither of these Sermons (not to say any thing of
the rest which concern us not) could be writ by Austin the latter, every thing
therein considered by no man of wisdom.

(2) I say as things then were in the Christian Church, that Sermon was not
likely to be Saint Austines. It had been too much rashness to prohibit
hunting, being in it self a lawful sport: when such as in themselves were
extremely evil, and an occasion of much sin, were not yet put down. The
Cirque and Theater were frequented hitherto, as well upon the Lords day as on
any other: and they were first to be removed, before it could be seasonable to
inhibit a lawful pleasure. Somewhat to this effect, was done in the Age
before: the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, having made a law
that no man should exhibit any public show upon the Sunday, as before we
noted. But this prevailed not at the first. And thereupon the Fathers of the
Council of Carthage, in the first year of this first Centurie, did then and
there decree by public order, to make petition to the Emperor then being: ut
spectacula theatrorum, coeterorumque ludorum die dominica, vel coeteris
religionis Christianae diebus solennibus, amoveantur, etc. Their suite was
double, first that the shows exhibited on the theaters, and other plays then
used, might no more be suffered on the Lords day, or any other festival of the
Christian Church, especially on the Octaves of the feast of Easter, what time
the people used to go in greater numbers unto the Cirque or shew-place, than
the house of God. Then that for other days, no man might be compelled to
repare unto them, (as they had been formerly) as being absolutely repugnant
unto Gods commandments: but that all people should be left at liberty to go
or not to go, as they would themselves. Nec oportere quenquam christianorum ad
haec spectacula cogi etc. Sed uti oportet homo in libera voluntate subsistat,
sibi divinitus concessa; so the Canon. The Emperor Theodosius thereupon
enacted, that on the Lords day, on the feast of Christ's Nativity, and after to
the Epiphanie or twelfth day, as we call it commonly; as also on the feast of
Easter, and from thence to Whitsontide, the Cirques and Theaters in all places
should be shut up: that so all faithful Christian people might wholly bend
themselves to the service of God. Cod. Theodos.
Dominico qui totius septimanae primus est dies, and Natale atque Epiphaniorum
Christi, Paschae etiam and Quinquagesimae diebus etc. Omni theatrorum atque
Circensium voluptate per universas urbes earundem populis denegata; totae
Christianorum and fidelium men^es dei cultibus occupentur. So far the letter
of the law, which was enacted at Constantinople, the first of February Anno
425. Theodosius the second time, and Valentinian being that year Consuls.
Where still observe, how equally the principal festivities, and the Lords day,
were matched together: that being held unlawful for the one, which was
conceived so of the other. And so it stood, until the Emperor Leo, by two
several Edicts, advanced the Lords day higher than before it was, and made it
singular above other festivalls, as in some other things, of which more annon;
so in this particular. For in an Edict by him sent unto Amasius, at that time
Captain of his Guard, or Praefectus pretorio, he enacts it thus. Cod. l. 3.
tit. 12. de ^^riis.
First generally, Dies festos, dies altissimae malestati dedicatos, nullis
volumus voluptatibus occupari; that he would have holy days, which had been
dedicated to the supreme majesty, not to be taken up with pleasures. What
would he have no pleasures used at all, on the holy days? No, he says not so,
but only that they should not wholly be taken up with sports and pleasures; no
time being spared for pious and religious duties; Nor does he bar all
pleasures on the Sunday neither, as we shall see anon in the law it self; but
only base, obscene, and voluptuous pleasures. Then more particularly for the
Lords day thus, in reference to the point in hand, that neither theater nor
Cirque^ight nor combatings with wild beasts, should be used thereon: and if
the birth day or inauguration of the Emperor, fell upon the same, that the
solemnities thereof should be referred to another day: no less apenalty than
loss of dignity, and confiscation of estate, being laid on them that should
offend against his pleasure. But for the better satisfaction, take so much of
the law it self, as concerns this business. Nihil eadem die vendicet scena
theatralis, aut Circense certamen, aut ferarum lachrymosa spectacula: Etiam, si
in nostrum ortum aut natalem celebranda solennitas inciderit, differatur.
Amissionem militiae, proscriptionemque patrimonij sustinebit, si quis unquam
spectaculis hoc die interesse, [praesumpscrit.] Given at Constantinople,
Martian and Zeno being consuls; 469 of our Saviors birth.

(3) Now for the things prohibited in these several Edicts, we will take
notice of two chiefly, the sports accustomed to be shown on the ^^age or
theater; and those Spectacula, wherein men with beasts, and sometimes men with
men did use to fight together in the Cirque or shew-place: 1. that we may know
the better what these Princes aimed at, and what the fathers mean in their
frequent invectives against plays and s^ewes. And first for that which first
is named, the scene or stage play, though they arose from poor beginnings, yet
they attained at last to an infinite impudence; such as no modest eye could
endure to see, or ear to hear The whole contexture of the Poems, wanton and
lascivious; the speeches most extremely sorded, and obscene; the action such
as did not so much personate; as perform all base kind of vices. Their women,
as their parts were framed, did many times act naked, on the open stage; and
sometimes, did perform the last acts of lust, even in the sight of all
spectators: then which what greater scorn could be given to nature, what more
immodest spectacle could be represented to the eye of heaven. De theatro lib. 1.
This C^sar Bullinger assures us, and withal makes it the chief cause why
both profane and sacred Authors did cry down the stage, as being a place of
such uncleanness* Authors omnes cum sacri tum profani, spur^itiem s^en^
exagitant, non modo quod fabulae obscenae in sena agerentur, se^^ etiam quod
motus gestusque essent impudici, at que adeo prostibula ipsa in scenam saepe
venirent, and scena prostarent. So he: Nor has he done them wrong, or
delivered any thing, without good authority. Lactantius and Tertu^lian, have
affirmed as much, and from them he had it: moulding up into one relation, what
they had severally r^ported. First for their Women, acting naked, Lactantius
says that so it was in all their plays, De falls. rel. ^. 1. c. 20.
devoted to the memory of their Goddess Flora. Exuuntur vestibus populo
flagitante meretrices, quae tunc mimorum funguntur officio, etc. The whores,
which used to act those parts, (for who else would do it) were by the people
importuned to put off their clothes, which they did accordingly; and being
naked personated, as the Mimicks used all shameless and immodest gestures,
till the most impudent eye amongst them was glutted with so foul a spectacle.
Then for the other filthiness, Tertullian tells us, De spectacu^^^. ^ cap. 17.
that the common prostitutes, such as received the filts of all the town, like
the common shewers, perfo^med those beastly acts on the public stage, and
which was yet more shameful, in the sight and presence of the selfsame sex.
Ipsa etiam prostibula, publicae libidinis hostiae, De gubern. De^. l. 6.
in scena proferuntur, plus misera in presentia foeminarum, as that Author has
it. And sure there must be in them, some extreme impurities, when Salvian a
godly Bishop of this Age, has told us of them, that such they were Vt ea non
solum dicere, sed etiam recordari, aliquis sine pollutione non possit: that
none could speak, no not so much as think of them, without some infection.
Such, that whereas all other crimes, of what kind soever, murder, adultery,
and theft, and sacrilege, and others of that heinous nature, might without any
breach of Modesty, be accused and censured: Solae impuritates theatrorum sunt,
quae honest non possunt velaccusari, the baseness of the theaters was so
transcendent, that no man could accuse them, but must put off modesty. No
mervaile therefore if the fathers both of this and the former Ages, used to
declame so much against them, and to cry them down; at least to weane the
people from them: as being the bane of chastity, the Shipwreck of the Soul,
the devils temples, the scandal of the world, and the shame of nature. No
merveile if the Council held in Carthage, in the Age before, or any of the
Christian writers of these present times, Salvian, and Chrysostom, and the
rest, so highly censured those, who left the Church and public service of the
Lord, to go to those impure delights, and unmanlike spectacles; for that the
Fathers in the same place assembled, in this present centurie, agreed so well
together to petition the Emperors then being, to redress this mischief; or
lastly that the Emperors of these times, sent out their Edicts, to prohibit
such unchristian sports.

(4) As wicked, as unchristian, were those other shows against which the self
same Fathers do enveigh, against the which the foresaid Councels did petition,
and the good Emperors before remembered, made their several laws; though of a
very different nature: those worthily abhominated for their filthy baseness;
and these as much to be detested for their inhumanity. It was the custom of
the great ones in the State of Rome, to court the favor of the people, by
enterteining them with several shows; which in the end became repleate with
all kind of cruelty; which fashion afterward was retained among the
Emperors, the better to content the vulgar, and keep them in a good opinion
of the present change. Sometimes they enterteined their humors by presenting
them with diverse sorts of cruel and outlandish beasts; which being brought
into the place appointed, were chased and hunted up and down, by such as were
condemned to dye, or otherwise would adventure for reward and hire: In which it
happened many times, that many a man was made a prey unto Bears and Lions, and
other beasts of the like feirce and c^uell nature: and therefore in the
Emperors law before recited, are justly called ferarum lachrymosa spectacula;
a most proper Epithet. Sometimes again they would present them with a show of
fencers, not such as played at Cudgells, or with swords rebated, only to show
their activenesse, and teach men how to use their weapons: but such as in good
earnest were to fight it out and not give over till the victory was made good
by death. And these I take to be Cirque-fights, or the Circense certamen, De
specta^.
principally in the law prohibited. Tertullian tells us of the first, ferarum
voluptati satis non fieri, nisi and feris humana corpora dissiparentur; that
they conceived the beasts had not sport enough, unles^ they tore in pieces the
wretched bodies of poor men. And to the other, we may well apply the words of
Ciprian, Epl. 2. l^2:
Quid potest inhumanius quid acerbius dici? disciplina est ut perimere quis
possit, gloria quod peremit. What, says the Father, can be told that is more
cruel more inhumane. Murder is grown into an Art, and they that kill most,
have the greatest honor. And so indeed they had, there being rewards designed
for them, that came off with victory: liberty, if they had been Bondmen; if
freemen, sometimes money and sometimes a garland of palm tree, which being
wound about with certain woollen ribbands called Lemnisci, had generally the
name of Palmae Lemniscatae. De spectac. cap. 28.
With this Tertullian does upbraide the Roman people, that sometimes they would
cry out, to have a notable murderer cast unto the Lions: Iidem gladiatori
atroci rudem petunt, and pileum praemium conferunt, the selfsame men would
have some cruel swash-buckler or Gladiator, rewarded with a Rod and cappe, the
signs of freedom. These barbarous and bloody sights, being so far different
from the spirit of meekness, which was the badge and proper cognizance of a
Christian; were therefore bitterly inveighed against by the ancient writers,
the Reverend Fathers of the Church: and such as harkened not to their
exhortations, esteemed as men given over to a reprobate sense; such as had cast
away their livery, and forsook their Master. The nature of these fights, and
the opinion had of those that did frequent them, we cannot better show then by
the story of Alipius, as S. Austin tells it; Confession. lib. 6. c. 8.
and is briefly this, Quidam amici ejus and condiscipuli, etc. Some friends of
his meeting him as he came from dinner, with a familiar kind of violence,
forced him against his will to go with them into the Amphitheator (for there
these sports were sometimes held) crudelium and funestorum ludorum diebus, upon
a day designed to these cruel pastimes. He told them by the way, that though
they haled his body with them, yet should his eyes and soul be free from
these bloody spectacles, cum talia aversaretur and detestaretur, which of
himself he so detested. But thither he went and took his place, and presently
closed his eyes that he might not see those dismal sights, which were before
him. When as the fight waxed hot, et omnia fervebant immanissimis voluptatibus,
and all were taken up with those unmorcifull delights, upon a sudden shout,
occasioned in the fight, he let loose his eyes to see what it meant: Et
percussus est graviori vulnere in anima, quam ille in corpore; ceciditque
miserabilius, quam ille, quo cadente factus est clamor. By means whereof, he
became smitten with a greater wound in his soul, than the poor fellow in his
body; and fell more miserably by far, than he, upon whose death the said
noise was raised. How so, Vt enim vidit illum sanguinem, immanitatem simul
ebibit, etc. For presently as soon, as he beheld the blood, he sucked in
cruelty, and drew in the furies of the place, being delighted with the
wickedness the sport, and made drunk as it were with those bloody spectacles.
Such plays and shows as these, were not unlawful to be seen on the Lords
day only, but on all days else. And such and none but such, were the plays
and shows, against the which the Fathers do enveigh with so much bitterness:
which as they were unworthy of a Christian eye, so as religion did prevail,
they began to vanish; and finally were put down, I mean these last, by
Theodoricus King of the Goths, in Italy. Our plays and theirs, our shows and
theirs, yea and our dauncings too compared with theirs, are no more of kin,
than Alexander the Coppersmith was with Alexander the Great King of Macedon.
Annals Anno 469.
Nay if Baronius tells us true, as I think he does, these Plays and
Cirquefights were not prohibited by the Emperor Leo, because he thought them
not as lawful to be performed upon the Lords day, as on any other, but for a
more particular reason. He had a purpose to avenge himself of Asper and
Ardaburius, two great and powerful men that had conspired against his safety;
and for the execution of that purpose made choice of such a time, when the
Circensian sports were to be exhibited. Which therefore he prohibited at this
time, to be presented on the Sunday, because, though his revenge was just, yet
the effusion of so much Christian blood on that sacred day; might be a blemish
to religion. Ne licet justa esset ultio, tamen diem sacrum ignominia videri
posset labefactasse. So far the Cardinal.

(5) A second thing which this Emperor did, in the advancing of the Lords day,
was in relation unto Civil, and legal businesses. It was before appointed by
the Emperor Constantine, that Judges should not set that day, in the open
Court, the Emperors Gratian, Valentinian and Theodosius added thereunto, Cod.
l 2. de ser. lex. 2.
that none should arbitrate in any brawling and litigious cause upon the ^ame.
And whereas, Valentinian, Theodosius, and Arcadius, had privileged other days,
as well as Sunday, from the suites of Court, which days are formerly remembered
in their proper place: the Emperor Theodosius the younger was pleased to add
the feast of Christ's Nativity, and so to the Epiphany, or twelfth-tide as we
use to call it, together with seven days before, and seven days after;
[Diem natalis domini, and epiphaniae septem qui praecedunt, and septem qui
sequuntur] making this festival with the rest before remembered, in this case
equal with the Sunday; where by the way, we may observe of what antiquity the
feast of the Epiphany is to be accounted, as having got unto such an height in
this Emperors time, (he entered on the Empire Anno 408) as to be privileged in
the selfsame manner, as Christmasse was. And not in this respect alone, in
respect of pleadings, but in a following law of his Anno 4^5 he declared his
pleasure, that this day, with the other principal feasts, as before we noted,
was not to be profaned, as it had been formerly, by the Cirques and Theaters.
For the antiquity thereof more might be said, were not this sufficient. Only I
add that in the Eastern Churches from the times of old, they used to lengthen
out the feast of Christmasse for 12 days together; not ending the solemnities
of the same till the Epiphany was gone over: from whence in likeli-hood, that
custom came at last, to these Western parts! Nativitatem domini Epiphaniae
continuantes, Hist. l. 7. c. 32.
duas illas festivitat^s unam faciunt. So Otho. Frisnigensis tells us of them.
But to proceed, it seems that either these Edicts were not well observed; or
else the ministers of the Courts used to meet together, for dispatch of
business on that day, though the Judges did not. Therefore it seemed good to
this Emperor Leo, in the year and day above recited, to declare his pleasure
thereupon in this form that follows. Dies festos, Cod. Justin. l. 3. (...)
^. 1 2.
dies altissimae majestati dedicatos, etc. It is our will that the holy days
being dedicated to the most high God, should not be spent, or wholly taken up
in pleasures; or otherwise profaned with vexatious suites. Particularly for
the Lords day that it be exempt from executions, citations, entering into bonds,
apparances, pleadings, and such like: that cryers be not heard upon it, and
such as go to law lay aside their actions, taking truce a while, to see if
they can otherwise compose their differences. For so it passes in edict.
Dominicum itaque ita semper honorabilem decernimus and venerandum, ut a cunctis
executionibus excusetur, Nulla quenquam urgeat admonitio, nulla fidei jussionis
flagitetur exactio, taceat apparitio, advocatio delitescat, sit idem dies a
cognitionibus alienus, praeconis horrida vox sileat, respirent a controversijs
litigantis, and habeant faederis interva^^^m, etc. I have the rather here laid
down the Law it self, that we may see how punctual the good Emperor was,
in silencing those troublesome suites, and all preparatives or appurtenances
thereunto: that so men might with quieter minds, repair unto the place of
Gods public service: yet was not the Edict so strict that neither any kind of
Pleasures were allowed upon that day, as may be thought by the beginning of the
Law; nor any kind of secular and civil business to be done upon it. The
Emperor Constantine allowed of manumission, and so did Theodosius too. ^od l.
2. de. ^er. lex. 2.
Die dominico emancipare and manumittere licet; relic causae vel lites
qui^scant, so the latter Emperor: Nor do we find but that this Emperor Leo
well allowed thereof, Sure we are that he well allowed of other civil
businesses, when he appointed in this very Edict that such as went to Law might
meet together on this day to compose their differences, to show their
evidences and compare their writings. And sure I am, that he prohibited not all
kind of pleasures, but only such as were of an obscene and unworthy nature.
For so it follows in the Law: first in relation unto businesses, ad se se
simul veniant adversarij non timentes, pacta conferant, transactiones
loquantur. Next in relation unto pleasures, Nec tamen hujus religiosae di^i
ocia relaxantes, obscenis quemqua^ patimur voluptatibus detineri, where note
not simply voluptates, but obscenae voluptates, not pleasures but obscene and
filthy pleasures are by him prohibited; such as the Scena theatralis therein
after mentioned: nor civil business of all sorts, but brangling and litigious
businesses, are by him forbidden, as the Law makes evident. Collectan.
And thus must Theodorus Lector be interpreted, who tells us of this Emperor
Leo, how he ordained (...), that the Lords day should be kept holy by all
sorts of people* that it should be a non-lee day, a day of rest and ease unto
them; which is no otherwise to be understood, than as the ^aw it self
intended; however the words of Theodorus seem to be more general? Nor was it
long before this Edict or the matter of it had found good enterteinment in the
Christian world: the rather since those Churches which lay further off, and
were not under the command of the Roman Emperor, taking perhaps their hint
from hence, had made a Canon to that purpose. For in a Council held in Aragon,
Anno 516. being some 47. years after Leos Edict, it was decreed that neither
Bishop, Priest, or any other of the Clergy (the Clergy at that time were
possessed of some seats of judicature) should pronounce sentence in any cause,
Can. 4*
which should that day be brought before them. Nullus Episcoporum aut
presbyterorum vel Clericorum, quepropositum cujuscuna cause negotium, die
dominico audeat judicare. This was in Anno 516. as before I said, the second
year of Amalaricus King of the Goths in Spain.

(6) Nor stayed they here. The people of this sixth age wherein now we are,
began to Iudaeize a little; in the imposing of so strict a rest upon this day:
especially in the Western Churches, which naturally are more inclined to
superstition, then the Eastern nations. Wherein they had so far proceeded,
that it was held at last unlawful to travail on the Lords day with waines or
horses, to dress meat or make clean the house or meddle with any manner of
domesticke businesses. The third Council held at Orleans, Can. 27.
Anno 540. does inform us so; and plainly thereupon determined, that since
these prohibitions above said, Ad Iudaicam magis quam ad Christianam
observantiam pertinere probantur, did favor far more of the Jew than of the
Christian; Die dominico quod ante licuit, licere, that therefore whatsoever had
formerly been lawful on that day, should be lawful still: Yet so that it was
thought convenient, that men should rest that day from husbandry, and the
vintage, from sowing, reaping, hedging, and such servile works; quo facilius
ad ecclesiam venientes, orationis gratia^ vacent, that so they might have
better leisure to go unto the Church and there say their Prayers. This was the
first restraint which hitherto we have observed whereby the Husbandman was
restrained from the plough and vintage, or any work that did concern him. And
this was yielded, as it seems, to give them some content at least, which aimed
at greater and more slavish prohibitions than those here allowed of; and would
not otherwise be satisfied then by grant of this: Nay so far had this
superstition, or superstitious conceit about this day, prevailied amongst the
Goths in Spain, a sad and melancholic people, that mingled and married with
the Jews, who then therein dwelt: that in their dotage on this day, they went
before the Jews their neighbors; the Sabbath not so rigorously observed by
one as was the Lords day by the other. The Romans, in this age had utterly
defeated the Vandals and their power in Africa: becoming so bad neighbors to
the Goths themselves. To stop them in those prosperous courses, Theude the
Gothis^ King, Anno 543. makes over into Africa with a complete Army. The
Armies near together, and occasion fair, the Romans on a Sunday set upon
them, and put them all unto the sword: the Goths, as formerly the Jews, never
so much as laying hand upon their weapons, or doing any thing at all in their
own defense; only in reverence to the day. The general History of Spain so
relates the story, although more at large. A superstition of so sudden and so
quick a growth, that whereas till this present age, we cannot find that any
manner of Husbandry or country labors were forbidden as upon this day, it was
now thought unlawful on the same to take a sword in hand for ones own
defense. Better such doctrines had been crushed, and such Teachers silenced in
the first beginnings; then that their Jewish speculations should in fin^
produce such sad and miserable effects. Nor was Spain only thus infected
where the Jews now lived: the French we see began to be so inclined. Not only
in prohibiting things lawful, which before we specified; and to the course
whereof the Council held at Orleans gave so wise a check: but by imputing
such calamities, as had fallen amongst them, to the neglect or ill observance
of this day. A flash of lightning or some other fire from heaven, as it was
conceived, had on the Lords day made great spoil of men and houses in the
City of Limoges. This Gregory of Tours, who lived about the end of this sixth
Centurie, pronounces to have fallen upon them, ob diei dominici injuriam,
because some of them used to work upon the Sunday. But how could he tell that;
or who made him acquainted with Gods secret counsels. Had Gregory been
Bishop of Limoges, as he was of Toures; it may be Limoges might have escaped so
fierce a censure, and only Tours have suffered in it. For presently he adds,
in Turonico vero nonnulli a^ hoc igne, sed non die dominico, adusti sunt; that
even in Tour^ it self, many had perished by the self same fire; but being it
fell not on the Sunday, as it did at Limoges, therefore that misery fell on
them for some other reason. Indeed he tells us of this day, that being it was
the day whereon God made the light, and after was the witness of our Saviors
resurrection: Ideo omni fide a Christianis observari debet, ne fiat in eo omne
opus publicum; therefore it was to be observed of every Christian, no manner of
public business to be done upon it. A piece of new Divinity, and never heard
of till this age; nor in any afterward.

(7) Not heard of till this age, but in this it was. For it the 24. year of
Gunthram, King of the Burgundians, Anno 588. ^onc. Mati so^e^s. 2^ Can. 1.
there was a Council called at Mascon, a town situate in the Duchy of
Burgundy, as we now distinguish it: wherein were present Priscus, Evantuis,
Praetextatus, and many other reverend and learned Prelates. They taking into
consideration how much the Lords day was of late neglected; for remedy thereof
ordained, that it should be observed more carefully for the times to come:
Which Canon I shall therefore set down at large, because it has been often
produced as a principal ground of those precise observances, which some
amongst us have endeavored to force upon the consciences of weak and ignorant
men. It is as follows; Videmus populum Christianum temerario more diem
dominicum contempt^i tradere, etc. It is observed that Christian people do
very rashly slight and neglect the Lords day; giving themselves thereon as on
other days, to continual labors, etc. Therefore let every Christian, in case
he carry not that name in vain, give care to our instruction; knowing that we
have care that you should do well, as well as power to bridle you, that you
do not ill. It follows, Custodite die^ dominicum qui nos denuo peperit, etc.
Keep the Lords day, the day of our new birth, whereon we were delivered from
the snares of sin. Let no man meddle in litigious controversies, or deal in
actions or law-suites; or put himself at all upon such an exigent, that needs
he must prepare his Oxen for their daily work, but exercise your selves in
hymns, and singing praises unto God, being intent thereon both in mind and
body. If any have a Church at hand, let him go unto it, and there power forth
his soul in tears and prayers; his eyes and hands being all that day lifted
up to God. It is the everlasting day of rest, insinuated to us under the shadow
of the Seventh day or Sabbath, in the Law and Prophets: and therefore it is
very meet that we should celebrate this day with one accord, whereon we have
been made what at first we were not. Let us then offer unto God our free and
voluntary service, by whose great goodness we are freede from the Jail of
error: not that the Lord exacts it of us, that we should celebrate this day in
a corporal abstinence, or rest from labor; who only looks that we do
yield obedience to his holy will, by which contemning earthly things, he may
conduct us to the heavens of his infinite mercy. However if any man shall set
at naught this our exhortation, be he assured, that God shall punish him as he
has deserved; and that he shall be also subject unto the censures of the
Church. In case he be a Lawyer he shall loose his cause; If that he be an
husbandman, or servant, he shall be corporally punished for it: but if a Clergy
man or Monk, he shall be six months separated from the Congregation. Add
here, that two years after this, being the second year of the second Clotaire
King of France, there was a Synod holden at Auxxerre, a town of Champaigne,
(concilium Antisiodorense in the Latin writers) wherein it was decreed as in
this of Mascon, Non licet die dominico boves jungere, vel alia oper^ exercare;
that no man should be suffered to yoke his Oxen, or do any manner of work
upon the Sunday. This is the Canon so much urged, (I mean that of Mascon) to
prove that we must spend the Lords day holily in religious exercises; and that
there is no part thereof, which is to be employed unto other uses. But there
are many things to be considered, before we yield unto this Canon, or the
authority thereof: some of them being of that nature that those who most insist
upon it, must be feign to traverse. For first it was contrived of purpose with
so great a strictnes, to meet the better with those men, which so extremely
had neglected that sacred day. A stick that bends too much one way cannot be
brought to any straightness, till it be bent as much the other. This Synod
secondly, was Provincial only, and therefore can oblige none other, but those
for whom it was intended: or such who after did submit unto it, by taking it
into their Canon. Nor will some part thereof be approved by them, who most
stand upon it; none being bound hereby to repair to Church, to magnify the
name of God in the Congregation, but such as have some Church at hand: and what
will then become of those that have a mile, two, three, or more to their parish
Churches, and no Chapel nearer? they are permitted by the Canon to abide at
home. As for religious duties here are none expressed, as proper for the
Congregation, but Psalms and hymns and singing praise unto the Lord, and
pouring forth our souls unto him in tears and prayers: and then what shall
we do for preaching, for preaching of the Word which we so much call for.
Besides, King Gunthram, on whose authority this Counsel met, in his
Confirmatory letters does extend this Canon as well unto the other holy days,
as unto the Sunday; commanding all his Subjects, Vigore huju^ decreti and
definitionis generalis, by virtue of his present mandate that on the Lords day,
vel in quibuscunque alijs sole^nitatibus, and all solemn festivalls
whatsoever, they should abstain from every kind of bodily labor, save what
belonged to dressing meat. But that which needs must most afflict them; is
that the council does profess, this abstinence from bodily labor which is
there decreed, to be no ordinance of the Lords, that he exacteth no such duty
from us: and that it is an ecclesiastical exhortation only and no more but
so. And if no more but so, it were too great an undertaking, to bring all
nations of the world to yield unto the prescript of a private and particular
Canon, made only for a private and particular cause: and if no more but so, it
concludes no Sabbath.

(8) Yet notwithstanding these restraints from work and labor, the Church did
never so resolve it, that any work was in it self unlawful on the Lords day,
though to advance Gods public service, it was thought good, that men should
be restrained from some kind of work; that so they might the better attend
their prayers, and follow their devotions. Its true, these centuries, the fifth
and sixth, were fully bent, to give the Lords day all fit honor: not only in
prohibiting unlawful pleasures, but in commanding a forbearance of some
lawful business^; such as they sound to yield most hinderance to religious
duties. Yea and some works of piety they affixt unto it, for its greater
honor. The Prisoners in the common Gaoles had formerly been kept in too
strictly. It was commanded by Honorius and Theodosius at that time Emperous
Anno 412. that they should be permitted omnibus diebus dominicis, every Lords
day to walk abroad; with a guard upon them: as well to crave the charity of
well disposed persons, as to repair unto the Bathes for the refreshing of
their bodies. Nor did he only so command it, but set a mulct of 20 pound in
gold, on all such public ministers as should disobey: the Bishops of the
Church being trusted to see it done. Where note, that going to the Bathes on
the Lords day, was not thought unlawful; though it required, no question,
corporal labors; for had it been so thought, as some thought it afterward;
the Prelates of the Church would not have taken it upon them, to see the
Emperors will fulfilled, and the law obeyed. A second honor affixt in these
Ages to the Lords day, is that it was conceived the most proper day for giving
holy Orders, in the Church of God: and a law made by Leo then Pope of Rome, and
generally since taken up in the Western Church that they should be conferred
upon no day else. There had been some regard of Sunday in the times before:
and so much Leo does acknowledge. Quod ergo a patribus nostris propensiore cura
novimus servatum esse, Epl. decret. 81.
a vobis quoque volumus custodiri, ut non passim diebus omnibus sacerdotalis
ordinatio celebretur. But that which was before a voluntary Act, is by him made
necessary: and a law given to all the Churches under his obedience, Vt his qui
consecrandi sunt, nunquam benedictiones nisi in die resurrectionis dominicae
tribuantur, that ordinations should be celebrated on the Lords day only. And
certainly he gives good reason why it should be so, except in extraordinary
and emergent cases, wherein the law admits of a dispensation. For on that day,
says he, The holy Ghost descended upon the Apostles, and thereby gave us as it
were this celestial rule, that on that day alone we should con^erre spiritual
orders, in quo ^ollata sunt omnia dona gratiarum, in which the Lord conferred
upon his Church all spiritual graces. Nay that this business might be done with
the more solemnity and preparation; it was appointed that those men who were to
be invested with holy Orders, should continue fasting from the Eve before; that
spending all that time in prayer, and humbling of themselves before the Lord;
they might be better ^itted to receive his Graces. For much about these times
the service of the Lords day was enlarged and multiplied; the Evenings of the
day being honored with religious meetings, as the Mornings formerly: Yea, and
the Eves before were reckoned as a part or parcel of the Lords day following;
Cui a vespere sabbati initium constat ascribi, as the same Decretall informs
us. The 251 Sermon de tempore; ascribed unto Saint A^stine does affirm as
much; but we are not sure that it is his. Note that this Leo entered on the
chair of Rome Anno 440 of our Saviors birth, and did continue in the same
full 20 years; within which space of time he set out this decretall, but in
what year particularly, that I cannot find.

(10) I say that now the Evenings of the Lords day began to have the honor of
religious meetings: for ab initio non fuit sic, it was not so from the
beginning. Nor had it been so now, but that almost all sorts of people were
restrained from work; as well by the Imperial Edicts, as by the constitutions
of particular Churches; by means where of the afternoon was left at large, to
be disposed of for the best increase of Christian Piety. Nor probably had the
Church conceived it necessary, had not the admiration which was then generally
had of the Monasticke kind of life, facilitated the way unto it. For whereas
they had bound themselves to set hours of prayer, Epitaphium Paul^ matr.
Mane hora tertia, sexta, nona, vespere, noctis medio, at three of the clock
in the morning, at six, at nine, and after in the evening, and at midnight, as
S. Hierome tells us: the people generally became much affected with their
strict devotions; and seemed not unwilling to conform unto them, as far at
least, as might consist with their vocations: upon this willingness of the
people, the service of the Church became more frequent, then before; and was
performed thrice every day in the greater Churches, where there were many
Priests and Deacons to attend the same: namely, at six, and nine, before
noone; and at sometime appointed in the evening, for the afternoon;
accordingly as now we use it in our Cathedral and Collegiate Churches. But in
inferior towns and pettit villages, where possibly the people could not every
day attend so often: it was conceived sufficient that they should have the
morning and the evening prayer sung or said them that such as would, might come
to Church for their devotions: and so it is by the appointment of the Rubricke
in ou^ Common Prayer Book. Only the Sundays and the holy^ days were to be
honored with two several meetings, in the morning: the one, at six of the
Clock, which simply was the morning service; the other; at nine, for the
administration of the holy Sacrament, and Preaching of the Word to the
congregation. This did occasion the distinction of the first and second
Service, as we call them still: though now by reason of the peoples sloth, and
backwardness in coming to the Church of God, they are in most places joined
together. So whereas those of the monasticke life, did use to solemnize the Eve
or Vigils of the Lords day, and of other festivals; with the peculiar and
preparatory service, to the day it self: that profitable and pious custom,
began about these times, to be taken up, and generally received in the
Christian Church. Of this there is much mention to be found in Cassian; as
Institut. lib. 2. cap. 18. l. 3. c. 9. Colla^. 21. c. 20. and in other places.
This gave the hint to Leo, and S. Austine if he made that Sermon, to make the
Eve before, a part or parcel of the day; because some part of the Divine
offices of the day, were begun upon it. And hence it is, that in these Ages,
and in those that followed (but in none before) we meet, with the distinction
of matutinae and vespertinae precationes, mattins and Evensong, as we call it:
the Canons of the Church about these times, beginning to oblige men to the one,
as well as formerly to the other. The Council held in Arragon, hereupon
ordained, Co^t. Tarra. (...). Ca^. 7.
Vt omnis clerus die Sabbati ad vesperam paratus sit etc. That all the Clergy
be in readiness on the Saturday vespers, that so they may be prepared with the
more solemnity, to celebrate the Lords day in the congregation. And not so
only, sed ut diebus omnibus vesperas and matutinas celebrent, but that they
diligently say the morning and the evening service, every day continually. So
for the mattins on the Sunday, Gregory of Tours informs us of them, Motum est
signum ad matutinas, Erat enim dies d^minica; how the bell rung to mattins for
it was a Sunday. I have translated it the bell^ according to the custom of
these Ages, whereof now we write; wherein the use of bells was first taken up,
for gathering of the people to the house of God: Baron. Anu. Anno 614.
there being mention in the life and history of S. Loup or Lupus, (who lived in
the fifth Century) of a great bell that hung in the Church of Sens in France,
whereof he was Bishop, ad convocandum populum for calling of the congregation.
Afterward they were rung on the holy day Eves, to give the people notice of
the feast at hand and to advertise them* that it was time to leave off their
businesses. Solebant vesperi, initia feriarum campanis praenunciare; so he that
wrote the life of S. Codegundus.

(11) Well then, the bells are rung, and all the people met together: what is
expected at their hands? That they behave themselves there like the Saints of
God, in servent prayers, in frequent Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs,
hearing Gods holy Word, receiving of the Sacraments. These we have touched upon
before, as things that had been always used from the beginnings of the
Church. Collections for the poor, had been sometimes used on this day before:
but now about these times, the Offertory began to be an ordinary part of Gods
publicke^ worship. Pope Leo seems to intimate it, in his fifth Sermon de
collectis; Et quia die dominico proxima futura est collectio, vos omnes
voluntariae devotioni praeparare etc: and gives them warning of it, that they
may be ready. For our behavior in the Church, it was first ordered by Saint
Paul, that all things be done reverently, (...) because of the Angels:
according to which ground and warrant it was appointed in these ages, that
every man should stand up, at the reading of the Gospel, and the Gloria Patri;
that none depart the Church, till the service ended. Pope Anastatius who lived
in the beginning of the fifth Age, is said to have decreed the one. Dum S. S.
Evangelia in ecclesia recitantur, sacerdotes and coeteri omnes praesentes, non
sedentes sed venerabiliter curvi, Epl. Decret. 1 ap. Bin.
in conspectu sancti evangelij stantes, dominica verba attente audiant, and
fideliter adorent. The Priests, and all else present are enjoined to stand
(their bodies bowed a little in sign of reverence) during the reading of the
Gospel; but by no means to hear it sitting: adding some joyful acclamation
at the end thereof^ such as is that of Glory be to thee O Lord. So for the
Gloria Patri, that form of giving to the Lord the glory which belongs unto
him; we find in Cassian, that they used to stand upon their feet at the doing
of it: In clausula psalmi; Institut. lib. 2. c. 8.
omnes astantes pronunciant magno clamore, Gloria patri, etc, that gesture
being thought most natural and most proper for it. No constitution needed to
enjoin those duties, which natural dis^retion of it self, could dictate. As
for the last, it seemed the people in those parts, used to depart the Church,
some of them, before the service ended, and the blessing given: for otherwise
there had been no Canon to command the contrary. Ex malis moribus bonae
nascuntur leges, the old saying is. And out of this ill custom did arise a
law, made in a Synod held in a town of Gallia Narbonensis, Conc. Agathens*
Can. 47.
the 22 of the reign of Alaricus King of the Visi-Gothes, or Westerne-Gothes
Anno 506. that on the Lords day all Lay people should be present at the
public liturgy; and none depart before the blessing. Missas die dominico
secularibus audire speciali ordine praecipimus: ita ut egredi ante
benedictionem sacerdotis populus non praesumat: So the Canon has it. According
unto which it is provided in the Canons of the Church of England, Can. 18.
that none depart out of the Church during the time of service and Sermon,
without some reasonable or urgent cause. The benediction given and the assembly
broken up, the people might go home no doubt; and being there make merry with
their friends and neighbors: such as came either to them of their own accord,
or otherwise had been invited. Gregory of Tours informs us of a certain
Presbiter, that thrust himself into the Bishopric of the Arverni,
immediately upon the death of Sidonius Apollinaris, who dyed about the year
487: hist. l. 31
and that to gain the peoples favor, on the next Lords day after, Iussit
cunctos cives praeparato epulo invitari, he had invited all the principal
Citizens to a solemn feast. Whatever might be said of him, that made the
invitation, no doubt but there were many pious and religious men, that accepted
of it. Of recreations after dinner until evening prayers; and after evening
prayer till the time of supper: there is no question to be made but all were
practiced, which were not prohibited, Nam quod non prohibetur, permissum est,
as Tertullian. Of this more annon.

(12) Thus have we brought the Lords day to the highest pitch; the highest
pitch that hitherto it had enjoyed, both in relation unto rest from worldly
business* and to the full performance of religious duties. What ever was done
afterward in pursuit hereof, consisted specially in beating down the
opposition of the common people, who were not easily induced to lay by their
business: next in a descant as it were on the fomer plaine-song; the adding of
particular restrictions, as occasion was which were before contained, though
not plainly specified, both in the Edicts of the former Emperors, and
Constitutions of the Churches before remembered. Yet all this while we find not
any one who did observe it as Sabbath, or which taught others so to do: not
any, who affirmed that any manner of work was unlawful on it, further than as
it was prohibited by the Prince, or Prelate; that so the people might assemble
with their greater comfort: not any one, who preached or published, that any
pastime, sport, or recreation of an honest name, such as were lawful on the
other days, were not fit for this. And thereupon we may resolve, as well of
lawful business as of lawful pleasures: that such as have not been
forbidden by supreme authority, whether in proclamations of the Prince, or
Constitutions of the Church, or Acts of Parliament, or any such like
declaration of those higher powers, to which the Lord has made us subject; are
to be counted lawful still. It matters not, in case we find it not recorded
in particular terms, that we may lawfully apply our selves to some kind of
business, or recreate our selves in every kind of honest pleasure, at those
particular hours and times, which are le^t at large, and have not been
designed to Gods public service. All that we are to look for, is to see how
far we are restrained from labor, or from recreations, on the holy days;
and what authority it is, that has so restrained us: that we may come to know
our duty, and conform unto it. The Canons of particular Churches have no
power to do it, further then they have been admitted, into the Church wherein
we live: for then being made a part of her Canon also, they have power to bind
us to observance. As little power there is to be allowed unto the declarations
and Edicts of particular Princes, but in their own dominions only, Kings are
Gods Deputies on the Earth, but in those places only, where the Lord has set
them; their power no greater than their empire: and though they may command in
their own estates, yet is it extra sphaeram activitatis, to prescribe laws to
nations, not subject to them. A King of France can make no law, to bind us in
England. Much less must we ascribe, unto the dictates and directions of
particular men, which being themselves subject unto public order, are to be
hearkened to no further, then by their life and doctrine they do preach
obedience, unto the public ordinances under which they live. For were it
otherwise, every private man, of name and credit, would play the tyrant with
the liberty of his Christian brethren; and nothing should be lawful, but what
he allowed of: especially if the pretense be fair and specious, such as the
keeping of a Sabbath to the Lord our God; the holding of an holy convocation to
the King of heaven. Example we had of it lately in the Goths of Spain, and
that strange bondage, into which some pragmaticke and popular men had brought
the French; had not the council held at Orleans gave a check unto it. And
with examples of this kind, must we begin the story of the following Ages.

CHAP. V.
That in the next six hundred years from Pope Gregory forwards, the Lords day
was not reckoned of, as of a Sabbath.
(1) Pope Gregory's care to set the Lords day free from some Jewish rigours, at
that time^ obtruded on the Church. (2) Strange fancies taken up by some about
the Lords day, in these darker ages. (3) Scriptures and Miracles in these times
found out, to justify the keeping of the Lords day holy. (4) That in the
judgment of the most learned in these six ages, the Lords day has no other
ground, then the authority of the Church. (5) With how much difficulty the
people of these times were barred from following their Husbandry, and
Law-dayes, on the Lords day. (6) Husbandry not restrained on the Lords day in
the Eastern parts, until the time of Leo Philosophus. (7) Markets and
Handicrafts restrained with no less opposition, then the plough and pleading.
(8) Several casus reservati in the Laws themselves wherein men were permitted
to attend those businesses on the Lords day, which the laws restrained* (9) Of
diverse great and public actions done in these ages; on the Lords day. (10)
Dancing, and other sports no otherwise prohibited on the Lords day, then as
they were an hinderance to Gods public service. (11) The other holy days as
much esteemed of, and observed as the Lords day was. (12) The public
hallowing of the Lords day, and the other holy days in these present ages.
(13) No Sabbath all these ages heard of, either on Saturday or Sunday; and how
it stood with Saturday in the Eastern Churches.

(1) We are now come to the declining ages of the Church, after the first 600.
years were fully ended, and in the entrance on the seventh, some men had gone
about to possess the people of Rome with two dangerous fancies; one, that it
was not lawful to do any manner of work upon the Saturday, or the old
Sabbath, it a ut die Sabbati aliquid operari prohiberent; the other, ut
dominicorun die nullus debeat lavari, that no man ought to bathe himself on
the Lords day, or their new Sabbath, With such a race of Christened Jews, or
Iudaizing Christians was the Church then troubled. Against these dangerous
doctrines did Pope Gregory write his letter to the Roman Citizens; Epl. 3. l.
11.
stiling the first no other then the Preachers of Antichrist: one of whose
properties it shall be, that he will have the Sabbath and the Lords day both so
kept, as that no manner of work shall be done on either; qui veniens, diem
Sabatum atque dominicum, ab omni faciet opere custodire, as the Father has it:
Where note, that to compel or teach the people, that they must do no manner
of work on the Lords day, is a mark of Antichrist. And why should Antichrist
keep both days in so strict a manner? Because, says he, he will persuade the
people that he shall die and rise again; therefore he means to have the Lords
day in especial honor; and he will keep the Sabbath too, that so he may the
better allure the Jews to adhere unto him. Against the other he thus
reasons. Et si quidem pro luxuria, and voluptate, qu^s lavari appetit, hoc
fieri nec reliquo quolibe^ die concedimus, etc. If any man desires to bathe
himself, only out of a luxurious and voluptuous purpose (observe this well^)
this we conceive, not to be lawful upon any day: but if he do it only, for
the necessary refreshing of his body; then neither is it fit it should be
forbidden upon the Sunday. For if it be a sin to bathe, or wash all the body
on the Lords day; then must it be a sin, to wash the face upon that day: if
it be lawful to be done in any part, why then, necessity requiring, is it
unlawful for the whole. It seems then by Saint Gregory's doctrine, that in
hot weather, one may lawfully go into the water, on the Lords day, and there
wade or swim, either to wash or cool his body, as well as upon any other.
Note also here, that not the quality of the day, but the condition of the thing
is to be considered, in the denominating of a lawful or unlawful act: that
things unlawful in themselves, or tending to unlawful ends are unfit for all
days; and that what ever thing is fit for any day, is, of it self, as fit for
Sunday. Finally he concludes with this, Dominicorum vero die a labor terreno
cessandum est, etc. We ought to rest indeed on the Lords day from earthly
labors, and by all means abide in prayers; that if by humane negligence, any
thing has escaped in the six former days, it may be expiated by our prayers
on the day of the resurrection. This was the salve, by him applied to those
dangerous sores, and such effect it wrought upon them, that for the present,
and long after we find not any that prohibited working on the Saturday. But at
the last, it seems some did; who thereupon were censured and condemned by
another Gregory of that name the seventh. Damnavit docentes, non^licere die
Sabbati operas fac^re; as the Law informs us. De consecratione distinct. 3.
cap. Pervenit. But this was not till Anno 1074. or after, almost 500. years
after the times where now we are. As for the other fancy, that of not going to
the Bathes on the Lords day, it seems he crushed that too, as for that
particular: though otherwise, the like conceits did break out again, as men
began to entertain strange thoughts, and superstitious doctrines, about this
day; especially in these declining Ages of the Church, wherein so many errors
both in faith and manners, did in fine defile it* that it was black indeed,
but with little comeliness. The Church, as in too many things, not proper to
this place and purpose, it did incroach upon the Jew; much of the ceremonies,
and Priestly habit, in these times established being thence derived: so is it
not to be admired, if in some things, particular both (...) and Synods began
to Iudaize, a little, in our present business; making the Lords day no less
rigidly to be observed, than the Jewish Sabbath, if it were not more.

(2) For in the following Age, and in the latter end thereof, when learning was
now almost come to its lowest ebb; there was a Synod held at Friuli, by the
command of Pepin then King of France; a town now in the territory of the
State of Venice. The principal motive of that meeting, was to confirm the
doctine of the holy Trinity, and the incarnation of the word; which in those
times had bin disputed. The President thereof, Pa^linus, Patriarch of
Aquilegia: Anno 791. of our Redemption. There, in relation to this day, it was
thus decreed. Diem dominicum inchoante noctis initio, i. e. vespere Sabbati,
quando signum insonuerit, etc. We constitute and appoint that all Christian
men (that is to say all Christian men who lived within the Canons ^each) should
with all reverence and devotion honor the Lords day, beginning on the evening
of the day before, at the first ringing of the bell: and that they do abstain
therein, especially from all kind of sin, as also from all carnal acts,
Etiam a proprijs conjugibus, even from the company of their wives, and all
earthly labors: and that they go unto the Church devoutly, laying aside all
suites of Law, that so they may in love and charity praise Gods name together.
You may remember that some such device as this, was fathered formerly on Saint
Austine; but with little reason. Such trim conceits, as these, had not then
been thought of. And though it be affirmed in the preamble to these
constitutions, nec novas regulas instituimus, nec supervacuas rerum
adinventiones inhianter sectamur; that they did neither make new rules, or
follow vain and needless fancies; Sed sacris paternorum Canonum recensitis
folijs, etc. but that they took example by the ancient Canons: yet look who
will, into all Canons of the Church for the times before* and he shall find no
such example. For my part, I should rather think, that it was put into the
Canon, in succeeding times, by some misadventure: that some, observing a
restraint, ab omni opere carnali, of all carnal acts, might, as by way of
question, write in the Margin, etiam a proprijs conjugibus; from whence, by
ignorance, or negligence of the Collectours, it might be put into the text. Yet
if it were so passed at first, and if it chance that any be so minded, (and
some such there be) as to conceive the Canon to be pure and pious; and the
intent thereof not to be neglected: they are to be advertised, that the holy
days must be observed in the self same manner. It was determined so, before,
by the false Saint Austine. And somewhat to this purpose says this Synod now,
that all the greater festivalls must with all reverence be observed and
honored; and that such holy days as by the priests were bidden in the
Congregation, Omnibus modis sunt custodienda, were by all ways and means to
be kept amongst them; that is, by all those ways and means, which in the said
Conon were before remembered. In this the Christian plainly outwent the Jew;
amongst whose many superstitions, Ap. Ainsw. in Ex. 20. 10.
there is none such found* true indeed, the Jews accounted it unlawful to
marry on the Sabbath day, or on the evening of the Sabbath, or on the first
day of the week: lest (say the Rabbis) they should pollute the Sabbath by
dressing meat. Conformably whereunto, it was decreed in a Synod held in Aken,
or Aquis granum, Ca^. 17.
Anno 833. nec nuptias pro reverentia tantae solennitatis celebrari visum est,
that in a reverence to the Lords day, it should no more be lawful to marry,
or be married upon the same. The Jews, as formerly we showed, have now by
order from their Rabbis, restrained themselves on their Sabbath day, from
knocking with their hands, upon a table, to still a child; from making figures
in the air, or drawing letters in the ground, or in dust and ashes, and such
like niceties. And some such teachers: Olaus King of Norway, had, no question
met with, Anno 1028. For being taken up one Sunday, in some serious thoughts,
and having in his hands a small walking stick, he took his knife and whitled
it, as men do sometimes, when as their minds are troubled, or intent on
business. And when it had been ^old him, as by way of jest, how he had
^respassed therein against the Sabbath, he gathered the small chippes together,
put them upon his hand, and set fire unto them: Vt viz. in se ulcisceretur,
Metropol. l. 4. c. 8.
quod contra divinum praeceptum incautus admisisset; that so, says Crantzius,
he might revenge that on himself, which unawares he had committed against
Gods Commandment. Crantzius, it seems, did well enough approve the folly:
for in the entrance on this story, he reckons this inter alia virtutum suarum
praeconia, amongst the monuments of his piety, and sets it up as an especial
instance of that Princes sanctity. Lastly, whereas the modern Jews are of
opinion, that all the while their Sabbath lasts the souls in hell have liberty
to range abroad, and are released of all their torments: so, lest in any
superstitious fancy, they should have pre-eminence, Epi. ad (...). c. 5.
it was delivered of the souls, in Purgatory, by Petrus Damiani, who lived in
Anno 1056. Dominico die refrigerum poenarum habuisse, that every Lords day they
were manumitted from their pains* and fluttered up and down the lake Avernus,
in the shape of birds.

(3) Ind^ede the mervaile is the less, that these and such like Jewish fancies
should in those times begin to show themselves in the Christian Church:
considering that now some had begun to think that the Lords day was founded on
the fourth Commandment; and all observances of the same, grounded upon the Law
of God. As long as it was taken only for an Ecclesiastical istitution, and
had no other ground upon which to stand, then the authority of the Church; we
find not any of these rigours annexed unto it. But being once conceived to
have its warrant from the Scripture, the Scripture presently was ransacked, and
whatsoever did concern the old Jewish Sabbath was applied thereto. It had bin
ordered formerly that men should be restrained on the Lords day, from some kind
of labors, that so they might assemble in the greater numbers; the Princes and
the Prelates both conceiving it convenient that it should b^ so. But in these
Ages there were Texts produced, to make it necessary. Thus Clotaire King of
France, grounded his Edict of restraint from ^ervile labors on this day, from
the holy Scripture: quia ho^ lex prohibet, and sacra Scriptura in omnihus
contradicit, because the Law forbids it, and the holy Scripture contradicts it.
And Charles the Great builds also on the self same ground, Statuimus secundum
quod in lege dominus praecepit, etc. We do ordain according as the Lord
commands us, that on the Lords day none presume to do any servile business.
Thus finally the Emperor Leo Philosophus in a constitution to that purpose, of
which more hereafter, declares that he did so determine, secundum quod Sp.
Sancto ab ipsoque institutis Apostolis placuit, according to the dictate of the
holy Ghost, and the Apostles by him tutored. So also when the Fathers of the
Church had thought it requisite, that men should cease from labor on the
Saturday in the afternoon; that they might be the better fitted for the^r
devotions the next day; some would not rest till they had found a Scripture for
it. Observemus diem dominicum fratres, sicut antiquis praeceptum est de
Sabbato, etc. Let us observe the Lords day, as it is commanded, from even to
even shall ye celebrate your Sabbath. The 251. Sermon inscribed de tempore,
has resolved it so. And lastly, that we go no further, the superstitious act
of the good King Olaus, burning his hand as formerly was related, was then
conceived to be a very just reveng upon himself, because he had offended,
although unawars, contra divinum praeceptum, against Gods Commandment. Nor
were these rigorous fancies left to the naked world, but they had miracles to
confirm them. It is reported by Vincentius and Antoninus, that Anstregisilus,
one that had probably preached such doctrine, restored a Miller by his power,
whose hand had cleaved unto his Hatchet, as he was mending of his Mill on the
Lords day: for now you must take notice that in the times in which they lived;
grinding had been prohibited on the Lords day, by the Canon Laws. As also how
Sulpitius had caused a poor man's hand to wither, only for cleaving wood on
the Lords day (no great crime assuredly, save that some parallel must be found
for him, that gathered sticks on the former Sabbath;) and after of his
special goodness, made him whole again. Of these the first was made
Archbishop of Burges, Anno. 627. Sulpitius being successor unto him in his
See, and as it seems too, in his power of working miracles. Such miracles as
these they who list to credit, shall find another of them in Gregorius
Turonensis, Miracul. l. 1. c. 6. And some we shall hereafter meet with when
we come to England, forged purposely, as no doubt these were to countenance
some new devise about the keeping of this day; there being no new Gospel
preached, but must have miracles to attend it, for the greater state.

(4) But howsoever it come to pass, that those four Princes, especially Leo,
who was himself a Scholar, and Charles the Great, who had as learned men
about him, as the times then bred, were thus persuaded of this day; that all
restraints from work and labor on the same, were to be found expressly in the
word of God: yet was the Church and the most learned men therein, of another
mind. Nor is it utterly impossible, but that those Princes might make use of
some pret^nce or ground of Scripture, the better to incline the people to yield
obedience unto those restraints which were laid upon them. First for the
Church, and men of special eminence in the same, for place and learning, there
is no question to be made, but they were otherwise persuaded. Isidore
Archbishop of Sevill, De e^cl^s. Offic. l. 1. 29.
who goes highest, makes it an Apostolical sanction only, no divine
commandment; a day designed by the Apostles for religious exercises, in honor
of our Saviors resurrection on that day performed. Di^m dominicum Apostoli
ideo religiosa solennitate sanxerunt, quia in eo redemptor noster a mortuis
resurrexit. And adds, that it was therefore called the Lords day, to this end
and purpose, that resting in the same from all earthly Acts, and the
temptations of the world, we might intend Gods holy worship; giving this day
due honor for the hope of the resurrection, which we have therein. The same
verbatim is repeated by Beda, lib. de Offic. and by Rabanus Maurus lib. de
institut. Cleric. l. 2 c. 24* and finally by Alcuinus de divin. Offic. cap. 24.
which plainly shows that all those took it only for an Apostolical usage,
an observation that grew up by custom, rather then upon commandment. Sure I
am that Alcuinus, one of principal credit with Charles the Great, who lived
about the end of the eighth Centurie, as did this I^idore, in the beginning of
the seventh, says clearly that the observation of the former Sabbath had
been translated very fitly to the Lords day, by the custom and consent of
Christian people. For speaking how the Sabbath was accounted holy in the former
times, and that the Jews resting thereon from all manner of work, did only
give themselves to meditation and to feasting; H^mil. 18. ^ost. Pe^ta.
he adds, cujus observationem mos Christianus ad diem dominicum competentius
transtulit. Where plainly mos Christianus does imply no precept, no order or
command from the Apostles that it should be so, and much less any precept in
the Old Testament which should still oblige. And sure I am Rabanus Maurus
speaks only as by way of exhortation, as not armed with any warrant from the
Apostles, or other argument from Scripture: Homil. i^ dieb. dom.
Where he advises us, a vespera diei Sabbati usque ad vesperam diei dominici,
sequestrati a rurali opere and omni negotio, solo divino cultui vacemus: Where
no man will presume to say, that either rest from husbandry and such other
business, or the beginning of the Lords day on the Eve before, were introduced
by any precept of the Apostles* considering how long it wa^, before either of
them had bin used in the Christian Church. And so Hesychius Bishop of
Jerusalem, In Levit. lib. 2. cap.
who flourished at the self same time with Isidore, speaks of it only as a
custom, or a matter of fact, descending by tradition from the Apostles.
Apostolorum sequentes traditionem, diem dominicum conventihus divinis
sequestramus; which was the most that he could say, for the original thereof,
indeed who could more. Etymolog. l. 6. c. 18.
And as for Isidore himself whom the others followed, its clear that they
esteemed the Lords day for no other, then a common holiday; by far inferior
unto Easter. Pascha festivitatum omniu^ prima est. Then follows Pentecost,
Epiphanie, Palme-sunday, Maundie-thursday, and in the last place, Dies
daminicus, the Lords day. Which questionless he had not placed in so low a
room, had he conceived it instituted by any precept, or injunction of those
blessed Spirits. So in a Council held at Paris, Anno 829. it was determined
positively, that keeping of the Lords day had no other ground then custom
only: and that this custom did descend ex Apostolorum traditione, immo
ecclesiae autoritate, at most from Apostolical tradition, but indeed rather
from the authority of holy Church. And whereas Courts of Law, or Law days had
formerly been prohibited on this day, that so men might in peace and concord*
go to Church together: the several Counsels that of Friburg, Anno 895. and
that of Erpford, Anno 932. though then the times were at the darkest; ascribe
it not to any Law or Text of Scripture, but only to the ancient Canons.
Secund^ugrave;m sanctorum statuta patrum, says the first, Can. 26.
Secund^ugrave;m Canonicam institutionem says the second, Cap. 2. And howsoever
some have said that Alexander Pope of Rome, of that name the third, referres
the keeping of the Lords day to divine commandment: yet they that look upon
him well, can find no such matter. He says indeed that both the Old and New
Testament depute the seventh day unto rest, but for the keeping of it holy,
both that and other days appointed for Gods public service, ecclesia
decreverit observanda; that he ascribes alone to the Churches order. De^ret. l.
2. tit. 9. de ferijs. cap. 3. The like may be affirmed also of restraint from
labor, that it is grounded only on the authority of the Church, and Christian
Princes; how ever in some Regal and Imperial Edicts there be some show or
color added from the Law of God.

(5) I say some show or color added from the Law of God. For as before I said,
it is not utterly impossible, but that those Princes might make use of some
pretense or show of Scripture, the better to incline the people, to yield
obedience unto those restraints which were laid upon them. The Synod held at
Mascon, and that in Auxerre, both before remembered, expressly had prohibited all
works of husbandry on this day: the former having added for enforcing of it,
not only Ecclesiastical censures, but corporal and civill^ punishments. But
yet this was not found enough to weane the people from their works, their
ordinary labors used before, upon that day, and it is no marvel. The Jews
were hardly brought unto it, though they had heard God thundering from the holy
mountain, that they should do no manner of work upon their Sabbath: It being
added thereunto, that whosoever should offend therein, he should dye the death.
And certainly it was very long, before either Prince or Prelate, or both
joined together, with all their power and policy could prevail upon them;
either to lay aside their labors, or forbear their Law days; as may appear
by many several Edicts of Emperors, decrees of Popes, and Canons of
particular Counsels; Can 18.
which have successively been made in restraint thereof. The Synod of Chalons,
Anno 662. wherein were 44. Bishops, and amongst them S. Owen Archbishop of
Roane, concluded as had been before, [non nova condentes sed vetera
renovantes] that on the Lords day no man should presume to sow or plough, or
reap, vel quicquid ad ruris culturam pertinet, or deal in any thing that
belonged to husbandry: and this on pain of Ecclesiastical censure and
correction. But when this did no good, Clothaire the third of France, (for he I
think it was who set out that Law) beginning with the word of God, and ending
with a threate of severe chastisement, Leg. Al^ma^. tit. 39. ap. Brisso^.
does command the same. Die dominico nemo servilia opera praesumat facere, quia
hoc lex prohibet, and sacra Scriptura in omnibus contradicit, as before was
said. If any do offend herein, in case he be a bondsman, let him be soundly
bastinadoed; in case a freeman, let him be thrice admonished of it, if he
offend again the third part of his patrimony was to be confiscated; and
finally if that prevailed not, he was to be convented before the Governor, and
made a bondslave. So for the Realm of Germany, a Council held at Dingulofinum
in the lower Bavaria, Anno. 772. did determine thus. Festo die Solis, ocio
divino intentus, prophanis negotijs abstineto, upon the Sunday (so they call
it) let every man abstain from profane employments, and be intent upon Gods
worship; If any man shall work his Cart this day, or busy himself in any
such like work, jumenta ejus publica sunto, his Teeme shall presently be
forfeited to the public use: And if stubbornely they persist to provoke Gods
anger, be they sold for Bondmen. Hist. l. 3.
So Aventine reports the Canon. And somewhat like to this was ordered by
Theodorius king of the Bavarians, Ap. Brisson. ut supra.
viz. Si quis die dominico, etc. If any man upon the Lords day shall yoke his
Oxen, and drive forth his waine, dextrum bovem perdat, his right hand Ox shall
be forthwith forfeit; if he make hay or carry it in; if he mow corn or carry
it in, let him be once or twice admonished; and if he amend not thereupon, let
him receive no less then 50. stripes: yet notwithstanding all this care, when
Charles the Great being King of France, had mastered Germany, which was 789. or
thereabouts; there had bin little reformation in this point amongst them.
Therefore that Prince first published his own Regal edict, grounding himself
secundu quod in lege praecepit dominus, upon the prescript of Gods Law, and
there commands that all men do abstain from the works of husbandry. Which
Edict since it speaks of more particulars, at that time prohibited, we will
speak more thereof anon. That not prevailing as it seems, he caused five
several Synods to be assembled at one time, Anno 813. at Mentz at Rhemes, at
Tours, at Chalons, and Arles: in all of which it was concluded against the
Husbandman; and many others more, as we shall see in the next Section. And yet
we find some grudging still of the old disease; as is apparent by a Synod held
at Rome, Anno. 826. under Eugenius the second Chap. 30. another in the same
place, Anno. 853. under Leo the fourth, Can. 30. the like in that of Compeigne
held by Alexander the third what time he lived an exile in the Realm of
France. So for restraint of Law days, or Courts of judgment those chiefly
that determined of men's lives; it was not brought about, in these Western
parts without great difficulty. Witness, besides the several Imperial edicts
before remembered, Conc. Mogunt. Anno. 813. Can 37. Rhemens. Can. 35. Turonens.
Can. 40. Arelatens. Can. 16. being four of those Counsels which were called
by Charles, as before was said: as also that of Aken, Anno. 836. Ca. 20. And
though it was determined in the Roman Synod under Leo the fourth, that no
suspected person should receive judgment on that day; a clause being added in
the Canon, legibus infirmari judicium eo die depromptum, that all Acts sped
upon that day, were void in law: yet more then 300 years after it was so
resolved of, was Alexander the third in council of Compeigne before remembered,
enforced particularly to revive it* and then and ther^ to set it down, Ne
aliquis ad mortem vel ad poenam judicetur, that no man should upon that day be
doomed to death, or otherwise condemned unto bodily punishment. So difficult a
thing it was to weane the people from their labors, and other civil business
unto which they had been accustomed; there being nothing to enforce or induce
them to it, but humane authority.

(6) On the same reason as it seems, Leo Philosophus Emp. of Constantinople
did make use of Scripture: when in conformity with the Western Churches, he
purposed to restrain the works of husbandry, on that day, which till his time
had been permitted. The Emperor Constantine had ordained, as before was
shown that all Artificers, and such as dwelt in Cities, should on the Sunday
leave their trades: but by the same Edict gave license to the husbandman to
pursue his business, as well upon that day, as on any other. But contrary this
Leo, surnamed Philosophus (he began his reign Anno 886, grounding himself,
for so he tells us, on the authority of the holy Ghost, and of the Apostles;
(but where he found that warrant from the holy Ghost, and from the holy
Apostles, that he tells us not) restrained the husbandman from his work, as
well as men of other callings. Nicephorus mistakes the man, Eccl. hist. l. 15
c. 22.
and attributes it to the former Leo, whom before we spoke of in our fourth
Chapter. Quo tempore primus etiam Leo constitution^ lata, ut dies dominicus ab
omnibus absque labor omni, per ocium transigeretur, festusque and venerabilis
esset, quemadmodum and divis Apostolis visum est, praecepit. Where the last
clause with the substance of the Edict, make the matter plain, that he
mistook the man though he hit the business: the former Leo using no such
motive in all his Edict. But take it from the Emperor himself, Constit. (...)
who having told us first that the Lords day was to be honored with rest from
labor, adds next, that he had seen a law, (he means that of Constantine)
quae non omnes simul operari prohibendos nonnullosque ^ti operentur indulgendum
censuit, which having not restrained all works but permitted some, did upon no
sufficient reason, dishonor that so sacred day. Then follows. Statuimus nos
etiam, quod Sp. Sancto ab ipsoque institutis Apostolis placuit, ut omnes in die
sacro, etc. a labor vacent. Neque Agricolae, etc. It is our will, says he,
according to the true meaning of the holy Ghost, and of the Apostles by him
directed, that on that sacred day, whereon we were restored unto our integrity,
all men should rest themselves and surcease from labor: neither the husbandmen
nor others, putting their hand that day to prohibited work. For if the Jews
did so much reverence their Sabbath which only was a shadow of ours; are not
we which inhabit light and the truth of grace, obliged to honor that day
which the Lord has honored, and has therein delivered us, both from
dishonor and from death? Are not we bound to keep it singularly and
inviolably, sufficiently contented with a liberal grant of all the rest; and
not encroaching on that one, which God has chosen for his service? Nay were it
not a retchlesse slighting and contempt of all religion, to make that day
common: and think that we may do thereon, as we do on others. So far this
Emperor determines of it first, and disputes it afterward, I only note it
for the close, that it was near 900 years from our Saviors birth, if not
quite so much, before restraint of husbandry on this day, had been first
thought of in the East: and probably being thus restrained, did find no more
obedience there, then it had done before in the Western parts.

(7) As great a difficulty did it prove to restrain other things in these
times projected, although they carried it at the last, The Emperor Constantine
had before commanded, that all Artificers in the Cities should surcease from
labor, on the Lords day; as well as those whom he employed in his seats of
justice: and questionless he found obedience answearable to his expectation.
But when the Western parts became a prey to new Kings and Nations; and that
those Kings and nations had admitted the laws of Christ: yet did they not
conceive it necessary, to submit themselves to the laws of Constantine, and
therefore followed their employments, as before they did. And so it stood
until the time of Charles the Great who in the year 789, published his regal
Edict, in this form that follows. Statuimus, secundum quod and in lege
dominus praecepit, etc. In ^egib* Aquis granens.
We do ordeine, according as it is commanded in the law of God, that no man
do any servile work on the Lords day. This in the general had been before
commanded by his father Pepin, in the council holden in Friuli but he now
explicates himself in these particulars. That is to say, that neither men
employ themselves in works of husbandry, in dressing of their Vines, ploughing
their lands, making their hay, fencing their grounds, grubbing or felling
trees, working in mines, building of houses, planting their gardens, nor that
they plead that day, or go forth on hunting: and that it be not lawful for
the women, to weave, or dress cloth, to make garments, or needle work, to
card their wool, beat hemp, wash clothes in public, or sheere sheep: but
that they come unto the Church, to divine service, and magnify the Lord their
God, for those good things which on that day he has done for them. After
considering with himself that faires and markets on this day, were an
especial means to keep men from Church; he set out his Imperial Edict, de
nundinis non concedendis, as my author tells me. Nor did he trust so far, to
his own Edict, as not to strengthen it, (as the times then were) by the
authority of the Church, and therefore caused those five Counsels before
remembered, to be assembled at one time: in four of which it was determined
against all servile works, and Law days, as also ut merca^tus in ijs minime
sit, Council, Mogunt. C^n. 37. ne mercata excerceant, Rhemens. can. 35. and so
in those of Tours, 40. and Arles 16. That of Chalons which was the fifth, did
only intimate, that whereas the Lords day had been much neglected, Can. 50.
the better keeping of the same was to be established authentica constitutione,
by some Authentical constitution of the Emperor himself. But whatsoever care
this Emperor took, to see his will performed, and the Lords day sanctified;
it seems his successor Ludovicus was remiss enough; which being found, as
found it was, the people fell again to their former labors; ploughing and
marketting and Lawdayes, as before they did. The Council held at Paris Anno
829, which was but sixteen years after the holding of the aforesaid Synods,
Council. Paris^e^s ^. l. c. 50
much complains thereof: and withal adds, that many of the Prelates
assembled there, knew both by fame and by their own proper knowledge, quosdam
in hoc die ruralia opera excercentes, fulmine interemptos, that certain men
following their husbandry on that day, had been killed with lightning; and
others with a strange convulsion of their joints, had miserably perished:
whereby say they, it is apparent, that God was very much offended, with their
so great neglect of that holy day. Rather with their so great neglect of their
superiors in that, nor declaration of their King, nor constitution of the
Church, could work so far upon them, as to gain obedience; in things
conducing to Gods service* Had working on that day, been so much offensive in
the ^ight of God, likely it is, we might have heard of some such judgments,
in the times, before: but being not prohibited, it was not unlawful. Now being
made unlawful, because prohibited, God smote them for their frequent workings,
at times which were designed to another use; not in relation to the day, but
their disobedience. Therefore the council did advise that first of all the
Priests and Prelates, then that Kings, Princes, and all faithful people, would
do their best endeavor for the restoring of that day to its ancient luster;
which had so fowly been neglected. Next they adressed themselves particularly
to Ludovicke and Lotharius then the Roman Emperors, ut cunctis metum
incutiant, that by some sharp injunction, they would strike a terror into all
their subjects, that for the times to come none should presume to plough, or
hold Law-dayes, or Market, as of late was used. This probably occasioned the
said two Emperors 853. to call a Synod at Rome, under Leo the fourth: where it
was ordered more precisely, Syn. Romans Can. 30.
than in f^rmer times, ut die dominico nullus audeat mercationes, nec in
cibariis rebus, aut quaelibet opera rustica facere, that no man should from
thenceforth dare to make any Markets on the Lords day, no not for things that
were to eat; neither to do any kind of work that belonged to husbandry.
Which Canon being made at Rome, confirmed at Compeigne, and afterward
incorporated, as it was, into the body of the Canon Law (whereof see Decretal.
l. 2. tit. 9. de feriis cap. 2.) became to be admitted, without further
question, in most parts of Christendom: especially when the Popes had attained
their height, and brought all Christian Princes to be at their devotion. For
then the people, who before had most opposed it, might have justly said. Behold
two Kings stood not before him, how then shall we stand? 2 King. ^0.
Out of which consternation all men presently obeyed, tradesmen of all sorts
being brought to lay by their labors: and amongst those* the miller, though
his work was ^asiest, and least of all required his presence. N^c aliquis a
vespera diei Sabbati, usque ad vesperam diei dominicae, ad molendi^a aquarum
vel ad aliqua alia molere a^deat. So was it ordered in the Council of Angeirs,
(of which see Bochellus) Anno 1282: wherein the Barber also was forbidden to
use his trade.

(8) Yet were not those restraints so strict, as that there was no liberty to
be allowed of, either for business or pleasure! A time there was for both, and
that time made use of: there being in the Imperial Edicts, and Constitutions
of the Church, yea and the decretalls of the Popes many reservations, whereby
the people might have liberty to enjoy themselves: They had been else in worse
condition, then the jews before. In the Edict of Charles the Great before
remembered, though otherwise precise enough, there were three several kinds of
carriages, allowed and license on the Lords day: i. e. Hortalia carra, vel
victualia, vel si fortenecesse erit corpus cujuslibet ducere ad sepulchrum;
that is to say, carriage of gardening ware, and Carts of victuals, and such as
are to carry a dead corpse to burial. So Theodulphus Aurelianensis who lived
about the year 836, having first put it down for a positive rule, that the
Lords day ought with such care to be observed, ut praeter orationes and
missarum solennia, and ea quae ad vescendum pertinent, Epl. ap. Bibl. Patr*
nil aliud fiat; that besides prayer, and hearing mass, and such things as
belong to food, there is directly nothing that may be done: admits of an
exception, or a reservation. Nam si necessitas fuerit navigandi vel itinerandi,
licentia datur. For if (says he) there be a necessary occasion, either of
setting sail, or going a journey; this may be allowed of: in case they
pretermit not Mass and Prayers. This I find extant as a Canon of the 6
General council holden in Constantinople: but since both this and all the
rest of the same stamp, (there are nine in all) are thought not to belong of
right unto it, I have chose rather to refer it to this Theodulphus, though a
private man, amongst whose works I find it in the great Bibliotheca Patrum.
Tom. 9. Thus in a Synod held at Coy, within the realm and diocese of Oniedo;
Anno 1050, it was decreed, that all men should repair to Church on the Lords
day, and there hear Matins, Mass, and other the ^anonicall hours; (...). 6.
as also, Opus servile non excerceant, nec sectentur itinera, that they should
do no servile work, nor take any journey. Yet with exceptions four or five
namely unless it were for devotions sake, or to bury the dead, or to visit the
sick; or finally prosecreto regis, vel Saracenorum impetu, on special
business of the Kings, or to make head against the Saracens. The King was much
beholding to them that they would take such care of his state affairs: more
then some Princes might be now in case their business were at the disposing of
particular men. So had it been decreed by several Emperors, yea and by
several Counsels too: which for the East part^ was confirmed by Emanuel
Comnenus the Eastern Emperor, Anno 1174. (...), that all access to the
tribunal should be quite shut up; that none of those who sat in judgment
should sit on any cause that day. Yet this not absolutely, but (...) etc.
unless the King shall please on any new emergent cause, as many times
business comes unlooked for, to appoint it otherwise. Thus also for the works
of labor, fishing had been restrained on the Lords day, as a toylesome Act;
and on the other holy days, as well as that: yet did it please Pope Alexander
the third, (he entered on the chair of Rome Anno 1160.) to order by his
decretall, that on the Lords day and the rest, Decretal. l. 2. 7 tit. 9* c. 3.
it might be lawful unto those who dwelt upon the Coast, Si halecia terrae
inclinarint, ^orum captioni, ingruente necessitate, intendere; to set
themselves unto their fishing* in case the Herring came within their reach, and
the tim^ was seasonable. Provided that they sent a convenient portion, unto the
Churches round about them, and unto the poor. Nay even the works of
handycrafts were in some sort suffered. For whereas in the Council of
Laodicea, it was determined, that men should rest on the Lords day, (...), from
all their handy work, and repair to Church. Balsamon tells us in his Gloss,
In Can. 29. Council* L^^d.
that so it was resolved amongst them, (...), not absolutely; but (...) if with
convenience they could. For still, says he, (he lived in Anno 1191) in case
men labor on that day, (...), either because of want or any other necessity
they are held excusable. Lastly, whereas Pope Gregory the ninth had on the
Sundays and the holy days commanded ut homines and jumenta omnia quiescant,
Chroni^. Aeditui.
that there should be a general restraint from labor both of man beast: there
was a reservation also, nisi urgens necessitas instet, vel nisi pauperibus, vel
ecclesiae, gratis fiat; unless on great necessity, or some good Office to be
done unto the poor, or the Church.

(9) Nor were there reservations and exceptions only in point of business and
nothing found in point of practice; but there are many passages, especially of
the greatest persons* and most public actions left upon record; to let us know
what liberty they assumed unto themselves, as well on this day as the rest. And
in such only shall I instance, and as being most exemplary: and therefore most
conducing to my present purpose. And first we read of a great battle fought
on Palm Sunday, Aventi^e* Hist. ^. 3.
Anno. 718. between Charles Martell, Grand master of the household of the king
of France, and Hilpericus the King himself; wherein the victory fell to
Charles: and yet we read not there of any great necessity, nay of none at
all, but that they might on both sides have deferred the battle, had they
conceived it any ^inne to fight that day. Upon the Sunday before Lent, Anno
835. Ludovick the Emperor surnamed Pius, or the godly, together with his
Prelates and others, Baron.
which had been present with him at the assembly held at Theonville, went on
his journey unto Mets* nor do we find that it did derogate at all from his
name and piety. Upon the Sunday after Whitsontide Anno 844. Ludowick son unto
Lotharius the Emperor made his solemn entrance into Rome: the Roman Citizens
attending him with their Flagges and Ensigns; the Pope and Clergy staying his
coming in S. Peter^ Church, there to entertain him. Upon a Sunday, Anno 1014.
Henry the Emperor duodecem senatoribus vallatus, environed with twelve of the
Roman Senators, Ditmarus Hist. l. 7.
came to S. Peter's Church, and there was crowned, together with his wife, by
the Pope then being. On Easter day, in ipsa die paschalis solennitatis, Anno.
1027. Conrade the Emperor was solemnly inaugurate by Pope John; Canutus King
of England, Otho Frising. hist* l. 6. c. 29.
and Rodalph King of the Burgundians, being then both present: and the next
Sunday after began his journey toward Germany. Upon Palm Sunday, Anno. 1084.
Wibert Archbishop of Ravenna was solemnly inthronized in the Chair of Rome:
Vrspergens. C^^onico^.
and the next Sunday after being Easter day, Henry the third Imperiali
dignitate sublimatus est, was crowned Emperor. On Passion Sunday Anno 1148.
Lewis the King of France afterward Canonized for a Saint, made his first
entry into Jerusalem with all his Army; and yet we read not any where that
it was laid in bar against him, to put by his Sainting; as possibly it might
be now, were it yet to do: What should I speak of Counsels on this day
assembled, as that of Charles, Anno 1146. for the recovery of the holy land; of
Tours, on Trinity Sunday as we call it now, Anno 1164. against Octavian the
Pseudo Pope; that of Ferrara, upon Passion Sunday, Anno. 1177. against
Frederick the Emperor; or that of Paris, Anno 1226. summoned by Stephen then
Bishop there, on the fourth Sunday in Lent, for the condemning of certain
dangerous and erroneous positions, at that time on foot. I have the rather
instanced in these particulars, partly because they happened about these times,
when Prince and Prelate were most intent in laying more and more restraints
upon their people, for the more honor of this day* and partly because being
all of them public actions, and such as moved not forwards but by diverse
wheels; they did require a greater number of people to attend them. And
howsoever Counsels in themselves be of an ecclesiastical nature; and that the
crowning of a King in the act it self, be mixed of sacred and of ^ivill: yet
in the train and great attendance that belongs unto them, the pomp the
triumphs, and concourse of so many people they are merely secular. And
secular although they were, yet we may well persuade our selves, that neither
Actor or Spectatour, thought themselves guilty* any wise of offering any the
least wrong to the Lords day: though those solemnities no question might
without any prejudice have been put off to another time. No more did those who
did attend the Princes before remembered in their magnificent entries into Rome
and Metz; or the other millitary entrance into Jerusalem: which were mere
secular Acts, and had not any the least mixture, either of e^^lesiasticall or
sacred nature.

(10) For recreations in these times, there is no question to be made, but all
were lawful to be used on the Lords day, which were accounted lawful upon
other days; and had not been prohibited by authority: and we find none
prohibited but dancing only. Not that all kind of dancing was by Law
restrained: but either the abuse thereof at times unseasonable, when men should
have been present in the Church of God; or else immodest shameless dancings,
such as were those, against the which the Fathers did inveigh so sharply in the
primitive times. In reference to the first, Damascen tells us of some men,
Parallellorum lib. 3. cap. 47.
who only wished for the Lords day, ut ab opere feriati vitiis operam dent,
that being quitted from their labors, they might enjoy the better their
sinful pleasures. For look into the streets (says he) upon other days, and
there is no man to be found; Die dominico egredere, atque alios cithara
canentes, alios applaudentes, and saltantes, etc. But look abroad on the Lords
day, and you shall find some singing to the Harp, others applauding of the
Music; some dancing, others jeering of their Neighbors, alios denique
luctantes reperi^s, and some also wrestling. It follows, Praco ad ecclesiam
vocat? omnes segnitie torpent, and moras nectunt: cithara aut tuba personuit?
omnes tanquam alis instructi currunt. Does the Clarke call unto the Church?
they have a feaver-lurdane, and they cannot stir: does the Harp or Trumpet
call them to their pastimes? they fly, as they had wings to help them. They
that can find in this a prohibition either of music, dancing, public
sports, or manlike exercises, such as wrestling is on the Lords day; must
certainly have better eyes than Lynceus, and more with than Oedipus. Plainly
they prove the contrary to what some allege them: and show most clearly, that
the recreations there remembered, were allowed of publicly; otherwise none
durst use them, as we see they did, in the open streets. Only the Father
seems offended, that they preferred their pastimes before their prayers; that
they made little or no haste to Church, and ran upon the spur to their
recreations: that where Gods public service was to be first considered, in
the Lords day, and after, on spare times men's private pleasures; these had
quite changed the course of nature, and loved the Lords day more for pleasure
than for devotion. This is the most that can be made, from this place of
Damascen; and this makes more for dancing, and such recreations, then it does
against them, in case they be not used at unfitting hours. Much of this
nature, is the Canon produced by some, to condemn dancing on the Lords day, as
unlawful utterly: which being looked into, condemns alone immodest and
unseemely dancings, such as no Canon could allow of upon any day of what name
soever. A Canon made by Pope Eugenius in a Synod held at Rome, Anno 826. what
time both Prince and Prelates did agree together to raise the Lords day to as
high a pitch as they fairly might. Now in this Synod, there were made three
Canons which concern this day: the first prohibitive of business and the
works of labor; the second against process, in causes criminal; the third,
ne mulieres festis diehus vanis ludis vacent: that women do not give
themselves on the holy days, unto wanton sports: and is as follows. Sunt
quidam, and maxim mulieres, qui festis and sacris diebus, etc. Can. 35.
Certain the^e are, but chiefly women, which on the holy days, and Festivalls
of the blessed Martyrs, upon the which they ought to rest, have no great list
to come to Church, as they ought to do: sed balando, and turpia verba
decantando, etc. but spend the time in dancing, and in shameless songs,
leading and holding out their dances as the Pagans used, and in that manner,
come to the Congregation. These, if they come unto the Church, with few sins
about them, return back with more: and therefore are to be admonished by the
parish Priest, that they must only come to Church to say their prayers; such
as do otherwise, destroying not themselves alone; but their neighbors also.
Now in this Canon there are these three things to be considered: First that
these women used not to come unto the Church with that sobriety and gravity
which was fitting, as they ought to do; but dancing, singing, sporting, as the
Pagans used, when they repaired unto their Temples: secondly, that these
dancings were accompanied with immodest songs, and therefore as unfit for any
day, as they were for Sunday: and thirdly, that these kind of dancings were not
prohibited on the Lords day only, but on all the holy days. Such also was the
Canon of the third Council of Tolledo, Anno. 589. Decret. pars. 3. de
consectat. distinct. 3.
which afterward became a part of the Canon Law; though by the oversight of
the Collector, it is there said to be the fourth: and this will make as little
to the purpose, as the other did. It is this that follows, Irreligiosa
consuetudo est, quam vulgus per sanctorum solennitates and festivitates agere
consuevit. Populi qui divina officia debent attendere, saltationibus turpibus
invigilant, cantica non solum mala can^ntes, sed etiam religiosorum officijs
perstrepunt. Hoc euim ut ab omni Hispania [the Decret reads ab omnibus
provincijs] depellatar, sacerdotum ac judicum a sancto Conci ^io cura
committitur. There is an irreligious custom taken up by the common people,
that on the Festivalls of the Saints, those which should be attent on Divine
Service, give themselves wholly to lascivious and shameless dances: and do not
only sing unseemely songs, but disturb the Service of the Church. Which
mischief that it may be soon remooved out of all the Country, the Council
leaves it to the care of the Priests and Judges. Such dances and employed to so
bad a purpose, there is none could tolerate; and yet this generally was upon
the holy days, Saints days I mean, as well as Sundays: whereby we see the
Church had no less care of one, than of the other.

(11) And so indeed it had, not in this alone, but in all things else: the
holy days, as we now distinguish them, being in most points, equal to the
Sunday; and in some superior. Leo the Emperor by his Edict shut up the
Theater, and the Cirque or shewplace, on the Lords day. The like is willed
expressly, in the sixth general Council holden at Constantinople, Anno 692.
Can. 66.
for the whole Easter week. Nequaquam ergo his diebus, equorum cursus, vel
aliquod publicum fiat spectaculum; so the Canon has it. The Emperor Charles,
restrained the Husbandman and the tradesman, from following their usual work
on the Lords day. The Council of Melun does the same, for the said Easter
week, and in more particulars: it being ordered by that Synod, that men
forbear, during the time above remembered, Can. 77.
ab omni opere rurali, fabrili, Carpentario, gynaeceo, coement ario, pictorio,
venatorio, forensi, mercatorio, audientiali, ac sacrametis exigendis; from
husbandry, the craft of Smithes and Carpenters, from needle work, cementing,
painting, hunting, pleadings, merchandise, casting of accounts, and from taking
Oaths. The Benedictines had but three mess of pottage upon other days: die
vero dominico and in praecipuis festivitatibus, but on the Lords day and the
principal festivalls, a fourth was added; as says Theodomare the Abbot in an
Epistle to Charles the Great. Law-suites and Courts of judgment were to be
laid aside, and quite shut up on the Lords day; as many Emperors and Counsels
had determined severally. The Council held at Friburg, Anno 895. Conc. Tribu.
(...). 26.
did resolve the same of holy days or Saints days, and the time of Lent.
Nullus omnino secularis diebus dominicis, vel Sanctorum in festis, seu
Quadragesimae, aut jejuniorum, placitum habere, sed nec populum illo pr^^sumat
coercere, as the Canon goes. The very same with that of the Council of
Erford, Anno 932. cap. 2. But what need private and particular Synods be
produced, as witnesses herein, when we have Emperors, Popes, and Patriarchs,
that affirm the same. To take them in the order in which they lived, Photius
the Patriarch of Constantinople, Anno 858. Ap. Balsam. tit. 7. cap. 1.
thus reckons up the Festivalls of especial note, viz. Seven days before
Easter, and seven days after Christmasse, Epiphanie, (...) the feasts of the
Apostles, and the Lords day. And then he adds, (...) that on those days, they
neither suffer public shows, nor Courts of justice. Emanuel Comnenus next,
Emperor of Constantinople, Ap^ Balsam.
Anno 1174. (...) etc. We do ordeine says he that these days following be
exempt from labor, viz. the nativity of the Virgin Mary, holy-rood day, (and
so he rockoneth all the rest in those parts observed) together with all the
Sundays in the year: and that in them there be not any access to the seats
of judgment. Lib. 2. tit. de ferijs. cap. 5.
The like Pope Gregory the ninth, Anno 1228. determines in the Decretall,
where numbering up the holy days he concludes at last, that neither any
process hold, nor sentence be in force, pronounced on any of those days,
though both parts mutually should consent unto it. Consentientibus etiam
partibus, nec processus habitus teneat, nec sententia quam contingit diebus
hujusmodi promulgari. So the Law resolves it. Now lest the feast of Whit
sontide, might not have some respect, as well as Easter, it was determined in
the Council held at Engelheim, Cap. 6.
Anno 948. that Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday in the Whitsun-weeke, non minus quam
dies dominicus solenniter honorentur, should no less solemnly be observed,
than the Lords day was. So when that Otho Bishop of Bamberg had planted the
faith of Christ in Pomerania, Vrspergens. Chronic.
and was to give account thereof to the Pope then being, he certifieth him by
his letters, Anno. 1124, that having christened them, and built them Churches he
left them three injunctions for their Christian carriage. First that they eat
no flesh on Fridayes: secondly, that they rest the Lords day ab omni opere
malo, from every evil work, repairing to the Church for religious duties:
and thirdly Sanctorum solennitates cum vigiliis omni diligentia observent, that
they keep carefully the Saints days, with the Eves attendant. So that in all
these outward matters, we find fair equality; save that in one respect the
principal festivals had pre-eminence above the Sunday: For whereas fishermen
were permitted by the Decretall of Pope Alexander the third, as before was
said, diebus dominicis and aliis festis, on the Lords day and other holy days,
to fish for herring, in some cases: there was a special exception of the
greater festivals, praeterquam in majoribus anni solennitatibus, as the order
was. But not to deal in generals only, Isidore Archbishop of Sevill in the
beginning of the seventh Century, making a Catalogue of the principal
festivalls, begins his list with Easter, and ends it with the Lords day, as
before we noted, in the fifth section of this Chapter. Now lest it should be
thought that in sacred matters and points of substance, the other holy days
were not as much regarded, as the Lords day was: the Council held at Mentz
Anno 813 did appoint it thus, that if the Bishop were infirm, or not at home,
Non desit tamen diebus dominicis, and festivitatibus, qui verbum dei praedicet
juxta quod populus intelligat; yet there should still be some to preach Gods
word unto the people, according unto their capacities, both on the Lords day,
and the other festivals. Indeed why should not both be observed alike; the
Saints days being dedicated unto God, as the Lords day is; and standing both
of them on the same authority: on the authority of the Church, for the
particular institution; on the authority of Gods Law, for the general warrant.
It was commanded by the Lord, and written in the heart of man by the pen of
nature, that certain times should be appointed for Gods public worship: the
choycing of the times, was left to the Churches power; and she designed the
Saints days, as she did the Lords; both his, and both allotted to his service
only. This made Saint Bernard ground them all, the Lords day and the other
holy days on the fourth Commandment, the third in the Account of the Church
of Rome. Spirituale obsequium deo praebetur in observantia sanctarum
solennitatum, unde tertium praceptum contexitur. Sermon. 3. Super Salve reg.
Observa diem Sabbati, i. e. in sacris ferijs te exerce. So S. Bernard in his
third Sermon, Super salve Regina.

(12) The Lords day and the holy days or Saints days being of so near a
kin; we must next see what care was taken by the Church, in these
presentages, for hallowing them unto the Lord. The times were certainly
devout, and therefore the less question to be made, but that the holy days
were employed, as they ought to be: in hearing of the Word of God, receiving of
the Sacraments, and pouring forth their prayers unto him. The sixth general
counsel holden at Constantinople appointed that those to whom the cure of the
Church was tr^sted, should on all days, (...) especially on the Lords day,
instruct the Clergy and the people, out of the holy Scripture, in the ways of
godliness. I say the Clergy and the people, for in these times the Revenue of
the Church being great, and the offerings liberal; there were besides the
Parish Priest who had Cure of souls, many assisting ministers of inferior
Orders, which lived upon Gods holy Altar. Somewhat to this purpose, of
preaching every Sunday, yea and Saints days too in the Congregation, we have
seen before, established in the Council at Mentz Anno 813. So for receiving
of the Sacrament, whereas some would that it should be administered every day,
singulis in anno diebus as Bertram has it, lib de corp. and sangu. Christi:
Rabanus Maurus who lived 824, leaves it as a thing indifferent; advising all
men notwithstanding, De Sermon. proprieta^. l 4 10.
in case there be no lawful let, to communicate every Lords day. Quotidie
Eucharistiae communionem percipere nec vitupero nec laudo, omnibus tamen
dominicis diebus communicandum hortor, sitamen men's in affectu peccandi non
sit, as his words there are. And whereas this good custom had been long
neglected, it was appointed that the Sacrament should be administered every
Lords day, Can. 2^.
by the Council at Aken. Anno 836. Ne forte qui long est a sacramentis
quibusest redemptus etc: least, says the council, they which keep so much
distance from the Sacraments of their redemption, be kept as much at distance
from the fruition of their Salvation. As for the holy days or Saints days,
there needed no such Canon, to enjoyne on them, the celebration of the
Sacrament, which was annexed to them of course. So likewise for the public
prayers, besides what scatteringly has been said in former places, the
Council held at Friburg Anno 895 has determined thus, Conc. Friburiens. Can.
26.
Diebus dominicis and sanctorum festis vigilis and orationibus nisistendumest,
and ad missas cuilibet Christiano cum oblationibus currendum: that on the Lords
day, and the festivalls of the Saints, every Christian was to be intent upon
his devotions, to watch and pray, and go to Mass, and there make his
offering. Its true the Service of the Church being in the Latin; and in these
times, that language being in some Provinces quite worn out, and in some
others grown into a different dialect, from what it was* that part of Gods
worship which was public prayer, served not so much to comfort and to
^dification as it should have done. As for the outward adjuncts of Gods
public service, on the Churches part, the principal was that of Music
which in these Ages grew to a perfect height. We showed before that vocal
music in the Church, is no less ancient than the liturgy of the Church it
self: which as it was begun in Ignatius time, after the manner of
plaine-song, or a melodious kind of pronunciation; as before was said; so in
S. Austins time, it became so excellent, that it drew many to the Church, and
consequently many to the faith. Now to that vocal music which was then in
use, and of which formerly we spoke; it pleased the Church, in the beginning of
these Ages, to add isntrumental: the organ being added to the voice, by Pope
Vitalian, Anno 653; almost 1000 years ago, and long before the aberration of
the Church from its pristine piety. And certainly it was not done without good
advise, there being nothing of that kind, more powerful, than melody both
vocal and isntrumental, for raising of men's hearts, and sweetning their
affections toward God. Not any thing, wherein the militant Church here on
Earth, has more resemblance to the Church in heaven triumphant; then in that
sacred and harmonious way of singing praise, and Allelujahs to the Lord our
God; which is and has of long been used in the Church of Christ.

(13) To bring this Chapter to an end, in all that has been said touching the
keeping of the Lords day, we find not any thing like a Sabbath either in the
practice of the Church, or writings of particular men: however these last Ages
grew to such an height, in restraint of labors on this day; that they might
seem to have a mind, to revive that part of the fourth Commandment, Thou
shall do no manner of work upon it. For where they tell us of this day, as
before was said, that it was taken up by custom, on the authority of the
Church, at most on Apostolical tradition; this makes it plain, that they
intended no such matter as a Sabbath day; though, that the Congregation might
assemble in the greater numbers, and men might join together in all christian
duties, with the greater force; it pleased the Church and principal powers
thereof, to restrain men from corporal labors, and bind them to repair to
the house of God. Or if they did intend the Lords day for a Sabbath day, its
plain they must have made more Sabbaths than one day in seven: those holy
days, which universally were observed in the Christian Church, being no
otherwise to be kept than the Lords day was; and those increasing in these Ages
to so great a number, that they became a burden to the common people. Nor is it
likely, that being once free from the bondage of the Jewish Sabbath, they would
submit themselves unto another of their own devising: and do therewith, as
the Idolaters of old with their wooden gods, first make them, and then
presently fall down and worship them. Rather they took a course to restrain
the Jews, from sanctifying their Sab^ath, and other legal festivals, as
before they used. Statutum est de Iudoeis, in the 12 Council of Tolledo Anno
681, Can. 10.
Ne Sabbata, coeterasque festivitates ritus sui, celebrare praesumant: and not
so only: Sed ut diebus dominicis and ab opere cessent, but that they should
refrain from labor on the Lords day also. Of any Sabbath to be kept in the
Christian Church, some few might dream perhaps, such filthy dreamers as Saint
Jude speaks of; but they did only dream thereof; they saw no such matter.
They which had better visions could perceive no Sabbath; but in this life, a
Sabbath or a rest from sin; and in the life to come, a Sabbath, or a rest
from misery. Plainly Rupertus so conceived it, as great a Clerk, as any in
the times wherein he lived, which was in the beginning of the twelfth Century.
Nam sicut signum circumcisionis inc^rnationem etc. For as, says he, the sign
of Circumcision, foreshewed the incarnation of our Lord and Savior; the
offering of the paschall Lamb, his death and passion: Sic Sabbatismus ille
requiem annunciabat, quae post hanc vitam po^ita est sanctis and electis; so
did the Sabbath signify that eternal rest, which after this life is provided
for the Saints, and elect of God. And more than this, Spiritualis homo non uno
die hebdomadis, sed omni tempore sabbatizare satagit; the true spiritual man
keeps not his Sabbath once a week, but at all times what ever, every hour
and minute. What then? would he have no day set a part for Gods public
service; no, but not the Sabbath. Because, (says he) we are not to rejoice in
this world that perishes, but in the sure and certain hope of the
resurrection; therefore we ought not rest the seventh day in sloth and
idleness: but we dispose our selves to prayers and hearing of the word of God
upon the first day of the week, on the which Christ rose: cum summa cura
providentes, ut tam illo quam coeteris diebus feriati semper simus a servili
opere peccati. Provided always that upon that, and all days else, we keep
our selves free from the servile Acts of sin. This was the Sabbath which they
principally looked for in this present life: never applying of that name, to
the Lords day, in any of those monuments of learning they have lest behind
them. The first who ever used it, to denote the Lords day, (the first that I
have met with in all this search) is one Petrus Alfonsus, he lived about the
times that Rupertus did; who calls the Lords day by the name of the Christian
Sabbath. Dies dominica, dies viz. resurrectionis, quae su^^ salvationis causa
extitit, Christianorum sabbatum est. But this no otherwise to be construed,
then by Analogy and resemblance, no otherwise than the feast of Easter is
called the Christian Passover; and Whitsontide, the Christian Pentecost. As
for the Saturday, the old Sabbath day, though it continued not a Sabbath; yet
it was still held in an high esteem, in the Eastern Churches; counted a
festival day, or at lest no fast; and honored with the meetings of the
Congregation. In reference to the first we find how it was charged on the
Church of Rome, by the sixth Council in Constantinople, Anno 692, that in the
holy time of Lent, (...) they used to fast the Saturday, which was directly
contrary to the Canons of the Apostles, as they there allege. This also was
objected by Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, against Pope Nicolas of Rome,
Anno 867; and after that, by Michael of Constantinople, against Leo the ninth
Anno 1053. which plainly shows that in the Eastern Churches they observed it
otherwise. And in relation to the other, we find that whereas in the
principal Church of Constantinople, Curop^l^t.
the holy Sacrament was celebrated only on the greater feasts, as also on the
Saturdayes and the Sundays [ Sabbatis and dominicis] and not on other days,
as at Rome it was: Constantine surnamed Mononiachus, Anno 1054, enriched it
with revenue, and bestowed much fair plate upon it, that so they might be able
every day to perform that office. Which proves sufficiently that Saturday was
always one, in all public duties; and that it kept even pace with Sunday.
But it was otherwise, of old, in the Church of Rome, where they did laborare
and jejunare, as Humbertus says, in his defense of Leo the ninth against
Nicetas. And this with little opposition, or interruption, save that which had
been made in the City of Rome, in the beginning of the seventh Century; and
was soon crushed by Gregory then Bishop there, as before we noted. And
howsoever Urban of that name the second, Hect. Bo^^. hist. l. ^2.
did consecrate it to the weekly service of the blessed Virgin, and instituted
in the Council held at Clermont, Anno 1095, that our Ladies office, [Officium
B. Marie] should be said upon it; Eandemque Sabbato quoque die, pr^cipua
devotione, populum Christianum colere debere, and that upon that day, all
Christian folk should worship her with their best devotions: yet it continued
still, as before it was, a day of fasting and of working. So that in all this
time, in 1200 years, we have found no Sabbath: nor do we think to meet with
any in the times that follow; either amongst the Schoolmen, or amongst the
Protestants, which next shall come upon the Stage.

CHAP. VI.
What is the judgment of the Schoolmen and of the Protestants; and what the
practice of those Churches in this Lords day business.
(1) That in the judgment of the Schoolmen the keeping of one day in seven,
is not the moral part of the fourth Commandment. (2) As also that the Lords
day is not founded on Divine authority, but the authority of the Church. (3) A
Catalogue of the holy days drawn up in the Council of Lions: and the new
Doctrine of the Schools, touching the native sanctity of the holy days. (4)
In what estate the Lords day stood, in matter of restraint from labor, at the
Reformation. (5) The Reformatours find great fault, both with the said new
doctrine, and restraints from labor. (6) That in the judgment of the
Protestant divines, the keeping of one day in seven, is not the moral part of
the fourth Commandment. (7) as that the Lords day has no ground on which to
stand, then the authority of the Church. (8) And that the Church has power to
change the day, and to transfer it to some other. (9) What is the practice of
all Churches, the Roman, Lutheran, and Calvinian chief^ly in matt^r of
Devotion, rest from labor, and sufferance of lawful pleasures. (10) Dancing
cried down by Calvin and the French Churches, not in r^lation to the Lords day
but the sport it self. (11) In what estate the Lords day stands in the
Eastern Churches; and that the Saturday is no less esteemed of by the
Ethiopians, then the said Lords day,

(1) We are now come unto an Age wherein the learning of the world began to
make a different show, from what it did: to such a period of time, in which was
made the greatest alteration in the whole fabric of the Church that ever any
time could speak of. The Schoolmen, who sprung up in the beginning of the
thirteenth Age, contracted learning, which before was diffused and scattered
into fine subtilties, and distinctions: the Protestants in the beginning of the
sixteenth, endeavoring to destroy those buildings, which with such diligence
and curiosity had been erected by ihe School men; though they conscented well
enough in the present business, so far as it concernd the institution either
of the Lords day, or the Sabbath. Of these, and what they taught, and did in
reference to the point in hand, we are now to speak: taking along with us
such passages of especial note, as happened in the Christian world, by which we
may learn any thing that concerns our business. And first beginning with the
Schoolmen, they tell us generally of the Sabbath, that it was a Ceremony, and
that the fourth Commandment is of a different nature, from the other nine:
That whereas all the other precepts of the Decalogue, are simply moral, the
fourth which is the third in their account, is partly moral, partly
ceremonial. Morale quidem quantum ad hoc, quod homo depu^et aliquod tempus
vitae suae, advacandum divinis. etc. 2 2. qu. 122. art 4. ad 1.
Moral it is in this regard, that men must set apart some particular time, for
Gods public service: it being natural to man to destinate particular times
to particular actions, as for his dinner, for his sleep and such other
actions. Sedin quantum in hoc praecepto determinatur speciale tempus in signum
creationis mundi, sic est praeceptum ceremoniale. But in as much as that there
is a day appointed in the Law it self, in token of Gods rest, and the Worlds
creation; in that respect the Law is ceremonial, And ceremonial too they make
it, in referrence to the Allegory; out Saviors resting in the grave that day:
and in relation to the Analogicall meaning of it, as it prefigureth our
eternal rest in the Heaven of glories. Finally they conclude of the fourth
Commandment, that it is placed in the Decalogue, in quantum est praeceptum
morale, non in quantum est ceremoniale; only so far forth as it is moral,
and not as ceremonial: that is, that we are bound by the fourth Commandment
to destinate some time to Gods public service, which is simply moral: but not
the Seventh day, which is plainly ceremonial. Aquinas so resolves it, In
^ra^. de Sabbato.
for all the rest^ his judgment in this point, (if Doctor Prideaux note be
true, as I have no reason but to think so) being universally embraced, and
followed by all the Schoolmen, of what sect soever. So that in him we have
them all: all of them consonant in this point, to make up the harmony; however
dissonant enough in many others. But that this consent may appear the more full
and perfect, we will take notice of two others, men famous in the Schools, and
eminent for the times in which they lived. First Bonaventure, who lived in the
same time with Aquinas, and dyed the same year with him, which was 1274. has
determined thus. Intelligendum est quod prae^eptum illud habet aliquid, quod
est mere morale, etc. Sermon. de dcce^ precep^.
It is to be conceived, says he, that in the fourth Commandment there is
something which is simply moral; some thing again that is plainly
ceremonial, and something mixed. The sanctifying of a day is moral; the
sanctifying of a seventh day, ceremonial: rest from the works of labor,
being mixed of both. Quod praecipit deus sanctificationem, est Praeceptum
morale! Est and in hoc praecepto aliquid ceremoniale, ut figuratio diei
septimae. Item continetur aliquid quod est partim morale, partim ceremoniale,
ut cessatio ab operibus. Lastly, To status Bishop of Avila in Spain has
resolved the same; aliquid est in eo juris naturalis, aliquid legalis: In Exodus
20. qu. 11.
that in the fourth Commandment there is some thing natural, and something
legal; that it is partly mor^ll and partly ceremonial. Natural est quod dum
Deu^ colimus, abalij sab stineamus, etc. Moral and natural it is, that for the
time, we worship God, do abstain from every thing of what kind soever, which
may divert our thoughts from that holy action. But that we should design, in
every week, one day unto that employment; and that the whole day be thereto
appointed; and that in all that day, a man shall do no manner of work: those
things he reckons there to be ceremonial.

(2) So for the Lords day, 2. 2a. qu. 122. art 4. ad 4.
it is thus determined by Aquinas, that it depends on the authority of the
Church, the custom and consent of Gods faithful servants; and not on any
obligation laid upon us by the fourth Commandment. Diei dominicae observantia
in nova lege, ^uccedit observantiae sabbati, non ex vi praecepti legis, sed ex
constitutione ecclesiae consuetudine populi Christiani. What follows
thereupon? Et ideo non est itae arcta prohibitio operandi, in die dominica,
sicut in die Sabbati. Therefore, says he, the prohibition of doing no work on
the Lords day, is not so rigorous and severe, as upon the Sabbath; many things
being licenced on the one, which were forbidden on the other: as dressing meat
and others of that kind and nature. And not so only, but he gives us a
dispensatur facilius in nova lege, an easier hope of dispensation under the
Gospel in case upon necessity, we meddle with prohibited labors; then possibly
could have been gotten under the Law. The like To status tells us, though in
different words: save that he does extend the prohibition, as well to all the
feasts of the Old Testament, as all the holy days of the new; and neither to
the Sabbath, nor the Lords day only. In veteri lege major fuit strictio in
observatione festorum, quam in nova lege. In Exodus 20. qu. 13.
How so? In omnibus enim festivitatibus nostris quant^cunque sint, etc.
Because, says he, in all our festivalls how great soever, whether they be the
Lords days, or the feasts of Easter, or any of the higher rank, it is
permitted to dress meat and to kindle fire, etc. As for the grounds whereon
they stood, he makes this difference between them, that the Jews Sabbath had
its warrant from divine commandment: but that the Lords day, though it came in
the place thereof, is founded only on (...) constitution. In Math. 23. qu. 148.
(...) Sabbatum ^x man(...), cujus (...) successit dies dominica, and tamen
manifestum est, quod observatio dici dominicae, non est de jure divino, (...)
Canonico. This is plain enough, and this he prooves, because the Church has
still a power (...) illum diem, vel totaliter tollere, either to change the
^ay, or take it utterly away, and to dispense touching the keeping of the same:
which possibly it neither could no^ ought to do, were the Lords day of any
other institution, then the Churches only. They only have the power to
repeal a Law, which had power to make it; Qui habe^ institutionem, habet
destitutionem, as is the Bishops plea in a Quare Impedit. As for the first of
these two powers, that by the Church the day may be transferred, and abrogated;
Suarez has thus distinguished in it; verum id esse absolute, non practice:
that is, as I conceive his meaning, that such a power is absolutely in the
Church, though not convenient now to be put in practice. According unto that of
S. Paul, which probably was the ground of the distinction. All things are
lawful for me but all things are not expedient. This is the general tendry of
the Roman Schools, that which is publicly avowed, and made good amongst them.
And howsoever Petrus de Anchorana and Nicholas Abbat of Patermo two learned
Canonists; as also Angelus de Clavasio, and Silvester de Prierats, two as
learned Casuists, seem to defend the institution of the Lords day to have its
ground and warrant on divine authority: yet did the general current of the
Schools, and of the Canonists also, run the other way. And in that current
still it holds, the Jesuits and most learned men in the Church of Rome,
following the general and received opinion of the Schoolmen: whereof see
Bellarm* de cultu Sanct. l. 3. c. 11. Estius in 3. Sent. did. 37. Sect. 13.
but specially Azorius, in his Institut. Moral, part second cap. 2 who gives us
an whole Catalogue of them, which hold the Lords day to be founded only on the
authority of the Church. Touching the other power, the power of dispensation,
there is not any thing more certain, then that the Church both may and does
dispense with such as have therein offended against her Canons. The Canons in
themselves do profess as much; there being many casus reservati, as before
we said, expressed particularly in those Laws and Constitutions, which have
been made about the keeping of this day, and the other festivalls; wherein a
dispensation lies, if we disobey them. Many of these we specified in the
former Ages; and some occur in these whereof now we write. Decretal.l. 2* tit
de feriis. cap. 5.
It pleased Pope Gregory the ninth, Anno 1228, to inhibit all contentious
suites on the Lords day and the other festivalls; and to inhibit them so far,
that judgment given on any of them, should be counted void, Etiam
consentientibus partibus, although both parties were consenting. Yet was it
with this clause, or reservation, nisi vel necessitas urgeat vel pietas
suadeat, unless necessity enforced, or piety persuaded that it should be done.
So in a Synod holden in Valladolit [apud vallem Oleti] in the parts of Spain,
Anno 1322. Council. ^abinens de feriis
a general restraint was ratified that had been formerly in force, quod
nullus in diebus dominicis and festivis, agros colere a^deat, aut manualia
artificia exercere praesumat; that none should henceforth follow husbandry, or
exercise himself in mechanic trads upon the Lords day or the other holy days:
Yet was it with the same Proviso, nisi urgente necessitate, vel evidentis
pietatis causa, unless upon necessity, or apparent piety or charity in each of
which he might have license from the Priest, his own Parish Priest, to attend
his business. Where still observe that the restraint was no less peremptory
on the other holy days, then on the Lords day.

(3) These holy days, as they were named particularly in Pope Gregory's
decretall; so was a perfect list made of them in the Synod of Lions, Anno* 244.
De consecrat. distinct. 3. c.1.
which being celebrated with a great concourse of people, from all parts of
Christendom, the Canons and decrees thereof, began forthwith to find a
general admittance. The holy days allowed of there, were these that follow,
viz. the feast of Christ's nativity, ^aint Stephen, S. John the Evangelist, the
Innocents, S. Silvester, the Circumcision of our Lord, the Epiphanie, Easter,
together with the week precedent, and the week succeeding, the three days in
Rogation week, the day of Christ's ascension, Whitsunday, with the two days
after, John S. the Baptist, the feasts of all the twelve Apostles, all the
festivities of our Lady, S. Lawrence, all the Lords days in the year^, S.
Michael the Archangell, All Saints, S. Martins, the Wakes or dedication of
particular Churches, together with the feasts of such topicall or local Saints
which some particular people had been pleased to honor, with a day particular
amongst themselves. On these and every one of them, the people were restrained,
as before was said, from many several kinds of work, on pain of
ecclesiastical censures to be laid on them, which did offend: unless on some
emergent causes, either of charity or necessity, they were dispensed with for
so doing. In other of the festivalls which had not yet attained to so great an
height, the Council thought not ^it perhaps by reason of their numbers, that
men should be restrained from labor; as neither that they should be encouraged
to it, but left them to themselves, to bestow those times, as might stand best
with their affairs, and the Common wealth. For so the Synod did determine,
Reliquis festivitatibus quae per annum Cunt, non esse plebem cogendam ad
feriandum, sed nec prohibendam. And in this state things stood a long time
together, there being none that proferd opposition, in reference to these
restraints from labor on the greater festivalls; though some there were, that
thought the festivalls too many, on which those burden of restraints had
unadvisedly been imposed on the common people. Nicholas de Clemangis,
complained much as of some other abuses in the Church, so of the multitude of
holy days, Ap. Hospin. cap. 4. de. fest. Christi.
which had of late times been brought into it. And Pet. de Aliaco Cardinal of
Cambray, in a discourse by him exhibited to the Council of Constance, made
public suite unto the Fathers there assembled, that there might a stop in that
kind, hereafter: as also that excepting Sundays and the greater festivalls,
liceret operari post auditum officium, it might be lawful for the people,
after the end of Divine Service, to attend their businesses: the poor
especially having little time enough on the working days, ad vite necessaria
procuranda, to get their livings. But these were only the expressions of
well-wishing men. The Popes were otherwise resolved, and did not only keep
the holy days, which they found established, in the same state in which they
found them; but added others daily, as they saw occasion. At last it came unto
that pass, by reason of that rigorous and exact kind of rest, which by the
Canon Law had been fastened on them, that both the Lords day and the other
festivalls were accounted holy, not in relation to the use made of them, or to
the holy actions done on them, in the honor of God: but in and of themselves
considered, they were avowed to be vere alijs sanctiores, truly and properly
invested with a greater sanctity then the other days. Bellarm. de cultu S. l.
3. c. 10.
Yea so far did they go at last, that it is publicly maintained in the
Schools of Rome, non sublatam esse, sed mutatam tantum [in novo Testamento]
significati^n^m discretionem dierum: that the difference of days and times and
the mysterious significations of the same, which had before been used in the
Jewish Church; was not abolished, but only changed in the Church of Christ.
Aquinas did first lead this dance, in fitting every legal festival, with
some that were observed in the Christian Church; laying this ground, that ours
succeeded in the place of theirs. (...) qu. 103* Art. 3. ad 4^
Sabbatum mutatur in diem d^minicum; similiter alijs solennitatibus veteris
legis, novae solennitates succedunt: as his words there are. Upon which ground
of his, the doctrines now remembed were, no question, raised: and howsoever
other men might think all days alike in themselves considered; yet those of
Rome will have some holier than the rest, even by a natural and inherent
holiness.

(4) And in this state things stood, both for the doctrine and the practice,
until such time as men began to look into the errors and abuses in the
Church of Rome, with a more serious eye then before they did: the Canonists
being no less nice, in the point of practice; then were the Schoolmen and the
rest exhorbitant in the point of doctrine. Whose niceties, especially in matter
of restraint, In Exodus 12.
we have most fully represented to us by ^ostatus: one that had run through
all the parts of learning at that time on foot, and was as well studied in the
Canon, as in the Schools. He then determines of it thus. ^tinerando pro
negotijs p^ccatum esse mortale, etc. Q^. 25.
He that does travail on the holy days (for in that general name the Lords
day and the other festivalls are comprehended) about worldly business, commits
mortal sin; as also if he Trade or Traffic in the place wherein he lives.
But this has two exceptions* or reservations: First, if the business by him
done be but small and light, quae quictem Sabbati non impediunt, such as are
no great hinderance to the Sabbaths rest; and secondly, nisi hoc sit in causa
pia, unless it were on some devou^ and pious purpose. To read unto, or teach
a man, to deal in actions of the Law, Qu. 26.
or determine suites, or to cast accounts, si quis doceret ut lucretur, if it
be done for hire, or for present gain, become servile works, and are
forbidden: Otherwise, if one do it gratis. Qu. 27.
If a Musician wait upon a Gentleman, to recreate his mind with Music, and
that they are agreed on a certain wages; or that he be hired only for a
present turn^; he sins, in case he play, or sing unto him on the holy days:
but not if his reward be doubtful; Qu. 28.
and depends only upon the bounty of the parties, who enjoy his music. A
Cook that on the holy days is hired to make a feast, or to d^esse a dinner,
does commit mortal sin: sed non pro toto mense aut anno, but not if he be
hired by the month, or by the year. Meat may be dressed upon the Lords day,
Qu. 29.
or the other holy days: but to wash dishes on those days, was esteemed
unlawful; et differi in diem alteram, and was to be def^rred till another
day. Qu* 32.
Lawyers, that do their clients business for their wonted fee, were not to
draw their bills, or frame their answers, or peruse their evidences, on the
holy days: Secus si causam agerent pro miserabilibus personis, etc. But it was
otherwise, if they dealt for poor indigent people, such as did sue in forma
pauperis, as we call it; or in the causes of a Church, or hospital, in which
the Popes had pleased to grant a dispensation. A man that travailed on the holy
days, Qu. 34.
to any special shrine or Saint, did commit no sin, Si autem in redeundo,
peccatum est mortale; but if he did the like in his coming back, Qu. 35.
he then sinned mortally. In any place where formerly it had been the custom,
neither to draw water, nor to sweep the house, but to have those things ready
on the day before; the custom was to be observed; where no such custom is,
there they may be done. Actions of a long continuance, if they were
delightful, or if one played three or four hours together on a Musical
instrument; were not unlawful on the holy days: yet possibly they might be
sinful, ut si quis hoc ageret ex lascivia, as if one played only out of
wantonness, Qu* 36.
or otherwise were so intent upon his music, that he went not to Mass.
^rtificers which work on the holy days for their own profit only, are in
mortal sin; unless the work be very small: quia modicum non facit
solennitat^m dissolui, because a little thing dishonours not the Festival: De
minimis non curat lex, as our saying is. Contrary Butchers, Vintners, Bakers,
Coster-mongers, sinned not in selling their commodities; because more profit
does redound to the Common wealth, which cannot be without such commodities,
than to them that ^ell; yet this extended not to Drapers, Shoomakers, or the
like, because there is not such a present necessity for clothes, as meat. Yet
where the custom was, that Butchers did not sell on the holy days, but
specially not upon the Lords day; that commendable custom was to be observed:
though in those places also, it was permitted to the Butcher, that on those
days, at some convenient times thereof, he might make ready what was to be
sold on the morrow after, as kill and skin his bestiall which were fit for
sale; in case he could not do it with so much convenience [ non ita congrue]
at another time. Qu. 3^.
To write out or transcribe a book, though for a man's own private use, was
esteemed unlawful, except it were exceeding small; because this put no
difference between the holy days and the other: yet was it not unlawful
neither, in case the Argument were spiritual, nor for a preacher to write out
his sermons, or for a Student to provide his lecture for the day following.
Windmils were suffered to be used on the holy days, Q^. 3^.
not Watermils: because the first required less labor and attendance, than
the other did. This is the reason in Tostatus, though I can see no reason in
it* the passage of the water being once let run, being of more certainty and
continuance, then the changeable blowing of the wind. But to proceed,
Ferry-men were not to transport port such men, in their boats or wherries, as
did begin their journey on an holy day, Qu. 39.
unless they went to M^sse, or on such occasions: but such as had begun
their journey, and now were in pursuit thereof, might be ferried over, quia
forte carebunt victu, because they may perhaps want victuals if they do not
pass. To repair Churches on the Lords day and the other holy days, Qu. 41.
was accounted lawful; in case the workmen did it gratis, and that the Church
were poor, not able to hire workmen on the other days: not if the Church
were rich and in case to do it. Qu* 42*
So also to build bridges, repair the walls of Towns and Castles, or other
public edifices, on those days, was not held unlawful; si instent hosts,
in case the enemy be at hand: though otherwise not to be done, where no
danger was. These are the special points observed and published by Tostatus*
And these I have the rather exactly noted, partly that we may see in what
estate the Lords day and the other holy days, were in the Church of Rome* what
time the reformation of religion was first ^et on foot: but principally to let
others see, how near they come in their new fancies and devises, unto the
nicetie^ of those men whom they most abhor.

(5) Thus stood it, as before I said, both for the doctrine and the practice,
till men began to look into the errors and abuses in the Roman Church, with a
more serious eye than before they did: and at first sight, they found what
little pleased them, in this particular. Their doctrine pleased them not, in
making one day holier than another, not only in relation to the use made of
them, but to a natural and inherent holiness^, wherewith they thought they
were invested, Nor did their practice please much more, in that they had
imposed so many burdens of restraint, upon the consciences of Gods people; and
thereby made that day a punishment, which was intended for the ease, of the
laboring man. Against the doctrine of these men, and the whole practice of
that Church, Calvin declares himself in his book of Institutions, And
therewith taxes those of Rome, l. 2 cap. 8. p. 34.
qui Iudaica opinione populum superioribus seculis imbuerunt, who in the times
before possessed the peoples minds with so much Iudaisme; that they had
changed the day indeed, as indishonour of the Jew, but otherwise retained the
former sanctity thereof; which needs must be, says he, if there remain with
us, (as the Papists taught) the same opinion of the mysteries and various
significations of days and times, which the Jews once had. And certainly,
says he, we see what dangerous effects have followed, on so false a doctrine:
those which adhere to their instructions, having exceedingly out gone the
Jews, crassa carnalique Sabbatismi superstitione, in their gross and carnal
superstitions, about the Sabbath. Beza his Scholar and Acates, sings the self
same song, In Apocal. 1. v. 10.
that howsoever the assemblies of the Lords day were of Apostolical and divine
tradition: sic tamen ut Iudaica cessatio ab omni opere non observaretur,
quoniam hoc plane fuisset judaismum non abol^re, sed tantum, quod ad diem
attinet, immutare; yet so that there was no cessation from work, required as
was observed among the Jews. For that, says he, had not so much abolished
Iudaisme, as put it off and changed it to another day. And then he adds, that
this cessation was first brought in by Constantine, and afterward confirmed
with more and more restraints, by the following Emperors: by means of which
it came to pass, that that which first was done for a good intent, viz. that
men being free from their worldly businesses, might wholely give themselves to
hearing of the Word of God; in merum Iudaismum degenerarit, degenerated at the
last into downright Iudaisme. So for the Lutheran Churches, Chemnitius
chalengeth the Romanists of superstition, quasi dominicae diei and reliquis
diebus festis, per se, peculiar^s quaedam insit sanctitas, because they taught
the people that the holy days, considered only in themselves, had a native
sanctity. And howsoever for his part, he think it requisite, that men should
be restrained from all such works, as may be any hinderance unto the
sanctifying of the day: yet he accounts it but a part of the Jewish leaven;
nimis scrupulose diebus festis prohibere operas externas, quae vel quando, non
impediunt publicum ministerium; so scrupulously to prohibit such external
Actions which are at all no hindrance to Gods public service, and man's
Sabbath duties. In Mat. 12.
Bucer goes further yet, and does not only call it a superstition, but an
apostasy from Christ, to think that working on the Lords day, in it self
considered, is a sinful thing. Si existimetur operari in eo die, per se,
esse peccatum, superstitio, and gratiae Christi, qui ab elementis mundi nos suo
sanguine liberavit, negatio est: as his own words are. Then adds, that he did
very well approve of the Lords day meetings, si eximatur e cordibus hominum
opinio necessitatis, if men were once dispossessed of these opinions, that the
day was necessary to be kept, that it was holier in it self then the other
days, and that to work upon that day, in it self, was sinful. Lastly, the
Churches of the Switzers profess in their Confession, that in the keeping of
the Lords day, they give not the least hint to any Jewish superstitions. Neque
enim alteram diem altera sanctiorem esse credimns, Cap. 24.
nec otium deo, per se, probari existimamus. For neither, (as they said) do we
conceive one day to be more holy than another; or think that rest from labor,
in it self considered, is any way pleasing unto God. By which we plainly may
perceive, what is the judgment of Protestant Churches in the present point.

(6) Indeed it is not to be thought, that they could otherwise resolve and
determine of it: considering what their doctrine is of the day it self: how
different they make it from a Sabbath day, which doctrine that we may perceive
with the greater ease, we will consider it in three propositions, in which most
agree: 1. That the keeping holy one day of seven, is not the Moral part of the
fourth Commandment, or to be reckoned as a part of the law of nature; 2. That
the Lords day is not founded on Divine Commandment, but only on the authority
of the Church, and 3. That the Church has still authority to change the day,
and to transfer it to some other. First for the first, it seems that some of
Rome, considering the restraints before remembered, and the new doctrine thence
arising, about the natural and inherent holiness which one day had above
another; had altered what was formerly delivered amongst the Schoolmen, and
made the keeping of one day, in seven to be the Moral part of the fourth
Commandment. This Calvin charge them withal that they had taught the people
in the former times, In stit. l. 2. cap. 8. 11. 34.
that whatsoever was ceremonial in the fourth Commandment, which was the
keeping of the Jews seventh day, had been long since abrogated: remanere vero
quod morale est, nempe unius diei observationem in hebdomade, but that the
moral part thereof which was the keeping of one day in seven, did continue
still. With what else is it, as before was said, then in dishonor of the
Jews, to change the day; and to affixe as great a sanctity thereunto, as the
Jews ever did. And for his own part he professes, that howsoever he approved
of the Lords day meetings, Non tamen numerum septennarium ita se morari, ut
ejus servituti ecclesias astringeret; yet stood not he so much for the number
of seven, as to confine the Church unto it. If Calvin elsewhere be of another
mind, and speak of keeping holy one day in seven as a matter necessary;
(which some say he does) either they must accuse him of much inconstancy and
forgetfulness; or else interpret him, In decalog,
with Ryvell, as speaking of an ecclesiastical custom, not to be neglected,
non de necessitate legis divinae, and not of any obligation laid upon us by
the law of God. Neither is he the only one that has so determined. Simler
has said it more expressly. Quod dies una cultui divine consecretur, ex lege
naturae est; quod autom haec sit septima, In Exodus 20.
non octava, nona aut decima, juris est divini, sed ceremonialis: That one day
should be set apart for Gods public worship, is the law of nature, but that
this day should be the seventh, and not the eighth, ninth, or tenth, was of
divine appointment, but as ceremonial. Loc. 55.
Aretius also in his common pla^es distinguished between the substance of the
Sabbath, and the time thereof: the substance of it, which was rest, and the
works of piety, being in all times to continue; tempus autem ut septimo die
observetur, hoe non fu^t necessarium in ecclesia Christi, but for the time, to
keep it on the seventh day always, that was not necessary in the Church of
Christ. So also Frankisc. Gomarus, that great undertaker against Arminius, Cap.
5. n. 8.
in a book written purposely de origin and institutione Sabbati, affirms for
certain, that it can neither be made good by the law of nature, or text of
Scripture, or any solid argument drawn from thence, unum e septem diebus ex vi
praecepti quarti ad cultum dei necessario observandum, that by the fourth
Commandment, one day in seven, is of necessity to be dedicated to Gods
service. And Ryvet, as professed an enemy of the Remonstrants, In Exodus 20. p.
190.
though for the antiquity of the Sabbath, he differs from the said Gomarus;
yet he agrees with him in this: not only making the observance of one day in
seven, to be merely positive, as in our first part we observed; but lays it
down for the received opinion, of most of the Reformed Divines, unum ex septem
diebus, non esse necessari^ eligendum, ex vi praecepti, ad sacros conventus
celebrandos; the very same with what Gomarus affirmed before. In Examine. Conc
Tred.
So lastly for the Lutheran Churches, Chemnitius makes it part of our Christian
liberty, quod nec ^int alligati nec debeant alligari ad certorum vel dierum vel
temporum: observationes, opinione necessitatis, in Novo Testamento, etc. That
men are neither bound, nor ought to be, unto the observation of any days, or
times, as matters necessary, under the Gospel of our Savior: though otherwise
he account it for a barbarous folly, not to observe that day with all due
solemnity, which has for so long time been kept by the Church of God.
Therefore in his opinion also, the keeping of one day in seven, is neither any
moral part of the fourth Commandment, (...)
or parcel of the law of nature. As for the subtle shift of Amesius finding,
that keeping holy of one day in seven is positive indeed, sed immutabilis plane
institutionis, but such a positive Law as is absolutely immutable; and does as
much oblige, as those which in themselves are plainly natural and moral: it
may then serve, when there is nothing else to help us. For that a positive law
should be immutable in it self; and in its own nature, be as universally
binding, as the moral law; is such a piece of learning, and of contradiction,
as never was put up to show, in these latter times. But he had learnt his
^^rry in England, here; and durst not broach it but by halues, amongst the
Hollanders.

(7) For the next Thesis, that the Lords day is not founded on divine
Commandment, but the authority of the Church: it is a point so universally
resolved on, as no one thing more. and first we will begin with Calvin, who
tells us how it was not without good reason, that those of old, appointed the
Lords Day as we call it, to supply the place of the Jewish Sabbath. (...) l. 2.
c. 8. ^. 3.
. Non sine delectu, daminicum, quem vocamus diem, veteres in locum sabbati
subr^garunt, as his words there are. Where none, I hope will think, that he
would give our Savior Christ or his Apostles such a short come off, as to
include them in the name of Veteres, only: which makes it plain, that he
conceived it not to be their appointment. In Math. 12.
Bucer resolves the point more clearly, communi christianorum consensu
Dominicum, diem publicis Ecclesie conventibus ac requieti publicae, dicatu^^
esse, ipso statim Apostolorum tempore: and says, that in the Apostles times,
the Lords day by the common consent of Christiau people, was dedicated unto
public rest, In (...).
and the assembli^s of the Church. And Peter Martyr, upon a question asked, why
the ^ld seventh day was not kept in the Christian Church; makes answer, that
upon that day, and on all the rest, we ought to rest from our own works, the
works of sin. Sed quod is magis quam ille, eligatur ad (...) Deicultum,
libern^ fui^ Ecclesis per Christum, ut (...) consuleret quod ex re magis
judicaret: (...) illa pessime judicavit, etc. That this was rather chose then
that for Gods public service, that says he, Christ left totally unto the
liberty of the Church, to do therein what should seem most expedient: and that
the Church did very well, in that she did prefer the memory of the
resurrection, before the memory of the creation. These two I have the rather
thus joined together, as being sent for into England i^ King Edwards time, and
placed by the Protector in our Universities, the better to establish (...), at
that time begun: and doubt we not, but that they taught the self same doctrine
(if at the least they touched at all upon that point) with that now extant in
their writings; at the same time with the lived Bullinger and Gu^ltor, In Apoc.
1:
two great learned men. Of these, the first informs us, hunc (...), loco
sabbati in memoriam resurgentis Domini delegisse sibi Ecclesia^, that in
memorial of our Saviors resurrection, the Churches set apart this day in the
Sabbaths steed, whereon to hold their solemn and religious meeting^. And
after, Sponte receper^^^ Eccle^i^ illam diem, non legimus came ullibi
praeceptam, that of their own accord, and by their own authority, the Church
made choice thereof for the use afore^aid; In Act. Ap. (...). 131.
it being no where to be ^ound, that it was commanded. Gualten, more generally,
that the Christians first assembled on the Sabbath day, as being then most
famous, and so most in use: but when the Churches were augmented, pr^ximus a
sabbat^ dies robus sacris destinatus, the next day after the Sabbath was
des^gned to those holy uses. If not before, then certainly not so commanded by
our Savior Christ: and if designed only, then not enjoined by the Apostles.
Yea Beza though herein he differ from his Master, C^lvin, Apoc. 1* 10.
and makes the Lords day meetings to be Apostolicae and verae divinae
traditionis, to be indeed of Apostolical and divine tradition: yet being a
tradition only although Apostolical, it is no commandment. And more then
that, In Act. ^0
he tells us in another place, that from Saint Rauls preaching at Troas, and
from the Text. 1. Corinthians. 16. 2. non inepte colligi, it may be gathered not
unfitly, that then the Christians were accustomed to meet that day, the
ceremony of the Jewish Sabbath beginning by degrees to vanish. But sure the
custom of the people makes no divine traditions; and such conclusions, as not
unfitly may be gathered from the Text, are not Text it self. Others there be,
who attribute the changing of the day, In Genesis
to the Apostles; not to their precept, but their practice. So Mercer,
Apostoli, in Dominicum converterunt, the Apostles changed the Sabbath to the
Lords day: in Genesis 2. Parae^s attributes the same Apostolicae Ecclesia unto the
Apostolical Church, or Church in the Apostles time: quo modo autem facta fit
haec mutatio in sacris literis expressum non habemus; but how, by what
authority such a change was made, In Thesi^. p. 733.
is not delivered in the S^ripture. And John Cuchlinus though he call it an
consuetudinem Apostolicam an Apostolical custom^; yet he is peremptory that
the Apostles gave no such Commandment; Apostolos prae^ptum reliquisse
constanter negamus. So Simler calls it only consuetudinem tempore Apostolorum
receptam* Def^stis Chr: p. 24.
a custom taken up in the Apostles time. And so Hospinian, although says he,
it be apparent that the Lords day was celebrated in the place of the Jewish
Sabbath, even in the times of the Apostles: non invenitur tamen vel Apostolos,
vel alios, leg^ aliqua and praecepto, observationem ejus instituisse; yet find
we not that either they, or any other, In 4. praecep^.
did institute the keeping of the same, by any law or precept, but left it
free. Thus Zanchius, nullibi legimus Apostoles, etc. we do not read, says
he, that the Apostles commanded any to observe this day. We only read what
they and others did upon it; liberum ergo reliquerunt, which is an argument
that they left it to the Churches power. In (...) ^alat.
To those add Vrsin in his exposition on the fourth Commandment, liberum
Ecclesiae reliquit alios dies eligere, and that the Church made choice of this,
in honor of our Saviors resurrection: Arctius in his Common-places,
Christiani^^ Dominicum transtulerunt: Gomarus, and Ryvet, in the ^racts before
remembered. Both which have also there determined, that in the choosing of this
day, the Church did exercise as well her wisdom, as her freedom: her
freedom, being not obliged unto any day, by the Law of God; her wisdom ne
majori mutatione Iudaeos offenderet, that by so small an alteration, she might
the less offend the Jews, who were then considerable. As for the Lutheran
Divines it; it is affirmed by Doctor Bound, that (...) the most part they
ascribe too much unto the liberty of the Church in appointing days for the
assembly of the people: which is plain confession. But for particulars,
Brentius, as Doctor Prideaux tells us, calls it civilem institutionem, a
civil institution, and no commandment of the Gospel* which is no more
indeed, then what is elsewhere said by Calvin, when he accounts no otherwise
thereof, then, ut remedium retinendo ordini necessarium, as a fit way to
retain order in the Church. And sure I am Chemnitius tells us, that the
Apostles did not impose the keeping of this day, as necessary upon the
consciences of Gods people by any law or precept whatsoever: sed libera fuit
observatio ordinis gratia, but that for orders sake, it had been voluntarily
used amongst them, of their own accord.

(8) Thus have we proved that by the Doctrine of the Protestants, of what side
soever, and those of greatest credit in their several Churches, eighteen by
name, and all the Lutherans in general of the same opinion; that the Lords Day
is of no other institution then the authority of the Church. Which proved, the
last of the three Theses, that still the Church has power to change the day,
and to transfer it to some other; will follow of it self, on the former
grounds: the Protestant Doctors before remembered, in saying that the Church,
did institute the Lords day, as we see they do; confessing tacitly, that
still the Church has power to change it. Nor do they tacitly confess it, as
if they were afraid to speak it out: but some of them in plain terms affirm
it, as a certain truth. Zuinglius, the first reformer of the Switzers, has
resolved it so, in his Discourse against one Valentine Gentilis, a new Arian
heretic. Audi mi Valentine, quibus modis and rationibus, sabbatum ceremoniale
reddatur. Tom. 1 p 254 ^.
Harken now Valentine by what ways and means, the Sabbath may be made a
ceremony: if either we observe that day which the Jews once did, or think the
Lords day so affixed unto any time, ut nefas sit illum in aliud tempus
transfer that we conceive it an impiety, it should be changed unto another;
on which as well as upon that, we may not rest from labor, and harken to the
Word of God, if perhaps such necessity should be: this would indeed make it
become a ceremony. Nothing can be more plain then this. Yet Calvin is as
plain, when he professes, that he regarded not so much the number of seven,
ut ejus servituti Ecclesias astringeret, as to enthrall the Church unto it.
Sure I am, Doctor Prideaux reckons him, as one of them, who teach us that
the Church has power to change the day, and to transfer it to some other: In
Orat. de Sab.
and that John Barclaie makes report, how once he had a Consultation, de
transferenda Dominica in feriam quintam, of altering the Lords day unto the
Thursday. Bucer affirms as much, as touching the authority, and so does
Bullinger, and Brentius, Vrsine, and Chemnitius, as Doctor Prideaux has
observed. Of Bullinger, Bucer, Brentius, I have naught to say, because the
places are not cited; but take it, as I think I may upon his credit. But for
Chemnitius he says, often, that it is libera observatio, a voluntatie
observation; that it is an especial part of our Christian liberty, not to be
tied to days and times, in matters which concern Gods service; and that the
Apostles made it manifest by their example, Singulis diebus, vel quocunque die,
That every day, or any day, may by the Church be set apart for religious
exercises. (...). qu. 103.. 2.
and as for Vrsine, he makes this difference between the Lords day and the
Sabbath, that it was utterly unlawful to the Jews, either to neglect or
change the Sabbath, without express Commandment from God himself, as being a
ceremonial part of divine worship: but for the Christian Church, that may
design the first, or second, or any other day to Gods public service.
Eccl^sia vero Christiana primum, vel al^um diem, trib^it ^inisterio, salva s^a
liberate, sine opinione cultus vel necessitatis: (...). 17 post Tr^^it.
as his words there are. To these add Dietericus a Lutheran Divine, who though
he makes the keeping of one day in seven, to be the moral part of the fourth
Commandment; yet for that day, it may be dies Sabbati, or dies Solis, or
quicunque alius, Sunday or Saturday, or any other, be it one in seven. And so
Hospinian is persuaded, D^minicum diem mutare and in alium transfer licet,
That if the occasions of the Church do so require, the Lords day may be changed
unto any other: provided it be one of seven; and that the change be so
transacted, that it produce no scandal or confusion in the Church of God. Nay
by the doctrine of the Helvetian Churches, if I conceive their meaning rightly,
every particular Church may destinate what day they please, to religious
meetings; and every day may be a Lords day, or a Sabbath. For so they give it
up in their C^nfession, (...).
Deligit ergo qu^vis Ecclesia sibi certum tempus ad preces publicas, and
Evangelii praedicati^ne^, nec n^n sacramentorum celebrationem: though for their
parts, they kept that day, which had been set apart for those holy uses, even
from the time of the Apostles, yet so, that they conceived it free, to keep
the Lords day, or the Sabbath: Sed and Dominicum, non Sabbatum, libera
observatione, celebra^us. Some Sectaries, since the Reformation, have gone
further yet, and would have had all days alike, as unto their use, all equally
to be regarded; and reckoned that the Lords day as the Church continued it was
a Jewish ordinance, thwarting the doctrine of Saint Paul, who seemed to them to
abrogate that difference of days, which the Church retained. This was the
fancy, or the frenzy rather of the Anabaptist, taking the hint perhaps from
something, which had been formerly delivered by some wiser men; and after
them, of the Swinckfeildian, and the Familist: as in the times before, of the
Petro-Brusians, and (if Waldensis wrong him not) of Wiclef also.

(9) Such being the doctrine of those Churches, the Protestant, and those of
Rome, it is not to be thought but that their practice is according: Both make
the Lords day only an Ecclesiastical constitution, and therefore keep it so
far forth, as by the Canons of their Churches, they are enjoined. These what
they are at Rome, and those of her obedience, we have seen already; and little
has been added since. It has not been, of late, a time, to make new
restraints; rather to mitigate the old, to lay down such which were most
burdensome, and grievous to be borne withal. And so it seems they do, Azorius
the Jesuit being more remiss in stating and determining the restraints,
imposed on the Lords day, and the other holy days; then Tostatus was, who
lived in safer times by far, then these now present: nor is their discipline
so severe, as their Canon, neither. So that the Lords day there, for ought I
could observe, when I was amongst them, is solemnized much after the same
manner as with us in England: repairing to the Church, both at Mass and
Vespers, ryding abroad to take the air, or otherwise to refresh themselves,
and following their honest pleasures at such leisure times, as are not
destinate to the public meetings; the people not being barred from traveling
about their lawful business, as occasion is, so they reserve some time for
their devotions in the public. Which is indeed agreeable to the most ancient
and most laudable custom, in the Church of God. Now for the Protestant
Churches, the Lutherans do not differ much, from that which we have said before
of the Church of Rome: and therefore there is nothing to be said of them. But
for the rest which follow Calvin, and think themselves the only orthodox and
reformed Churches; w^ will consider them in ^h^ee several circumstances: first
in the exercise of religious d^ties, secondly in restraint from labors, and
(...) in permission of recreations. And first for the exercise of religious
duties, they use it in the morning only: the afternoon being left at large,
for any, and for every man to dispose thereof, as to him seems fitting. So is
it in the Churches of high Germany, those of the Palatinate, and all the others
of that mould. For I have heard from Gent. of good repute, that at the first
reception of the Lady Elizabeth into that Country, on Sunday after dinner,
the Coaches and the horses were brought forth; and all the Princes Court,
betook themselves unto their pleasures, hunting or hawking, as the season of
the year was fit for either. Which when it seemed strange at first to those
English Lords and Gentlemen, which did attend the Princess thither: answer was
made, it was their custom so to do, and that they had no Eve^ing-service, but
ended all the duties of the day with the Morning Sermon. Nor is this custom
only, and no more but so. There is a Canon for it in some places, it must be
no otherwise. A^t. 46.
For in the first Council of Dort, Ann. 1574, it was decreed, Publicae
vespertinae preces non sunt introducendae, ubi non sunt introductae; ubi sunt,
tollantur: that in such Churches where public Evening Prayer had not been
admitted, it should continu^ as it was; and where they were admitted, they
should be put down. So Doctor Smith relates the Canon (if so irregular a
decree may deserve that name) in his Collat. doctr. Cathol. and protest. cap.
68. Art. 1. And so it stood till the last Synod of Dort, Ann. 1618. what time,
to raise the reputation of the Palatine Catechism, Sess. 14
. being not long after to be admitted into their Canon, it was concluded, that
Catechisme-lectures should be read each Sunday in the afternoon; nor to be
laid aside propter auditorum infrequentiam, for want of Auditors. Now to
allure the people thither, being before staved off by a former Synod, it was
provided that their M^nisters should read howsoever, Coram paucis auditoribus,
immo vel coram suis famulis tantum, Though few were present, or none but their
domesticke servants; in hope by little and little to attract the people. And
secondly it was resolved on, to implore the Civil Magistrate, Vt opera omnia
servilia, seu quotidiana, etc. quibu^ tempus pomeridianum diebus Dominicis
maxim in pagis, plerunque transigi soleret, that by their Edicts they would
restrain all servile works, the works of ordinary days, and especially,
games, drinking-matches, and other profanations of the Sabbath, wherewith the
afternoon or Sundays, chiefly in smaller Towns and Villages, had before
been spent; that so the people might repair to the catechizing. By which we
also may perceive, that there was no restraint, on ^undayes in the afternoon,
from any kind of servile works, or daily labors, but that men might and did
apply themselves to their several busin^sses, as on other days. As for the
greater Towns there is scarce any of them wherein there are not Faires and
Markets, kirk-masses, as they use to call them, upon the Sunday: and those as
much frequented in the afternoon, as were the Churches in the Forenoone. A
thing from which they could not hold, not in D^rt it self, what time the Synod
was assembled. Nor had it now been called upon, as it is most likely, had not
Amesius, and some others of our English Malcontents, scattered abroad Bounds
principles amongst the Netherlands, which they had sown before in England. And
certainly they had made as strong a faction there before this time, their
learned men beginning to bandie one against the other, in the debates about the
Sabbath; but that the livelihood of the States, consisting most on trade and
traffic, cannot spare any day, Sunday no more then any other, from venting
their commodities, and providing others. So that in general, the Lords day is
no otherwise observed with them (though somewhat better then it was twelve
years ago) then an halfe-holiday is with us: the morning though not all of
that, unto the Church; the afternoon, to their employments. So for the French
and Germane Churches, we may perceive by their Divines, Calvin, and Beza, and
Martin Bucer who do so highly charge the Romanist, for the restraint of working
on the Lords day; that they were well enough content to allow the same. And for
the Churches of the Switzers, Zuinglius avoweth it to be lawful, Resp. ad Val.
Gentilem.
Die Dominico peractis sacris laboribus incumbere, On the Lords day after the
end of Divine Service, for any man to follow and pursue his labors; as
commonly we do, says he, in the time of harvest. Indeed the Polish Churches
formerly decreed in two several Synods, the one at Cracow Ann. 1573, the other
at Petricow, Ann. 1578. Vt Domini in suis ditionibus prohibeant Dominicis
diebus nundinas annuas and septimanales, That Lords of Mannours (as we call
them) should not permit on the Lords day either Faires or Markets, in any of
the Towns unto them belonging: Neque iisdem diebus colo^os suos ullos
laboribus aut vecturis onerent, nor on those days employ their Tenants in
carriages, or such servile labors. But this was rather done to please the
Lutherans, amongst whom; and those of the Communion of the Church of Rome,
under whom they live: then out of any principle or example of those Churches,
whom they chiefly followed. For recreations last of all, there is no question
to be made, but that where working is permitted, and most kind of business, a
man may lawfully enjoy himself and his honest pleasures; and without danger of
offense, pursue those pastimes, by which the mind may be refreshed, and the
spirits quickened. Already have we told you what the custom is in the Palatine
Churches. And for the Belgicke, besides it was before declared from the Synod
of Dort, touching the usua^l spending of that day in games and drinking
matches; their four great Doctors, Syn^ps. (...). disp. 21. n. 58.
Polyander, Ryvet, Thysius, and Walaeus, make recreation to be part of the
Sabbaths rest, Et inter fines Sabbati esse, and to be reckoned as a principal
intent thereof. Even in Geneva it self, the mother Church unto the rest, as
Robert Johnson tells us in his enlargement of Boterus, All honest exercises,
s^ooting in pieces, long-bowes, crosse-bowes, etc. are used on the Sabbath day,
and that in the morning both before and after Sermon: neither do the Ministers
find fault therewith, so they hinder not from hearing of the Word at the time
appointed. Indeed there is no reason why they should find fault, the practice
so directly rising upon their principles.

(10) Dancing indeed they do not suffer, either in Geneva, or the French
Churches (though not prohibited for ought I can learn, in either Germany, or
any of the Lutheran kingdoms;) but this not in relation to the day, but the
sport it self, which absolutely they have forbidden on all days whatever.
Calvin took great offense thereat of so austere a life would he have the
people) and kept a great ado about it in Geneva, when he lived amongst them: as
he does thus relate the story to his friend Farellus. Epist* ad Fare^.
Corneus, and Perinus, two of special power and quality in that City,
together with one Heinrichus one of the Elders of the Church, a Syndie (which
is one of the four chief Officers of the Commonwealth) and some others of
their friends, being merry at an invitation, fell to dancing. Notice hereof
being given to Calvin, by some false brother, they were all called into the
Consistory, excepting Corneus and Perinus: and being interrogated thereupon,
Impudenter Deo and nobis mentiti sunt, they lied, says he, most impudently
unto God and us. (Most Apostolically said). At that, says he, I grew offended,
as the indignity of the thing deserved: and they persisting in their contumacy,
Censui ut jure-jurando ad very confessio^em adigerentur. I thought it fit to
put them to their oaths about it. So said, so done; and they not only did
con^esse their former dancing, but that that very day, they had been dancing
in the house of one Balthasats widow. On this confession he proceeded unto the
censure, which certainly was sharp enough for so small a fault (for a fault it
was, if he would have it): the Syndick being displaced, the Elder turned out of
his office, Perryn and his wife both clapped in prison, and all the rest, pudore
confusi, put to open shame. This was in Ann. 1546. And afterward, considering
how much he disliked it, their Ministers and Preachers cried down dancing as a
most ^infull and unchristian pastime, and published diverse tracts against it.
At last in Ann. 1571. it was concluded in a Synod held ^t Rochel, and made to
be a part of their public discipline; viz. that All congregations should be
admonished by their Ministers seriously to reprehend and suppress all dances*
mummeries, and enterludes: as also that all dancing-masters, or those who make
any dancing meetings, after they have been often admonished to desist, ought to
be excommunicate for that their contumacie, and disobedience. Which rigidn^^e
of theirs, as it is conceived, considering how the French do delight in
dancing, Dalling^^^ ^ew ^f F^.
has been no small impediment unto the general entertainment of the reformed
Religion in that kingdom. So great is their delight therein, and with such
eagerness they pursue it, when they are at leisure from their business; that
as it seems, they do neglect the Church on ^he holidayes, that they may have
the more time to ^ttend their dancing. Upon which ground, it was, Ap Boche^^.
and not that dancing was conceived to be no lawful sport for the Lords day,
that in the Council of Sens, Ann. 1524. in that of Paris, Ann. 1557. in those
of Rhemes, and Touts, Ann. 1583. and finally in that of Bourges, Ann. 1584.
dancing on Sundays, and the other holy days has been prohibited: prohibited
indeed, but practiced by the people, notwithstanding all their Canons, But this
concerns the French and their Churches only. our Northern Nations not being
so bent upon the sport: as to need restraint. Only the Polish Churches did
conclude, in the Synod of Petricow before remembered, that Taverne-meetings,
drinking-matches, dice, cards, and such like pastimes, as also musical
instruments and dances should on the Lords day be forbidden. But then it
follows with this clause, Praesertim eo temporis momento quo concio and
cultus divinus in templo peragitur, especially at that instant time, when men
should be at Church to hear the Sermon, and attend Gods worship. Which clearly
shows that they prohibited dancing, and the other pastimes then recited, no
otherwise then as they were a means, to keep men from Church. Probably also
they might be induced unto it by such French Protestants, as came into that
country with the Duke of Anjou, when he was chosen King of Poland, Ann. 1574,
which was four years before this Council.

(11) As for the Churches of the East, being now heavily oppressed with Turkish
bondage, we have not very much to say. Yet by that little which we find
thereof, it seems the Lords day keeps that honor which before it had; and
that the Saturday continues in the same regard, wherein once it was: both of
them counted days of feasting, and both retained for the assemblies of the
Church. First that they are both days of feasting, or at the least exempted
from their public Fasts, appears by that which is related by Christopher
Angelo, a Grecian whom I knew in Oxford, De institu^. Gra^c c. 16.
(...) that on the Saturday and Sunday, which we call the Lord day, they do
both eat oil and drink wine, even in Lent it self; whereas on other days
they feed on pulse, and drink only water. Then that they both are still
retained for the assemblies of the Church, Id. c. 17.
with other Holidays, he tells us in another place: where it is said, (...),
etc. that for the Lords day, and the Saturday, and the other Festivals, they
use to go unto the Church on the Eve before, and almost at midnight; where
they continue till the breaking up of the Congregation. For the Egyptian
Christians, or Cophties, as we call them now, Travels l 2.
it is related by G. Sandys, that on the Saturday presently after midnight,
they repair unto their Ch^rches, where they remain well nigh until Sunday at
noone; during which time, they neither sit nor kneel, but support themselves
on Crutches: and that they sing over the most part of David's Psalm^s at every
meeting, with diverse parcels of the old and new Testament. He has informed us
also of the Armenians, another sort of Eastern Christians, that coming into
the place of the Assembly on Sunday,^ the afternoon, he found one sitting in
the midst of the Congregation, in habit not differing from the rest, reading
on a Bible in the Chaldaean tongue: that annon after came the Bishop in an hood
or vest of black, with a staff in his hand; that first he prayed, and then
sung certain Psalms assisted by two or three; after, all of them ^inging
jointly, at interims praying to themselves; the Bishop all this while with his
hands erected, and face toward the Altar: That service being ended, they all
kissed his hand, and bestowed their Alms, he laying his other hand on their
heads and blessing them; finally that bidding the succeeding Fasts and
Festivals he dismissed the assembly. The Muscovites, being near unto the and
Greeks, once within the jurisdiction of the Patriark of Constantinople, partake
much also of their customs. They count it an unlawful thing to fast the
Saturday, Gagvinus de M^scovit.
which shows that somewhat is remaining of that esteem, in which once they
had it: and for the Holidays, Sundays as well as any other, they do not hold
themselves so strictly to them, but that the Citizens and Artificers,
im^ediatly after Divine Service betake themselves unto their labour^, and
domesticke businesses. And this, most probably, is the custom also of all the
Churches of the East; as holding a Communion with the Church of Greece, though
not subordinate thereunto: from the which Church of Greece, the faith was first
derived unto these Muscovites, as before was said; and with the faith, the
observation of this day, and all the other holidays, at that time in u^e. As
for the Country people, as Gaguinus tells us, they seldom celebrate or ob^erve
any day at all, at lest not with that care and order as they ought to do;
saying, that it belongs only unto Lords and Gentlemen to keep Holidays. Last
of all, for the Habassines, or Ethiopian Christians, though further off in
situation; they come as near unto the fashions of the ancient Graecians. Of
them we are informed by Master Br^rewood out of Damiani, Enquiries c. 23.
that they reverence the Sabbath, keeping it solemn equally with the Lords
day. Emend. Temp. lib. 7.
Scaliger tells us, that they call both of them by the name of Sabbaths; the
one the first, the other the later Sabbath: or in their own language, the one
Sanbath Sachristos, that is, Christ's Sabbath; the other Sanbath Iudi, or the
Jews Sabbath, Bellarmine thinks that they derived this observation of the
Saturday or Sabbath, from the Constitutions ascribed to Clemens: De Script. E^*
c^. in Clem.
which indeed frequently do press the observation of that day, with no less
fervor then the Sunday. Of this we have already spoken. And to this Bellarmine
was induced the rather, because that in this Country they had found authority,
and were esteemed as Apostolical. Audio Ethiopes his Constitutionibus uti, ut
vere Apostolicis, and ea de causa in erroribus versari, circa cultum* Sabbati,
and diei Dominicae. But if this be an error in them, they have many partners;
and those of ancient standing in the Church of God, as before was shown. As
for their service on the Sunday, they celebrate the Sacrament in the morning
early, except it be in the time of Lent: when fasting all the day, they
discharge that duty in the Evening, and then fall to meat; as the same Scaliger
has recorded. So having looked over all the residue of the Christian World,
and found no Sabbath in the same, except only nominall, and that as well upon
the Saturday, as upon the Sunday; it is n^w time, we turned our course, and
set sail for England* where we shall find as little of it as in other places,
until that forty years ago, no more, some men began to introduce a Sabbath
thereunto, in hope thereby to countenance and advance their other projects.

CHAP. VII.
In what estate the Lord's Day stood in this Isle of Britain, from the first
planting of religion, to the reformation.
(1) What does occur about the Lords day, and the other festivalls, amongst
the Churches of the Brittans (2) Of the estate of the Lords day, and the other
holy days in the Saxon Heptarchie. (3) The honors done unto the Sunday and
the other holy days, by the Saxon Monarchs. (4) Of the public actions
Civil, Ecclesiastical, mixed, and Military, done on the Lords day, under the
first six Norman Kings. (5) New Sabbath doctrines broached in England in King
John's Reign; and the miraculous original of the same. (6) The prosecution of
the former story; and ill success therein of the undertakers. (7) Restraint of
worldly business on the Lords day, and the other holy days, admitted in those
times, in Scotland. (8) Restraint of certain servile works, on Sundays, holy
days, and the wakes, concluded in the Council of Oxon, under Henry 3. (9)
Husbandry and Legal process, prohibited on the Lords day first, in the
reign of Edward 3. (10) Selling of wools, on the Lords day and the solemn
feasts, forbidden first by the said King Edward as after, faires and markets
generally, by King Henry 6. (11) The Cordwainers of London, restrained from
selling their wares on the Lords day, and some other festivalls, by King Edward
the fourth, and the repealing of that Act by King Henry the eight. (12) In what
estate the Lords day stood, both for the doctrine, and the practice, in the
beginning of the reign of the said King Henry.

(1)AND now at last we are for England, that we may see what has been done
amongst our (...), in this particular; and thereby be the better lessoned,
what we are to do. For as before I noted, the Canons of particular Churches,
and edicts of particular princes, though they sufficiently declare, both what
their practice and opinion was, in the present point; yet are no general rule,
nor prescript to others, which lived not in the compass of their authority.
Nor can they further bind us, as was then observed; then as they have been
since admitted into our Church, or State, either by adding them unto the body
of our Canon, or imitating them in the composition of our Acts and statutes.
Only the Decretalls of the Popes, the body of their Canon Law is to be
excepted: which being made for the direction and reiglement of the Church in
general, were by degrees admitted, and obeyed, in these parts of Christendom;
and are by Act of Parliament so far still in force, as they oppose not the
prerogative royal, or the municipall laws and statutes of this Realm of
England. Now that we may the better see, how it has been adjudged of here,
and what has been decreed or done, touching the Lords day and the other holy
days: we will ascend as high as possibly we can, even to the Church and
Empire of the Brittans. Of them indeed we find not much, and that delivered
in as little; it being said of them by Beda, Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
that in the time of Constantine they did dies festos celebrare, observe those
holy days which were then in use: which, as before we said, were Easter,
Whitsontide, the feasts of Christ's Nativity, and his Incarnation, every year;
together with the Lords day, weekly. And yet it may be thought, that in those
times, the Lords day was not here of any great account; in that they kept the
feast of Easter, after the fashion of the Churches, in the Eastern parts
decima quarta luna, on what day of the week soever: which certainly they had
not done, had the Lords day obtained amongst them that esteem, which generally
it had found in the western Churches. And howsoever a late writer of
Ecclesiastical history, endeavor to acquit the Brittans of these first Ages,
Brought. hist. ^ 4. c. 13.
from the erroneous observation of that feast, and make them therein followers
of the Church of Rome: yet I conceive not that his proofs come home, to make
good his purpose. For where it is his purpose to prove, by computation, that
that erroneous observation, came not in amongst the Brittans, till 30 years
before the entrance of S. Austin, and his associates into this Island; and for
that end has brought a passage out of Beda, touching the continuance of that
custom: its plain that Beda speaks not of the British, but the Scottish
Christians. Permansit autem apud ^os [ the Scottish-Irish Christians, as
himself confesseth] hujusmodi observantia Paschalis tempore non pauco, hoc est
usque ad annum Domini. 717. per annos 150: which was, (as he computes it
somewhat near the point) but 30 years before the entrance of that Austin. Now
for the Scots, it is apparent that they received not the faith, till the year
of Christ 430, (not to say any thing of the time wherein they first set sooting
in this Island, which was not very long before): and probably might about that
time, of which Beda speaks, receive that custom of keeping Easter from the
Brittans, who were next neighbors to them, and a long time lived mingled with
them. But for the Brittans it is most certain, that they had longer been
accustomed to that observation: though for the time thereof, whether it came in
with the first plantation of the Gospel here, we will not contend; as not
pertaining to the business which we have in hand. Suffice it, that the
Brittans anciently were observant of those public festivalls, which had been
generally entertained in the Church of God: though for the time of celebrating
the feast of Easter, they might adhere more unto one Church, then unto another.
As for the Canon of the Council of Nice, Anno 198.
which is there alleged, Baronius rightly has observed out of Athanasius,
that notwithstanding both that Canon, and the Emperors Edicts thereupon; tamen
etiam post^a, Syros, Cilices, and Mesopotamios, in eodem errore permansisse,
the Syrians, Cilicians, and Mesopotamians, continued in their former errors.
And why not then the Brittans, which lay farther off; as well as those that
dwelt so near the then Regal City?

(2) Proceed we next unto the Saxons, who as they first received the faith,
from the Church of Rome; so did they therewithal, receive such institutions,
as were at that time generally entertained in the Roman Church: the celebration
of the Lords day, and the other festivalls, which were allowed of and observed,
when Gregory the Great attained the Popedom. And here, to take things as they
lie in order, we must begin with a narration, concerning Westminster, which
for the prettiness of the story I will here insert. Sebert the first Christian
King of the East Saxons, having built that Church, unto the honor of God, and
memory of Saint Peter, Adredus de Ge^^is Edwardi.
invited Mellitus Bishop of London, on a day appointed, unto the consecration
of it. The night before, S. Peter coming to the further side crosses the
ferrie, goes into the Church, and with a great deal of celestial music,
lights, and company, performs that office; for the dispatch of which Mellitus
had been invited. This done, and being wafted back to the further side, he
gives the ferri-man for his fare, a good draught of fishes, only commanding
him, to carry one of them, which was the best for price and beauty, for a
present, from him, to Mellitus; in testimony that the work was done, to his
hand already. Then telling who he was, he adds, that he and his posterity,
the whole race of fishermen, should be long after stored with that kind of
fish: tantum ne ultra piscari audeatis in die Dominica, provided always, that
they fished no more upon the Sunday. Aldredus so reports the st^ry. And though
it might be true, as unto the times wherein he lived, (which was in the
declining of the twelfth Century) that fishing on the Lords day was restrained
by Law: yet sure he placed this story ill, in giving this injunction from
Saint Peter in those early days, when such restraints were hardly settled; if
in a Church new planted, they had yet been spoke of. Leaving this therefore as
a fable, let us next look on Beda, what he has left us of this day, in
reference to our Ancestors of the Saxons ^^^ce: and many things we find in
him, worth our observation. Before we showed you, how the Sunday was esteemed
a festival, that it was judged heretical to hold fasts thereon. This
ordinance came in amongst us with the faith it self. Hist. l. 3. c. 23.
S. Chadd, having a place designed him by King Oswald, to erect a monastery,
did presently retire unto it, in the time of Lent: In all which time, Dominica
excepta, the Lords day excepted, he fasted constantly till the evening, as the
story tells us. The like is told of Adamannus, one of the monastery of
Coldingham, now in Scotland, Hist. l. 4. c. 25.
(but then accounted part of the Kingdom of Northumberland,) that he did live
in such a strict and abstemious manner, ut nil unquam cibi vel potus, excepta
die Dominica, and quinta Sabbati percipere^; that he did never eat nor drink
but on the Sunday and Thursday only. This Adamannus lived in Anno 690. Before
we showed you, with what profit music had been brought into the Church of
God: and hither it was brought, it seems, Eccl. hist. l. 2. c. 20.
with the first preaching of the Gospel. Beda relates it of Paulinus, that
when he was made Bishop of Rochester, which was in An. 631, he left behind him
in the North one James a Deacon, cantandi in Ecclesia peritissimu^, a man
exceeding perfect in Church music: who taught them there that form of
singing divine service, which he learnt in Canterbury. And after in the year
668, what time Archbishop Theodorus made his Metropoliticall visitation, the
Art of singing service, which was then only used in Kent (for in the North it
had not been so settled, but that it was again forgotten) was generally taken
up over all the Kingdom. ^ib. 4. c. 2.
Sonos cantandi in Ecclesia, quos catenus in Cantia tantum noverant, ab hoc
tempore per omnes Anglorum Ecclesias discere coeperunt, as that Author has it.
Before we showed, how Pope Vitalianus, anno 653. added the Organ to that
vocal music, which was before in use in the Church of Christ. In less then
30 years after, and namely in the year 679. were they introduced by Pope
Agatho, into the Churches of the English: and have continued in the same well
neer^ 1000 years, without interruption. Before we showed you, how some of the
greater festivalls, were in esteem before the Sunday; and that it was so even
in the primitive times. And so it also was in the primitive times of this
Church of England: Bed. Eccl. hist. l. 4. c. 19.
it being told us of Queen Etheldreda, that after she had put her self into
a monastery, she never went unto the Bathes praeter imminentibus solenniis
majoribus, but on the approach of the greater festivalls, such as were Easter,
Pentecost, and Christmasse; for so I think he means there by Epiphani^: as
also, that unless it were on the greater festivalls she did not use to eat,
above once, a day. This plainly shows, that Sunday was not reckoned for a
greater festival; that other days were in opinion and esteem above it: and
makes it evident withal, that they conceived not that the keeping of the L^rds
day, was to be accounted as a part of the law of nature; or introduced into the
Church, by divine authority, but by the same authority that the others were.
For Laws in these times made, Ap. Lambert. ^^chai^n.
we meet with none but those of Ina, a West Saxon King, who entered on his
reign anno 712: A Prince exceedingly devoted to the Church of Rome, and
therefore apt enough to embrace any thing, which was there concluded. By him it
was enacted, in this form that follows. Servus si quid operis patrarit die
Dominico, ex praecepto Domini sui, liber esto etc., If a servant work on the
Lords day, by the appointment of his master, he was to be set free, and his
master was to forfeit 30 shillings: but if he worked without such order from
his master, to be whipped, or mulcted. Liber si hoc die operetur injussu
Domini sui, etc. So if a freeman worked that day, without direction from his
master, he either was to be made a Bondman, or pay 60 shillings. As for the
doctrine of these times, we may best judge of that by Beda. In Luc. 19.
First for the Sabbath, that he tells us, ad Mosis usque tempora caeterorum
dierum similis erat, was merely like the other days until Moses time; no
difference at all between them: therefore not institute and observed in the
beginning of the world, as some teach us now. Next for the Lords day, that he
makes an Apostolical sanction only, no divine commandment; as before we
noted: and how far Apostolical sanctions bind, we may clearly see, by
that which they determined in the Council of Jerusalem. Of these two
specialties, we have spoke already.

(3) This is the most we find in the Saxon Heptarchie; and little more then
this we find in the Saxon Monarchy. In this we meet with Alured first,
Lamber. Archaion.
the first that brought this Realm in order, who in his laws cap. de diebus
festis and solennibus, reckons up certain days in which it was permitted
unto freemen to enjoy their festival liberty, as the phrase there is: servis
autem and ijs qui sunt legitima officiorum servitute astricti, non item; but
not to slaves, and such as were in service unto other men viz. the twelve days
after Christ's Nativity, dies ille quo Chr^stus subegit diabolum, the day
wherein our Savior overcame the Devil; the festival of Saint Gregory, seven
days before Easter, and as many after, the festival day of Saint Peter and
Paul, the week before our Lady day in harvest, All-Hallowtide, and the four
wednesdayes in the Emberweeke. Where note how many other days, were privileged
in the self same manner, as the Lords day was; in case that be the day then
spoke of, wherein our Savior overcame the Devil, as I think it is; as also
that this privilege extended unto freemen only, servants and bondmen being
left in the same condition as before they were; to spend all days alike in
their masters businesses. This Alured began his reign, anno 871. and after him
succeeded Edward, surnamed the Elder, in the year 900. who in a league
between himself and Gunthrun King of the Danes in England, did publickely on
both sides prohibit, as well all markettings on the Sunday, as other kind of
work whatsoever on the other holy days. Dacus si die Dominico quicquam fuerit
mercatus, reipsa, and Oris praeterea 12 mulctator; Anglus 30 solidos numerato,
etc., If a Dane bought any thing on the Lords day, he was to forfeit the thing
bought, and to pay 12 Oras, (every Ora being the fifteenth part of a pound) an
Englishman doing the like to pay 30 shillings. A freeman if he did any work,
die quocunque festo, on any of the holy days, was forthwith to be made a
Bondsman, or to redeem himself with money; a bond-slave to be beaten for it, or
redeem his beating with his purse. The master also whether that he were
Englishman or Dane, if he compelled his servants to work on any of the holy
days, was to answer for it. So when it had been generally received in other
places to begin the Sunday-service on the Eve before, it was enacted by K.
Edgar, surnamed the peaceable, who began his reign, anno 959, diem Sabbati, ab
ipsa die* Saturni hora pomeridiana tertia, usque in lunaris diei diluculum,
festum agitari: that the Sabbath should begin on Saturday, at three of the
clock in the afternoon, (and not as Fox relates it in his Acts and
Monuments, at nine in the morning) and so hold on till day break, on Monday.
Where, by the way, though it be dies Sabbati in the Latin, yet in the Saxon
copy, it is only* Healde, the holy day. After this Edgars death, the Danes so
plagued this realm, that there was nothing settled in it either in Church or
state, till finally they had won the Garland, and obtained the Kingdom. The
first of these, Canutus, an heroicke Prince; of whom it is affirmed by
Malmesbury, omnes leges ab antiquis regibus, and maxim sub Etheldredo latas,
that he commanded all those laws to be observed which had been made by any of
the former Kings, (and those before remembered amongst the rest, of which see
the 42 of his Constitutions;) especially by Etheldred his predecessor: and
that upon a grievous mulct, to be laid on such, who should disobey them.
These are the laws which afterward were called King Edwards, non quod ille
statuerit, sed quod observarit, not because he enacted them, but that he
caused them to be kept. Of these more anon Besides which Laws so brought
together, there were some others made at Winchester by this King Canutus: Leg.
14. 15.
and amongst others, this, that on the Lords day there should be no marketting,
no Courts, or public meetings of the people for civil businesses: as also
that all men abstain from hunting, and from all kind of earthly work. Yet was
there an exception too, nisi ^lagitante necessitate, in cases of necessity,
wherein it was permitted both to buy and sell, and for the people to meet
together in their Courts. For so it passes in the Law. Die Dominico mercata
concelebrari, populive conven^us agi, nisi flagitante necessitate planissime
vetamus: ipso praeterea die sacrosancto a venatione, and opere terreno prorsus
omni, quisque abstineto. Not that it is to be supposed, as some would have it,
that he intended Sunday for a Sabbath day. For entering on the Crown an. 1017,
he did no more then what had formerly been enacted by Charles the Great, and
several Councels after him; none of which dreamed of any Sabbath. Besides it
is affirmed of this Canutus, Lib. 6. c. 29.
by Otho Frisingensis, that in the year 1027, he did accompany the Emperor
Conrade at his coronation on an Easter day; which questionless he would not
have done, knowing those kind of pompes to be merely civil, and to have in
them much of ostentation; had he intended any Sabbath, when he restrained some
works on Sunday. But to make sure work of it, without more ado, the laws by
him collected, which we call S. Edwards, make the matter plain: where Sunday
has no other privilege then the other fea^ts; and which is more, is ranked
below the^. The law is thus entitled, De te^poribus and diebus pacis Domini
Regis: the text as follows. ^og de Hoveden. in Henrico secundo.
Ab adventu Domini usque ad octavam Epiphaniae, pax Dei and Ecclesiae, per ^mne
regnu^, etc. From Advent to the ctaves of Epiphanie, let no man's person be
molested, nor no suite pursued: the like from Septuagesima, to Low-sunday* and
so from holy thursday to the next Sunday after Whitsontide. Item omnibus
Sabbatis ab hora nona usque ad diem Lunae etc. the like on Saturdayes from
three in the afternoon until monday morning; as also on the Eves of the
Virgin Mary, S. Michael, S. John the Baptist, all the holy Apostles; of such
particular Saints whose festivalls are published in the Church on the Sunday
mornings; the Eve of All Saints in November, from three of the Clock, till the
solemnity be ended. As also that no Christian be molested, going to Church for
his devotio^s, or returning thence: or traveling to the dedicatio^ of any new
erected Church, or to the Synods, or any public chapter meeting. Thus was it
with the Lords day, as with many others, in S. Edwards Laws; which after were
confirmed and ratified by King Henry the second, after they had long been
neglected.

(4) Now go we forwards to the Normans, and let us see what care they took
about the sanctifying of the Lords day; whether they either took or meant it
for a Sabbath. And first beginning with the reign of the first six Kings, we
find them times of action, and full of troubles, as it does use to be in
unsettled states: no Law recorded to be made touching the keeping of this day;
but many actions of great note to be done upon it. These we will rank for
orders sake under these 5 heads: 1 Coronations, 2 Synods Ecclesiastical, 3
Counsels of Estate, 4 Civil business, and 5 battles and assaults; which we
shall sum up briefly in their place and time. And first for Coronations,
which as before I said, are mixed kind of actions, compound of sacred and of
civil; William, surnamed Rufus, was crowned at Canterbury by Archbishop
Lanfrancke, the 25 of Sept. being Sunday; anno 1087. So was King Steven, the 21
of December. being Sunday too, anno 1135. On Sunday before Christmasse day was
Henry the second crowned at London, by Archbishop Theobald. anno 1155: and on
the Sunday before Septuagesima, his daughter Ioane was, at Palermo, crowned
Queen of Sicile. Of Richard the first it is recorded, that hoysing sail from
Barbeflet in Normandy, he arrived safely here upon the Sunday, before our
Lady day in harvest: whence setting toward London, there met him his
Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, and Barons, cum copiosa militum multitudine, with
a great multitude of Knightly rank; by whose advise and Counsel he was
crowned on a Sunday, in September following, anno 1189: and after crowned a
second time on his return from thraldom and the holy Land, anno 1194. on a
Sunday too. The royal and magnificent form of his first coronation, they who
list to see, may find it most exactly represented in Rog. de Houeden. And last
of all King John, was first inaugurated Duke of Normandy, by Walter Archbishop
of Roane, the Sunday after Easter day, anno 1200: and on a Sunday after crowned
King of England, together with Isabell his Queen, by Hubert at that time
Archbishop of Canterbury. For Synods next, an. 1070 a Council was assembled at
Winchester, by the appointement of King William the first, and the consent of
Alexander then Pope of Rome, for the degrading of Stigand Archbishop of
Canterbury: and this upon the Sunday next after Easter. And we find mention
of a Synod called by Richard Archbishop of Canterbury. Anno 1175. the Sunday
before holy thursday: ad quod concilium venerunt fere omnes Episcopi and
Abbates Cantuariensis dioeceseos; where were assembled almost all the Bishops
and Abbats of the whole Province. For Counsels of Estate, there was a solemn
meeting called on Trinity Sunday, anno 1143, in which assembled Maud the
Empress, and all the Lords which held her party; where the Ambassadors from
Anjou gave up their account: and thereupon it was concluded, that the Earl of
Gloucester should be sent thither to negotiate his sisters business. So in
the year 1185, when some Ambassadors from the East, had offered to King Henry
the second, the Kingdom of Jerusalem; the King des^gned the first Sunday in
Lent for his day of answer. Upon which day there met at London, the King, the
Patria^ke of Jerusalem, the Bishops, Abbats, Earls, and Barons of the Realm
of England; as also William King of Scotland, and his brother David, with the
Earls and Barons of that country: and habito inde cum deliberatione concilio
etc. and then and there upon mature deliberation, it was concluded, that though
the King accepted not the title, yet he would give his people leave, to put
themselves into the action, and take up the Cross. For civil business of
another nature, we find it on record that on the fourth Sunday in Lent, next
following, the same King Henry Knighted his Son John, and sent him forthwith
into Ireland: Knighthood at those times being far more full of ceremony,
then now it is. Which being but a preparation to war and military matters,
leads us unto such battles, as in these times were fought on Sunday. Of
which we find it in our Annalls, that in the year 1142. upon a Sunday being
Candlemasse day, King S^ephen was taken prisoner at the battle of Lincoln:
as also that on Holy-Crosse day next after, being Sunday too, Robert Earl of
Gloucester Commander of the adverse forces, was taken prisoner at the battaille
of Winchester. So read we that on Sunday the 25 of August anno 1173. the King
of France besieged and forced the Castle of Dole in Britain, belonging to the
King of England: as also that on Sunday the 26 of September anno 1198. King
Richard took the Castle of Curceles, from the King of France. More of this
kind might be remembered, were not these sufficient, to show how anciently it
has been the use of the Kings of England, to create Knights, and hold their
Counsels of estate, on the Lords day, as now they do. Were not the others
here remembered, sufficient to let us know, that our progenitors did not think
so superstitiously of this day, as not to come upon the same unto the crowning
of their Kings, or the public Synods of the Church; or if need were, and
their occasions so required it, to fight as well or the Lords day, as on any
other. Therefore no Lords day Sabbath hitherto, in the Realm of England.

(5) Not hitherto indeed. But in the Age that followed next there were some
overtures thereof, some strange preparatives to begin one. For in the very
entrance of the 13 Age, Rog. de Hov^^ den.
Fulco, a French Priest, and a notable hyp^crite, as our King Richard counted
him and the story proves, lighted upon a new Sabbatarian fancy; which one of
his associates, Eustathius Abbat of Flay, in Normandy, was sent to scatter
here in England: but finding opposition to his doctrine, he went back again
the next year after, being 1202, he comes better fortified, preaching from
town to town, and from place to place, ne quis forum rerum venalium diebus
Dominicis exerceret, that no man should presume to market on the Lords day.
Where by the way we may observe, that notwithstanding all the Canons and Edicts
before remembered in the fifth Chapter of this book, and the third Section of
this Chapter, the English kept their marketts on the Lords day, as they had
done formerly, as neither being bound to those which had been made by foreign
states; or such as being made at home, had long before been cut in pieces by
the sword of the Norman Conqueror. Now for the easier bringing of the people to
obey their dictates, they had to show, a warrant sent from God himself, as
they gave it out. The title this, Mandatum sanctum Dominicae diei quod de coelo
venit in Jerusalem, etc. An holy mandat touching the Lords day, which came
down from Heaven, unto Jerusalem, found on S. Simeons Altar in Golgotha,
where Christ was Crucified for the sins of all the world: which lying there
three days, and as many nights, struck with such terror all that saw it,
that falling on the ground they besought Gods mercy. At last the Patriarch, and
Akarias the Archbishop (of I know not whence) ventured to take into their hands
that dreadful letter, which (...) written thus. Now wipe your eyes and look a
while on the Contents, which I shall render with as much brevity, as the thing
requires. Ego Dominus qui praecepi vobis ut observaretis diem sanctum
Dominicum, and non custodistis ^um etc. I am the Lord which has commanded to
keep holy the Lords day, and you have not kept it, neither repented of your
sins, etc. I caused repentance to be preached unto you, and you believed
not. Then sent I Pagans amongst you, etc. and because you did not keep the
Lords day holy, I punished you a while with famine, etc. Therefore I charge you
all, that from the ninth hour on the saturday, until Sunne-rising on the
monday, no man presume to do any work, but what is good; or if he do, that
he repent him of the same. Verily I say and swear unto you by my Seat and
Throne, and by the Cherubins that keep my seat, that if you do not harken to
this my Mandat, I will no more send to you any other Epistle; but I will open
the heavens, and rain upon you stones, and wood and scalding water, etc. This
I avow, that you shall dye the death, for the Lords day and other festivalls of
my Saints, which you have not kept: and I will send amongst you beasts with the
heads of Lions, and the hair of women, and the tails of Camels; and they
shall eat you and devour you. There is a great deal more of this wretched
stuff: but I am weary of abusing both my pains and patience. Only I cannot
choose but wi^h, that those who have enlarged their Lords day Sabbath to the
same extent, would either show us some such letter, or bring us any of the
miracles which hereafter follow: or otherwise be pleased to lengthen out the
festivals of the Saints in the self same manner, as by this goodly Script they
are willed to do.

(6) But to proceed, the said Eustathius thus furnished, and having found but
ill success, the former year, in the Southern parts, where he did A^gliae
Praelatos praedicatione sua^ molestare, disturb^^^ Prelates by his preachings,
as my Author has it; hee^^nt up to York. There did he preach his doctrines,
and absolve such as had offended^ conditioned that hereafter they did show more
reverence unto the Lords day, and the other holy days, doing no servile works
upon them; nec in di^bus Dominicis exercerent for^m rerum venalium,
particularly, that on the Lords day they should hold no marketts. The people
hereunto assented, and promised they would neither buy nor sell on the Lords
day, nisi forte cibum and potum praetereuntibus, excepting meat and drink to
passengers. Whereby it seems, that notwithstanding all this terror, men were
permitted yet to travail on the Lords day, as they had occasion. This coming
to the notice of the King, and Council, my men were all fetched up; such
specially qui in di^bus Dominicis forum rerum venalium dejecerant, which had
disturbed the marketts, and overthrown the boothes and merchandise on the
Lords day: and made to fine unto the King, for their misdemeanour. Then were
they feign to have recourse to pretended miracles. A Carpenter making a wooden
pin, and a woman making up her web, both after three on Saturday, in the
afternoon; are suddenly smitten with the Palsy. A certain man of Nafferton,
baking a cake on Saturday night, and keeping part until the morrow, no sooner
brake it for his breakfast, but it gushed out blood. A Miller of Wakefield,
grinding Corn on Saturday after three of the clock, instead of meal, found
his binne full of blood: his mill-wheele standing still of its own accord. One
or two more there are of the same edition. And so I think is that related in
the Acts and Monuments, out of an old book entitled de Regibus Angliae;
which, now I am fallen upon these fables, shall be joined with them. King
Henry the second, says the story, being at Cardiffe in Wales, and being to
take horse, there stood a certain man by him having on him a white coat, and
being barefoote, who looked upon the King, and spoke in this wise. Good old
King, John Baptist and Peter straightly charge you, that on the Sundaies
throughout all your dominions, there be no buying or selling nor any other
servile business, (those only except which appertain to the preparation of
meat and drink:) which thing if thou shall observe, whatsoever thing thou
take in hand, thou shall happily finish. Adding withal, that unless he did
these things, and amend his life, he should hear such news within the twelve
month, as would make him mourn till his dying day. But to conclude, what was
the issue of all this, this terrible letter, and forged miracles? That the
historian tells us with no small regreate, Hou^den.
informing us that notwithstanding all these miracles, whereby God did invite
the people to observe this day: populus plus timens regiam potestatem, quam
divinam, the people fearing more the Kings power, then Gods, returned unto
their marketting, as before they did.

(7) I say that the historian tells it with no small regreate; for in that
passionate discontent he had said before, that inimicus humani generis, the
Devil enjoying the proceedings of this holy man so far so possessed the King
and the Princes of darkness (so he calls the Council) that they forthwith
proceeded against them who had obeyed him. Which makes me think, that this
Eustathius was a familiar of the Popes, sent hither for the introducing of
those restraints, which had been formerly imposed on most parts of
Christendom; though here they found no entertainment; the Popes had found
full well how ill their justlings had succeeded hitherto with the Kings of
England, of the Norman race: and therefore had recourse to their wonted arts,
by prodigies and miracles to ensnare the people, and bring them so unto their
bent. And this I do the rather think, because that in the following year,
Anno 1203, there was a Legate sent from Rome, to William King of Scots, with
several presents, and many indulgences. Quae quoniam grato accepit anim^,
^odem concilio approbante dec^etum est, etc. He^t. Boet. lib. 23.
Which he accepting very kindly, it pleased him with the approbation of his
Parliament at that time assembled, to pass a Law, that Saturday from twelve at
noone should be counted holy; and that no man should deal in such worldly
businesses, as on the feast-dayes were forbidden. As also that at the sounding
of the bell, the people should be busied only about holy actions, going to
sermons, hearing the Vespers or the Evensong: idque usque in diem Lunae
facerent, and that they should continue thus until monday morning; a penalty
being laid on those who should do the contrary. So passed it then, and in the
year 1214, some eleven years after, it was enacted in a Parliament at Scone,
under Alexander the third King of the Scots, that none should fish in any
waters, Lex aquarum cap. 16.. 2.
a die, Sabbati post vesperas usque ad diem lunae post ortum solis, from
Saturday after Evening prayer, until Sunne-rising on the monday. This after
was confirmed in the first Parliament of King James the first; and is to this
day called the Saturdaies Slop. So easily did the Popes prevalle with our now
friends of Scotland; that neither miracle, nor any special packet from the
Court of Heaven, was accounted necessary.

(8) But here with us in England it was not so, though now the Popes had got
the better of King John, that unhappy Prince; and had in Canterbury an
Archbishop of their own appointment, even that Steven Lang^on, about whom so
much strife was raised. Which notwithstanding, and that the King was then a
Minor, yet they proceeded here with great care and caution; and brought the
holy days into order, not by command or any Decretall from Rome, Ap. Lind^ood.
but by a council held at Oxford, Ann^ 1222: where amongst other ordinances
tending unto the government of the Church, the holy days were divided into
these three ranks. In the first rank were those, quae omni venerati^ne
servanda erant, which were to be observed with all reverence and solemnity: of
which sort were omnes dies Dominici, etc. all Sundays in the year, the feast
of Christ's Nativity, together with all others now observed in the Church of
England: as also all the festivalls of the Virgin Mary, excepting that of her
Conception which was left at large; with diverse which have since been
abogated. And for conclusion, festum dedicationis cujuslibet Ecclesiae in sua
parochia, the W^kes, or feasts of dedication of particular Churches, in their
proper parishes, are there determined to be kept with the same reverence and
solemnity, as the Sundays were. Nor was this of the Wakes or feasts of
dedication any new devise; but such as could plead a fair original from the
Council held in Mentz, anno 813, If it went no higher. For in a Catalogue
there made of such principal feasts, as annually were to be observed; they
reckon dedicationem templi, the consecration feast, or wake, as we use to call
it; and place it in no lower rank, in reference to the solemnity of the same,
then Easter, Whitsontide and the rest of the greater festivalls. Now in those
Wakes or feasts of dedication were either held upon the very day on which, or
the Saints day to which, they had first been consecrated. But after finding
that so many holy days brought no small detriment to the commonwealth, it came
to pass, that generally these Wakes or feasts of dedication were respited
until the Sunday following, as we now observe them. Of the next rank of
feasts in this Council mentioned, were those, which were by Priest and Curate
to be celebrated most devo^tly, with all due performances; minoribus operibus
servilibus, secundum consu^tudinem l^^i, i^^is diebus interdictis, all servile
works of an inferior and less important nature, according to the custom of
the place, being laid aside. Such were Saint Fabian and Sebastian, and some
twenty more, which are therein specified, but now out of (...): and amongst
them, the festival of Saint George was one, which after in the year 1414, was
made by Chicheley then Archbishop, a Majus duplex, and no less solemnly to be
observed then the feast of Christmasse. Of the last rank of (...), were those
in q^ibus post missa^ opera rusticana ^oncedebantur, sed antequam non, wherein
it was permitted that men might after Mass, pursue their Country businesses,
though not before: and these were only the Octaves of Epiphanie, and of John
the Baptist, and of Saint Peter, together with the translations of Saint
Benedict, and Saint Martin. But yet it seems that on the greater festivalls,
those of the first rank, there was no restraint of tillage, and of shipping,
if occasion were; and that necessity did require; though on those days,
Sundays and all before remembered, there was a general restraint of all other
works* For so it stands in the title, prefixed before those festivalls^ haec
sunt festa, in quibus, prohibitis aliis operibus, conceduntur opera
agriculturae and carrucarum. Where, by the way, I have translated carrucarum,
shipping: the word not being put for plough or Cart, which may make it all one,
with the word foregoing; but for ships and sailing. Carruca, signifies a
ship of the greater burden, such as to this day we call Carrects; which
first came from hence. And in this sense the word is to be found in an Epistle
writ by Gildas, Illis ad sua remeantibus emergunt certatim de Carruchis, quibus
sunt trans Seyticam vallem avecti. So then, as yet, tillage and sailing were
allowed of on the Sunday, if, as before I said, Math. Westm^naster.
occasion were, and that necessity so required. Of other passages considerable
in the reign of K. Henry the third, the principal to this point and purpose,
are his own coronation, on Whitsonaa^, anno 1220, two years before this
Council; which was performed with great solemnity and concourse of people.
Next, his bestowing the order of Knighthood on Richard de Clare, Earl of
Gloucester, accompanied with forty other gallants of great hopes and spirit, on
Whitsunday too, anno 1245: and last of all, a Parliament assembled on mid-lent
Sunday, Parliamentum generalissimum, the Historian calls it, the next year
after.

(9) This was a fair beginning, but they staid not here. For after in a Synod
of Archbishop I^^ippes, (he was advanced unto that see anno 1349.) Lindw. l. 2.
ti^. de feri^s.
it was decreed de fratrum nostrorum consili^, with the assent and counsel of
all the Prelates then assembled, that on the principal feasts hereafter named,
there should be generally a restraint through all the Province, ab universis
servilibus operibus etiam reipubl. utilibus, even from all manner of servile
works, though otherwise necessary to the Commonwealth. This general restraint,
in reference to the Sunday was to begin on Saturday night, ab hora diei
Sabbat^ vespertina, as the Canon goes, not a minute sooner: and that upon good
reason too, n^ Iudaic ae superstitionis participes videamur, lest if they did
begin it sooner, (as some now would have us) they might be guilty of a
Jewish superstition. The same to be observed in such other feasts, quae suas
habent vigilias, whose Eves had formerly been kept. As also that the like
restraint should be observed, upon the feast of Christmasse, S. Steven, S.
John, etc. and finally on the Wakes, or dedication^ feasts which before we
spoke of. Now for the wo^kes before prohibited, though necessary to the
Commonwealth; as we may reckon husbandry, and all things appertayning
thereunto, so probably we may reckon lawdayes, and all public sessions in
Courts of Justice; in case they had not been left off in former times, when as
the Iudg^s general being of the Clergy, might in obedience to the Canon Law,
Fi^^^ of the la^^. l. 1. c. 3.
forbear their sessions on those days, the Lord day especially. For as our
Sages in the law have resolved it generally, that day is to be exempt from such
business, even by the Common law, for the sole^nity thereof, to the intent
that people may apply themselves (...) prayer, and ^^ds public service.
Particularly, Fitz-Herbert tells us, that no plea shall be holden Quindena
Paschae, because it is always on the Sunday, Not. ^revium fol. 17.
but it shall be holden ^rastino quindenae pas^^ae, on the morrow after. So
Justice Dyer has resolved, 1 Eliz. p. 168.
that if a writ of scire facias out of the Common pleas, bear Test on a
Sunday, it is an error, because that day is not dies juridicus in Ban^o. And
so it is agreed amongst them, that on a fine levied with Proclamations
according to the Statute of King Henry the seventh, if any of the Proclamations
be made on the Lords day, all of them are to be accounted erroneous Acts. But
to return unto the Canon where before we left, however that Archbishop
Langton formerly, and Islip at the present time, had made these several
restraints from all ^^rvile labors: yet they were far enough from intertayning
any Jewish fancy. The Canon last remembered, that of Simon Islip, does express
as much. But more particularly and pun^tually we may find what was the
judgment of these times, in a full declaration of the same, in a Synod a^
^ambeth, what time John Peckam was Archbishop, which was in anno 1280. It was
thus determined. Sci^udum est quod obligatio ad feriandum in S^bbato legali
expiravit omnino, etc. Lindw. l. 1. ti^. de offic. Archipresb.
It is to be understood, that all manner of obligation of resting on the
legal Sabbath, as was required in the Old Testament, is utterly expired with
the other ceremonies. And it is now sufficient in the New Testament, to attend
Gods service upon the Lords days, and the other holy days, ad hoc
Ecclesiastica authoritate deputatis, appointed by the Church to that end and
purpose. The manner of sanctifying all which days, non est sumendus a
superstitione Iudaica, sed a Canonicis institutis, is not to be derived from
any Jewish superstition, but from the Canons of the Church. This was exact and
plain enough; and this was constantly the doctrine of the Church of England.
Johannes de Burgo, who lived about the end of K. Henry the sixth, does almost
word for word resolve it so, in his Pupilla oculi, part, 10. c. 11. D.

(10) Yet find we not in these restraints, that Marketting had been
forbidden, either on the Lords Day, or the other holy days, and, indeed, it
was not; that came in afterward by degrees, partly, by Statutes of the Realm,
partly, by Canons of the Church; not, till all Nations else had long laid them
down. For in the 28. of King Edward the third, cap. 14. it was accorded and
established, that showing of Wools shall be made at the Staple every day of the
week, except the Sunday and the solemn Feasts in the year. This was the
first restraint in this kind with us here, in England; and this gives no more
privilege to the Lords Day, than the solemn Festivals. Nor was there more
done in it, Antiq. ^rit. in Stafford.
for almost an hundred years; not, till the time of Henry the sixth, anno 1444.
what time, Archbishop Stafford decreed throughout his Province, ut nundina^ and
emporia in Ecclesiis, aut Coemiteriis, diebusque Dominicis atque Festis,
praeterquam tempore messis, non teneantur; that Faires and Markets should no
more be kept in Churches and Churchyards, or on the Lords days or the other
holy days, except in time of harvest only. If in that time they might be
suffered, then certainly in themselves they were not unlawful on any other;
further then as prohibited by the higher powers. Now that which the Archbishop
had decreed throughout his Province, Catworth Lord Major of London, Fabians
Chronicle.
attempted to exceed within that city. For in this year, says Fabian, (anno
1444) an Act was made by authority of the common Council of London, that upon
the Sunday should no manner of thing within the franchise of the City be
bought or sold, neither victual, nor other thing: nor none Artificer should
bring his ware unto any man to be worn, or occupied, that day; as Taylers
garments, and Cordwayners shoes; and so likewise all other occupations. But
then it follows in the story, the which ordinance held but a while: enough to
show by the success, how ill it does agree with a Lord Mayor, to deal in
things about the Sabbath. Afterward in the year 1451, which was the 28 of
this Henry's reign, it pleased the King in Parliament, to ratify what before
was ordered by that Archbishop; in this form that follows. Considering the
abominable injuries and offenses done to Almighty God, 28. H. 6. c. 16.
and to his Saints always ayders and singular assistants in our necessities,
by the occasion of faires and marketts upon their high and principal feasts;
as, in the feast of the Ascension of our Lord, in the day of Corpus Christi, in
the day of Whitsunday, Trinity Sunday, and other Sundays; as also in the high
feast of the assumption of our Blessed Lady, the day of All Saints, and on Good
Friday, accustomably and miserably holden and used in the Realm of England,
etc. our Sovereign Lord the King, etc. has ordained that all manner of faires
and marketts on the said principal feasts, and Sundays, and Good Friday,
shall clearly cease, from all showing of any goods and merchandises, necessary
victual only except, (which yet was more then was allowed in the City-Act)
upon pain of forfeiture of all the goods aforesaid to the Lord of the
franchise or liberty, where such goods be or shall be showed, contrary to this
ordinance; the four Sundays in harvest except. Which cause or reservation,
shows plainly that the things before prohibited* were not esteemed unlawful
in themselves: as also that this law was made, in confirmation of the former
order of the Archbishop, as before was said. Now on this law, I find two
resolutions made, by my Lords the Judges. First Justice Brian in the 12 of King
Edward the fourth, declared, that no sale made upon a Sunday, though in a fair
or market overt, (for markets, as it seems, were not then quite laid down;
though by law prohibited) shall be a good sale to alter the property of the
goods. And Ploydon in the time of Queen Elizabeth was of opinion, Dal^ous
Justice. cap. 27.
that the Lord of any fair or market kept upon the Sunday contrary to the
statute, may therefore be e^dited for the King or Queen, either at the
Assizes, or general Jail delivery, or quarter Sessions within that County. If
so, in case such Lord may be endited for any fair or market kept upon the
Sunday, as being contrary to the Statute: then by the same reason may he be
endited, for any fair or market kept on any of the other holy days, in that
Statute mentioned.

(11) Nor stayed it here. For in the 1465, which was the fourth year of King
Edward the fourth, 4. Edw. 4. c. 7.
it pleased the King in Parliament, to enact, as follows. Our Sovereign Lord
the King, etc. has ordained and established, that no Cordwainer or Cobbler,
within the City of London, or within three miles of any part of the said
City, etc. do upon any Sunday in the year, or on the feasts of the Ascension
or Nativity of our Lord, or on the feast of Corp^s Christi, sell or command to
be sold any shoes, hu^eans (.i.e. boots) or Galoches; or upon the Sunday or
any other of the said Feasts, shall set or put upon the feet or legs of any
person any shoes, huseans, or Galoches, upon pain of forfeiture and loss of
20 shillings, as often as any person shall do contrary to this ordinance.
Where note, that this restraint was only for the City of London, and the
parts about it; which shows that it was counted lawful in all places else.
And therefore there must be some particular motive, why this restraint was
laid on those of London only; either their insolences, or some notorious
neglect of Gods public service: the Gentle craft had otherwise been ungently
handled, that they of all the tradesmen in that populous ci^ty, should be so
restrained. Note also, that in this very Act, there is a reservation or
indulgence for the inhabitants of S. Martins le Grand, to do as formerly they
were accustomed, 14 and 15 of H. 8. cap. 9.
the said Act or Statute notwithstanding. Which very clause did after move King
Henry the eight to repeal this statute, that so all others of that trade might
be free, as they: or as the very words of the statu^e are, that to the honor
of allmighty God, all the Kings subjects might be hereafter at their liberty,
as well as the inhabitants of S. Martins le Grand. Now where it seems by the
proeme of the Statute 17 of this King Edward. 4. c. 3. that many in that time
did spend their holy days, in dice, quoites, tennis, bowling, and the like
unlawful games, forbidden (as is there affirmed) by the Laws of the Realm;
which said unlawful games are thereupon prohibited, under a certain penalty
in the Statute mentioned: It is most manifest that the prohibition was not in
reference to the time, Sundays or any other holy days; but only to the Games
themselves, which were unlawful at all times. For public actions in the
times of these two last Princes, the greatest were the battailles of Towton,
and Barnet; one on Palms. Sunday, and the other on Ea^^er day: the gr^atest
fields that ever were fought in England. And in this Sta^e things stood till
King Henry the eight.

(12) Now for the doctrine and the practice of these times, before King Henry
the eight, and the reformation; we cannot take a better view then in John de
Burgo, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge, about the latter end of King
Henry the sixth. Pupilla Oculips. 10. ^. 11. D.
First doctrinally he determines, as before was said, that the Lords day was
instituted by the authorit^ of the Church, and that it is no otherwise to be
observed, then by the Canons of the Church we are bound to keep it. Then for
the name of Sabbath, that the Lords day, (...).
and quaelibet dies statuta ad divina^ culturam, and every day appointed for
Gods public service, may be so entitled, because in them we are to rest
from all servile works: such as are arts mechanicke, husbandry, Law-daies, and
going to marketts, with other things quae ab Ecclesia determinantur, which are
determined by the Church. Id. pars. 9. cap. 7. H.
Lastly, that on those days, insistendum est orationibus, etc. We must be
busied at our prayers, the public service of the Church, in hymns, and in
spiritual songs, and in hearing Se^mons. Next practically for such things as
were then allowed of, he does sort them thus. First generally, Non t^men
prohibentur his diebus facere quae pertinent ad providentiam necessariorum,
etc. We are not those days restrained from doing such things as conduce to the
providing of necessaries either for our selves or for our neighbors: as in
preserving of our persons, or of our substance; or in avoiding any loss that
might happen to us. Particularly next, si iacentibus, etc. Id. ib. I^
In case our Corn and hay in the fields abroad, be in danger of a tempest, we
may bring it in, yea though it be upon the Sabbath, Butchers and victualers, if
they make ready on the holy days, what they must sell the morrow after, either
in open market, or in their shops; in case they cannot dress it on the day
before, or being dressed they cannot keep it: non peccant mortaliter, they fall
not by so doing, Id. ib. L.
into mortal sin. vectores mercium, etc. Carriers of wares, or men, or
victuals, unto distant places, in case they cannot do it upon other days
without inconvenience, are to be excused. Barbers and Chirurgions, Smithes or
Farriers, Id. ib. M.
if on the holy days they do the works of their daily labor, especially
propter necessitatem ^orum quibus serviunt, for the necessities of those who
want their help; are excusable also, but not in case they do it chiefly for
desire of gain. Id. ib. N.
Messengers, Posts and Travelers, that travaille, if some special occasion
be, on the holy days; whether they do it for reward, or not; non audeo
condemnare, are not at all to be condemned. As neither Millers, which do
grind either with water-mils, or wind-mils, and so can do their work without
much labor; but they may keep the custom of the place in the which they
live, not being otherwise commanded by their Ordinaryes: secus si tractu
iumentorum multuram faci^nt; Id. ib. O.
but if it be an horsemill, then the case is altered. So buying and selling on
those days, in some present exigent, as the providing necessary victuals for
the day, was not held unlawful: dum tamen exercentes ea non subtrahunt se
divinis officiis, in case they did not thereby keep themselves from Gods
public service. Id. ib. Q.
Lastly for recreations, for dancing on those days, he determines thus: that
they which dance on any of the holy days, either to stir themselves, or
others, unto carnal lusts, commit mortal sin; and so they do, says he,
in case they do it any day. But it is otherwise, if they dance upon honest
causes, and no naughty purpose; and that the persons be not by law restrained.
Choreas ducentes, maxim in diebus festis, ca^sa incitandi se, vel ali^s, ad
peccatu^ mortale, peccant mortaliter: and similiter si in profestis diebus hoe
fiat: secus si hoc fiat ex causa honesta, and intention non corrupta, and a
persona, cui talia non sunt prohibita. With which determination I conclude this
Chapter.

CHAP. VIII.
The story of the Lord's Day, from the reformation of Religion, in this
Kingdom, till this present time.
(1) The doctrine of the Sabbath and the Lords day, delivered by three several
Martyrs, conformably to the judgment of the Protestants before remembered. (2)
The Lords day, and the other holy days, confessed by all this Kingdom, in the
Court of Parliament, to have no other ground, then the authority of the Church.
(3) The meaning and occasion of that clause in the Common prayer book, Lord
have mercy upon us, etc. repeated at the end of the fourth Commandment. (4)
That by the Queens Inj^nctions, and the first Parliament of her reign, the
Lords day was not meant for a Sabbath day. (5) The doctrine in the Homilies
deli^ered, about the Lords day, and the Sabbath (6) The sum and substance of
that Homily; and that it makes not any thing for a Lords day Sabbath. (7) The
first original of the New Sabbath Speculations, in this Church of England; by
whom, and for what cause invented (8) Strange and most monstrous Paradoxes,
preached on occasion of the former doctrines; and of the other effects thereof.
(9) What care was taken of the Lords day in King James his reign; the
sp^eading of the doctrines: and of the Articles of Ireland. (10) The Jewish
Sabbath set on foot: and of King James his declaration about lawful sports,
on the Lords day. (11) What tracts were writ and published in that Princes
time, in opposition to the doctrines before remembered. (12) In what estate the
Lords day and the other holy days have stood in Scotland, since the
reformation of Religion in that Kingdom. (13) Statutes about the Lords day,
made by our present Sovereign; and the misconstruing of the same: His Majesty
reviveth and enlarges the declaration of King James. (14) An exhortation to
obedience unto his Majesty's most Christian purpose, concludes this History.

(1) THVS are we safely come to these present times, the times of reformation,
wherein what ever had been taught or done in the former days, was publickely
brought unto the test, and if not well approved of, laid aside, either as
unprofitable, or plainly hurtful. So dealt the Reformatours of the Church of
England, as with other things, with that which we have now in hand, the Lords
day, and the other holy days: keeping the days, as many of them as were
thought convenient for the advancement of true godliness, and increase of
piety; but paring off those superstitious conceits and matters of opinion,
which had been enterteined about them. But first, before we come to this, we
will by way of preparation, lay down the judgments of some men in the present
point; men of good quality in their times, and such as were content to be made
a sacrifice, in the Common cause. Of these I shall take notice of three
particularly, according to to the several times in the which they lived. And
first we will begin with Master Fryth, who suffered in the year 1533 who in
his declaration of Baptism, thus declares himself. P. 96.
Our forefathers (says he) which were in the beginning of the Church, did
abrogate the Sabbath, to the intent that men might have an ensample of
Christian liberty; etc. Howbeit because it was necessary that a day should be
reserved in which the people should come together, to hear the word of God,
they ordained instead of the Sabbath which was Saturday, the next day following
which is Sunday. And although they might have kept the Saturday with the Jew,
as a thing indifferent; yet they did much better. Some three years after him,
anno 1536 being the 28 of Henry the eight suffered Master Tyndall, who in his
answer to Sir Thomas More, has resolved it thus. Page 287.
As for the Sabbath we be Lords over the Sabbath, and may yet change it into
Monday, or into any other day, as we see need; or may make every tenth day
holy day only, If we see cause why. Neither was there any cause to change it
from the Saturday, but to put a difference between us and the Jews; neither
need we any holy day at all, if the people might be taught without it. Last
of all Bishop Hooper, sometimes Bishop of Gloucester, who suffered in Queen
Mary's reign, does in a treatise by him written on the ten Commandments, and
printed in the year 1550, go the self same way. Page 103.
We may not think (says he) that God gave any more holiness to the
Sabbath, then to the other days. For if ye consider Friday, Saturday, or
Sunday, in as much as they be days, and the work of God, the one is no more
^oly then the other: but that day is always most holy, in the which we most
apply and give our selves unto holy works. To that end did he sanctify the
Sabbath day, not that we should give our selves to illenesse, or such
Ethnicall pastime as is now used amongst Ethnicall people: but being free that
day from the travailles of this world, we might consider the works and
benefits of God, with thankesgiving; hear the word of God, honor him and
fear him; then to learn who, and where be the poor of Christ, that want our
help. Thus they: and they amongst them have resolved on these four
conclusions. First, that one day is no more holy then another, the Sunday then
the Saturday or the Friday; further than they are set apart for holy uses.
Secondly, that the Lords day has no institution from divine authority, but was
ordained by our fore fathers in the beginning of the Church, that so the people
might have a Day to come together, and hear Gods Word: thirdly, that still the
Church has power to change the day, from Sunday unto Monday, or what day she
will. And lastly, that one day in seven, is not the Moral part of the fourth
Commandment: for M. Tyndall faith expressly, that by the Church of God, each
tenth day only may be kept holy, if we see cause why. So that the mervaile is
the greater, that any man should now affirm, as some men have done, that they
are willing to lay down both their Lives and Livings, in maintenance of those
contrary Opinions, which in these latter days have been taken up.

(2) Now that which was affirmed by them, in their particulars, was not long
afterward made good by the general Body of this Church and State, the King,
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all the Commons met in Parliament, 5.
and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 3.
anno the fifth and sixth of King Edward the sixth; where, to the honor of
Almighty God, it was thus enacted: For as much as men be not at all times so
mindful to laud and praise God, so ready to resort to hear Gods Holy Word,
and to come to the holy Communion, etc. as their bounden duty does require:
therefore, to call men to remembrance of their duty, and to help their
infinnitie, it has been wholesomely provided, that there should be some
certain times and days appointed, wherein the Christians should cease from
all kind of labor, and apply themselves only and wholly unto the aforesaid
holy works, properly pertaining to true Religion, etc. Which works as they may
well be called Gods Service, so the times especially appointed for the same,
are called holy days: Not for the matter or the nature either of the time or
day, etc. for so all days and times are of like holiness, but for the nature
and condition of such holy works, etc. whereunto such times and days are
sanctified and hallowed; that is to say, separated from all profane uses, and
dedicated not unto any Saint or Creature, but only unto God, and his true
worship. Neither is it to be thought that there is any certain time or
definite number of days, prescribed in holy Scripture; but the appointment
both of the time and also of the number of days, is left by the authority of
Gods Word unto the liberty of Christ's Church, to be determined and assigned
orderly in every Country, by the discretion of the Rulers and Ministers
thereof, as they shall judge most expedient, to the true setting forth of Gods
glory, and edification of their people. Nor is it to be thought, that all this
Preamble was made in reference to the holy days or Saints days only; whose
being left to the authority of the Church, was never questioned: but in
relation to the Lords Day also, as by the Act it self does at full appear;
for so it follows in the Act: Be it therefore enacted, etc. That all the
days hereafter mentioned, shall be kept and commanded to be kept holy days,
and non^ other: that is to say, all Sundays in the year, the Feasts of the
Circumcision of our Lord Jesus Christ, of the Epiphanie, of the Purification,
(with all the rest now kept, and there named particularly) and that none other
day shall be kept* and commanded to be kept holy day, and to abstain from
lawful bodily labor. Nay, which is more, there is a further Clause in the
selfsame Act, which plainly shows that they had no such thought of the Lords
day, as that it was a Sabbath, or so to be ob^erved, as the Sabbath was; and
therefore did provide it, and enact by the authority aforesaid, That it shall
be lawful to every Husbandman, Labourer, Fisherman, and to all and every other
person and persons, of what estate, degree, or condition he or they be, upon
the holy days aforesaid in Harvest, or at any other times in the year, when
necessity shall so require, to labor, ^ide, fish, or work any kind of work,
at their freewills and pleasure: any thing in this Act unto the contrary
notwithstanding. This is the total of this Act; which, if examined well, as it
ought to be, will yield us all those propositions or conclusions, before
remembered, which we collected from the writings of those three particular
Martyrs: Nor is it to be said, that it is repealed, and of no authority:
Repealed, indeed, it was, in the first year of Queen. Mary; and stood
repealed in Law, though otherwise in use and practice, all the long Reign of
Queen El^zabeth: but in the first year of King James, was revived again.
Note here, that in the selfsame Parliament, the Common Prayer-Book^, now in
use, being reviewed by many godly Prelates, was confirmed and authorized;
wherein, so much of the said Act, as does concern the names and number of the
holy days, is expressed, and as it were incorporate into the same. Which makes
it manifest, that in the purpose of the Church, the Sunday was no otherwise
esteemed of, than another holy day.

(3) This Statute, as before we said, was made in anno 5. and 6. of Edward the
sixth. And in that very Parliament, as before we said, the Common Prayer-Booke
was confirmed, which still remains in use amongst us: save, that there was an
alteration or addition of certain Lessons to be used on every Sunday of the
year; 1. Eliz. cap. 2.
the form of the Letanie altered, and corrected; and two Sentences added, in
the deliverie of the Sacrament unto the Communicants. Now, in this Common
Prayer-Booke thus confirmed, in the fifth and sixth years of King Edward the
sixth, Cap. 1.
it pleased those that had the altering and revising of it, that the
Commandments, which were not in the former Liturgy, allowed of in the second
of the said Kings Reign, should now be added, and accounted as a part of this;
the people being willed to say after the end of each Commandment, Lord have
mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law. Which being used
accordingly, as well upon the hearing of the fourth Commandment, as of any
others; has given some men a color to persuade themselves, that certainly it
was the meaning of the Church, that we should keep a Sabbath still, though
the day be changed; and that we are obliged to do it, by the fourth
Commandment. Assuredly, they who so conclude, conclude against the meaning of
the Book, and of them that made it. Against the meaning of the Book: for if
the Book had so intended, that that ej^culation was to be understood in a
literal sense, according as the words are laid down in terminis; it then must
be the meaning of the Book, that we should pray unto the Lord, to keep the
Sabbath of the Jews, even the seventh day precisely, from the Worlds Creation,
and keep it in the selfsame manner, as the Jews once did; which no man, I
presume, will say was the meaning of it. For, of the changing of the day, there
is nothing said, nor nothing intimated; but the whole Law laid down in
terminis, as the Lord delivered it. Against the meaning also of them that made
it: for they that made the Book, and reviewed it afterward, and caused these
Passages and Prayers to be added to it; Cranmer, Archbishop of Canterbury;
Ridley, Bishop of London; and certain others of the Prelates, then and there
assembled; were the same men, by whose advice and counsel, the Act before
remembered, about keeping holy days, was in the selfsame Parliament drawn
up, and perfected. And is it possible, we should conceive so ill of those
reverend persons, as that they would erect a Sabbath in the one Act, and beat
it down so totally in the other: to tell us in the Service-Booke, that we are
bound to keep a Sabbath, and that the time and day of Gods public worship, is
either pointed out in the fourth Commandment, or otherwise ordained by Divine
Authority; and in the selfsame breath, to tell us, that there is neither
certain time, nor definite number of days. prescribed in Scripture, but all
this left unto the liberty of the Church? I say, as formerly I said, it is
impossible we should think so ill of such Reverend persons: nor do I think,
that any will so think hereafter, when they have once considered the non
sequitur of their own Conclusions. As for the Prayer there used, we may thus
expound it, according to the doctrine and the practice both, of those very
times; viz* that their intent and meaning was, to teach the people, to pray
unto the Lord, to incline their hearts to keep that Law, as far as it
contained the Law of Nature, and had been entertained in the Christian Church;
as also to have mercy on them for the neglect thereof, in those holy days,
which by the wisdom and authority of his Church, had been set apart for Gods
public Service. Besides, this Prayer was then conceived, when there was no
suspicion, that any would make use thereof, to introduce a ^ewish Sabbath; but
when men rather were inclined to the contrary error, to take away those
certain and appointed times, Lords days, and other holy days, which by the
wisdom of the Church had been retained in the Reformation. The Anabaptists
were strongly bent that way, as before we showed: and if we look into the
Articles of our Church, S^^ Art. 26. 37, 38, 39.
we shall then find what special care was taken, to suppress their errors
in other points, which had took footing, as it seems, in this Church and
Kingdom. Therefore the more likely is it, that this Clause was added, to crush
their furious fancies in this particular, of not hallowing certain days and
times to Gods public Service. Yet I conceive withal, that had those Reverend
Prelates foreseen how much their pious purpose would have been abused, by
wresting it to introduce a Sabbath, which they never meant; they would have
cast their meaning in another mould.

(4) Proceed we to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, that so much celebrated
Princess; and in the first place, we shall meet with her Iujunctions,
published the first year of her Empire: in which, the Sunday is not only
counted with the other holy days; but labor, at some times permitted; and
which is more, enjoined upon it: For thus it pleased her to declare her will
and pleasure; (...) 20.
(...) Subjects shall from (...) their holy day, according to (...) that is, in
hearing the (...) and public (...) unto God, and amendment of the same; in
reconc^ling of themselves charitably to their Neighbors, where displeasure
has b^ene; in offentimes receiving the Communion of the Body and Blood of
Christ; in visiting the Poor, and Sick; using all soberness, and godly
conversation. This seems to be severe enough; but what follows next? Yet
notwithstanding, all Parsons, Vicars, and Curates shall teach and declare to
their Parishioners, that they may with a safe and quiet Conscience, after their
Common Prayer, in the t^ne of Harvest, labor upon the holy and festival
days, and save that thing which God has sent: And if, for any scrupulositie,
or grudge of Conscience, men should superstitiously abstain from working on
these days, that then they should grievously offend and displease God. This
makes it evident, that Queen Elizabeth in her own particular, took not the
Lords day for a Sabbath; or to be of a different nature from the other holy
days: nor was it taken so, by the whole Body of our Church, and State, in the
first Parliament of her Reign; what time it was enacted, 1. Eliz* c. ^.
That all and every person and persons inhabiting within this Realm, and any
other the Queens Dominions, shall diligently and faithfully, having no lawful
or reasonable excuse to be absent, endeavor themselves to resort to their
Parish Church, or Chapel, accustomed; or upon reasonable let thereof, to some
usual place where Common Prayer shall be used in such time of let, upon every
Sunday, and other days ordained and used to be kept as holy days, and then
and there to abide orderly and soberly, during the time of Common Prayer,
Preaching, or other Service of God, upon pain of punishment, etc. This Law is
still in force, and still like to be; and by this Law, the Sundays and the
holy days are alike regarded: Nor by the Law only, but by the purpose and
intent of holy Church, who in her public Liturgy is as full and large for
every one of the holy days, as for the Sunday, the Letanie excepted only. For
otherwise, by the rule and prescript thereof, the same Religious Offices are
designed for both, the same devout attendance required for both; and whatsoever
else may make both equal. And therefore by this statute, and the Common
Prayer-Booke, we are to keep more Sabbaths then the Lords day Sabbath, or
else none at all.

(5) Next look we on the Homilies, part of the public monuments of the
Church of England, set forth and authorized an. 1562. being the fourth of that
Queens reign. In that entitled Of the place and time of prayer, we shall
find it thus. As concerning the time in which God has appointed his people to
assemble together solemnly, it does appear by the fourth Commandment etc. And
albe it this Commandment of God does not bind Christian people so straitely
to observe and keep the utter ceremonies of the Sabbath day as it did the
Jews, as touching the forbearing of work and labor in the time of great
necessity, and as touching the precise keeping of the seventh day, after the
manner of the Jews: (for we keep now the first day, which is our Sunday, and
make that our Sabbath, that is, our day of rest, in honor of our Savior
Christ, who as upon that day rose from death conquering the same most
triumphantly.) Yet notwithstanding whatsoever is found in the Commandment
apperteining to the law of nature, as a thing most godly, most just, and
needful for the setting forth of Gods glory, ought to be retained and kept of
all good Christian people. And therefore by this Commandment we ought to have
a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest yea from our lawful
and needful works. For like as it appears by this Commandment, that no man
in the six days ought to be slothful and idle, but diligently to labor in
that state wherein God has set him, even so God has given express charge to
all men, that upon the Sabbath day, which is now our Sunday, they should cease
from all weekly and workeday labor: to the intent that like as God himself
wrought six days and rested the seventh, and blessed and sanctified it, and
consecrated it to quietness and rest from labor; evenso Gods obedient people
should use the Sunday holily, and rest from their Common and daily business,
and also give themselves wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and
service. So that God does not only command the observation of this holy day;
but also by his own example does stir and provoke us to the diligent keeping
of the same, etc. Thus it may plainly appear that Gods will and Commandment
was to have a solemn time and standing day in the week, where in the people
should come together, and have in remembrance his wonderful benefits, and to
render him thanks for them, as apperteineth to loving, kind, and obedient
people. This example and Commandment of God, the godly Christian people
began to follow immediately after the Ascension of our Lord Christ, and
began to choose them a standing day of the week to come together in: yet not
the seventh day, which the Jews kept, but the Lords day, the day of the Lords
resurrection the day after the seventh day, which is the first day of the
week, etc. Sithence which time, Gods people has always in all Ages, without
any gainsaying* used to come together on the Sunday, to celebrate and honor
the Lords blessed Name, and carefully to keep that day in holy rest and
quietness, both man, and woman, child, servant and stranger. So far the
Homily: and this is all thereof which is doctrinall. The residue consists in
reprehension of two sorts of men: one of the which, if they had any business
to do, though there were no extreme need, would not spare the Sunday, but
used all days alike, the holy days and worke-dayes all as one; the other so
consumed the day in gluttony and drunkenness, and such fleshly filthiness,
that as it is there said, the Lord was more dishonored and the Devil better
served on the Sunday, then upon all the days in the week besides.

(6) This says the Homily, and this has often been alleged, as well to
prove a Lords day Sabbath, to be allowed of by the doctrine of the Church of
England; as at this present time, to justify the disobedience of those men,
who have refused to publish the Princes pleasure, in point of recreations. But
this if well examined, will as little help them; as Lord have mercy upon us,
in the Common Prayer book. For first it is here said, that there is no more of
the fourth Commandment to be retained and kept of good Christian people, then
whatsoever is found in it appertaining to the law of Nature. But we have
proved before, that there is nothing in the fourth Commandment of the law of
Nature, but that some time be set apart for Gods public service: the precept,
so far forth, as it enjoynes one day in seven, or the seventh day precisely
from the worlds creation, being avowed for ceremonial by all kind of writers.
Secondly it is said, not that the Lords day was enjoined by Divine authority,
either by Christ himself, or his Apostles; but chosen for a standing day to
come together in, by godly Christian people, immediately after the Ascension of
our Lord Christ: If chose by them, then not enjoined by the Apostles: if not
till after the Ascension of our Savior Christ, then not at all by him
commanded. Thirdly, whereas they chose themselves a standing day in the week
to come together in, they did not this by any obligation laid upon them by the
fourth Commandment, but only by a voluntary following of Gods example, and
the analogy or equity of Gods Commandment, which was (they do not say which
is) that he would have, [amongst the ^ewes] a solemn time and standing day in
the week, wherein the people should have in remembrance his wonderful
benefits, and render thanks to him for the same. For it is said, that this
example and commandment of God, the godly Christian people began to follow
after Christ's ascension: so that it seems they might have chosen, whether they
would have followed them, or not. Fourthly, when they had chose this day, which
we now observe, for their public meetings, they did not think themselves
obliged by the fourth Commandment, to forbear work and labor in time of
great necessity, or to the precife keeping of the same, after the manner of the
Jews: both which they must have done, had they conceived the keeping of one
day in seven, to be the moral part of the fourth Commandment; and to oblige
us now, no les^e, then it did them formerly, as some men have taught us. Now
whereas some have drawn from hence these two Conclusions. First, that
according to this Homily, we ought to keep one day in ^eaven, by the fourth
Command^ment; and secondly, that we must spend it wholly in religious exercises:
I would feign know how those conclusions can be raised from the former
premises. It Is true, the Homily has told us that by the fourth Commandment
we ought to have a time, as one day in the week, wherein we ought to rest
from our needful works. Where note, that there it is not said, that by the
fourth Commandment we ought to have one day in the week, which is plain and
peremtory; but that we ought to have a time, as one day in the week, which
was plainly arbitrary. A time we ought to have by the fourth Commandment, as
being that part of (...) which perteines to the law of Nature: but for the next
words as one day in the week, they are not there laid down, as imposed on us
by the law; but only instanced in, as settled at that time in the Church of
God. So where it is affirmed in another place, that Gods will and commandment
was to have a solemn time and standing day in the week; we grant indeed that
so it was: and that the Godly Christian people in the Primitive times, were
easily induced to give God no less, then what he formerly commanded. But had
the meaning of the Homily been this, that we were bound to have a standing
day in the week, by the fourth Commandment; they would have plainly said, it
is Gods will and pleasure that it should be so, and not have told us what it
was, in the times before. Its true, the Homily has told us, that we should
rest our selves, on Sunday, from our common business, and also give our selves
wholly to heavenly exercises of Gods true religion and service. Where note, it
is not said, that we should spend the day wholly in heavenly exercises; for
then there were no time allowed us to eat and drink, which are mere natural
employments: but that we give our selves wholly, that is our whole selves body
and soul, to that performance of those heavenly exercises, which are required
of us in the way of true religion, and Gods public service. It is accounted,
as we have formerly made plain, In Exodus 20. qu. 11.
to be the ceremonial part of the fourth Commandment, quod fiat semel in
qualib^t hebd^mada; and quod fiat* in una die tota, ista observatio; and quod
per totam diem abstineatur ab operibus servilibus: first the determining of the
day, to be one in seven; next that this one day wholly be so employed; and
last of all, that all that day there be an absolute cessation from all servi^e
works. Therefore the spending wholly of one day in seven, being ceremonial;
comes not within the compass of the Homily: which would have no more of the
fourth Commandment to be kept amongst us, then what is appertaining to the
law of Nature. Now it pertaines unto the law of Nature, that for the times
appointed to Gods public worship, we wholly sequester our selves from all
worldly businesses; Id. ib.
natural est quod dum Deum colimus, ab ali^s abstineamus, as Tostatus has it:
and then the meaning of the Homily will be briefly this, that for those times
which are appointed by the Church, for the assembly of Gods people, we should
lay by ou^ daily business, and all worldly thoughts* and wholly give our selves
to the heavenly exercises of Gods true Religion and Service. But to encounter
them at their own weapon, it is expressly said in the Act of Parliament about
keeping holy days, that on the days and times appointed, as well the other
holy days, as the Sunday, Christians should cease from all kind of labor,
and only and wholly apply themselves to such holy works as appertain to true
Religion: the very same with that delivered in the Hamilie. If wholly in the
Homily must be applied unto the day, then it must be there: and then the
Saints days and the other holy days must be wholly spene, in religious
exercises. When once we see them do the one, we will bethink our selves of
doing the other. As for the residue of that Homily which consists in popular
reproves and exhor^ations, that concerns not us, in reference to the point in
hand. The Homilies, those parts thereof especially which tend to the correction
of manners, and reformation of abuses, were made agreeable to those times,
wherein they were first published. If in those times, men made no difference
between the working day and holy day, but kept their faires and markets, and
bought and sold, and rowed and f^rried, and drove and carried, and rode and
iourneyed, and did their other business, on the Sunday, as well as on the
other days, when there was no such need but that they might have tarryed
longer: they were the more to blame, no doubt, in trespassing so wilfully
against the Canons of the Church, and Acts of Parliament, which had restrained
many of the things there specified: The Homily did well to reprove them for
it. If on the other side, they spent the day in ungodliness and filthiness,
in gluttony and drunkenness, and such like other crying sins, as are there
particularly noted: the Prelates of the Church had very ill discharged their
duty, had they not took some course to have told them of it. But what is
that to us, who do not spend the Lords day in such filthy steshlinesse, (what
ever one malicious Sycophant has affirmed therein): or what is that to
dancing, shooting, leaping, vau^ting, may-games, and meetings of good
neighborhood, or any other recreation not by law prohibited; being no such
ungodlie and filthy Acts as are therein mentioned.

(7) Thus upon due search made, and full examination of all parties, we find
no Lords day Sabbath in the book of Homilies: no nor in any writings of
particular men, in more then 33 years after the Homilies were published. I
find indeed that in the year 1580 the Magistrates of the City of London
obtained from Queen Elizabeth, that plays and enterludes should no more be
acted on the Sabbath day, within the liberties of their City. As also that in
83. on the 14 of January being Sunday, many were hurt, and eight killed
outright by the sudden falling of the Scaffolds in Paris-garden. This shows
that Enterludes and Beare-baitings were then permitted on the Sunday, and so
they were a long time after, though not within the City of London: which
certainly had not been suffered, had it been then conceived that Sunday was
to be accounted for a Sabbath. But in the year 1595, some of that faction
which before had labored with small profit, to overthrow the Hierarchy and
government of this Church of England; now set themselves on work to ruinate
all the orders of it: to bea^e down at one blow all days and times, which by
the wisdom and authority of the Church, had been appointed for Gods service,
and in the steed thereof to erect a Sabbath, of their own devising. These
Sabbath speculations, and presbyterian directions, as mine Author calls them,
they had been hammering more then ten years before; though they produced them
not till now: and in producing of them now, they introduced, says he, a more
then either Jewish or Popish superstition into the Land, Rogers in preface to
the Articles.
to the no small blemish of our Christian profession, and scandal of the true
servants of God, and therewith doctrine most erroneous, dangerous, and
Antichristian. Of these, the principal was one Doctor Bound, who published
first his Sabbath Doctrines Anno 1595, and after with additions to it and
enlargements of it, Anno 1606. Wherein he has affirmed in general over all
the book, that the Commandment of sanctifying every seventh day, as in the
Mosaicall decalogue, is natural, moral, and perpetual: that where all other
things in the Jewish Church were so changed, that they were clean taken away,
as the Priesthood, the sacrifices, and the Sacraments; this day, the Sabbath,
was so changed, that it still remains. p. 91: that there is great reason why
we Christians should take our selves as straightly bound to rest upon the Lords
day, as the Jews were upon their Sabbath; for being one of the moral
Commandments, it binds us, as well as them, being all of equal authority. p.
247. And for the Rest upon this Day, that it must be a notable and singular
Rest, a most careful, exact, and precise Rest, after another manner than men
were accustomed, p. 124. Then for particulars; no buying of Victuals, Flesh or
Fish, Bread or Drink, 158. no Carriers to travail on that Day, 160. nor
Parkmen, or Drovers, 162. Scholars not to study the liberal Arts; nor
Lawyers to consult the Case, and peruse men's Evidences, 163. Sergeants,
Apparitours, and Sumners, to be restrained from executing their Offices, 164.
Justices not to examine Causes, for preservation of the Peace, 166. no man to
travail on that Day, 192. that Ringing of more Bells than one, that Day, is
not to be justified, p. 202. No solemn Feasts to be made on it, 206. nor
Wedding Dinners, 209. with a permission notwithstanding to Lords, Knights, and
Gentlemen, (he hoped to find good welcome for this dispensation) p. 211. all
lawful Pleasures, and honest Recreations, as Shooting, Fencing, Bowling, (but
Bowling, by his leave, is no lawful pleasure for all sorts of people) which
are permitted on other days, were on this Day to be forborne, 202. no man to
speak or talk of Pleasures, p. 272. or any other worldly matter, 275. Most
Magisterially determined; indeed, more like a Jewish Rabbin, than a Christian
Doctor. Yet Jewish and Rabbinicall though his Doctrine were, it carried a fair
face and show of Piety, at the least in the opinion of the common people; and
such, who stood not to examine the true grounds thereof, but took it up, on
the appearance; such, who did judge thereof, not by the workmanship of the
Stuff, but the gloss and color. In which, it is most strange to see, how
suddenly men were induced not only to give way unto it, but without more
ado, to abett the same; till in the end, and that in very little time, it grew
the most bewitching Error, the most popular Deceit, that ever had been set on
foot in the Church of England. And verily I persuade my self, that many an
honest and well-meaning man, both of the Clergy and the Laity, either because
of the appearance of the thing it self, or out of some opinion of those men,
who first endeavored to promote it; became exceedingly affected toward the
same, as taking it to be a Doctrine sent down from Heaven, for increase of
Piety: So easily did they believe it, and grew at last so strongly possessed
therewith, that in the end they would not willingly be persuaded to conceive
otherwise thereof, than at first they did; or think they swallowed down the
Hook, when they took the Bait. An Hook indeed, which had so fastened them to
those men, who love to fish in troubled waters; that by this artifice, there
was no small hope conceived amongst them, to fortify their side, and make good
that cause, which till this trim Deceit was thought of, was almost grown
desperate. Once, I am sure, that by this means, the Brethren, who before
endeavored to bring all Christian Kings and Princes under the yoke of their
Presbyteries; made little doubt to bring them under the command of their
Sabbath Doctrines. And though they failed of that applauded paritie, which they
so much aimed at, in the advancing of their Elderships; yet hoped they, without
more ado, to bring all higher Powers, what ever, into an equal rank with the
common people, in the observance of their Jewish Sabbatarian rigours. So Doctor
Bound declares himself, p. 171. The Magistrate, says he, and Governor in
authority, how high soever, cannot take any privilege to himself, whereby he
might be occupied about worldly business, when other men should rest from
labor. It seems, they hoped to see the greatest Kings and Princes make suit
unto their Consistory for a Dispensation, as often as the great Affairs of
State, or what cause soever, induced them otherwise to spend that Day, or any
part or parcel of it, than by the new Sabbath Doctrine had been permitted.
For the endeering of the which, as formerly to endeere their Elderships, they
spared no place, or Text of Scripture, where the word Elder did occur; and
without going to the Heralds, had framed a Pedigree thereof, from ^ethro, from
Noah's Arc, and from Adam finally: so did these men proceed in their new
Devices, publishing out of holy Writ, both the antiquity and authority of
their Sabbath day: No passage of Gods Book unransacked, where there was
mention of a Sabbath, whether the legal Sabbath, charged the Jews, or the
spiritual Sabbath of the Soul, from si^ne, which was not fitted and applied
to the present purpose: though, if examined, as it ought, with no better
reason, than Paveant illi, and non paveam ego, was by an ignorant Priest
alleged from Scripture, to prove that his Parishioners ought to pave the
Chancell. Yet, upon confidence of these proofs, they did already begin to
sing Victoria; especially, by reason of the entertainment which the said
Doctrines found with the common people. For, thus the Doctor boasts himself,
in his second Edition, anno 606. as before was said, Many godly learned both in
their Preachings, Writings, and Disputations, did concur with him in that
argument; and, that the lives of many Christians, in many places of the
Kingdom, were framed according to his Doctrine, p. 61. Particularly, in the
Epistle to the Reader, that within few years, three several profitable
Treatises successively were written, by three godly learned Preachers,
[Greenehams was one, whose ever were the other two:] that in the mouth of two
or three witnesses, the doctrine of the Sabbath might be established. Egregiam
vero laudem, and spolia ampla!

(8) But whatsoever cause he had thus to boast himself, in the success of
his new doctrines; the Church, I am sure, had little cause to rejoice thereat.
For what did follow hereupon but such monstrous paradoxes, and those delivered
in the pulpit, as would make every good man tremble at the hearing of them?
First, as my Author tells me, it was preached at a market town in
Oxfordshire, that to do any servile work or business on the Lords day, was
as great a sin, as to kill a man or commit adultery: Secondly, preached in
Somersetshire, that to throw a bowl on the Lords day was as great a sin, as
to kill a man: Thirdly, in Norfolk, that to make a feast or dress a wedding
dinner on the Lords day, was as great a sin; as for a Father to take a knife
and cut his childs throat: Fourthly, in Suffolk, that to ring more bells
then one, on the Lords day, was as great a sin as to commit murder. I add
what once I heard my self, at Sergean^^ Inn in Fleet-streete, about five
years since, that temporal death, was at this day to be inflicted, by the Law
of God, on the Sabbath-breaker, on him, that on the Lords day did the works of
his daily calling: with a grave application, unto my masters of the Law, that
if they did their ordinary works on the Sabbath day, in taking fees and giving
Counsel, they should consider what they did deserve by the Law of God. And
certainly these and the like conclusions cannot but ^ollow most directly, on
the former principles. For that the fourth Commandment be plainly moral,
obliging us as straitely as it did the Jews: and that the Lords day be to be
observed according to the prescript of that Commandment: it must needs be,
that every wilful breach thereof, is of no lower nature, then Idolatry, or
blaspheming of the Name of GOD, or any other deadly sin against the first
table; and therefore questionless as great as murder or adultery, or any sin
against the second. But to go forwards where I left, my Author whom before I
spoke of, being present when the Suffolk Minister was convented, for his so
lewd and impious doctrine, was the occasion that those Sabbatarian errors and
impieties, were first brought to light, and to the knowledge of the state. On
which discovery, as he tells us, this good ensued, that the said books of the
Sabbath were called in, and forbidden to be printed and made common.
Archbishop Whitguift by his letters and visitations, did the one, Ann^ 1599.
and Sir John Popham Lord Chief Justice, did the other Ann^ 1600, at Bury in
Suffolk. Good remedies indeed, had they been soon enough applied: yet not so
good as those which formerly were applied to Thacker and his fellow, in the
aforesaid town of Bury, for publishing the books of Br^wn^ against the
service of the Church. Nor was this all the fruit of so bad a doctrine. For by
inculcating to the people these new Sabbath speculations, teaching that that
day only was of Gods appointment, and all the rest observed in the Church of
England a remnant of the will worship in the Church of Rome: the other holy
days in this Church established were so shrewdly shaken, that till this day
they are not well recovered of the blow then given. Nor came this on the by, or
besides their purpose; but as a thing that specially was intended from the
first beginning; from the first time that ever these Sabbath doctrines peeped
into the light. For Doctor Bound, the first sworn servant of the Sabbath, has
in his first edition thus declared himself, P. 31.
that he sees not where the Lord has given any authority to his Church,
ordinarily and perpetually to sanctify any day, except that which he has
sanctified himself: and makes it an especial argument against the goodness
of the religion in the Church of Rome, P. 32.
that to the seventh day they have joined so many other days, and made them
equal with the seventh, if not superior thereunto, as well in the solemnity
of divine offices, as restraint from labor. So that we may perceive by this,
that their intent from the beginning, was to cry down the holy days, as
superstitious, Popish ordinances: that so their new ^ound Sabbath being placed
alone (and Sabbath now it must be called) might become more eminent. Nor were
the other, though more private effects thereof, of less dangerous nature: the
people being so ensnared with these new devises, and pressed with rigours more
than Jewish, that certainly they are in as bad condition, as were the
Israelites of old, when they were Captivated and kept under by the Scribes and
Pharisees* Some I have known, (for in this point I will say nothing without
good assurance,) who in a furious kind of zeal like the mad Prophetess in
the Poet, have run into the open streets, yea and searched private houses
too, to look for such as spent those hours on the Lords day in lawful
pastimes, which were not destinate by the Church to Gods public service: and
having sound them out scattered the company, brake the instruments; and if my
memory fail me not, the musicians; and which is more, they thought that they
were bound in conscience so to do. Others, that will not suffer either baked
or roast to be made ready for their dinners, on their Sabbath day, lest by so
doing they should eat and drink their own damnation; according to the
doctrine preached unto them. Some, that upon the Sabbath, will not sell a pint
of wine, or the like Commodity: though wine was made by God, not only for
man's often infirmities, but to make glad his heart, and refresh his spirits,
and therefore no less requisite on the Lords day, then on any other. Others,
which have refused to carry provender to an horse, on the supposed Sabbath
day, though our Redeemer thought it no impiety on the true Sabbath day indeed,
to lead poor Cattle to the water: which was the motive and occasion of M.
Brerewoods learned Treatise. So for the female sex, maid servants I have met
with some two or three, who though they were content to dress their meat upon
the Sabbath, yet by no means would be persuaded either to wash their dishes,
or make clean their kitchen. But that which most of all affects me, is, that
a Gentlewoman, at whose house I lay in Leicester, the last Northern Progress
Anno 1634. expressed a great desire to see the King and Queen who were then
both there. And when I proferd her my service, to satisfy that loyal longing,
she thanked me, but refused the favor, because it was the Sabbath day. Unto
so strange a bondage are the people brought, that as before I said, a greater
never was imposed on the ^ewes themselves, what time the consciences of that
people were pinned most closely on the sleeves of the Scribes and Pharisees.

(9) But to go forwards in my story, it came to pass for all the care before
remembered, that having such a plausible and fair pretense, as sanctifying a
day unto the Lord, and keeping a Commandment that had long been silenced; it
got strong footing in the Kingdom, as before is said: the rather because many
things, which were indeed strong avocations from Gods public service, were as
then permitted. Therefore it pleased King James, in the first entrance of his
reign, so far to condescend unto them, as to take off such things which
seemed most offensive. To which intent he signified his royal pleasure by
Proclamation dated at Theo^alds May 7. 160^, that Whereas he had been informed,
that there had been in former times a great neglect in keeping the Sabbath day;
for better observing of the same, and for avoiding of all impious profanation
of it, he straitely charged and commanded that no Beare-baiting, Bull-baiting,
enterludes, common plays, or other like disordered or unlawful exercises or
pastimes, be frequented, kept or used at any time hereafter upon any Sabbath
day. Not that his purpose was to debar himself of lawful pleasures on that
day, but to prohibit such disordered and unlawful pastimes, whereby the Common
people were withdrawn from the congregation: they being only to be reckoned
for Common plays, which at the instant of their Acting or representing, are
studied only for the entertainment of the Common people, on the public
Theaters. Yet did not this, though much, content them. And therefore in the
conference at Hampton Court, it seemed good to D. Reynolds (who had been made
a party in the cause) to touch upon the profanation of the Sabbath, (for so
he called it) and contempt of his Majesty's proclamation made for the
reforming of that abuse; of which he earnestly desired a straiter course, for
reformation thereof: to which he found a general and unanimous assent. Nor
was there an assent only, and nothing done. For presently in the following
Convocation, it pleased the Prelates there assembled, to revive so much of the
Queens Injunction before remembered, as to them seemed fitting, and to
incorporate it into the C^nons then agreed of; only a little alteration, to
make it more agreeable to the present times, being used therein. Thus then they
ordered in the Canon for due celebration of Sundays, and holy days. viz. Ca^.
13.
All manner of persons within the Church of England shall from henceforth
celebrate and keep the Lords day commonly called Sunday and other holy days,
according to Gods holy will and pleasure, and the orders of the Church of
England prescribed in that behalf, i. e. in hearing the word of God read and
taught, in private and public prayers, in acknowledging their offenses to
God, and amendment of the same, in reconciling themselves charitably to their
neighbors where displeasure had been, in oftentimes receiving the Communion
of the Body and Blood of Christ, using all godly and sober conversation. The
residue of the said injunction, touching work in harvest, it seemed fit unto
them not to touch upon; leaving the same to stand or fall, by the statute of
King Edward the sixth before remembered. A Canon of an excellent composition. For
by enjoining godly and sober conversation, and diligent repair to Church to
hear the Word of God and receive the Sacrament, they stopped the course of
that profaneness, which formerly, had been complained of: and by their
ranking of the holy days in equal place, and height, with Sunday, and
limiting the celebration of the same, unto the Orders in that case prescribed
by the Church of England; showed plainly their dislike of those Sabbath
doctrines, which had been lately set on foot; to the dishonor of the
Church, and diminution of her authority in destinating other days to the
service of God, than their new Saint Sabbath. Yet did not this, the Churches
care, either so satisfy their desires, or restrain the follies of those men,
who had embraced the new Sabbath doct^ines; but that they still went ^orwards
to advance that business, which was now made a part of the common cause: no
book being published by that party, either by way of Catechism, or Comment
on the ten Commandments, or moral piety, or systematicall divinity, of all
which, these last times have produced too many; wherein the Sabbath was not
pressed upon the consciences of Gods people^ with violence, as formerly with
authority upon the ^ewes. And hereunto they were encouraged a great deal the
rather, because in Ireland, what time his Majesty's Commissioners were
employed, about the settling of that Church, Anno 1615. there passed an Article,
which much confirmed them in their Courses, and has been often since alleged
to justify both them and their proceedings. The article is this. Ar^. 56.
The first day of the week which is the Lords day is wholly to be dedicated
to the service of God; and therefore we are bound therein to rest from our
common and daily business, and to bestow that leisure upon holy exercises both
private and public. What moved his Majesty's Commissioners to this strict
austeritie, that I cannot say: but sure I am, that till that time, the Lords
day never had attained such credit, as to be thought an Article of the Faith,
though of some men's fancies. Nor was it like to be of long continuance, it was
so violently followed: the whole book being now called in, and in the place
thereof, the Articles of the Church of England confirmed by Parliament, in that
Kingdom, Anno 1634.

(10) Nor was this all the fruit neither of such dangerous doctrines, that the
Lords day was grown into the reputation of the Jewish Sabbath* but some that
built on their foundations, and ploughed with no other then their heifers,
endeavored to bring back again the Jewish Sabbath, as that which is
expressly mentioned in the fourth Commandment; and abrogate the Lords day for
altogether, as having no foundation in it, nor warrant by it. Of these, one
Thraske declared himself, for such, in King James his time, and therewithal
took up another Jewish doctrine about meats and drinks: as in the time of
our dread Sovereign now being, Theophilus Braborne grounding himself on the
so much applauded doctrine of the morality of the Sabbath; maintained that the
Jewish Sabbath ought to be observed, and wrote a large book in defense
thereof, which came into the world 1632. For which their I^wish, doctrines, the
first received his censure in the Star Chamber, and what became of him I know
not: the other had his doom in the High Commission, and has since altered his
opinion, being misguided only by the principles of some noted men, to which
he thought he might have trusted. Of these I have here spoke together,
because the ground of their opinions, so far as it concerned the Sabbath, (...)
the very same; they only making the conclusions, which of necessity must
follow from the former premises: just as the Brownists did before, when they
abhominated the Communion of the Church of England, or the Puritan principles.
But to proceed. This of it self had been sufficient to bring all to ruin,
but this was not all. Not only Iudaisme did begin, but Popery took great
occasion of increase, by the preciseness of some Magistrates and Ministers in
several places of this Kingdom, in hindering people from their recreations on
the Sunday: the Papists in this Realm being thereby persuaded that no honest
mirth or recreation was tolerable in our religion. Which being noted by King
James, K. James De^^arat.
in his progress through Lancashire, it pleased his Majesty to set out his
Declaration, May 24. Anno 1618. the Court being then at Greenewich, to this
effect that for his good peoples lawful recreations his pleasure was, that
after the end of divine service, they should not be disturbed, let or
discouraged, from any lawful recreations; such as dancing, either men or
women, Archery for men, leaping, vaulting, or any other such harmless
recreations: nor from having of Ma^-games, Whitsun-Ales, or Morrice-dances, and
setting up of May-poles, or other sports therewith used; so as the same be had
in due and convenient time, without impediment or let of divine service: and
that women should have leave to carry rushes to the Church, for the decoring
of it, according to their old custom: withal prohibiting all unlawful Games
to be used on the Sundays only, as beare-baiting, bull-baiting, enterludes,
and at all times, in the meaner sort of people, by law prohibited, bowling. A
Declaration which occasioned much noise and clamor; and many scandalls spread
abroad, as if these Counsels had been put into that Princes head, by some
great Prelates, which were then of most power about him. But in that point they
might have satisfied themselves, that this was no Court-doctrine: no
newdivinity; which that learned Prince had been taught in England. He had
declared himself before, when he was King of the Scots only, to the
selfsame purpose: as may appear in his Basilicon Doron, published anno 1598.
This was the first Blow, in effect, which had been given, in all his time, to
the new Lords-Day-Sabbath, then so much applauded.

(11) For howsoever, as I said, those who had entertained these Sabbatarian
Principles, spared neither care nor pains to advance the business, by being
instant in season, and out of season, by public Writings, private Preachings,
and clandestine insinuations, or whatsoever other means might tend to the
promotion of this Catholic cause: yet find we none that did oppose it in a
public way, though there were many that disliked it: Only one M. Lo, of the
Church of Exeter, declared himself in his Effigiatio very Sabbatismi, ann^
1606. to be of different judgment from them; and did lay down indeed the
truest and most justifiable Doctrine of the Sabbath, of any Writer in that
time. But being written in the Latin Tongue, it came not to the peoples hands:
many of those which understood it, never meaning, to let the people know the
Contents thereof. And whereas, in the year 1603. at the Commencement held in
Cambridge, this Thesis, or Proposition, Dies Domi^^cus nititur Verbo Dei, was
publicly maintained by a Doctor there, and by the then Vice Chancellor so
determined; neither the following Doctors ^here, or any in the other
Universitie, that I can hear of, did ever put up any Antithesis, in opposition
thereunto. At last, some four years after his Majesty's Declaration before
remembered, anno 1622. Doctor Prideaux, his Majesty's Professor for the
Universitie of Oxon. did, in the public Act, declare his judgment in this
point, de S^bbato; which afterward, in the year 1625. he published to the
World, with his other Lectures. Now, in this Speech, or Determination, he did
thus resolve it. First, That the Sabbath was not instituted in the first
Creation of the World; nor ever kept by any of the ancient Patriarchs, who
lived before the Law of Moses: therefore, no Moral and perpetual Precept, as
the others are, Sect. 2. Secondly, That the sanctifying of one day in seven, is
ceremonial only, and obliged the Jews; not Moral to oblige us Christians to
the like observance, Sect. 3. and 4. Thirdly, That the Lords day is founded
only on the Authority of the Church, guided therein by the practice of the
Apostles: not on the fourth (...), which in the 7. Section he e^tituleth a
Scandalous Doctrine; nor any other authority in holy Scripture, Sect. 6. and
7. Fourthly, That the Church has still authority to change the day, though
such authority be not ^it to be put in practice, S^ct. 7. Fifthly, Th^^ in the
celebration of it, there is no such cessation from the works of labor,
required of us, as was exacted of the Jews: but that we lawfully may dress
Meat, proportionable unto every man's estate: and do such other things, as be
no hinderance to the public Service, appointed for the day, Sect. 8. Sixthly,
That on the Lords day all R^creations whatsoever are to be allowed, which
honestly may refresh the spirits, and increase mutual love and neighborhood
amongst us: and, that the Names whereby the Jews did use to call their
Festivals (whereof the Sabbath was the chief) were borrowed from an Hebrew
word, which signifies to Dance, and to make merry, or rejoice. And lastly, that
it app^rtaine^ to the Christian Magistrate, to order and appoint, what
^astime^, on the Lords day, are to be permitted, and what prohibited: not unto
every private person, much less to every ^an^ rash Zeal, as his own words
are, who out of a schismatic (...), (debarring men from lawful Pastimes)
does incline to I^daisme, Sect. 8. This was the sum and substance of his
resolution, then: which, as it gave content unto the sounder and the better
part of the Assembly; so it did infinitely stomach and displease the greater
numbers, such as were formerly possessed with the other Doctrines* though they
were wiser, than to make it a public Quarrel. Only it pleased M. Bifeild of
Surrey, in his Reply to a Disco^rse of M. Brerewoods, of Gresham College, anno
1631. to tax the Doctor, as a spreader of wicked Doctrine; and much to marvel
with himself, how either he durst be so bold to say, P. 161.
or having said it, could be suffered to put it forth, viz. That to establish
the Lords day on the fourth Commandment, were to incline too ^uch to Iudaisme:
This, the said M. Bifeild thinks to be a foul aspersion on this fa^ous
Church. But in so thinking* I conceive, that he consulted more his own
opinion, and his private interest, than any public maintenance of the Churches
cause; which was not injured by the Doctor, but defended rather. But to
proceed, or rather to go a little: About a year before the Doctor thus
declared his judgment, one Thom. Broad, of Gloucestershire, ^ad published
something in this kind: wherein, to speak my mind thereof, he rather showed,
that he disliked those Sabbath Doctrines, than durst disprove them. And before
either, M. Br^rewood, whom before I named, had writ a learned Treatise about
the Sabbath, on a particular occasion therein mentioned; but published it was
not, till after both, anno 1629. Add here, to join them all together, that in
the Schools at Oxon, anno 1628. it was maintained by Doctor Robinson, now
Arch^eacon of Gloucester; viz. Ludos Recreationis gratia in die Dominico, non
esse prohibitos Divina Lege; That Recreations on the Lords day, were not at all
prohibited by the Word of God.

(12) As for our neighbor Church of Scotland; as they proceeded not at first
with that mature deliberation, in the reforming of that Church, which had been
here observed with us; so did they run upon a Course of Reformation, which
after was thought fitting to be reformed. The Queen was young, and absen^, in
the Court of France; the Regent was a desolate Widow, a Stranger to that
Nation, and not well obeyed: So that the people there, possessed by Cnoxe, and
other of their Teachers, took the cause in hand; and went that way, which came
most near unto Geneva, where this Cnoxe had lived. Among the first things
wherewithal they were offended, were the (...) D^nsreis: and in the year
1592, the Act of the Queen Regent granting license to keep the said two
feasts, was by them repealed. Yet find we by the Bishop of Brechin, in his
discourse of the Proceedings at the Synod of (...), that notwithstanding all
the Acts Civil, and Ecclesiasticke, made against the superstitious observation
and profane abuse of Zule day, the people could never be induced to labor on
that day: and wheresoever Divine service was done that day, as in towns which
have always morning and evening Prayers, they were perceived to resort in
greater numbers on that day, then on any other to the Church. As for King James
of happy memory, he did not only keep the said great festivalls from his
youth as there is said; but wished them to be kept by all his subjects, yet
without abuse; and in his Basilicon Doron published Anno 1598, thus declares
himself; that without superstition plays and lawful games may be used in
May, and good cheer at Christmasse. Now on the other side, as they had quite
put down those days, which had been dedicated by the Church to religious
meetings: so they appointed others of their own authority. For in their book
of ^^scipline before remembered, it was thus decreed, viz. That in every notable
town, a day, besides the Sunday should be appointed, weekly, for Sermons:
that during the time of Sermon, the day should be kept free from all exercise
of labor, as well by the master, as by the Servant: as also that every day [in
the said great townes] there be either Sermon, or Prayers, with reading of the
Scriptures* So that it seems, they only were ^fraid of the name of holy
days, and were contented well enough, with the thing it self. As for the
Lords day, in that Kingdom, I find not that it had attained unto the name or
nature of a Sabbath day, until that doctrine had been set on foot amongst us
in England. For in the book of discipline, set out as formerly was said in
6^0, they call it by no other name then Sunday; ordaining, that upon ^oure
S^ndayes in the year, which are therein specified, the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper should be administered to the people: and in the year 1592, an Act of
King James the third about the (...), and other Vigills ^o be kept holy (...)
Ev^nsong to (...), was annulled and abrogated. Which pla^^ely shows that then
they thought not of a Sabbath. But when the Sabbath doctrine had been raised
in E^gla^d, Ann^ 1595, as before was said, it found a present enter^^^ment with
the Brethren there; who had before (...) in their public writings to our
Puritans here, Davis^n p. 20.
that both their ca^ses were most ^eerely linked together, and thereupon, they
both took up the name of Sabbath, and imposed the rigou^: yet so, that they
esteem it lawful to hold f^sts thereon, Altar Damasc. p. 669.
quod sapiss^^^ in Ecclesia (...) factum est; and use it often in that Church*
which is quite contrary unto the nature of a Sabbath. And on the other side
they deny it, to be the weekly festival of the resurrection, Id. 696.
Non sunt dies Dominici ^esta Resurrectioni^ as they have resolved it; which
shows as plainly that they build not the translation of their Sabbath on the
same grounds, as our men have done. In brief by making up a mixture of a Lords
day Sabbath they neither keep it as the Lords day, nor as the Sabbath. And in
this state things stood until the year 1618. what time some of the Ancient
holy days were revived again, in the assembly held at Perth: in which, among
some other rites of the Church of England which were then a^mitted, it was thus
determined, viz. As we abhor the superstitions observation of festival
days by the Papists; and derest all licen^ious and profane abuse thereof, by
the Common sort of Professors: so we think that the inestimable benefits
received from God, by our Lord Ies^^ Christ his Birth, Passion, Resurrection,
(...), and ^^nding down of the Holy Ghost, was commendably and godly remembered
at certain particular days and times: by the whole Church of the world, and
may be also now. Therefore the Assembly ordaines, that every Minister shall
upon these days, have the (...) and make choice of several and pertinent
Texts of Scripture, and frame their Doctrine and Exhortation thereunto, and
rebuke all superstitious observation, and licentious profanation thereof. A
thing which much displeased some men, of contrary persuasion: first, out of
fear, that this was but a Preamble, to make way for all the other holy days
observed in England: And secondly, because it seemed, that these five Days
were in all points to be observed as the Lords day was, both in the times of
the Assembly, and after the dissolving of the same. But pleased, or displeased,
so it was decreed; and so still it stands.

(13) But to return again to England. It pleased his Majesty now reigning
(whom God long preserve) upon information of many notable misdemeanors on this
day committed; ^. Carol. 1.
in his first Parliament, to enact, That from thence-forwards there should be
no Meetings, Assemblies, or concourse of people, out of their Parishes, on the
Lords day, for any Sports or Past^mes whatsoever; nor any Beare-baitings,
Bull-baitings, common Plays, Enterludes, or any other unlawful Exercises or
Pastimes, used by any person or persons, in their own Parishes: every offense
to be punished by the forfeiture of 3. s. 4 d. This being a Probation Law, was
to continue till the end of the first Session of the next Parliament: And in
the next Parliament, it was continued till the end of the first Session of the
next, which was then to come. So also was another Act made, in the said last
Session, wherein it was enacted, 3. Carol. 1.
That no Carrier, Waggoner, Waine-man, Carre-man, or Drover, travail
thence-forwards on the Lords day, on pain, that every person and persons s^
offending, shall lose and forfeit 20. s. for every such offense: And that no
Butcher, either by himself, or any other by his privitie and consent, do kill
or sell any Victual on the said day; upon the forfeiture and loss of 6. s. 8.
d. Which Statutes being still in force, by reason that there has not been any
Session of Parliament, since they were enacted; many, both Magistrates and
Ministers, either not rightly understanding, or wilfully mistaking the intent
and meaning of the first, brought Dancing, and some other lawful Recreations,
under the compas^e of unlawful Pastimes, in that Act prohibited: and thereupon
disturbed and punished many of the Kings obedient people, only for using of
such Sports, as had been authorized by his Majesty's Father, of blessed
memory. Nay* which is more, it was so publicly avowed, and printed, by one
who had no calling to interpret Laws, except the provocation of his own ill
spirit, That Dancing on the Lords day, was an unlawful Pastime, punishable by
the Statute 1. Carol. 1. which intended (so he says) to suppress Dancing on
the Lords day, as well as Beare-baiting, Bull-beating, Enterludes, and common
Plays, which were not then so rife and common, as Dancing, when this Law was
made. Things being at this height, it pleased his excellent Majesty, King
Charles Declarat.
Observing, as he says himself, how much his people were debarred of
Recreation, and finding in some Counties, that under the pretense of taking
away abuses, there had been a general forbidding, not only of ordinary
Meetings, but of the Feasts of the Dedication of Churches, commonly called
Wakes; to ratify and publish the Declaration of his Majesty's Father, before
remembered: adding, That all those Feasts, with others, should be observed; and
that all neighborhood and freedom, with manlike and lawful Exercises, be
therein used. Commanding all the Iusti^es of Assise, in their several
Circuits* to see that no man do trouble or molest any of his loyal and
dutiful people, in or for their lawful Recrea^ions, having first done their
duty to God, and continuing in obedience unto him and his Laws: and further,
that publication thereof be made by order from the Bishops, through all the
Parishes of their several Diocesses, respectively. Thus did it please his
excellent and sacred Majesty to publish his most pious and religious purpose,
of opening to his loyal people that liberty of the Day, which the Day allowed
of; and which all Christian States and Churches, in all times before, had never
questioned: withal, of shutting up that Door, whereat no less than Iudaisme
would in fine have entered, and so in time have overran the fairest and most
beautiful Church, at this day in Christendom. And certainly, it was a pious
and Princely Act, nothing inferior unto that of Constantine, or any other
Christian King, or Emperor, before remembered: it being no less pious, in it
self considered, to keep the holy days free from superstition, than to
preserve them from profaneness; especially considering, that permission of
lawful Pleasures is no less proper to a Festival, than restraint from
labor. Nay, of the two, it is more ancient: For in his time, Tertullian tells
us, that they did diem solis laetitiae indulgere, devote the Sunday partly unto
Mirth and Recreation, not to Devotion altogether; when, in an hundred years
after Tertullians time, there was no Law or Constitution to restrain men from
labor on this day, in the Christian Church.

14 Yet did not his most excellent Majesty find such obedience in some men,
and such as should have been examples unto their flocks, as his most
Christian purpose did deserve: there being some so settled in the opinion of a
Sabbath day, a day not heard of in the Church of Christ 40 years ago, that
they chose rather to deprive the Church of their pains, and ministry, then
yield unto his Majesty's most just Commands. For whose sakes specially, next to
my duty unto God, my Sovereign, and the Church my Mother, I have employed my
time and studies, to compose this History: that they may see therein, in
brief, the practice of Gods Church in the times before them, and frame
themselves to do thereafter; casting aside those errors in the which they
are, and walking in the way which they ought to travail. Which way, when all
is done, will be via Regia, the Kings high way; as that which is most safe,
and of best assurance, because most travailed by Gods people. Our private
paths do lead us often into error, and sometimes also into danger. And
therefore I beseech all those who have offended in that kind, to lay aside
their passions, and their private interests, if any are that way misguided; as
also not to shut their eyes against those truths, which are presented to them
for their information: that so the King may have the honor of their due
obedience; the Church, the comfort of their labors, and conformable ministry.
For to what purpose should they hope, to be ennobled for their sufferings in so
bad a cause, that neither has the doctrine of the Scripture, to authorize it;
or practice of the Church of God, the best Expositour of the Scripture, to
confirm and countenance it? or to be counted constant to their first
Conclusions, having such weak and dangerous premises to support the same;
since constan^y not rightly grounded, is at best but obstinacy, and many times
does end in heresy. Once again therefore I exhort them, even in Gods name
whose Ministers they are and unto whom they are to give up an account of their
imploiment; and in the Kings Name, whom as Gods deputy they are bound to obey,
not for wrath only but for conscience sake; and in the Churches name, whose
peace they are to study above all things else; and their own names lastly,
whom it most concerns, that they desist, and go not forwards in this
disobedience, l^st a worse mischief fall upon them. For my part I have done my
best, so far to give them satisfaction in the present point, (so far forth
as the nature of an History would permit;) as* they might think it no
disparagement, to alter their opinions and desert their errors, and change
their resolutions: since in so doing, they shall conform themselves unto the
practice of Gods Church, in all times and Ages. The greatest victory, which a
man can get, is to subdue himself, and triumph over sin, and error. I end,
De Civit. Dei, I. 22. c. 30.
as I began, in S. Augustins language: Q^ibus hoc nimium, vel quibus parum est,
mihi ignoscant; quibus satis est, non mihi, sed Demino m^cum congratulantes,
gratias agant. Let such as shall conceive this Treatise, to be too little, or
too much* excuse my weakness: And as for those, whom it may satisfy in the
smallest measure, let them not unto me, but to God, with me, ascribe all the
honor; to whom belongs all praise and glory even for ever more.

Pibrac. Quadr. 5.
Ne va disant, ma main a faict cest oeuure,
Ou ma virtue ce bell oeuure a parfaict:
Mais dis ainsi, Dieu par moy l'oeuure a faict,
Dieu est l'Autheur, du pe^ de bien que i'oeuure.
Say not, my hand this Work to end has brought,
Nor, this my virtue has attained unto:
Say rather thus* this God by me has wrought;
God's Author of the little good I do.
FINIS.

