The play called the four PP.

A new and a very merry interlude of A palmer. A pardoner. A potycary. A peddler.


Made by John^ Heewood



Palmer. Now god be here who keeps this place
Now by my faith I cry you mercy
Of reason I must sew for grace
My rewdnes shows me no so homely
Whereof your pardon axt and won
I sew you as curtesy does me bind
To tell this which shall be begone
In order as may come best in myndy
I am a palmer as ye se
Which of my life much part has spent
In many a fair and far country
As pilgrims do of good intent
At Jerusalem have I been
Before Christ's blessed sepulture
The mount of Caluery have I seen
A holy place ye may be sure
To Iosephat and Olyuete
On foot god wot I went right bare
Many a salt tere did I sweet
Before this carkes could come there
Yet have I been at Rome also
And gone the stacions all arow
Saint peter's shryne and many mo
Then if I told all ye do know
Except that there be any such
That has been there and diligently
Has taken head and marked much
Then can they speak as much as I
Then at the Rodes also I was
And round about to amyas
At saint Toncomber and saint Tronion
At saint Bothulph and saint Anne of Buckston
On the hills of Armony where I see Noah's ark
With holy Job and saint George in Suthwarke
At Waltam and at Walsyngam
And at the good rood of dagnam
At saint Cornelys at saint James in Gales
And at saint Wynefrydes well in Walls
At our lady of Boston at saint Edmundes byry
And straight to saint Patrykes purgatory
At rydybone and at the blood of Hayles
Where pilgrims pains right much auayles
At saint Dauys and at saint Denis
At saint Matthew and saint Mark in Venis
At master Johan shorn at Canterbury
The graet god of Katewade at king Henry
At saint saviors at our lady of Southwell
At Crome at Wylsdome and at Muswell
At saint Richard and at saint Roke
And at our lady that stands in the oak
To these with other many one
Devoutly have I prayed and gone
Prayeng to them to pray for me
Unto the blessed trynyte
By whose prayers and my daily pain
I trust the sooner to obtaye
For my salvation grace and mercy
For be ye sure I think surely
Who seeks saints for Crystes sake
And namely such as pain do take
On foot to punyshe thy frail body
Shall thereby merit more hyely
Then by any thing done by man

Pardoner. And when ye have gone as far as ye can
For all your labor and gostely entente
Yet welcome home as wise as ye went

Palmer. Why sir despise ye pilgrimage

Pardoner. Nay for god sir then did I rage
I think ye right well occupied
To seek these saints on every side
Also your pain I not disprayse it
But yet I discomende your wit
And or we go even so shall ye
If ye in this will answer me
I yray you show what the cause is
Ye went al these pylgrymages

Palmer. Forsooth this life I did begin
To rydde the bondage of my syn
For which these saints rehearsed or this
I have both sought and seen Iwys
Besechynge them to be record
Of all my pain unto the lord
That gives all remyssyon
Upon each man's contricyon
And by their good mediacyon
Upon mine humble submission
I trust to have in very deed
For my soul health the better speed.

Pardonar. Now is your own confession lyckely
To make your self a fool quyckely
For I perceive ye would obtain
No another thing for all your pain
But only grace your soul to save
Now mark in this what wit ye have
To seek so far and help so nigh
Even here at home is remedy.
For at your door my self does dwell
Who could have saved your soul as well
As all your wide wandrynge shall do
Though ye went thryes to Jericho
Now syns ye might have spedde at home
What have ye wone by ronnyng at Rome.

Palmer. If this be true that ye have moved
Then is my wit in deed reproved
But let us here first what ye are

Pardonar. Truly I am a pardoner.

Palmer. Truly a pardoner that may be true
But a true pardoner does not ensew
Right selde is it seen or never.
That treuth and pardoners dwell together
For be your pardons never so great
Yet them to enlarge ye will not let
With such lies that oftymes Christ wot
Ye seem to have that ye have not
Wherefore I went my self to the self thing
In every place and without faynynge
Had as much pardon there assuredly
As ye can promise me here doutefully
How be it I think ye do but scofte
But if ye had all ^he pardon ye keep of
And no whyt of pa^^on granted
In any place where I have haunted
Yet of my labor I nothing repent.
God has respect how each time is spent
And as in his knowledge all is regarded
So by his goodness all is rewarded

Pardonar. By the first part of this last tale
It seems you come late from the ale
For reason on your side so far does fail
That ye leave sonyng and begin to rail
Wherein ye forget your own part clearly
For ye be as untrue as I
And in one point ye are beyond me
For ye may lie by aucthoryte
(...) that has wandered so far
That no man can be their controller
And where ye esteem your labor so much
I say yet again my pardons be such
That if there were a thousand souls on a hepe
I would bring them all to heaven as good chepe
As ye have brought your self on pilgrimage
In the least quarter of your vyage
Which is far a this side heaven by god
There your labor and pardon is od
With small cost and without any pain
These pardons brings them to heaven plain
Give me but a penny or two pens
And as soon as the soul departs hens
In half an hour or three quarters at most
The soul is in heaven with the holy ghost

Potycary. Send ye any souls to heaven by water

Pardoner. *If we did sir what is the matter

Potycary. By god I have a dry soul should thither
I pray you let our souls go to heaven together
So bysy you twain be in souls health
May not a potycary come in by stelth
Yes that I will by saint Antony
And by the leave of this company
Prove ye false knaves both or we goo
In part of your sayenges as this ^o
Thou by thy travail thynkest heaven to get
And thou by pardons and relyques countest no let
To send thine own soul to heaven sure
And all other whom thou list to procure
If I took an accyon then were they blanke
For like thieves the knaves rob away my thank
All souls in heaven having relefe
Shall they thank your crafts nay thank mine chief
No soul ye know enters heaven gate
Till from the body he be separate
And whom have ye known dye hostlye
Without help of the potycary
Nay all that comes to our handlynge
Except ye hap to come to hanging
That way perchance ye shall not myster
To go to heaven without a glyster
But be ye sure I would be woe
If ye should change to begyle me so
As good to lie with me a night
As hang abroad in the moon light
There is no choice to ^le my hand
But as I said into the band
Syns of our souls the multitude
I send to heaven when all is vewed
Who should but I then all together
Have thank of all their coming thither

Pardoner. If ye kylde a thousand in an hour space
When come they to heaven dyenge from state of grace

Potycary. If a thousa^de pardons about your necks were teyd
When come they to heaven if they never dyed

Palmer. *Long life after good works in deed
Does hinder man's receyt of mede
And death before one dewty done
May make us think we dye to sone
Yet better tarry a thing then have it
Then go to sone and vaynly crave it

Pardoner. The longer ye dwell in communicacion
The less shall you like this ymagynacyon
For ye may perceive even at the first chop
Your tale is trapt in such a stop
That at the least ye seem worse then we

Potycary. By the mass I hold us naught all three

Peddler. By our lady then have I gone wrong
And yet to be here I thought long

Potycary. Brother ye have gone wrong no wit
I praise your fortune and your wit
That can dyrecte you so discretely
To plant you in this company
Thou palmer and thou a pardoner
I a potycary.

Peddler. And I a peddler

Potycary. Now on my faith full well watched
Were the devil were we four hatched

Peddler. That makes no matter syns we be matched
I could be merry if that I catchyd
Some money for part of the ware in my pack

Potycary. What the devil have thou there at thy back

Peddler. Why do thou not know that every pedled
In every tryfull must be a medler
Specially in women's tryflynges
Those use we chief above all things
Which things to se if ye be disposed
Behold what ware here is disclosed
This gere shows it self in such bewte
That each man thinks it says come bye me
Look were your self can like to be chooser
Your self shall make price though I be looser
Is here nothing for my father Palmer
Have ye not a want on in a corner
For your walkyng to holy places
By christ I have herd of as strange cases
Who lives in love or love would win
Even at this pack he must begin
Where is right many a proper token
Of which by name part shall be spoken
Gloves, pynnes, combs, glasses vnspottyd
Pomanders, hooks, and lasses knotted
Broches, rings, and all manner bedes
Lace round and flat for women's hedes
Nedyls, threde thymbell, shers, and all such knackes
Where lovers be no such things lackes
Sypers swathbondes rybandes and sleue laces
Gyrdyls, knyues, purses, and pyncases.

Potycary. Do women bye their pyncases of you.

Peddler. Ye that they do I make god a vow

*Potycary. So mot I thryue then for my part
I be shrewe thy knaves nakyd heart
For making my wife is pyncase so wide
The pynnes fall out they can not abide
Great pynnes must she have one or other
If she lose one she will find an other
Wherein I find cause to complain
New pynnes to her pleasure and my pain

Pardoner. Sir ye seem well seen in women's causes
I pray you tell me what causes this
That women after their a^ysynge
Be so long in their apparelynge

Peddler. Forsooth women have many (...)
And they ^e ma^ked in many ^ettes
As frontlettes, fyllettes, parlettes, and barcelettes
And then their bonettes and their poynettes
By these lettes and nets the let is such
That speed is small when haste is much.

Potycary. An other cause why they come not forward
Which makes them daily to draw backwarde
And yet is a thing they can not forbere
The trymmynge and pynnynge up their gere
Specially their fydlyng with the tail pyn
And when they would have it prycke in
If it chance to double in the clothe
Then be they wode and swereth an oath
Till it stand right they will not forsake it
Thus though it may not yet would they make it
But be ye sure they do but defarre it
For when they would make it often times mar it
But prycke them and pynne them as nyche, as ye will
And yet will they look for pynnynge still
So that I durst hold you a joint
Ye shall never have them at a fall point

Peddler. *Let women's matters pass and mark mine
What ever their points be, these points be fine
Wherefore if ye be willing to bye
Ley down money, come of quyckely.

Palmer. Nay by my troth we be like friars
We are but beggars we be no buyers

Pardoner. Sir ye may show your ware for your mind
But I think ye shall no profit find

Peddler. Well though this your ney acquyte no cost
Yet think I not my labor lost
For by the faith of my body
I like full well this company
Up shall this pack for it is plain
I came not hither al for gain
Who may not play one day in a weke
May think his thryfte is far to seek
Deuyse what pastyme ye think best
And make ye sure to find me pressed

Potycary. Why be ye so universal
That you can do what so ever ye shall.

Peddler. Sir if ye list to appose me
What I can do then shall ye se.

Potycary. Than tell me this be ye perfyt in drinking

Peddler. Perfyt in drinking as may be wysht by thynkyng

Potycary. Then after your drynkyng how fall ye to wynkyng

Peddler. Sir after drinking while the shot is tynkynge
Some hedes be swimming but mine will be synkynge
And upon drinking mine eyse will be pynkynge
For wynkynge to drinking is always lynkynge.

Potycary^ Then drink and sleep ye can well do
But if ye were desired thereto
I pray you tell me can you sing

Peddler. *Sir I have some sight in singing.

Potycary. But is your breast any thing sweet.

Peddler. *What ever my breast be, my voice is mete*

Potycary. That answer shows you a right singing man
Now what is your will good father than.

Palmer. What helps will where is no skyll

Pardoner. *And what helps skyll where is no wit.

Potycary. For will or skyll what helps it
Where froward knaves be lacking will
Leave of this curyosytie
And who that list sing after me.

Here they sing. Peddler. This lyketh me well so mot I the.

Pardoner. So help me god it lyketh not me
Where company is met and well agreed
Good pastyme does right well in deed
But who can sit in dalyaunce
Men sit in such a variaunce
As we were set or ye came in
Which strife this man did first begin
Allegynge that such men as use
For love of god not and refuse
On fot to goo from place to place
A pilgrimage calling for grace
Shall in that pain with penitence
Obtain discharge of conscience
Comparynge that life for the best
Enduccyon to our endless rest
Upon these words our matter grew
For if he could auow them true
As good to be a gardener
As for to be a pardoner
But when I hard him so far wide
I then aproched and replied
Saying this that this indulgence
Having the foresaid penitence
Dyschargeth man of all offense
With much more profyt then this pretense
I a^ke but two pens at the most
I wys this is not very great cost
And from all pain without dyspayre
My soul for his keep even his chair
And when he dies he may be sure
To come to heaven even at pleasure
And more then heaven he can not get
How far so ever he list to ^et
Then is his pain more then his wit
To wake to heaven syns he may sit
Sir as we were in this contencion
In came this daw with his inuencyon
Revelling us him self auauntynge
That all the souls to heaven assendynge
Are most bound to the potycary
Because he helps most men to dye
Before which death he says in deed
No soul in heaven can have his mede

Peddler Why do potycaries kill men.

Potycary. By god men say so now and then.

Peddler. And I thought ye would not have mist
To make men live as long as ye list.

Potycary. *As long as we list, nay long as they can.

Peddler. So might we live without you than.

Potycary. Ye but yet it is necessary
For to have a potycary
For when ye feel your conscyens ready
I can send you to heaven quyckly
Wherefore concerning our matter here
Above these twain I am best clear
And if he list to take me so
I am content you and no mo
Shall be our judge as in this case
Which of us three shall take the best place

Peddler. I neither will judge the best nor worste
For be ye bleste or be ye curste
Ye know it is no whyt my sleyght
To be a judge in matters of weight
It behooves no pedlers nor proctours
To take on them judgment as doctors
But if your minds be only set
To work for soul health ye be well met
For each of you somewhat does show
That souls toward heaven by you do grow
Then if ye can so well agree
To continue together all three
And all you three obey on will
Then all your minds ye may fulfill
As if ye came all to one man
Who should goo pilgrimage more then he can
In that ye palmer as debite
May clearly dyscharde him parde
And for all other syns ones had contryssyon
Your pardons gives him full remyssyon
And then ye master potycary
May send him to heaven by and by.

Potycary. *If he taste this box nigh about the pryme
By the mass he is in heaven or even long time
My craft is such that I can right well
Send my fryndes to heaven and my self to hell
But syrs mark this man for he is wise
How could deuyse such a deuyce
For if we three may be as one
Then be we lords euerychone
Between us all could not be myste
To save the souls of whom we list
But for good order at a word
Twain of us must wait on the third
And unto that I do agree
For both you twain shall wayt on me
What chance is this that such an elfe
Commanded two knaves be, beside him self

Pardoner. Nay nay my fr^^de that will not be
I am to good to wayt on the.

Palmer. *By our lady and I would be loath
To wayt on the (...) on you both

Peddler. Yet be ye sewer for all this dout
This waiting must be brought about
Men can not prosper wylfully led
All thing decaye^ where is no hedde
Wherefore doutlesse mark what I say
To one of you three twain must obey
And sins ye can not agree in voice
Who shall be head, there is no choice
But to deuyse some manner thing
Wherein ye all be (...) conning
And in the same (...) do best
The other twain (...) make them priest
In every thing (...) his entente
Holly to be at com^^^ndement
And now have I ^^^nde one mastry
That ye can do in^yfferently
And is another sell^^nge nor byenge
But even only very lyenge
And all ye three can lie as well
As can the falsest devil in hell
And though before ye hard me grudge
In greater matters to be your judge
Yet in lyeng I can some skyll
And if I shall be judge I will
And be ye sure without flatery
Where my conscience fyndeth the mastrye
There shall my judgment strayt be found
Though I might win a thousand pound

Palmer. Sir for lyeng though I can do it
Yet am I loath for to goo to it

Peddler. Ye have not cause to fear to be bold
For ye may be here uncontrolled
And ye in this have good advantage
For lyeng is your comen usage
And you in lyenge be well spedde
For all your craft does stand in falshed
Ye need not care who shall begin
For each of you may hope to win
Now speak all three even as ye find
Be ye agreed to follow my mind

Palmer. Ye by my troth I am content.

Pardoner. *Now in good faith and I assente

Potycary. If I denied I were a nody
For all is mine by gods body.

Here the potycary hoppeth. Palmer. *Here were a hopper to hop for the ring
But sir this gere goth not by hoppynge.

Potycary. Sir in this hoping I will hop so well
That my tongue shall hop as well as my hele
Upon which hoppynge I hope and not doubt it
To hope so that ye shall hope without

Palmer. *Sir I will n^^ther boste ne brawll
But take such fo^^une as may fall
And if ye wynne^ ^s maystry
I will obaye you ^uietly
And sure I thyn^ that quietness
In any man is g^^^t richesse
In any manner company
To rule or be rul^d indifferently.

Pardoner. By that bost ^ou semest a beggar in deed
What can thy qu^etnesse help us at need
If we should sta^e thou have not I think
One penny to bye ^s one pot of drink
Nay if richesse myghe rule the roste
Behold what cause I have to boste
Lo here be pardons half a dosyn
For gostely riches they have no cosyn
And more over to me they bring
Sufficient succor for my living
And here be relykes of such a kind
As in this world no man can find
Knele down all ^^re and when ye leave kissing
Who list to off^ shall have my blyssynge
Friends here shall ye se even anon
Of all Hallows the blessed iaw bone
Kys it hardely with good devotion

Potycary. This kiss s^all bring us much promocyon
Fogh, by saint ^^^your I never kyst a wars
Ye were as goo^^ysse all hallows ars
For by all halows me thinks
That all halows breath stynketh

Palmer. Ye judge all halows breath unknown
If any breath stynke it is your own.

Potycary. *I know mine own breath from all halows
Or else it were time to kiss the galows.

Pardoner. Nay syrs behold here may ye se
The great toe of the trinite
Who to this toe any money voweth
And ones may role it in his moves
All his life after I undertake
He shall be ryd of the toth ache.

Potycary. *I pray you torn that relyke about
Other the Trinite had the gout
Or else because it is.iii. toes in one
God made it much as three toes alone.

Potycary. Well let that pass and look upon this
Here is a relyke that does not mys
To help the least as well as the most
This is a buttocke bone of Pentecoste.

Potycary. *By christ and yet for all your boste
This relyke has be shyten the roste

Pardoner. Mark well this relyke here is awhipper
My friends unfeigned here is a slypper
Of one of the seven slepers be sure
Doutiesse this kys shall do you great pleasure
For all these two days it shall so ease you
That none other savors shall displease you.

Potycary. All these two days, nay all this two year
For all the savors that may come here
Can be no worse for at a word
One of the seven ^epers trod in a torde.

Peddler. Sir me thinks your devotion is but small

Pardoner. Small mary me thinks he has none at all.

Potycary. *What the devil care I what ye think
Shall I praise relykes when they stynke.

Pardoner. Here is an ey^^^th of the great Turk
Whose eyes be on^s set on this piece of work
May happily lose part of his eye sight
But not all till h^^e blind out right.

Potycary. *What so ever any other man sees
I have no deuac^on to Turks teeth
For all though I never saw a greter
Yet me thinks I have seen many better.

Pardoner. Here is a box full of humble bees
That stonge Eve as she sat on her knees
Tastynge the fruit to her forbidden
Who kysseth the bees within this hydden
Shall have as much pardon of right
As for any relyke he kyst this night.

Palmer. *Sir I will kiss them with all my heart.

Potycary. Kiss them again and take my part
For I am not worthy, nay let be
Those bees that ^onge Eve shall not stynge me.

Pardoner. Good friends I have yet here in this glass
Which on the drink at the wedding was
Of Adam and Eve undoubtedly
If ye honor this relyke devoutly
All though ye thirst no whyt the less
Yet shall ye drink the more doutlesse
After which drinking ye shall be as mete
To stand on your head as on your fete

Potycary. Ye mary now I can ye thank
In presents of this the rest be blanke
Would god this relyke had come rather
Kiss that relyke well good father
Such is the pain that ye palmers take
To kiss the pardon bowl for the drink sake
O holy yeste that looks full sour and stale
For gods body help me to a cup of ale
The more I be hold the, the more I thirst
The oftener I kiss the, more like to burste
But syns I kiss the so deuoutely
Hyre me and help me with drink till I dye
What so much prayenge and so little speed

Pardoner. Ye for god knows when it is need
To send folks drink but by saint Antony
I wene he has sent you to much all ready.

Potycary. If I have never the more for the
Then be the relykes no riches to me
Nor to thy self except they be
More benefycyall then I can se
Rycher is one box of his tryacle
Then all thy relykes that do no miracle
It thou had prayed but half so much to me
As I have prayed to thy relykes and the
Nothing concerning mine occupacion
But straight should have wrought in operacyon
And as in value I pas you an a^^
Here lies much ^ychesse in little space
I have a box of r^^arb here
Which is as deynty as it is dear
So help me god and hollydam
Of this I would not give a deam
To the best friend I have in Englandes ground
Though he would give me.xx. pound
For though the ^^^make do it abhor
It pourget you (...) from the color
And makes you^ ^^omake sore to walter
That ye shall (...) come to the halter

Peddler. Then is that ^^^ycyn a souerayn thing
To preserve a m^^^rom hanging.

Potycary. If ye will ^wprd^ out this crome that ye se
If ever ye be ha^^ed never trust me
Here have I dia^^mpholicus
A special oyntement as doctors discuse
For a fistela or a canker
This oyntement is even shot anchor
For this medecyn helps one and other
Or brings them in case that they need no other
Here is syrapus de Byzansis
A little thing is Enough of this
For even the weight of one scryppull
Shall make you strong as a cryppull
Here be other as diosfialios
Diagalanga and sticados
Blanka manna diospoliticon
Mercury sublyme and metridaticon
Pelitory and arsefetita
Cassy and colloquintita
These be the things that break all strife
Between man's sycknes and his life
From (...) pain these shall you deleuer
And set you even at rest for ever
Here is a medecyn no mo like the same
Which comenly is called thus by name
Alikakabus or Alkakengy
A goodly thing for dogs that be mangy
Such be these medycynes that I can
Help a dog as well as a man
Not one thing here partycularly
But works universally
For it does me as much good when I sell it
As all the buyers that taste it or smell it
Now syns my medicines be so special
And in operacion so general
And ready to work when so ever they shall
So that in riches I am principal
If any reward may entreat ye
I beseech your mashyp be good to me
And ye shall have a box of marmelade
So fine that ye may dyg it with a spade.

Peddler. Sir I thank you but your reward
Is not the thing that I regard
I must and will be indifferent
Wherefore proceed in your intent.

Potycary. Now if I wist this wysh no sin
I would to god I might begin.

Pardoner. I am content that thou lie first

Palmer. *Even so am I and say thy worste
Now let us here of all thy lies
The greatest lie thou may deuyse
And in the fewyst words thou can

Potycary. Forsooth ye be an honest man.


Palmer. *There said ye much but yet no lie.

Pardoner. Now lie ye both by our lady
Thou lie in bost of his honesty
And he has lied in affyrmynge the

Potycary. If we both lie and ye say true
Then of these lies your part adieu
And if ye wyn make none auaunt
For ye are sure of one ill servant
Ye may perceive by the words he gave
He takes your mashyp but for a knave
But who told true or lied in deed
That will I know or we proceed
Sir after that I first began
To praise you for an honest man
When ye affyrmed it for no lie
Now by our faith speak even truly
Thought ye your affirmation true.

Palmer. *Ye mary I for I would ye knew
I think my self an honest man.

Potycary. What thought ye in the contrary than.

Pardoner. *In that I said the contrary
I think from troth I did not vary.

Potycary. And what of my words.

Pardoner. I thought ye lied.

Potycary. And so thought I by god that dyed
Now have you twain each for him self laid
That none has lied out but both relayed
And of us twain none has denied
But both affyrmed that I have lied
Now syns both your troth confess
And that we both my lie so witness
That twain of us three in one agree
And that the liar the wynner must be
Who could provide such euydens
As I have done in this pretens
Me thinks this matter sufficient
To cause you to give judgment
And to give me the mastrye
For ye perceive these knaves can not lie

Palmer. Though another of us as yet had lied
Yet what we can do is untried
For yet we have devised nothing
But answered you and given hyrynge

Peddler. Therefore I have devised one way
Whereby all three your minds may say
For each of you one tale shall tell
And which of you tells most meruell
And most unlike to be true
Shall most prevail what ever ensew.

Potycary. If ye be set in mer^alynge
Then shall ye here a meruaylouse thing
And though in deed all be not true
Yet suer the most part shall be new
I did a cure no longer a go
But Anno domini millelimo
On a woman young and so fair
That never have I seen a gayre
God save all women from that lyknes
This want on had the fallen syknes
Which by dissent came lynyally
For her mother had it naturally
Wherefore this woman to recure
It was more hard ye may be sure
But though I boste my craft is such
That in such things I can do much
How often she fell were much to report
But her head so gydy and her helys so short
That with the twynglynge of an eye
Down would she fall even by and by
But or she would arise again
I showed much practyse much to my pain
For the tallest man within this town
Should not with ease have broken her sown
All though for life I did not doubt her
Yet did I take more pain about her
Then I would take with my own sister
Sir at the last I gave her a glyster
I thrust a thampyon in her tewell
And bad her keep it for a jewel
But I knew it so heavy to carry
That I was sure it would not tarry
For where gunpowder is ones fyerd
The tampyon will no longer be hyerd
Which was well seen in time of this chance
For when I had charged this ordinance
Suddenly as it had thonderd
Even at a clap losed her bumberd
Now mark for here begins the revel
This tampion flew.x. long mile level
To a fair castle of lyme and stone
For strength I know not such a one
Which stood upon an hill full hye
At foot whereof a river ran bye
So deep till chance had it forbyden
Well might the regent there have ryden
But when this tampyon on this castle light
It put the castles so far to flight
That down they came each upon other
No stone left standing by gods mother
But rolled down so fast the hill
In such a number and so did fill
From botom to bryme from shore to shore
This foresaid river so deep before
That who list now to walk thereto
May wade it over and wet no shoo
So was this castle laid wide open
That every man might se the token
But in a good hour may these words be spoken
After the tampyon on the walls was wroken
And piece by piece in pieces broken
And she delivered with such violence
Of all her inconueniens
I left her in good health and lust
And so she does contynew I trust.

Peddler. Sir in your cure I can nothing tell
But to our purpose ye have said well.

Pardoner. Well sir then mark what I can say
I have been a pardoner many a day
And done greater cures gostely
Then ever he did bodily
Namely this one which ye shall here
Of one departed within this seven year
A friend of mine and likewise I
To her again was as friendly
Who fell so syke so suddenly
That deed she was even by and by
And never spoke with priest nor clerk
Nor had no whyt of this holy warke
For I was thens it could not be
Yet hard I say she asked for me
But when I bethought me how this chanced
And that I have to heaven auaunced
So many souls to me but strangers
And could not keep my friend from dangers
But she to die so daungerously
For her soul health especyally
That was the thing that grieved me so
That nothing could release my woo
Till I had tried even out of hand
In what estate her soul did stand
For which trial short tale to make
I took this journey for her sake
Give ear for here begins the story
From hens I went to purgatory
And took with me this gere in my fyste
Whereby I may do there what I list
I knocked and was let in quyckly
But lord how low the souls made curtesy
And I to every soul again
Did give a beck them to retain
And axed them this question than
If that the soul of such a woman
Did late among them there appear
Whereto they said she came not here
Then ferd I much it was not well
Alas thought I she is in hell
For with her life I was so acqueynted
That sure I thought she was not saynted
With this it chanced me to snese
Christ help quoth a soul that ley for his fees
Those words quoth I thou shall not lees
Then with these pardons of all degrees
I paid his tole and set him so quyght
That strayt to heaven he took his flight
And I from thens to hell that night
To help this woman if I might
Not as who says by authority
But by the way of entreat
And first the devil that kept the gate
I came and spoke after this rate
All hayle sir devil and made low curtesy
Welcome quoth he this smillyngly
He knew me well and I at last
Remembered him syns long time paste
For as good hap would have it chance
This devil and I were of old acquaintance
For often in the play of corpus Cristi
He has played the devil at Couentry
By his acquaintance and my behauoure
He showed to me right friendly favor
And to make my return the shorter
I said to this devil good master porter
For all old love if it lie in your power
Help me to speak with my lord and your
Be sure quoth he no tongue can tell
What time thou coudest have come so well
For this day lucyfer fell
Which is our festyuall in hell
Nothing unreasonable craved this day
That shall in hell have any nay
But yet be ware thou come not in
Till time thou may thy pasporte wyn
Wherefore stand still and I will wyd
If I can get thy save condyt
He tarried not but shortly gat it
Under seal and the deuyls hand at it
In ample wise as ye shall here
Thus it began Lucyfere
By the power of god chyefe devil of hell
To all the deuyls that there do dwell
And every of them we send gretynge
Under streygyt charge and commaundynge
That they aydynge and assystent be
To such a pardoner and maned me
So that he may at liberty
Pass save without his ieopardy
Till that he be from us extyncte
And clearly out of helles precinct
And his pardons to keep sauegarde
We will they lie in the porters ward
Geuyn in the fornes of our palys
In our hye court of matters of malys
Such a day and year of our reyne
God save the devil quoth I for playue
I trust this writing to be sure
Then put thy trust quoth he in ever
Syns thou art sure to take no harm
This devil and I walket arm in arm
So far till he had brought me thither
Where all the deuyls of hell together
Stood in a ray in such apparel
As for that day there metely fell
Their horns well gylt their clowes full clean
Their taylles well kempt and as I wene
With Sothery butter their bodies anointed
I never saw deuyls so well appointed
The master devil sat in his iacket
And all the souls were playnge at racket
None other rackettes they had in hand
Save every soul a good fire brande
Wherewith they played so pretely
That Lucyfer laughed merely
And all the resedew of the friends
Did laugh full well togytther like friends
But of my friend I saw no whyt
Nor durst not axe for her as yet
Anon all this rout was brought in silens
And I by an usher brought in presens
Then to Lucyfer low as I could
I knelyd which he so well alowde
That thus he beckte and by saint Antony
He smyled on me well fauoredly
Bendynge his brows as broad as barn durres
Shaking his ears as ^uged as burres
Rolynge his yes as round as two bushels
Flastynge the fire out of his nose thryls
Gnashynge his teeth so baynglorousely
That me thought time to fall to flatery
Wherewith I told as I shall tell
O pleasant pycture O prince of hell
Feuered in fashyon abominable
And syns that is inestimable
For me to praise the worthyly
I leave of prays unworthy
To give the prays besechynge the
To hear my sewte and then to be
So good to grant the thing I crave
And to be short this would I have
The soul of one which hither is flytted
Delivered hens and to me remitted
And in this doing though al be not quyt
Yet some part I shall deserve it
As thus I am a pardoner
And over souls as a controller
Thorough out the earth my power does stand
Where many a soul lies on my hand
That speed in matters as I use them
As I receive them or refuse them
Whereby what time thy pleasure is
I shall require any part of this
The least devil here that can come thither
Shall chose a soul and bring him hither
Now quoth the devil we are well pleased
What is his name thou would have eased
Nay quoth I be it good or evil
My coming is for a she devil
What calste her quoth he thou horyson
Forsooth quoth I Margery coorson
Now by our honor said Lucyfer
No devil in hell shall witholde her
And if thou would have twenty mo
Were not for justice they should goo
For all we deuyls within this den
Have more to do with two women
Then with all the charge we have beside
Wherefore if thou our friend will be tried
Aply thy pardons to women so
That unto us there come no mo
To do my b^^e I promised by oath
Which I have kept for as the faith goth
At this days to heaven I do procure
Ten women to one man be sure
Then of Lucyfer my leave I took
And straight unto the master coke
I was h^dde into the kechyn
For Margaryes office was there in
All thing handled there discretely
For every soul bears office metely
Which might be seen to se her sit
So bysely turnynge of the spyt
For many a spyt here has she turned
And many a good spyt has she burned
And many a spyt full hoth has tosted
Before the meat could be half roasted
And or the meat were half roasted in deed
I took her then fro the spyt for speed
But when she saw this brought to pas
To tell the joy wherein she was
And of all the deuyls for joy how they
Did rore at her delyuery
And how the cheynes in hell did ring
And how all the souls therein did sing
And how we were brought to the gate
And how we took our leave thereat
Be suer lack of time sufferyth not
To rehearse the.xx. part of that
Wherefore this tale to conclude breuely
This woman thanked me chyefly
That she was ryd of this endless death
And so we departed on new market heth
And if that any man do mind her
Who list to seek her there shall he find her

Peddler. Sir ye have sought her wonders well
And where ye found her as ye tell
To here the chance ye found in hell
I find ye were in great parell.

Palmer. *His tale is all much parellous
But part is much more meruaylous
As where he said the deuyls complain
That women put them to such pain
By their conditions so crooked and crabbed
Frowardly fashonde so waywarde and wrabbed
So far in division and sturrynge such strife
That all the deuyls be weary of their life
This in effect he told for t^ueth
Whereby much muruell to me ensues
That women in hell such shrewes can be
And here so gentle as far as I se
Yet have I seen many a mile
And many a woman in the while
Not one good city, town, nor borough
In cristendom but I have been through
And this I would ye should understand
I have seen women.v. hundred thousand
And often with them have long time married
Yet in all places where I have been
Of all the women that I have seen
I never saw nor knew in my consyens
Any one woman out of paciens.

Potycary. By the mass there is a greatly

Pardoner. *I never hard a greater by our lady

Peddler. A greater nay know ye any so great.


Palmer. Sir whether that I lose or get
For my part judgment shall be prayed.

Pardoner. And I desyer as he has said

Potycary. Proceed and ye shall be obeyed.

Peddler. Then shall not judgment be delayed
Of all these three if each man's tale
In Poules church yard were set on sale
In some man's hand that has the sleyghte
He should sure sell these tales by weight
For as they wey so be they worth
But which weyth best to that now forth
Sir all the tale that ye did tell
I bear in mind and yours as well
And as ye saw the matter metely
So lied ye both well and discretely
Yet were your lies with the lest trust me
For if ye had said ye had made fle
Ten tampyons out of ten women's tails
Ten times ten mile to ten castles or iayles
And fill ten ryuers ten times so deep
As ten of that which your ^a^^en ^^ones dy^^ (...)
Or if ye ten times had bodily
Fet ten souls out of purgatory
And ten times so many out of hell
Yet by these ten bonnes I could right well
Ten times sonner all that have believed
Then the tenth part of that he has meued.

Potycary. Two knaves before.i. lacks.ii. knaves of five
Then one and then one and both knaves a live
Then two and then two and three at a cast
Thou knave and thou knave and thou knave at last
Nay knave if ye t^yme by number
I will as knauyshly you accomber
Your mind is all on your pryuy tithe
For all in ten me thinks your wit lythe
Now ten times I beseech him that hye syttes
Thy wyfes.x. commandments may search thy.v. wits
Then ten of my tordes in ten of thy teth
And ten of thy nose which every man seth
And twenty times ten this wyshe I would
That thou had ben hanged at ten year old
For thou go about to make me a slave
I will thou know if I am a gentylman knave
And here is an other shall take my part.

Pardoner. *Nay first I be shrew your knaves heart
Or I take part in your knavery
I will speak fair by one lady
Sir I beseech your mashyp to be
As good as ye can be to me.

Peddler. I would be glade to do you good
And him also be he never so wood
But dout you not I will now do
The thing my conscience ledeth me to
Both your tales I take far impossyble
Yet take I his father incredyble
Not only the thing it self allows i^
But also the boldenes thereof auoweth i^
I know not where your tale to try
Nor yours but in hell or purgatory
But his boldness has faced a lie
That may be tried even in this company
As if ye list to take this order
Among the women in this border
Take three of the youngest and three of the oldest
Three of the hotest and three of the coldest
Three of the wysest and three of the shrewdest
Three of the lowest and three of the highest
Three of the farthest and three of the nyest
Three of the fairest and three of the maddest
Three of the fowlest and three of the saddest
And when all these threes be had a sonder
Of each three two justly be number
Shall be found shrewes except this fall
That ye hap to find them shrewes all
Him self for troth all this does know
And often has tried some of this row
And yet he swereth by his conscience
He never saw woman break paciens
Wherefore considered with true entente
His lie to be so evident
And to appear so euydently
That both you affyrmed it a ly
And that my conscience so depely
So deep has sought this thing to try
And tried it with mind indyfferent
Thus I awarde by way of judgment
Of all the lies ye all have spent
His lie to be most excellent.

Palmer. Sir though ye were bound of equity
To do as ye have done to me
Yet do I thank you of your pain
And will requyte some part again.

Pardoner. Mary sir ye can no les do
But thank him as much as it comes to
And so will I do for my part
Now a vengeance on thy knaves heart
I never knew peddler a judge before
Nor never will trust pedlynge knave more
What do thou there thou horson nody.

Potycary. By the mass learn to make curtesy
Curtesy before and curtesy behind him
And thenon each side the devil blind him
Nay when I have it perfytly
Ye shall have the devil and all of curtesy
But it is not sone learned brother
One knave to make curtesy to another
Yet when I am angry that is the worste
I shall call my master knave at the first.

Palmer. Then would some master perhaps clowtye
But as for me ye need not doubt ye
For I had lever be without ye
Then have such business about ye.

Pardoner. So help me god so were ye better
What should a beggar be a ietter
It were no whyt your honesty
To have us twain iet after ye.

Potycary. Sir be ye sure he tells you true
If we should wait this would ensew
^t would be said trust me at a word
Two knaves made curtesy to the third

Peddler. Now by my troth to speak my mind
Syns they be so loath to be assigned
To let them lose I think it best^
And so shall ye live best in rest

Palmer. Sir I am not on them so fond
To compel them to keep their bond
And ^yns ye list not to wait on me
I clearly of waiting dyscharge ye.

Pardoner. Mary sir I hertely thank you.

Potycary. *And I like wise I make god auowe

Peddler. Now be ye all even as ye begoon
No man has lost nor no man has won
Yet in the debate wherewith ye began
By way of advise I will speak as I can
I do perceive that pilgrimage
Is chyefe the thing ye have in usage
Whereto in effect for love of Christ
Ye have or should have been entyst
And who so does with such intent
Does well declare his time well spent
And so do ye in your pretense
If ye procure thus indulgence
Unto your neighbors charitably
For love of them in god only
All this may be right well applied
To shewell you both well occupied
For though ye walk not both one way
Yet walking thus this dare I say
That both your walks come to one end
And so for all that do pretend
By aid of gods grace to ensewe
Any manner kind of virtue
As some great almyse for to give
Some in wyllfull pouetie to live
Some to make hye ways and such other warkes
And some to maintain prestes and clerks
To sing and pray for soul departed
These with all other virtues well marked
All though they be of sundry kinds
Yet be they not used with sundry minds
But as god only does all those move
So every man only for his love
With love and dred obediently
Works in these virtues vnyformely
Thus every virtue if we list to scan
Is pleasant to god and thankful to man
And who that by grace of the holy ghost
To any one virtue is moved most
That man by that grace (...) one apply
And therein serve god most plentyfully
Yet not that one so far wide to wreste
So liking the same to myssyke the rest
For who so wresteth his work is in vain
And even in that case I perceive you twain
Liking your virtue in such wise
That each others virtue you do despise
Who walks this way for god would find him
The farther they leke him the farther behind him
One kind of virtue to despise another
Is like as the sister might hang the brother.

Potycary. For fere lest such parels to me might fall
I thank god I use no virtue at all

Peddler. *That is of all the very worste way
For more hard it is as I have hard say
^o begin de^iue where none is pretended
Then where it is begone the abuse to be mended
How be it ye be not all to begin
One syne of virtue ye are entered in
As this I suppose ye did say true
In that ye said ye use no virtue
In the which words I dare well report
Ye are well be loved of all this sort
By your raylynge here openly
At pardons and relyques so leudly.

Potycary. In that I think my fault not great
For all that he has I auowe counterfeit.

Peddler. *For his and all other that ye know feigned
Ye be another counceled nor constrained
To any such thing in any such case
To give any reverence in any such place
But where ye dout the truth not knowing
Beleuynge the be^^ good may be growing
In judging the best no harm at the least
In judging the worste no good at the best
But best in these things it seems to me
To make no judgment upon ye
But as the church does judge or take them
So do ye receive or forsake them
And so be sure ye can not err
But may be a frutfull follower.

Potycary. Go ye before and as I am true man
I will follow as fast as I can.

Pardoner. *And so will I for he has said so well
(...) would we should follow his counsel.

Palmer. Then to our reason god give us his grace
That we may follow with faith so fermely
His commandments, that we may purchase
His love, and so consequently
To believe his church fast and faithfully
So that we may according to his promise
Be kept out of error in any wise
And all that has scape^ us here by negligence
We clearly revoke and forsake it
To pass the time in this without offense
Was the cause why the maker did make it
And so we humbly beseech you take it
Besechynge our lord to prosper you all
In the faith of his church universal

Finis.
Imprynted at London in Fletestrete at the sign of the George by Wyllyam
Myddylton

printer's or publisher's device


