CERTAIN RULES, DIRECTIONS, OR ADVERTISEMENTS FOR THIS TIME OF PESTILENTIALL
CONTAGION. WITH A Caveat to those that wear about their necks impoisoned
Amulets as a Preservative from the Plague. First published for the behoof of
the City of London, in the two Visitations, 1603 and 1625. And reprinted for
the benefit of the said City now visited, and all other parts of the Land that
may or shall hereafter be: By FRANCIS HERRING, D. in Physic, and Fellow of
the College of Physicians in London. Whereunto is added certain Directions,
for the poorer sort of people when they shall be visited.

NVMB. 16. 47. And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of
the Congregation: and behold the plague was begun among the people, and he put
on incense, and made an atonement for the people.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, and are to be sold by Matthew Simmons at the
gilded Lion in Ducke Lane, 1636.

TO THE HIGH AND POTENT KING, CHARLES King of Great Britain, France, and
Ireland, health and happiness.
(Sovereign Lord,)
THey that are to treat with great Potentates and Personages are enjoined, to
be short and sweet. If I fail in the last, I shall not miss of the first, --
Ne longo sermon morer tua Tempora (Caesar.)

The last great Mortality, I published certain Rules, and Directions, for the
prevention of the spreading of that contagious, and all devouring Sickness.
Those brief advertisements I have searched out, reviewed, somewhat enlarged,
and brought forth again, to the view and use, and I hope good of my Citizens
and Countrymen. My presumption is, that though I shall purchase neither profit
nor praise, yet I shall obtain pardon of your Majesty, if tendering the common
good of my Country, I bring one pale-full, or rather dishfull of water, toward
the quenching of the common flame. Morbi (ut recte Celsus Med. Latinorum
Princeps) non curantur eloquentia, multo minus loquentia. Especially this
fierce Fury, which is non Morbus, sed Monstrum, superans saepissime tum Artem,
tum Naturam, not a disease, but a Monster, overmatching, and quelling,
oft-times both Art and Nature. The Lord of glory and mercy keep your Highness,
with your most Honorable Council from the rage of this man-slaying Hydra, and
all other both open and secret evils and enemies, and make you a wise and
skillful Physician to prevent the dangers, and cure the maladies of
Commonwealth and State.

Your MAJESTY'S humble subject and suppliant, FRANCIS HERRING.

CERTAIN RVLES, DIRECTIONS, OR ADVERTISEMENTS FOR THIS TIME OF PESTILENTIALL
CONTAGION.
Ictus irae divinae pro peccatis hominum, The stroke of Gods wrath for the
sins of mankind. Exodus 5. v. 3. and Cap. 9. 15. Levit. 26. 25. Number. 14. 12.
Deuteronomy. 28. 21. and 2 Chronicles. 36. v. 15.
This is not only the opinion of Divines, but of all learned Physicians, and
acknowledged by the blind Heathen in all ages, Inter Eth. Homerus 2. Iliad.
by the light of nature. Therefore his appropriate and special Antidote is
Seria paenitentia, and conversio ad Deum: unfeigned and hearty repentance and
conversion to God. Till this be practiced, I tell you plainly, I put small
confidence in other by-courses. The cause remaining, who can look for the
taking away of the effect? Let me therefore be an humble suitor, that your
Highness would be pleased to command a general humiliation of the people by
prayer and fasting. This action as it would be honorable to your Majesty, and
such as you would undoubtedly condescend unto most readily and willingly, if it
were but mentioned and moved; so in my persuasion, there would appear a most
admirable and comfortable effect thereof. And till this be performed, what
other ways soever we shall follow, we shall begin at the wrong end:

Ni Deus affuerit, viresque infuderit Herbis,
Quid cedo Diptamus, quid Panacea juvat?
Let not Gentlemen and rich Citizens by flying (unless they likewise fly from
their sins) think to escape Scotfree. So long as they carry their sin with
them, the Lord will find them out, and his hand will reach them wheresoever
they are.

Paul's Churchyard, where the chief Magistrates of the City, and many other
Citizens meet weekly to hear Sermons, must needs be not only inconvenient,
but very dangerous for spreading the contagion, and poisoning the whole City.
For all men that have the least insight in Philosophy know that from the dead
corpse, by force of the Sun, certain vapors or exhalations are elevated,
which partake of the nature of those bodies, and do undoubtedly taint,
corrupt, and poison the air with their ill quality. For this principal
cause, in most well ordered Cities of foreign Countries, there is a common
place of Burial appointed a good distance from the building of the City. And
till this may be procured for our City, I wish that straight charge be given,
that all dead corpses be laid a convenient depth in the ground, and not one
coffin heaped upon another, and they laid so near the top of the earth as (it
is to be feared) they now are.







Islington and Pick-hatch, Old-streete, and toward Shoreditch and
White-chappell, be well cleansed, and if it might be, the water of the new River
to run through them, as also the like to be done through the Borough of
South-worke.



Let men in their private houses, amend the air by laying in their windows
sweet herbs, as Marjoram, Time, Let them likewise rub their windows often
with worm wood and fennel.
Rosemarie, Balm, Fennel, Peniroyall, Mints, etc. Likewise by burning
Juniper, Rosemarie, Time, Bay Leaves, Cloves, Cinnamon, or using other compound
perfumes. The poorer sort may burn Worme-wood, Rue, Time. Let them cast often
on the floores of their houses water mingled with Vinegar.

Concourse of people to Stage Plays, Wakes or Feasts, and May Pole dauncings,
are to be prohibited by public Authority, whereby as God is dishonored, the
bodies of men and women by surfeiting, drunkenness, and other riots and
excesses, disposed to infection, and the contagion dangerously scattered both
in City and Country.

Let the Bells in Cities and Towns be rung often, and the great Ordnance
discharged, thereby the air is purified.

Touching our regiment and diet, repletion and inanition (as two dangerous
extremities) are heedfully to be avoided. Those meats are to be used which are
of easy digestion and apt to breed good juice.

The blankets, matresses, flockbeds, and all bed-clothes of the infected, are
to be burned, also leather garments, because they hold the infection very long.
Alexander Benedictus reports, Hist. de Pest.
That in Venice, a flockbed used in a contagious time, was after 7 years found
in an inward room, the Mistress of the house commanded the servants to air and
beat it, whereupon the servants were instantly infected with the pestilence and
died.

Such as are of hard concoction, and cause obstructions, are to be avoided:
specially those that easily corrupt and putrify in the stomach, as the most
part of summer fruit, raw cherries, plums, apples, etc.

It is not good to be abroad in the air, early in the morning before the Sun
have purified the air, or late in the night after Sunne-setting. In rainie,
dark, and cloudie weather, keep your house as much as you can.

Eschew all perturbations of mind, especially anger and fear. The one by
heating the body opens a door for the enemy to enter: the other by cowardly
running away gives him encouragement to tread on the hedge, which lies lowest,
and makes least resistance.

Let your exercise be moderate, ad ruborem, non ad sudorem. The time of
exercise is an hour before dinner or supper, not in the heat of the day, or
when the stomach is full. Use seldom familiarity with Venus, for she
enfeebleth the body, and makes it more obnoxious to external injuries.

You may feed three times in the day, Variety of meats is pernicious; much
more variety of sau^^^.
but more sparingly than at other times. Shun variety of dishes at one
meal: Perniciosa ciborum varietas, perniciosior condimentorum. And if at any
time the Rule holds, The most simple feeding is the most wholesome feeding;
then it is in force at this time of infection. Augenius (a learned Physician)
thinks it not possible that he that lives temperately and soberly, should
be subject to the Sickness.

Go not forth of your house into the air, neither willingly speak with any,
till you have broken your Fast. For breakfast you may use a good draught of
wormwood beer or ale, and a few morsels of I read and butter wi^h the leaves
of sage, or else a toste with swee^ salade oil, two or three drops of rose
vinegar, and a little s^gar. They that have cold stomachs may drink a draugh^
of wormewoodwine or malm-sey, in stead of al^ or beer. But take heed (as you
love your life) of extreme hot waters, as Aqua vitae, Rosa solis, or other
compound waters of like nature, which Emperickes prepare and set out with vain
and boasting words: Laudat venales qui vult extrudere merces. Of them Crato a
great and learned Physician pronounces, that they were inventa ad jugulandos,
non ad curandos homines: devised to kill not to cure men. He speaks of the
daily and continual use of them: and that is it which I disallow.

If you be not accustomed to a breakfast, take the quantity of a Nutmeg or
thereabouts of some cordial Electuarie prescribed by the learned Physician,
before you set foot out of doors. If you will use both, for greater cautell,
then take your Electuarie early in the morning, two hours before your
breakfast.

As you walk in the streets or talk with any; hold in your moath a Clove, a
piece of a Zodoarie, Angelica, or Enula campana root.

Once in four of five days take three or four cordial and stomachicall
pills by direction of your Physician, to fortify the heart and stomach
against all corruption, and to cleanse your body from such humors as may
dispose you to the sickness. For Agens non agit nisi in Pattente disposito: An
Agent works not but upon a fitted and disposed Patient.

If any man be bound by Religion, consanguinitie, office, or any such respect
to visit the sick parties; let him first provide, that the chamber be well
perfumed with odoriferous trochiskes, or such like, the windows laid with the
herbs aforementioned, the floor clean swept, and sprinkled with rose water and
vinegar: that there be a fire of sweet wood burning in the chimney, the
windows being shut for an hour, then open the casements toward the North.
Then let him wash his face and hands with rose water and rose-vineger, and
enter into the chamber with a wax candle in the one hand, and a sponge with
rose-vineger and wormwood, or some other Pomander, to smell unto. Let him hold
in his mouth a piece of Mastic, Cinnamon, Zedoarie, or Citron pill, or a Clove.
Let him desire his sick friend to speak with his face turned from him.

When he goes forth, let him wash his hands and face with rose vinegar and
water as before, especially if he have taken his friend by the hand as the
manner is: and going presently to his own house, let him change his garments,
and lay those wherein he visited his friend, apart for a good time before he
resume them again.

Let him not forget upon his return home or before, to take a convenient
quantity of his cordial Electuarie, and forbear meat an hour or two after
it.

That Amulets confected of Arsenicke, are no good Preservatives against the
Plague.
PErceiving many in this City to wear about their necks, upon the region of
the heart, certain Placents, or Amulets (as Preservatives against the
Pestilence) confected of Arsenicke a strong poison, I have thought it needful
(other men keeping silence) to declare briefly my opinion touching the said
Amulets: not (I profess) in hatred to any man's person, or envy at their
commodity, wherein I might have shared with them, if I could have brought my
judgment to concur with theirs; but in conscience, and discharge of my
duty. The rather because I fear greatly, that through vain confidence in
them, other more apposite, convenient and effectual Antidotes, and Alexeteries
are neglected.

My opinion is, that these Placents of Arsenicke carried about upon the Region
of the heart, are so far from effecting any good in that kind, as a
preservative, that they are very dangerous and hurtful, if not pernicious to
those that wear them.

It is evident that Arsenicke being a confessed poison, Gal. 3. de Temp cap.
is an opposite, professed and perpetual enemy to our nature. Therefore being
worn next the skin, as soon as the heart waxes hot by any vehement motion,
labor or stirring (as it falls out usually) it must needs send out venomous
vapors to that noble and principal part; which will either penetrate by their
own force, or be drawn in with the air* by the dilation of those arteries
which are spread about the skin.

Now these poisonfull vapors being entered or sucked into the body, when they
find no contrary poison with whom to wrestle as with an enemy (for if there
were any venom in the body, the party could not enjoy health: but we intend
him to be in health, whom we would preserve) they must needs imprint a
malignant venomous quality in the spirits and heart, most adverse and
pernicious to nature.

If by Galens doctrine, 1 Simp. cap. 18.
all Alexeteries in a manner, if they be used somewhat too liberally, do
greatly offend and weaken our bodies; shall we think that rank poisons and
Deleteries (such as Arsenicke is) if they be so applied, as to penetrate into
the noblest region of all other, will nothing at all violate, and wast our
native, vital, and radical heat?

Galen and the ancient Fathers and Masters of Physic, Lib. de There. and
Pamphil. Epid* com. 5. Aetius lib. 1. Tetrah 4. ca. 96. Paulus lib. 2. cap. 35.
did not use to preserve from the Plague or any other poison, either by giving
another poison inwardly, or by appointing other poisons to be outwardly
applied, but proceeded altogether by Antidotes and Alexiteries. Lib. de
Theriaca ad Pis. cap. 16. Therefore unless we will disclaim these ancient
worthies and ringleaders method, and follow newfound and unsound devises, we
must fight against this monster, not with poisons, but Antidotes.

Poisons are desined to be such: Gal 6. in Epid.
as at no time do agree with nature, either well, or ill affected. For though
there be poisons which if they find a contratie venom in the body, do fight
so with it, that by the skirmish both poisons die, and the party by their
contention and colluctation escapes with his life: yet it is agreed on by all,
that where they find no such adversary or opposition, they speed the party.
Therefore Arsenicke worn by a man in health, finding not only no contrary
poison to war upon, but no poison at all, must necessarily oppose and set
upon nature her self.

Gerardus Columbus a learned Physician reports, Lib ^ de feb. contag.cap.17.
that it has been observed, that the wearers of these Amulets, upon heating
their bodies, have fallen into sudden Lypothimies and soounings, with other
fearful accidents, which ceased not till the Bag or Placent was remooved:
That others, though not instantly, yet after some time, have by late and
woeful experience discerned their malignitie, falling into malignate and
pestilent fevers, some of them ending with death it self.

Franc. Alphanus a Physician of Salerne tells of one, who wearing Arsenicke,
and heating himself at tennise, fell down suddenly dead.

Matheus Hessus writes thus: As cordial bags or Amulets cannot be
disallowed, so empoisoned can no way be commended; neither do I remember that
any ever received good from them who abstained from other Antidotes. This I
certainly know, that diverse who carry about them quicksilver in a nut-shell,
by the vain persuasion of some impostors, have died of the Plague: and the
counselors of such like Amulets have been the first that have betaken
themselves to their heels, trusting more in their running than cunning. And
yet these good fellows, persuaded the ignorant with great words, and it may be
oaths, that whosoever carried Quicksilver or Arsenicke about his neck, was as
safe as if he had purchased a protection from the King of heaven.

Historians report, that Caracalla though a wicked Emperor, made a public
Edict or Proclamation, that no man should wear about him superstitious Amulets.

Theophrastus the great, esteemed (not without cause) Pericles to have a crased
brain, because he saw him wear an Amulet about his neck.

Hereunto (as a Corollary) we may add the experience of some London
Physicians, who have seen foul holes made in the breast of those that have
worn them, and observed diverse to die as well as others, who have religiously
carried them about their necks.

I omit, for brevitie, to answer their reasons, who allow them, because those
that are alleged by Emperickes and ignorant persons, are not worthy the
answering; and those that are produced by some few learned men (the whole
stream running against them) are not comprehensible by the common sort, for
whose good I have set forth this short Caveat. But if any will contend, I will
either answer him, or yield up my weapons. In conclusion only remember, that
whereas the sellers and setters out, of these deceiptfull wares, make them as a
Scout to discover the Infection, when it begins to seize upon a man, by
giving a watchword, and clapping close to the heart, to guard that part as the
chief Tower: this is a mere deceit, collusion and abusion. For whenever
the body is heated, this event follows necessarily, as is before declared,
though no other infection be near but the infectious, poisonfull and venomous
Arsenicke; who offers not at that time, to the heart a friendly salutation or
caveat, but rather a Judas kiss, and Ioab-like embracing.

Certain Directions for the use of the poorer sort of people that shall be
visited by the Pestilence, how to carry themselves.
SInce Almighty God, by his wise providence has disposed, that there should
be poor among us, that the richer sort might have fit objects whereupon to
exercise their mercy and compassion, and has commanded in the sacred
Scriptures, both Magistrates and others, to take care of them, lest they cry to
the Lord against us in their misery, and their neglect, and contempt be imputed
to us, as one of our heinous and crying sins, pulling down vengeance upon
our heads, Deuter. 15. I would entreat the Governovrs of the City of London,
and all others in the Country, with all richmen, to take special notice of
their poor brethren, being bone of their bone, and flesh of their flesh, and,
as to restrain the idle Vagabonds, by whose wandering up and down, the
infection may well be spread and increased, so to provide for the true and
honest poor miserable people, that they may be supplied with food, and
convenient Physic if they fall into sickness. And because I will not
persuade others to charity, and my self remain altogether uncharitable, I
purpose to set down certain curative directions, for the poorer sort, with
such parable and cheap Medicines, as may come within the compass of their
short and mean ability.

So soon therefore as any of them, apprehend themselves taken with the plague,
let them go to their warm bed, and take this Medicine.

Take of Verben with the root dried and poudred two dragmes, the juice of the
same herb three ounces, half a small spoonefull of white Wine vinegar, mix
it, and drink it warm, and sweat for two or three hours.

Let them not sleep during the time of their sweating; whilst they sweat, let
them hold under their arme-pits, and upon the either emunctories, especially
the groynes, a Radish root, divided into two parts, the same root is to be
tied, unto the plants or hollow of their feet, when they have sweat well, for
two or three hours, according to the strength, and age of the party, dry
their bodies well, with warm and clean linen clothes, beginning with the
arme-pits and groyne, then the breast, whereon after the sweat is well wiped
away, lay a fresh and clean linen Napkin doubled. That done, let them wash
their mouth, face, and hands, with water and vinegar, and drink a good draught
of mutton broth made with Rose-mary, Time, Sorrel, Cichory. If their stomach
will give them leave, they may eat a little mutton, or veale at dinner, but
they are to forbear flesh-meate at Suppers. In stead of broth, watergrewell
with Rose-mary, or Burnet will do well, or thin pannada.

For their drink.
Let it be the middle or six shillings-bee^e, warmed with a tossed, Or water
boiled with Cardius seed, and Caroway seed, and the roots of Scabius, and
Verben, with a crust of bread.

Then let them rest, or sleep, washing their mouth often, if they be awake,
with water and vinegar.

They may likewise make a Quilt with Balm, Mint, Rose-mary, Sage, Sweet
Marjeram dried, and sprinkling it with vinegar of wormwood or Hearb-grace, or
ordinary wine vinegar, apply it to the region of the heart warm.

The second sweating Medicine.
After eight hours from the first invasion of the Pest, let them take another
sweating Medicine.

Take of the powder of the root of Diptamne, Scabbius, Gentian each half a
dragme, seed of Carduus Benedictus a scruple, juice of Mary-gold flowers,
devils-pit, each two ounces, half a spoonful of vinegar, of Rue or Wormwood,
or in want of them, ordinary Vinegar of White Wine.

Let them drink this warm, and sweat again, as at the first time two or
three hours, keeping in the mean while a Radish root at the Emunctories, as
before. Then dry off the sweat, wash the mouth, face and hands as before, take
some convenient nourishment, and carry themselves as in the first interim of
eight hours.

The third sweating Medicine.
Again the third time, after the like pause or intervall, let them take
another sweating and Cordial Med. in this manner.

Take of the seed of Rue or Hearb-grace, a scruple and half, that is, (30
grains) of the roots of Enula campana, Valerian, Fullers teasells,
Aristolochia the round, each half a scruple, the juice of three leaved Sorrel
called allebia, two ounces; juice of Rue, Scabious, each an ounce, a little of
the forenamed vinegar. Let them take it warm, sweat, as before, and carry
themselves in all points as before, and continue this course for four or five
days.

But if any be in that extreamitie of poverty and misery, that they cannot
procure these parable and easy cheap Medicines, let them drink twice in the
day, a draught of their own Urine, in the morning, and five in the afternoon.

If in the first, second or third day, the Botches or Carbuncles appear, the
best and safest way, both for poor and rich, is to commit themselves to be
ordered and dressed, by a skillful Surgeon. There willbe (no doubt) assigned
and maintained, for the meaner and poorer sort, Chirurgions ex communi aerario,
out of the common Purse, especially in London. Let those that are wealthy, make
choice of their own Chyrurgion, and pay well for their cure. For a little
health, is worth a great deal of gold, which a Chyrurgion in that case, must
fetch out of the fire, and hazard his own life every day, to save his Patient.
Emis a Medico seu Chyrurgo Rem inestimabilem, Vita sinc valetudine (...) est,
non vita. Soranus and Seneca.
vitam, valetudinem, cui quantumcunque dederis, exaequare non potes Medicinae
beneficia. Medico si quidem non (...), set operae pretium solvitur.

Non domus, aut fundi, non aris acervus and auri,
Aegroto Domini deducunt corpore febres,
Non animo curas, valeat possessor oportet.
Si comportatis been Rebus cogitat uti.
Let me add this one advertisment, as a corollarie or conclusion, that you
tamper not too soon with the Botches or Blanes, before they be well come
forth, and nature well cleared and releeved; but rather continue in the taking
of inward Cordials, and sweating Medicines. As Pesicatoris, and the like.
The over hasty applying of topicall and outward remedies, especially, if they
be forcible and sharp, (which is too usually practiced by some Physicians, and
Chyrurgions, and by Patients themselves) do often times by causing pain,
increasing the Fever, and weakening Nature, drive back and scatter the venom
into the inward parts, which suddenly, by a second insult, and encounter,
surpriseth the Fort of life, the Heart, and carries away the Patient.

-- Si quid novisti rictius istis,
Candidus imperti, si non his utere mecum:
En veniam pro laud peto laudatus abunde,
Non fastiditus, si tibi (lector) ero.
Sit Nomen Domini benedictem.
-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: s i non, his utere mecum.
The Preservatives mentioned in this book, may be had from Mr. James the
Apothecarie, at his house in Alderman-bury, near to the Conduit, with others
of like nature, well approved, and experimented.

FINIS.

