A TRVE AND BRIEF RELATION OF THE FAMOVS SEIGE OF BREDA: BESEIGED, AND TAKEN
IN Under the Able and Victorious Conduct of his Highness the Prince of Orange,
Captain General of the States Army, and Admiral of the Seas, etc.

Composed by HENRY HEXHAM quartermaster to the Regiment of the honorable
Coronell GORING.

Printed at Delft by JAMES MOXON, And are to be sold at Hendricus Hondius
near the gevangen Port in the Hagh, Anno 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND MOST Noble Lord, HENRY LORD RICH of KENSINGTON,
Earl of HOLLAND, Captain of his Majesty's Guard, and Gentlemen of the
Bedchamber, Chancellor of the University of CAMBRIDGE, Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter, and one of his Majesty's thost Honorable Privy
Council, etc.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
YOUR LORDSHIPS GRACIOUS ACCEPtance of my former Book, entitled The
Principles of the Art military, has given me encouragement, to annex a
second addition to it, in the Practick of the famous seige, and taking in of
Breda this year, by his Highness the Prince of Orange our General. Marquess
Spinola of famous memory, one of the best Generals that ever his Majesty the
King of Spain had, in his Netherlandish wars blockt it up in the years
1624, and 1625 eleven months, and odd days, and had his Herman Hugo a Jesuit,
who in commendations of the Marquess, wrote a relation of some memorable
actions touching this seige to posterity and did it well.

It is now my turn (according to my weak ability) to writ some thing also to
succeeding ages, in the honor and memorial of his Highness the Prince of
Orange and those chief Commanders, Gentlemen, and Soldiers under his
Command, that were at the seige this year, and I hope truly without giving
offense to any man: Here your honor shall see, the difference between a
Town blocked up, which is a languishing death, and a Town bravely beseiged,
and taken in by Approaches, which in a Soldiers opinion, is accounted more
honorable. Again, if your Lordship compare the times of the one, and of the
other General together, you shall find that there was never Town so strongly
fortified, having 3000 able men to defend it, regained in so short a time, to
wit, in 50 days, from the 18 of August, (namely the night, that we first brak
ground against this town) till the sixth of October following, that the Enemy
called for a parley, your Honor may see the admirable expedition (notwithstanding
all opposition within and without to relieve it) his highness made which the
oldest soldiers in these Wars have not seen the like. This breife relation
then craves that under your Lo: gracious patronage, it may find favor to come
out in English to the view of the world, and to give satisfaction to some of
our own nation, that were at this seige, which if it be acceptable to your
honor as my former was, then I am bound in a double Obligation to pray unto
the Almighty, to bless your noble family with much increase of honor in this
world, and to crown you with eternal felicity in the next, resting.

Your Lordships devoted Servant, ever to Command, HENRY HEXHAM.

AN INFORMATION TO THE READER OF the State of BREDA Formerly.
CVRTEOVS READER, the City of Breda, taken in this year by his Highness the
Prince of Orange, lying in the Land of Kempen, is a part of the Dukedom of
great Brabant, and the Head-Towne of a brave Barrony, having 16 villages, and a
walled Town under the Jurisdiction thereof. Among the which, there is
Steen-bergen, a Town newly fortifyed, with a Strong-Fort, or two upon the
haven, Rosendale a great, and a very pleasant village, and Osterhout a goodly
Lord-ship. This City is situated, upon a river called the Marck, whose
headspring begins some four English Miles above Hoogh-strate. It lies one
and twenty English miles and a half from Lier, one and twenty from Anwerpe,
15 from Bergin op Zoom, 15 from Turnhout, 9 from Seuenberke, and 6 from
Getruydenberke.

This City, and Barronie fell by marriage to the illustrious house of Nassaw
Anno 1404, two hundred three and thirty years ago: For that year Count
Englebert Ear af Nassaw, Espoused the Lady Io ane the only Inheritrix of this
Barronie of Breda, and the Land of Leck: for a long time it was the Court, and
ancient ressidency of the Earls of Nassaw, until such time that Duke D' Alva
by his tirannie, drove Prince William the old Prince of Orange, and Earl of
Nassaw (his Highness Father of famous memory) out of his ancient inheritance.
It has in it a goodly Castle double moated, founded by Count Henry of Nassaw,
which if it had been finished, according to the model thereof, it would have
been one of the beautisullest, and goodliest Structures of Brabant. Since the
Wars began, it has been strongly fortified with many Bulwarks, Horneworks,
Halfe-moons, Rauelings, and a large moate round about the Town in some places
14. rod, or 180 foot broad, and 9 or 10 foot deep with a good Counterskarfe
without it. This Town has suffered much by the wars, as by surprises,
blocking up, and Seiges and has been subject to many changes, some times
being lost, and other-wiles regayned on both sides: For in the year of our
Lord 1585. Prince William of famous memory enjoyed it peaceably and till
Hautpenny, one of the Ennemies Commanders, surprised it that year on the 25 of
June, plundered it, and burnt diverse houses in it, and so it continewed under
the power of the King of Spain, until Prince Maurice (of famous Memory) by a
brave Stratagem, under the conduct of Captain Herangier, who with 70 other
vailliant, and resolute men, hid under a Turfe-Schip, coming into the Castle
by night, broke out of that covert Ambuscado, cut of a Corpse degard, and took
in the Castle, and Prince Maurice marching with part of the States Army, to
second his dessigne, took in both Castle, and Town on the fourth of march in
the year 1590. After this (being an ill neighbor to the Busse) Anthony Schtes
the Gouenour thereof, and Lord of Grubbing donck, had an other enterprizce upon
it, and falling on in the night with 4000 foot, and eleven troop of horse,
those of Breda takeiug the alarm betimes, he finding them in a readenesle to
entertain him, was beaten off with the loss of a hundred men.

Again, Marquess Spinola haueing (Anno 1622) layne long before Bergin op
zoom, and lost, and hurt in the space of twelve weeks a matter of ten thousand
men before it, being so repulsed by my Lord Morgan (then commanding with the
Governor, the Commanders, Captains, officers and soldiers of all Nations,)
that he could not get so much as a foot of ground of them, though he attempted
and assaulted oftentimes the outworkes, with the loss of a great many me^, who
at last by the coming of Prince Morris of happy memory, and Count Mansfeild
to Rossendale with the States Army, not willing to stand them: on a sudden
brake up, and quitted the seige in the night with a great confusion, leaving be
hind him a great many sick, and hurt men, ammunition, victuals, and other
matterials. The Marquess Spinola then being Jealous of his honor, after
Prince Maurize had putt into Breda 6000 choice Soldiers, namely, his own
Guard, and most of the Coronels Companies, came and satt down before it, on
the 28 of August. 1624. and having sustained the loss of a great many brave
men before Bergin, feareing to attempt the same by Approches, (commanding a
mighty Army) choose rather to block it up on all sides, and so knowing that
many mouths, must eat many victuals, sought rather to famish it out. Prince
Maurice coming with the States Army to the May, having a greater dessigne in
his head, to wit, an Enterprise upon the Castle of Antwerpe, which would have
fetch the Marquess from Breda: failing for want of Courage, and falling on (as
it is reported) gave the Marquess time to fortify himself the stronger before
Breda, and to that end, made a double line of Circumvalation about it, with
strong Forts, Horneworkes, halfemoones, Redoubts, and Spurrs, and cutting the
dike at Terhey, drowned all the lower grounds, and made a Steckado over the
drowned meddowes, to hinder and keep us from relieuing it by water, and
sloopes. Howsoever, his Highness the Prince of Orange to see if he could
possibly relieve yt, gave command to Sir Horace Vere of worthy Memory, Lord of
Tylbery, and Coronell General of the English, with my Lord of Oxford, who
commanded the new English, on the 16 of May 1625 to fall on upon the dike of
Terhey, between the drowned lands; the dike being not a boue 20, or 30 foot
broad at the most: the ennemie having two, or three strong Redoubts upon it,
ere you came to the Halfmoone before their quarter of Terhey. An hour before
day, the new English fell on, first took two Redoubts upon that Dike, and an
other upon Seuenberks-Dike, beat the Ennemie out of the^, slew many of the^,
and after a long fight the new and the old English fell upon the half moon,
and disputed it a long with the Ennemie, till such time as the Marquess sent
fresh forces, horse and foot to second them of Terhey, and to defend that
quarter: now after Sun rising, finding it not feisible, our me^ were driven to
retreat. Upon this service Sir Thomas Win being a voluntier, Captain Tubb,
Captain Dakers, Lieutenant Cheyney, Lieutenant Corbitt, and my Lord of Oxfords
Ensign, with diverse Gentlemen and souildiers were slain, and Capt: Shippon
shot, so that from that time forward, this City by famine languished away,
until the fifth of June 1625. On which day it fell again under the power, and
obedience of the King of Spain, and became a Receptacle for a great many
Freebooters, which did much annoy the States Countries, that lay next unto yt,
bringing them under Contribution: Till that this present year, his highness the
Prince of Orange beseiged it, and took it in again, every nation striving at
this seige, to do the land service, besides the particular obligation they
owed unto his highness, being his own town, it gave the more life and courage
unto them. Now what memorable pieces of service, and actions have bin performed
during this Seige from the 23 of July, until the 10 of October 1637. This true
and brief Relation (though I cannot remember all perticulars for want of due
information,) will give the worthy Reader reasonable satisfaction, and this as
a preamble may serve to the matter it self following.

A TRVE AND A BRIEF RELATION Of the famous Seige OF BREDA.
THE LORDS THE STATES GENERAL of the united Provinces, and his highness the
Prince of Orange, according to their alliance made with France, desirous to
divert the Cardinal Infant, from bending his whole force, against the King of
France his Army, which was fallen into Henegow, and had beseiged, and lay
engaged before. Landrescy; resolved to draw, their Army also into the field,
and to that end, made great preparations of all things, necessary for the
war, appointing the Rende-vous on the 12. of July, this present year at
Rammekens in Zealand: the Army conducted by the Prince, consisted of about one
and twenty thousand foot, and some three thousand horse, which were divided
into three Brigades, or Tercias. to wit, the French and the walloons; making
one and fifty foot Companies, commanded by Coronell Hauteriue: The English
whose meeting was first at Bergen op Zoom, making with the Lord of Brederodes
Regiment, and Count Solmes his Regiment 55. Companies, commanded by my Lord
Morgan, and Count Wlliams Lord Marshall of the field, consisting of 5 dutch
Regiments, and three Scotch, making in all 63 companies, beside the Horse,
ordered also into three Tercias, vidz. The Lord of Stakenbroecks, Lieutenant
Geneall of the Horse. The Duke of Bouillons, and Count Stirums Commissary of
the Horse, making in all some 40 troops. This Army was embarked in four,
or five thowsands Smack-ships, the greatest they could get for the horse, with
provisions of Hay, Oats, water and bridges for them: and as soon as they came
to Rammekins, the Army lay between that Castle, and Middleborough head the
Horse troops next the Head, and the train of victuals and Ammunition up toward
Armuyde. Those foot companies, which lay in little ships, were by order from
the prince removed into greater, and the Shippers had command, to provide them
selves Cables, Ankors, and to ballast their ships with sand, the Soldiers
likewise haueing order, to furnish themselves with tenn days victuals. The
Ennemy seeing, and hearing the noize of these preparations, thought verily that
the prince of Orange his dessigne was for Flanders, and therefore to hinder our
landing, they drew a head, and left his garrisons in other places of horse, and
foot, as weak as possibly he could, and getting a compitent army together, to
resist the Prince, put strong garrisons into Hulst, the Land of Waes, and all
the Towns lying along the Sea Coast of Flanders, even from Sluice, and Dam to
Greueling, to keep us from Landing.

This it seems the Prince of Orange did in all probability, to amuze the
Ennemy, and to harrie, and weary out his men, his highness design lying an
oaths way, or else perhaps the contrarienesse of the wind. which blew a stiff
gale, and by gusts diverse days together, might alter his highness resolution:
for after our Army had layne nine days between Rammekins, and Middleborough
head with expectation every day to set Sail for Flanders: upon Sunday the 19
of July, came order in the afternoon from his highness, that all our men,
which were a shore, at Middleborow, or Flishing, should presently upon pain
of death, that night repair to shipboard, and withal Commanded Monsieur
Perceuall quartermaster General, and all the particular quartermasters of
every Regiment, with all expedition that night to set sail for Bergin op zoom,
to veiw a landing place for the Army, and to draw out quarters for every
Regiment in the fields of Northgeest and Ostgeest, and Commanded also, that
upon Monday morning, being the twentieth, when the Princes shipp should set
sail from Rammekins, and shoot of a warning-peece, that then every Tercia, as
they lay, should make ready, to sail after him: So then on the 20, about five
of the Clock in the Morning, the Prince having a stiff, and a prosperous gale
of Wind, set sail for Bergin op zoom, all the army following him, as fast as
they Could get out. And at the same instant, his highness Caused two hundred
empty ships, with the shippers only, and some few drummers in them, to Sail
up the Scheld, and along the land of Waes, to make show of landing there, which
gave the ennemy So strong an alarm in all those parts, that they never thought
of his coming any where else, his highness in the interim kept his course
toward Bergin up zoom, and by twelve a clock came the same day to the Fort,
that lies upon the creek, between Bergin and Tertole, where he cast anchor,
and seeing Sir Jacob Ashley Seriant Mayor of the English tercia pass by him,
gave him order, that as the shipping came up, they should follow two ships,
which were to sail into the creek, that runns up toward Halter, as far as
they could, and there to find a fit landing place for the army, and coming to
the landing place should be drawn a shore, and march along the dike to their
several quarters, which was done accordingly with admirable expedition: for
the shipping coming up, a great part of the army that afternone was landed,
and drawn into their quarters, the officers, and soldiers having layne long
a board, were willing to refresh themselves a shore, some of them wading up to
the knees in water, and mudd, till they got to the dike. The horse troops had
order to run up into Bergen head, and as far as they could into the town,
for the more commodious, and the better landing of their troops,

The next day being tewsday, and the 21, the rest of the Army horse and foot
were disembarqued, drawn into their quarters, and received order, to provide
the^ three, for four days victuals, against the next morning. Now on wensday
the 22 at the break of the day, all the quarter master received wagons from
the waggon-master general, for the chief officers and Captains of their
Regiments, two Captains to a Wagon, which were presently distributed to the
Captains, and sent away with all expedition to the shipping, with command so
lade their wagons, and to follow the Army. This morning about seven of the
clock, the whole army drew into arms, and the English Tercia, having the
avantgard that day, marched to their old quarter of Rosendale (where they had
layne a whole winter, when Marquess Spinola had blocked up Breda anno 1624)
where they were well quartered, and the Coronels, and chief officers
accommodated with houses.

The next morning being the 23 of July, at the creek of the day, the army
began to move again, and Count Williams tercia having the Auantgard, we
marched that day to the heath, between Ginnekins, and the mast-wood before
Breda.

Some days before we departed from Rammekins, his highness had written to
Count Henry Casimir, governor of Frizeland, who to guard the Muze, and the
Rhene, and to desend those quarters, had an Army of 90 Companies, horse and
foot, composed of all nations, as English, French, Dutch, and Scotch, and gave
him order night and day to march with his Army, toward Breda, who upon the 21
of July, two days before his highness came before it, rounded the town, and
stopped all Auenues, and passages into it. This gave those of Breda a terible
alarm, which made them ring their alarm Bell, and made them shut, and damme
up their ports: the same day as Count Henry came before it, they sallied out of
the town with some 400 men, to fetch in Cattle, and other provisions, but our
horse beat them in again with the losre of some men slain, others hurt, and
some taken prisoners.

To return again to the Prinecs Army, on Thurs-day the 23 of July new style,
our Army came, and lay in Battle upon the Heath, between the princes houses
near Ginnekins and the River of Merch, and the Mastwoed. In the river by the
princes house, there lay a new long boat, very commodious to make a bridge
upon, his highness presently gave order to the Carpenters, and workmen, to
lay plancks over it, and to make two bridges upon it for his men to pass over
it, on the other side of the Merch to the Lord of Bredrods, Count Solmes, and
Count Henry's quarters, which that afternoon was made with all expedition, and
withal gave order, that noe quarters should be made for the Regiments, but all
of them to lie in Battaille attending an ennemy, until such time as our line
of Circumualation was defensible.

On Friday morning then the 24. at the break of the day, all the
quartermasters had orders, to fetch matterials from the Commisse Martin for
250. workmen of every English, and French Regiment, and proportionally of
every Regiment of the whole Army: so that there were above 5000 Commanded men
that morning, appointed with the quartermasters to go to work, every soldier
having given him by the Inginier, and his quartermaster a rhenish rodd of
ground, that is 12 foot, to cast up. The Line of Circumualation was began
first from the Princes house, by Coronell Colepeppers Regiment, and then every
Regiment, according to the order of their march, took their ground, the line
was cast up over the hills, and heights, a long through the Mastwood, to
Papenmutch, to the Hagh, where Count Williams quarter was, and so to Monsieur
Buyshuysens quarter of 8 Companies, and then to Terhey, where Coronell Varick
lay with 12 Companies. And over the bridge by the Princes house, it ran a long
through the walloons quarter, to the Lord of Bredrods, to Count Solmes, and so
to Tettering to Count Henry his quarter, and from thence over the feilds to the
Swart dicke, upon which redoubts were made, and so was shutt at Terhey, being
some 21 English miles in compass, having upon heights. and places of advantage
strong Forts, Horneworkes, Half moons, and spurs, with diverse batteries upon
it. And the merck, and the other River were stopped, and damned up in two places,
to wit, by the Princes quarter, and between Papenmutch and the Hagh, which
ouerflowed, and drowned all the meddowes, and lower grounds, more then a man's
height deep, and lay like a sea before our Trenches. Three or four days also
after the prince had satt down with his Army before Breda, there came a matter
of some 3 or 4. thousand Boores, or hus-bandmen out of Holland, who made an out
ditch casting the earth up (on both sides, on the out side of the first line)
eight foot deep, 8 foot high on both sides and sixteen foot broad, to
hinder the Ennemes horse from leaping over it, and breaking in upon us.

Upon Friday, Satterday, and Sunday the 24. the 25. and 26. of July, we wrought
upon the line with great expedition, while the rest of our army these three
days lay in bataille. On Sunday before noon the quartermaster General, and
the particular quartermasters of every Regiment, drew out the French quarters
upon the heigths, and the English quarter upon the heath nearer the town. And
on Monday, being the 27 the Regiments, and companies drew into their quarters,
and cast up a Trench before them, even from the mast wood to the river side.
Tewsday, Wensday, and Thursday were spent in reparing our line, raising it, and
making a foot-banke to yt, and in finishing the Trenches before the head of
our quarters.

Upon Friday the 14 of July, there were sent down in the night with Monsieur
Perceuall, the quartermaster General 150 English, and as many French all work
men, to break ground just half way, between Breda and Ginnekins, where they
cast up a small halfemoone and a redout by the water mill, and the burnt
houses, to keep in the Ennemy. Satterday the first of August was spent in
repairing, the line.

Upon Sunday about three of the Clock in the morning, the Ennemy sallyed out
upon these two small works, some 150 men, and discharged a volley of shot
upon them, but hearing our Trumpetter of the horse guard sound a charge,
retreated presently this was only to discover: for upon Monday the third,
about the same hour in the morning, they Sallied our again about 200 men with
fire-lockes, and encompassing both the works, offered to give on, upon one of
the points of the half moon, giving fire upon our men: But Monsieur Beringham,
who commands the Princes troop, came thither with some horsemen from the
Princes guard notfarre of, and sounding a charge the Ennemy instantly retreated,
as fast as they could, into the outworckes of the Town, and being come under
their ordinance, they shot from of the Bulwarks and walls, about 20 Canon
shot upon those works, and upon the way up toward Ginnekens, leaving dead
behind them a Sariant, a gallant man, and 5 or 6 others slain: and carried of
at least 15 or 16 hurt men. Upon this service Lieutenant Loofe, (Lieutenant tot
Lieut Coronell Thienen) was hurt.

About this time his Highness the Prince Elector Palatine, with his Brethren,
Prince Rupert and Prince Maurice, and a great train of English Noblemen, and
Gentlemen, came to the siege, who during the whole time of it, were every day
as frequent, and forward in the Approaches, as any needy Cadet could be, that
sought to make his fortune that way. And were attended on by Sir Robart Stone,
Sir Thomas Billing sley, Mr. Karr, Mr. Daniell, Mr. Hamptden, Mr. Grissin,
their own followers, accompained also with the Earls of Warwick and
Northhampton, my Lord Grandisson, Sir William Howard Mr. Oneall, Captain
Crofts, Mr. Apsley, Mr. Fanchy, Mr. Eldrington, Mr. Neale, and afterward Mr.
Neuill, who putt themselves under Coronell Gorings command, and marched with
his Company to their gards. And Mr. Georg, and Mr. Walter Vane, mounted
themselves under the Princes Troop.

His Hghnesse the Cardinal Infant, hearing now that the Prince of Orange with
our Army was set down before Breda, made all the expedition that possibly he
could, to gather a head from among his harried troops, who had had long and
wearisome marches, for the defending of the coast of Flanders, the land of
Waes, and other places, and picked up a reasonable Army consisting of some 10000
foot and 50 troops of horse (the most of them being employed against the
French to resist the^, and hinder their incursious and progress into the
Provinces of Henegow and Artois) and on the 24. of July new style, accompanied
with Prince Tomaso of Sauoy, Count Feria, and some other Grands came to
Antwerpe, drawing on the 23. 7 or 8 Canon through it. The same day came the
Regiment of Bruon to him, being a matter of twelve hundred men strong, who had
thought to have put his Regiment into Breda, but was prevented and deceived,
baked 80 thousand loaves of Bread for his army, and gave them some Money, and
drew out of Gelders, Gennip and Steuensward, and other forts, and places all
men that might be spared, to see if he could relieve Breda, his me^ promising
him, that they would either venture for to relieve it, or to dye before it, but
the carfulness and industry of his Highness the Prince of Orange was such,
that it was a thing impossible for them to break through our line.

The Cardinal Infant then the second of August being come to great and little
Sundert, and Rysbergen, which is an hours going from the Hagh Count Williams
quarter, as the mapp of the Barronie of Breda shows, quartered in these three
villages, hutted and cast up for their safeguard some trauerses upon the
auenues, and passages, and showed a matter of 17 troops of his Horse upon the
heath, within less then a Canon shot of Count Williams quarter, who saluted
them from his Batteries, with our Ordinance, and slew some four, or five of
them, shot of the chaps of a horse, which they left behind them, and so
retreated. Those of Breda seeing their friends were come so near with hopes of
relief, did encourage them: and on the third, fourth and fifth of August, hung
out lanternes upon the topp of their high steeple, to show them the way into
the Town by night: but by the vigilencie of his Highness, our out-line by
that time was made so strong, that they durst not venture to break through it.

The Ennemy being come so nere us, now was a time of action, for 10 or 12
nights one after an other, as long as the Cardinals Army lay in these
villages above named, our whole army horse and foot of all nations, every
night drew out after the warning piece went of to besett the out line, and
every company to march to their several stations, and attend the Ennemy, if
he durst have attempted any thing for the relief of Breda: once more he showed
14 troop of his horse, which were beaten back with our Cannon, as the former
were.

Upon wensday night the 12 of August 400 of our horse went and gave the Ennemy
an alarm in the night, and beat up their horse gards to a trauerse, which
they had cast up before their quarter, slew four or five of the Ennemy, and
finding there some of their foot, to second them, our men retreated with the
loose also of some four or five men.

On Friday night the 14 of August the Cardinal Infant; seeing noe possibility
to break through our line and Army, in the night sent away a part of his
forces, who brake up, and fired their quarters, and the next morning rose with
the gross of his Army, marching toward Loone, and other villages in Brabant,
having a secret plott, and enterprise upon the Sconce of the Vorne, and Theil,
and before that had given order to those troops of his, which were drawneout
of Gelders, Gennep, and Steuensward, to march to these two places, who coming
to the Maze side, and putting some men in boats to crosle over the river, into
the Island of the Vorne, were discovered on Saturday night the 15 of August. A
man of war, and our men discharged many shot among them, which slew diverse
of their men, and leaving their Scaling ladders behind the^, were driven to
retreat, being reported, that these two places had warning and intelligence of
them by a Boore, that rann from them, so that if they had fallen on, our men
were provided to entertain them. In the Interim the Cardinal Infant and his
army, who came to second them, buzzed up and down with hopes, that this
dessigne of his would take effect, and cause the Prince of Orange, to rise from
his seige of Breda, but his expectation was frustrate.

The Ennemy being marched away, his highness that evening sent for Coronell
Wyne-bergen, and Sir. Simon Harcourt, Sariant Maiour to Coronell Gorings
regiment, to attend the Ennemy, and gave them the command of 25 corpanies out
of every regiment: among the rest of our nation Sir. Simons own company,
Captain Ropers, Captain Herles, and Captain Duncums, and that night they
marched toward Ghetrudenberke, and coming to Hemersward by Heusden, Coronell
Wynebergen marched away with his 14. Companies up toward the Bettow, to desend
(with Coronell Pincen) the river, and those parts, lying upon the Rhene, and
the Whale. Sir. Simon Harcourt staying in Hemersward with his eleven companies
to guard that place: but on the 18 of August, received order from the Prince, to
march with his men to the Grave, for the securing of that Town, if the Ennemy,
who drew that ways should have beseiged it. There he stayed some ten, or
twelve days, until the Ennemy was marched away to Venlo and Roermont. The
Ennemy being gone, he received order again to march from thence to Nemwegen,
where he did embarke his eleven companies for Wesell: but before his arrival
there, he received a Counter-command from the Prince, to return again with
his men to the Army, This by the way.

On Satterday the 15 of August in the night, there were 150. English, and 150
French workmen, commanded to go down with Monsieur Perceuall, the
quartermaster General, to break ground and this night advanced some 300 paces
forward, from the two first works above named toward the hills, upon which
they made the first battery, for four or five pieces of ordinance, to favor
our workmen, and to keep the Ennemy from sallying out.

Upon Sunday the 16 that nights work was repaired, and in the afternoon the
Prince with a great train, went to view the Ennemies quarters, in what form
they lay. Also upon Sunday at night following, the English from the first
battery Northward on the left hand cast up a Trench, and got 76 Rod toward
the town, at the end whereof they made a good Redoubt: the French doing the
like from the right hand of the batrerie, and got as much ground, or rather
more, casting up also an other Redoubt, and there were commanded men the next
morning sent down, to repair that nights work.

On Monday the 17, Sundaies nights work being repaired, the the first battery
of five pieces was made, to hinder the Ennemy from Sallying out upon our
approches, and our trenches was enlarged to 12 foot broad, that ordinance and
wagons might be drawn down, the day following our trenches were heightened,
and some blindes set up.

On Tewsday night the 18 of August, My Lord Morgan, and Monsieur Hauteriue, as
Eldest Coronels went down to break ground, and to advance the approches.
Monsieur Hauteriue from the first battery, as eldest Coronell taking the
right hand, and my Lord Morgan the left, and so the English and French ran
their lines, each Coronell commanding ten companies, to wit, eight English, and
two Dutch, one of the Lord of Bredroods Regiment, and an other of Count Solms,
and the French Coronell ten Companies of their own nation, the Gards, and the
Walloons which guarded with them. There was appointed, to go down with these
two Coronells, to break ground, 250. Commanded men with matterials, and our
English that night, in running an oblique line, got forward 72. rodd, or 864.
foot, from the left corner of our first battery, and at the end thereof, made
a large Corpse of Guard to defend that approach. The French did the like that
night, from the right corner of the battery, and having 50 men more then the
English they got 80. rodd. The Ennemie Shot much this night upon our men,
that guarded the workmen, and with some five, or six of their men, gave us an
alarm, and my Lord Morgan shot through his briches, which bullet grazed upon
his buttock, without doing him any further harm. This night Captain
Francisco, who commands Captain Francis Veres Company, had three of his men
mortally wounded, whereof they all dyed with in two, or three days after.

Upon wensday morning being the 19. there was sent down into the approches, a
Sariant, and 30. men of every English, and Dutch Regiment to repair, heigthen,
and enlarge the approach made that night.

Moreover, about eleven of the clock that day, the Ennemy sallied out of their
works, about fifty men upon the French approaches, thinking to have cut of
some of those that had the point. But Captain d' Escars, Lieutenant de Brett,
and Monsieur la Terriere, who commanded Coronell Hauteriue his company, with
some French Volunteers, fell out of their trenches, and beat the Ennemy back
again into their works. In this sallie the Ennemy lost a Captain, a Sariant,
and seven or eight men, and had an other Sariant shot in his thigh, who had
behaved himself so stoutly, that afterward when there was a parley, the Prince
of Orange being in the approches, sent him four double-pistols, as a reward of
his courage: So much he prizeth valor, though in an Ennemy.

The Ennemy being retreated into his works, within half an hour after, they
beat a Parley, desiring that they might fetch off their dead bodies,
especially to seek for the Corpse of a Captain of theirs that was slain upon
this service. His Highness the Prince of Orange, being acquainted therewith,
granted them a Parley for an hours time, and presently after dinner the Prince
came down himself into the French approaches, and while the cessation of arms
dured, there were appointed Officers on both sides, to meet half way betwixt
the Ennemies works, and our Trenches, till they had sought out, and fetched of
their dead. The Prince on our side (with a french officier) commanded Monsieur
Perceuall, the quartermaster General, and chief Inginier for the directing of
the French Approaches, to take upon him the habit, and quality of a Sariant,
with a halbert in his hand, and to go out, and entertayning discourse with the
Ennemies Officer, which should come out on their side, should cast his eye
about him now and then, to discover how the ground lay, and the Ennemies
works, that he might the better know, which way to run his approches toward
them: neither was the Ennemy failing herein: for they sent also out of the
Town, their chief Inginier, to espy how our line, and Trenches lay. These
two chief Inginers meeting together, the Ennemies men to show their curtesy,
brought out of their Horneworke good Renish wine, and the best Bredaes Beer
they could get, and there they drank two or three healths, to the Cardinal
Infantes, the Prince of Oranges, and at last the Ennemies Inginier enquiring
how Monsieur Perceuall did, dranck a health unto him, who unknown unto the
Ennemies Inginier, pledged his own health.

On Wensday night the 19 Count Solms commanding in the English, and Dutch
Approaches, two Sariants with Sixty workmen were sent down into the Trenches,
and from the last nights corpse de guard, ran a line slooping some sixty rod,
and cast up an other Corpse de guard at the end of it, and on the left hand
began to make a battery, we got this night almost within two stones cast of
the Ennemies Horne-worke: the French likewise this night got as much ground
made likewise a Corpse de guard, and advanced their Approaches well. The next day
this nights work was repaired.

On Thursday night the 20 of August, Coronell Herbert went down to command in
the Approaches, and had a Sariant, and 30 men out of every Regiment, to advance
the work: this night they got 23 rod toward the Horne-worke, and from the
point, braunched out ten rodd on the right hand, upon which the great battery
for twelve half Canon was made. This night Captain Stanton was shot in his
leg, and Lieutenaut Baxter a liltle beneath his hipp, with seven others that
were shot besides them. The next day that night work was repaired, and the
Trench heightened, and made broader.

It was Coronel Gorings turn on Friday night the 21, to releive Coronell
Herbert, and to command in the approaches, with whom the Earl of
North-hampton, my Lord Grandison, with many other brave Volunteirs, worthy
Officers, and gentlemen of quality, came down to accompany him that night, and
the next day in the trenches. The Ennemy to hinder our men from working, and
Sapping forward shot much: but the Coronell to encourage the workmen, for the
advancing of the Sapp, went oftentimes into the Sapp this night, with Captain
Watkins chief Inginier for the guiding of the English Approches, as likewife
to Sariant Adams, (master of that Sapp,) with 27 sappers, which he had taken
on, who did not only receive his direction, but also tasted of his liberality,
for besides that which the States gave them, which was two Rixdallers a piece,
wherely he did not only encourage them for the present, but won their hearts
for any further employment, as did afterward appear in effect. And because
the work, which they had done that night, might be repaired the next morning:
the Coronell sent up his quartermaster to the quarter for 15 workmen and
a-Sariant out of every English Regiment, which he brought up to his Coronell by
three a clock in the morning, who presently fell to work, in heightning the
Sapp on both sides, fetch rise-busshes, made blinds, and set up a hundred
musket-baskets upon the topp of the Trench, and flanks, where our Musketeers
might offend the Ennemy most. This morning Sariant Bagnall, Coronell Gorings
Sariant was shot through his chapps, and some of his teeth struck out, and
one Abraham Gunly, of the Coronels Company, received there his mortal wound,
where of he dyed a day after.

Satterday night the 22. of August, Coronell Colepepper, relieved Coronell
Goring, this night the Ennemy shot very much, and cast diverse Handgranadoes
into our Sapp among the Sappers, and yet thanks be to God, there was but one
man slain. This night our men got 6 rod forward toward the Ennemies
Horne-worke, and the next day, that nights work was heightened, and the Sapp
made broader.

Upon Sunday the 23. there was planted six half Canon upon the great
Battery, which was made for 12 pieces. Two other batteries were a making
ready, for 8 half Cannon, and an other for four pieces in the French Approach,
as likewise a batterre for two great morters in the Corpse of guard on the right
hand: These ordinance played, and beat furiously upon the wall, and Ginnekins
Bulwark to dismount the Ennemies ordinance.

Upon Sunday morning also being the 23 of August, Sir James Sandalien, Coronell
of a Scotch Regiment, commanding then in Count Williams approches, standing
upon a place, that was somewhat higher the^ the rest, to show the Inginier,
which way was best for him to Sapp toward the palisadoes of the
Counter-skarfe, which lay without the Horneworke, received a dangerous shot
through his left hand, which raked along the blade of his arm, up toward his
elbow, and brake some small bones in his hand.

This afternoon the Ennemy shot a great granado, out of one of their morters,
of the bigness of a Canon bullet, two French men running after it, and
imagining it to be a Cannon bullet, one of them stooping to take it up, it
brake in pieces between his arms, toore him all to pieces; and blew his bones
and flesh up into the air, that a piece of him could not be found.

On Sunday night the 23. my Lord Morgan relieved Coronell Colepepper, this
night our men sapped two or three rod toward the Ennemies Counterskarse, our
men and the Ennemies, this night gave fire exceedingly one upon an other. This
night also the line of Communication, was begun between the French and the
English, and the next day being monday, that nights work was repaired, and
more ordinance planted upon the batteries.

Upon Monday night the 24 Count Solmes relieved my Lord Morgan, who commanded
the approaches. The workmen sapt forward this night, till they came to a
morras, which did hinder them much, so that they were constrained to turn the
line, and sapp along it, till they were past it: howsoever they got a matter
of 30 foot this night, and set up blinds of rize-bushes to shelter them. The
next day that nights work was repaired, and more Cannon planted upon our
batteries.

This afternoon Monsieur Perceuall, the quartermaster Geneall, who had the
direction of the French approaches, as is said before going to visit the
French Sapp, was dangerously shot through his left shoulder, where of he has
layne in great weakness a long time: God in his good time, restore him to his
former health.

This afternoon also toward evening, Count Henry of Nassau, Coronell of the
North-Holland Regiment, commanding in Count Williams approaches. The Ennemie
sallied out of their works on that side, a matter of 200, choice men, and
coming up to the very point, surprised the Duchess that had the Guard there,
beating them back through the trenches, where Captain Scheur a worthy man, who
commanded at the point, (in regard his men did abandon him) after he had
defended himself, as long as he could was slain: notwithstanding that Count
Harrie himself, very bravely did what was possible to resist their retreat:
and to second him: but could not, till at length, Lieutenant Coronell Erskins
his Company advancing from an after guard, charged up to the Ennemy, with
Count Harrie, and Alexander Hammilton, Ensign to the said Company, beat back
the Ennemie out of our Trenches, and fell into the upon field upon them, and
coming to push of the pike with them, the Ensign grapled hand to hand with
one of the Ennemies Ossicers, and killed him, and afterward took an Italian
prisonner, and so forced the Ennemy to retire very sadly, and with a great
loss, though but of a few persons: for one Cantelmo, a gallant yongman an
Italian, and much favored by the Cardinal Infant, who had stolen into the
town not long before in Boores apparel, was unfortunately shot upon this
sallie in the belly, of which hurt he dyed two days after.

Moreover upon this day being the 24 of August Bredroode the Commander of Venlo
with some other Captains, gave over this Town very unworthily into the hands
of the Cardinal Infant after he had layne with his army a day or two before
it, and marched out of it above eleue^ hundred able men besides officers, who
might well have defended it a month, or three weeks at the least, for which
they had their condign sentence from the high Council of War of the united
provinces, as an example to others.

On Tewsday night the 25 Coronell Herbert marched down to command in the
Approaches, and relieved Count Solms, and notwithstanding the Ennemie shot
much this night, yet our workmen sapped forward a matter of some 24 foot,
toward the Ennemies Counterskarfe, and set up blindes upon it, and the next
day repaired that nights work.

On Wensday night the 26, Coronell Goring haueing the command in the Aproches
relieved Coronell Herbert, the Ennemy this night shot much, especially upon the
French aproaches, and cast above 30 hand-granadoes toward, and into their sap.
The English advanced their Sapp this night some two rod. An hour before day
two of the Ennemie, with long firelockes came out of their counter-skarfe, and
crept upon their bellies to the end of our Sapp, and peeping into it, Seeing the
light, shot the workemaster thereof, and one of the Sappers stark dead, just as
Coronell Goring came from visiting them. The death of these two, retarted and
hindered the advancing of the Sapp for a while, till the Coronell persuaded some
expert soldiers of his own company (notwithstanding this disaster) to
undertake it again, causing them toward morning to make blindes, that the
Ennemie might not discover our Sappers, who under the favor of our Canon, and
musketteiers, which he caused to play continually, advanced the Sap the next
day 12 foot forwards, and upon wensday morning, there were sent down into the
Approches, two hundred commanded men with his quartermaster, and a hundred
muskett baskets; to be set up, to heigthen, and diepen the sap, and to make a
foote-banke upon the trench, that our musketeers might the better give fire
upon the Ennemy, between these musket basketts. This day, and the day
following, we beat continually with 12 or 14 pieces of half Canon, upon
Ginnekins Bulwark, and the Curtain of the wall, to dis. mount their
ordinance. Upon Thursday the 27, the Ennemie about eleven of the clock, sallyed
out of their Countersckarfe with pitch ropes, to fire the Blinds, which were
made upon the point of the French Sapp, and coming up cast a great many
Hand-granads into the sapp among the workmen. Monsieur Charneze Coronell, had
then the command in the French Approaches, and fell out bravely upon the Ennemy
with a hundred French, beat them back from the Approaches, to the topp of
their Counter-skarfe, and there came to push a pike, and sword to sword with
them, yea he beat them out of their Counter-skarfe, but lying open to the
Horn-worke, and the flanks of the Town, having noe couuert, nor time to turn
it up in the day, retreated again into his Approaches. Upon this service a
piece of a Granado breakeing struck Monsieur Charnaze upon his cheek, which
raized the skin, and drew a little blood, and though the Ennemy shot much, and
cast a great many Grenades into their Sap: yet they advanced it so forward,
that they came to the foot of the Counterskarfe: and their digd out one of the
Ennemies Palisadoes, and sent it to the Prince for a token, the Prince
rewarding him that brought it, (as he promissed before) with as much money, as
would buy him a new suit of clothes cloak and all.

On Thursday night the 27. Coronell Colepepper relieved Coronell Goring. The
Sapp this night was advanced three rod, and the workmen sapt to the very foot
of the Countreskarfe before the Horn. work, and the Sappers digd out three
Palisadoes, and on Friday morning the Inginier, and he that pulled them out,
presented them to the Prince, who rewarded him in the same manner, as he did
the other the day before. Without all question the English had bin first in
their Counterskarfe, if they had not met unfortunately with the Morrase
abouesaid, which did hinder them, and cast them Behind hand two days at the
least. On friday the sap was heightened on both sides, made deeper and broader,
and muskets-baskets and blinds set up.

On Friday night the 28 my Lord Morgan commanding the Approaches, being come
to the foot of the Counterskarfe sapped forward into it, and notwithstanding,
that the Ennemie shot very hard upon our men, both with their small shot and
Canon, to hinder our men from advancing, yet that night the sappers sapped
forwards 12 foot, my Lord Morgan commanding to give fire from al Corpse de
guard, and flanks upon the Ennemies Horne-worke, that under the favor thereof
our men might go on, The next morning being Satterday, that nights work was
repaired, and blindes set up.

Upon Satterday night the 29 Count Solmes releiued my Lord Morgan, and sapt
forward, being now in the Counterskarfe, our men had elbow room, to branch
out on both sides upon the Counterskarf and cast up two Corpse of guards, one on
the right hand, an other on the left hand, making blindes, and setting up
musket-baskets for our musketeers to play through, and to annoy the Ennemy,
that gave fire upon our men from their Horneworke, and other of their
out-workes, the next day being Sunday, and the 30 the sapp, and these gards
were repaired.

On Sunday night the 30 of August, it was Coronell Herberts turn to command
in the approaches, and notwith-standing that the ennemy, and our men that night
shot exceedingly one upon an other: yet the English sapped forwards, and
heigthned and repaired the two Corpse a guard above named, and Coronell Herbert
by encouraging the workmen, sapt this night within 12 foot of the brinke of
the moate of the Ennemies Horne-worke, and the next day that nights work was
repaired. This night also Coronell Hauteriue, who commanded in the French
Approches, having sapt to the brinke of the moate, attempted to put a damme
over it, but after the loss of some men, found it not fecible.

The night before (being the 30 of August) Coronell Hauteriue had attempted to
lay a Damme of Rize-busshes over the moate of the Horne-worke, in the French
Approach.: but sustaying the loss of about sixeteene persons, besides hurt
men, was constrained to forbear, noe others being willing to undertake it. The
Englisst sapp yet was not quite advanced to the brinke of the water:
notwithstanding Coronell Goring, perceiving how desirous the Prince was the
work should be hastened, and hearing him offer five and twenty hunderd gilders
to the French, who were in it before, obtained the same allowance for his
Approaches. And before he marched down on Sunday night the 30 of August,
sought out the most expert, and bold workmen of our Nation. Six men
undertook it, that themselves with some others, whom they would hire should
do it, for fiueteene hundred gilders, the Coronell reserving the other
thousand gilders, to pay bringers of Rise-busshes, and to hire others in case
these should be to few, or to reward them above their expectation if they did
succeed. After the Sappers had wrought twelve foot to come to the water, for
so much was yet wanting: these six men begann their task, and proceeded to
good effect, but were all slain, or hurt in a short space, only the chief of
them, being assisted by a succession of sixteen others, who likewise were all,
either slain, or dangerously shot, lived and worked forward, till six of the
clock the next morning, being the 31, at which time the damme was laid within
15 foot of the other side. Here this workman out of a bravery, would needs
sound the depth of the moate remaining, and dis-couering himself too
carelessly was slain, by which means many men were lost, for that he had
neglected to make blindes, as he went, which made other soldiers timorous, and
unwilling to under take it. In all this time and danger, you may imagine how
paynfull a part the Coronell acted: who did not only most vigilantly place
Musketeers, to discharge without intermission, in every foot of ground from
whence they night annoy the Ennemy, but oftentimes visited the Rise-bringers,
that matterials might not be wanting, and upon the failing of any workmen, by
his singular dexterity of persuasion, got new in their places, himself being
an example unto them, of singular diligence and boldness. Yet now they were
at such a stand, that for two hours space, the discourse of all was, that it
could not be done, till another night might contribute some shelter to them. At
last the Coronell, not being able to satisfy himself, with what was already
effected, (though it were enough to have gained honor for two nights) besides
that he saw the feciblenesse of that little remaynder, got first some men to
lay blindes of bushes, on that which was made, and then four other workmen,
to finish the rest, for the reward of two hundred and fifty gilders a piece,
which they received, being not so much as one hurt, and ended their work about
twelve of the clock at noone. The Prince coming down, and seeing what was
done, so much above his expectation, gave the Coronell Many thanks, with
expressions suitable to his merit, and hastened the Miners unto him, that noe
time might be lost.

One of them was presently set a mining under the Barme of the Horne-worke:
But his fear making him willing to find excuses, he quickly came back and
complaind, that the damn was not easily passable. Whereupon the Coronell sent
others to perfect it, if any thing were amiss, and when all was finished the
Miner being returned to his work, that noe more neede-lesse excuses should be
made, the Coronell himself went quite over it, and in his return, received a
shot with a sling bullet in his left leg, it strock him in the iuncture,
where the foot is fastened to the leg, brake assunder all the upper Sinnews,
toore away a great deal of his flesh, bruised the huckle bone, and broke the
end of the great shinn-bone, where it ioynes unto it.

At first the resolution of all the Chiurgians was, to cut of his leg, but
seeing the admirable courage, and firmness of his mind, wherewith he boar it,
and trusting much to this perfectness of health, and temper of his flesh, they
concluded they might defer it for a time, without danger of a Gangrene, and
after two dressings, resolved to go on in the cure, without any thoughts of
cutting it off. Which I express here, as that which was the matter of joy, not
only to our Nation, but also to the whole Army, as his great wound was, and
is the sorrow of all that love honor, virtue, and Soldiers. But I must
forbear, to enlarge my self in relating, what a universal dampe of sadness,
seized on the hearts of all men, or what praises, and honors were paid unto
his incomparable worth, not only by his Highness the Prince of Orange, but by
all others of quality: for I am to remember, I write but a Diarie: though
indeed in one days work, he has given penns work for many days: for if you
consider, the space of ground to be sapped through, before he came to the
water, the breadth of the moate about 60 foot, the depth of it 6 foot, and the
breadth of the Damn 15 foot, it will appear a work of greater bulk, then
ever was done in the service of this state since their wars began. Besides,
the difficulty of the action, from the strength of the Garrison, and
encouragement they received the night before, from the ill success of the
French attempt.

A while after the Miner, whom the Coronell had set to work, making an other
passage back, had his brains shoot out with the same sling piece. And the
rest of that day was sorrowfully spent, in mending, and perfecting the works,
Captain Syden-ham, whose actiuity, and vigilancie was not wanting in all this
buisinesse remaining there.

Upon Tewsday night the first of September, Coronell Colepepper, relieved
Coronell Gorings Regiment, and the Damme (as is said) being laid over, that
night, our men begann to sap a long the Barme of the Horne-worke, and on the
right hand of the Horn of the work, began to mine: the Ennemy shot hard upon
the damme that night from the other horn of the work, which flankered it, and
slew, and hurt four, or five of our men.

This night also Monsieur Charnaze Ambassador for the King of France, with the
Lords the, States and Coronell of a French Regiment, commanding in the French
approches received a shot in his head, whereof he presently dyed.

Upon wensday night the second, my Lord Morgan, relieved Coronell Colepepper,
this night our men repaired, and heightened the Corpse of guard, on both sides of
the damme, and began a left hand sap, a long the moate side of the Horne-worke,
the day following was spent in repairing the works, making of blinds, and
setting up musketbasketts, for the safeguard, and defense of our men.

Upon Thursday night the Lord of Brederoods Regiment took their turn, and his
Lieutenant Coronell Monsieur Thienen commanding the approches, our men sapped
forward, notwithstanding that the Ennemie shot hard upon our workmen: our
musketeers also giving fire from our flanks upon the Ennemies Horne-worke as
fast as they could, and our Canon playing from our batteries, upon the parapett
of their Horne-worke, to beat down their musketbaskets, and sand backs about
their Ears, and shot much upon the horn of the work, to make it mountable,
that our men might have the better access to come up to the topp of it.

Upon Friday night the fourth of September new still. It was Count Solms his
turn to command in the English, and Dutch approaches, and Monsieur Buat,
Lieutenant Coronell in the French. His Highness the Prince of Orange sent
express order that night, by Sir Iacoh Ashley Lieutenant Coronell to my Lord
Morgan, that he would have both the French and English, to set up, and
mainteyne musket-baskets upon the top of the Ennemies Horne-worke, and this was
to be done, both by the French, and the English at one time by daylight, and
according to the Prince his order, was attempted on our side, by Captain
Skippon the next morning, being Satterday in the sight of all men: between
six and seven of the clock. He took a long with him about 30 of his own
Company, who upon this service carried themselves all well, the one half of
them, being slain and hurt. Himself after a long dispute, and fight with the
Ennemie, who tumbled down our Musket-baskets, as fast as our men set them up,
coming to push of the pike, and slashing off some of the heads of their pikes,
upon the top of the work, besides 4 or 5 shot upon his armor, and head-peece
of proof, received a brush on his face with a stone (which by Gods especial
prevention did him no further harm) and after that got a sore shot, through
his neck, with which he was staggred, and for the present lost the use of his
left arm, (But God remarkeably strenthning him) he presently recovered himself
again, and betook himself to his former place and work, and disputed the
business a long time afterward with the Ennemie. In the mean time Noble Count
Solmes, who had a vigilant eye, and a careful regard upon all that passed,
sent his own Captain with some musketteirs, to assist Captain Skippon, which
he did very worthily, and (besides other narrow scapes) received a shot through
his left arm, and had ten of his men slain and hurt presently upon the place
the Ennemie could not be less then two hundred, against our few number that
had climed up to the topp of their work, to dispute this action with us,
haueing besides the advantage of the place, all necessary Instruments of
offense and deffence, as stones, flailes, clubs, and handgranadoes, which some
of our men wanted, and gaulled us most of all, at their pleasure from the right
hand flank of their work, though our men did their uttermost endeavor, to
execute what was commanded, but the many and great advantages the Ennemie had
prevailed, which moved Count Solmes to command Captain Skippon, and his own
Captain to come off with their men, and so that attempt being not fesible at
that time ceased, upon which the springing of our mine was resolved, the happy
success whereof, two days after you shall hear.

Upon Satterday night the fifth of September, Coronell Herbert commanded in
the English approaches, and advanced the work on the left hand sapp very much.
On Sunday that nights work was repaired, and in the morning the Ennemy
Countermining, our Miners mining forward, a little earth fell down in mining
through it, by which hole they discovered the Ennemies Mine, and seeing their
candle in it, they were driven to stop our mine, and to begin an other.

On Sunday the sixth of September, Coronell Goring being shot, it was his
Lieutenant Coronels turn to Command that night, and the next day in the
approaches, and Monsieur Maisonneufve Coronell in the French. Between ten and
eleven a clock in the night, the Ennemie sallied out of their works a matter
of some 150 men, upon the English left hand sapp, and came stealing along
between their half moon, before Ginnekens port, and their Horne-worke: the
sap being not defensible, our workmen had order, if the Ennemy fell upon it,
to retreat unto the next Corpse de guard, the Ennemie then falling upon it,
cast a great many hand-granadoes into the sapp, and entering it began to slgiht
two, or three rodd of it. Ensign Willis, the Coronels Ensign with 21 pikes,
and musketeers had then the utmost Corpse de guard on the left hand, next unto
the sap, and had order from Lieutenant Coronell Hollis, the chief Commandour
there all this time, to make it good, and if the Ennemy fell into the sap (as
is said) that then the workmen should retire to him. Now all the Coronels
Musketeers and pikes, with ten musketeers of every other Company, which
Captain Sydenham fetched, and brought up, were disposed of some on the right,
and others on the left hand of the two Corpse de guard, and the flanks on both
sides of the Damme, so that when the Ennemie fell on, they found us all ready
to give them entertainment. The Ennemy falling on and getting into the left
hand sapp, came up to Ensign Willis his Corpse de guard, and assaulted it, who
very valiantly continued at push of the pike with the Ennemie, and from the
topp of the work gave fire upon them, though for a great while, no supply was
sent him, the Ennemy striving to enter, shoud down our musket-baskets, and
indeed hooked down, some two or three of them. Lieutenant Moyle, Lieutenant to
Captain Abrahall his Company seeing this, that Ensign Willis was thus engaged
in a fight with the Ennemie, having but a few men with him to resist so many,
and fearing that the Ennemy might either enter, or get between him, and the
next Corpse de guard to cut him of, gathered up some musketeers and pikes, and
came to second him, and finding him at push of the pike, with the Ennemy, and
that some of his men began to flinge He, Mr. Oneale Mr. Predeaux and some other
Gentlemen entering: Lieutenant Moyle drew his sword, and made his men fall up
unto him again. Now from all our other Corpse de guard, and flanks, our
Musketeers gave fire upon the Ennemie, as fast as ever they could charge, and
discharge, Captain Sydenham commanding our Musketeers to shoot as low as
ever they could, that they might gaul the Ennemy the better. The Ennemy
finding it very hott, retreated with the loss of some 50 men slain and hurt,
leaving some arms behind them, as a Lorrannois one of their own men, left
wounded in the sap reported to Lieutenant Coronell Holles, and some other
Officiers, as he was dressed in our Corpse de guard.

Upon this piece of service, and in this Corpse de guard so worthily defended by
Ensign Willis, Lieutenant Moyle met with a favorable shot upon his chin:
Besides him, Mr-Marsh of the Coronels Company, carrying himself very stoutly
in this action received there his mortal wound, whereof within two, or three
days after he dyed, and one of our Hand-Granado-men was shot through his
right hand, which spoiled the casting of his Grenades, and thus much in brief
for this piece of service.

About two of the clock in the morning, the Ennemy being pott Valliant (for
they love to send there men foxt to Purgatory) would needs have an other bout
with us, and as the Ennemies Alferus Seignour De Belle, who the next morning
was taken prisouner in their Horne-worke reports, that he himself (being
shot free) with some others, making a noise and crying Sa, Sa, giving us
warning long enough of his coming, fell down with his men from the topp of
the Horne-worke to the bottom, to discover our mine for that was their intent,
Captain Monk the Coronels Captain with four pikes, and a musketteir or two,
meeting with them under the Barme of the Horne-worke, encountered them on the
furthest side of the Damme at push of the pike, beat them back again which
spoiled their discovery: and those men of theirs, which showed their boddies,
in giving fire from the topp of their Horneworke, our men from all Corpse de
guard. powered such vollies of shot upon them, and by giving fire from a Drake
planted upon the topp of our right hand Corpse de guard, which carried two
pounds of muskett bullets, made them pull down their Eeads quickly, and keep
themselves under covert.

The next morning being monday the seventh of September, the English, and
French mines being made ready, a messenger was sent to his highness the Prince
of Orange, to acquaint him therewith, where upon the Prince of Orange himself,
the Prince Electour with his brethren, and diverse other men of qualite, came
down into the approaches, the Prince immediately gave order, for the springing
of both the mines, and the falling on upon the breaches, which the mines should
make. The first Officer then of the English, which was to fall up the Breach,
and to enter it was Captain Monk, Coronell Gorings Captain, with 20
musketteirs, and 10 Pikes, and after him a workemaster with certain workeme^,
to cast up a breast behind them, that they might lodge our men upon the top of
the Hornworke. Next unto him Captain Abrahall, and Lieutenant Broom was to
fall on upon the right hand with forty pikes, and 20 musketeers. And Captain
Hamond with his Ensign on the luft hand, to second Captain Monk, with
Captain Abrahall, there fell on these Noble Volunteirs, worthy Officers, and
Cauilleros of the Coronels Company, my Lord Grandisson, Captain Croft,
Captain la Mere; Lieutenant Turuill, Cornet Lucas, Ensign Pagett, Mr.
Oneall, Mr. Apsley, Mr. Eldrington, Mr. Simon Fanchy, Mr. Griffin, Mr.
Postlumus Kirton, Mr. Euers, Mr. Morley Mr. Daniell, Mr. Predeaux, Mr. Lenthol
Mr. Wilford, Mr. Baskerfeild, Mr. Iyle, and Mr. Waston, with diverse other
Gentlemen of quality. This Company of pikes kept allwaies together. The
English mine then being sprung, and taking good effect, Captain Monk, ere
the smoke was vanished, hastens up to the breach, and with his commanded men,
fell up to the very topp of it, where at first, he was entertained with some
musketteires of the Ennemies: but they instantly gave back, and he with his
commanded men, of which half slunck away, advanced forward into the work,
where he found a stand of pikes, of about six, or seven score ready to
receive him. And falling in pell mell upon them, whether by order, out of an
affection to the Coronell, or for a revenge upon the Ennemy, they gave the word
a Goring a Goring, and though the Ennemy were twice their number, yet Captain
Abrahall, being so bravely followed, with a Company of gallant men, charged
home upon them, and came to push of the pike with them, and seeing this
advantage that Captain Monk fell upon the left flank of them, and gaulled
them shordly with his Musketteirs, Captain Abrah all pressing hard upon them,
this brought the Ennemie into a disorder, and made the^ give back. Upon this
the French also falling on upon their right flank from their side, diverse of
them were slain, drowned and wholly routed. Upon the first charge worthy
Captain Crofts was slain, My Lord Grandison at push of the pike received a
wound in his arm, Master One all in his thigh, and Master Connock of
Coronell Gorings Compaynie, received there his mortal wound. The Ennemie being
beaten out of their Horne-worke, Captain Abrahall with these Volunteers and
Gentlemen, which held together, followed them over a small bridge made of two
plankes broad, at the end whereof, the Ennemie had planted a brass piece
charged with muskets-bullets whether they persued them so fast, that they had
no time, to discharge it, fearing that they might kill some of their own men!
yet he that was to give fire stayed so long, till Mr. Eldrington clapped his
hand upon the piece, and espying the Cano^nier near unto the piece, with his
linstock in his hand charged his pike against his breast, whereupon he took him
prisoner and gave him to a private Soldier, upon this service he got a
Spanish blade from a dead Officer: from thence our me^ drove the Ennemie up to
their half moon before Ginnekins port with the loss of 150 of their men at
the least, and coming to the Counterskarfe of the moate, there our workmen
turned up the Earth against the Ennemy, and cast up a Brest-worke upon it, which
we held and maintained: this service was thus performed, and much more fully,
then was expected. whereupon his Highness sent fresh troops, to relieve those
that had fallen on, and as they came of, he embrased Captain Abrahall, and
Captain Hamond, and thanked all the Officers, volunteers, and Gentlemen, who
had performed so brave an action, and as if he rejoiced, that Coronell Goring
was in some part thus revenged on the Ennemy, by the valor of his Company,
those of his Regiment, and the other Companies that were there, and so returned
strait way out of the Approaches to visit him in his hutt, and did relate what
had passed unto him, which he did with particular Characters of the worth of
those men, who had carried themselves so bravely upon this service.

The most of the English that entered the Horne-worke, were not above two
hundred in all, and the like number of the French (under the Command of
Coronell Maisonnefue) carried themselves very vailliantly, and bravely upon
this piece of service (and turn up a Brest-worke also against the Ennemy) so
that the Ennemy were as strong within their Horne-worke, as those that
attempted it. Many prisoners were taken, among the rest Don Godfredo de
Bergerie, a Spanish Captain, who commanded the Horne-worke and the outworkes,
was taken prisonner by young Mr. Francis Perceuall Inginier, who after he had
received two hurts at push of the pike from him, yielded himself prisonner to
him, next him Seignor Iuan D' Albe a Spanish Alferus (or Ensign) was taken
prisoner by Monsieur Poterie, a gentleman of Coronell Maisonefs Company. And
after the Ennemie had called for a parlie, to fetch of their dead, while they
were a tumbling their carkases into a punt, a Burgonian Ensign called
Alfererus de Belle who acted the deadmans part, rising up in his shirt, cried
for quarter to Lieutenant Windon, who taking him prisonner. sent him up to
Coronell Colepepper, who entertained him vevery kindly, and gave him a suite of
clothes, and entreated every Captain of the watch of his own Regiment, to
take him into their keeping, to lodge him well and to give him friendly
entertainment, which they did all, and Lieutenant Windon gave his ransom,
among the priuaet hurt soldiers that were upon this seruiae. Besides, these
men of quality above mentioned, there were about 50 Spaniards, and Burgonians
private sonldiers taken prisonners, some of them being dangerously hurt, others
sound and whole.

The greatest part of our loss was after the Ennemie had lost their work, for
at the first of those that fell on with Captiane Monk, there was but one
slain, which was a Corporal of the Coronels company, shot through both his
thighas, and but one more hurt, which was one Mr. Apsley a volunteir, shot
(but not mortally) in the face and both his jaws broken. Of those that fell on
with Captain Abrahall there were but two killed, Captain Crofts a volunteir,
shot through the heart, and much lamented by our whole nation, and Master
Connock a gentleman of the Coronels company, and of hurt as is said, there was
the Lord Grandison hurt at push of the pike in the arm, Master Oneal in the
thigh, and Master Daniell shot in his side, the bullet falling down into his
boot, Master Flood, and Master Wright in the arm, all these were of Coronell
Gorings company slain and hurt: the rest were of other companies, which had
the guard in the English approaches as follows, of Leiutenant Coronell Caries
company, one slain and 5 hurt, of Sir Ferdinand Knightlyes company one
slain. and one hurt, of Sariant Maiour Corbits company two slain and seven
hurt, of Captain Abrahals Company one slain, and two Gentlemen hurt, of
Captain Hamonds company his Lieutenant Treymaine, his Ensign Kirck, his
Seriant Raymond, with one soldier more of his company slain, which stood on
the left hand more open to the Ennemy and a sling piece they discharged often
upon the^. Of Captain Reads company there were three slain, and four hurt,
of Captain Scubbingers two slain, and five hurt: so that upon this piece of
service with the officers, gentlemen, and soldiers, there were 17 slain in
all, and some thirty hurt.

What men the French lost I am not able to say, for want of information, bur
sure I am, that Monsieur D' hautcourt, a brave voluntier was hurt upon this
piece of service,

This lofty Horne-worke then being so happily taken in, it was the very
Creui-coeur, or Break-neck of the Town, for it gave access unto his
Highness, to come unto the maine moate of the Town, and there upon the
Counterskarfe, to make Corpse de guards, batteries, and flanks upon it, for the
more safe putting over of the two Galleries, which were to be begun.

About this tim came to the Army, other Volunteers, namely Lieutenant Roberts,
Lieutenant Woodhouse, Ensign Washiugton, Mast: Walker, and diverse others,
which marched down with Coronell Gorings Company into the Approches, and
Master Henningham, Master Preston and Master Bladwell, who trailed pikes under
Captain Gerrards Compaine, and marched down into the trenches with him, till
the Town was given over.

Upon Tewsday the eight, Coronell Colepepper releiuing Coronell Gorings
Regiment they turned up the earth upon the top of the Horneworke and
Counterskarfe, made passages and blindes into it, and repaired and set up
Musket-baskets, to flancker the wall of the town Ginnekins bridge, and the
half moon without it, which the Ennemy yet held. Upon the Counterskarfe there
was begun two batteries of 12 half Cannon, one for the French, and an other
for the English with six half Canon a piece upon them, to favor our
galleries, and to dismount the Ennemies ordinance, this night we shot much
upon them, for the more easy putting over of our galleries.

Upon wensday the 9 of September the English and French galleries were let out
for 33 thousand gilders to a workebasse of Gurcum the English for 17 thousand,
and the French for 16 thousand Gilders upon condition they must be both made
within 14 days after the tenth of this month and if he were longer then for
every day he should have 200 gilders shortened from him. The French gallery was
to be put over to the right face, and the English to the left face of Ginnekens
Bulwark.

Upon Thursday night the 10 of Sept: Lieutenant Coronell Erskins commanding
that night in the Scotch and Dutch, Approches received order from Count William
about 10 a clock in the night, to prepare the mines in the Horneworke, and lay
over the Bies, or Flagg-bridges against the morning, and afterward to spring
the mine, to assault that work, and beat the Ennemy out of it if it were
possible. Order was given for the assault in this manner following, that first
a Lieutenant, and a Sariant with 50 men firelocks, and Spring-stocks
accompanied with four Granadomen, should fall on, after the mine was sprung,
and after the^ Lieutenant Gladstone with 50 men, and a Sariant with half pikes
and half musketeers should give on, and to second them Captain John Leueston,
commanding a hundred men Pikes, and Musketeers with Lieutenant Duncan, Ensign
Niece, and two Sariants was to fall on, next after them Captain Kilpatrick
with his own Ensign, and two Sariants was to second the former with 80 pikes:
in the last place the Lieutenant Coronell abouesaid, was to advance with the
body of the troops, and after him a hundred commanded workmen with
matterials: but in regard our mine was found out by the Ennemie ere morning,
things were differed till further order from Count William. Afterward, it was
resolved that the day following, one of the mines upon necessity should be made
ready, and at 12 of the clock in the day: notwithstanding the two days
preparation, the Ennemy made to answer the Assault, our Flagg-bridges were
laid over the moate of their Horne-worke, in the full sight of the Ennemy, and
our troops, while those men came marching down out of the quarter, to succor
us in the Approaches and before all things were prepared, it was six a clock at
night, and past the time of relief, ere all things were in areadinesse. The
mine then being ready, orders was given for the springing of it, which was done
accordingly, but the mine being sprung, it made not that operation as was
expected, for it sprung backward in the work to our own great disadvantage:
for it brake, and spoiled the Flaggbridges, that lay over the moat for the
Dutche firelocks to pass over, and so hindered much our passage over the Damn,
and their falling on upon the horneworke it self, finding much difficulty to
clime up after the breach was made. Howsoever, the order was followed and the
Lieutenant of the Firelocks, with his Sariant passed the Damme, and fell up to
the breach, with as many as were able to follow: in regard of the breaking of
the flagg-bridge: yet they scrambled up, and entered, carrying themselves very
well, but the Horn work being cut of in diverse places, were driven to a
retreat, for the Lieutenant was hurt, and the Sargiant of the firelocks
slain, with diverse of his men, which stood so open to the Ennemies shot.
They being beaten of, and the Ennemy defending the ropp of the breach with
clubbs, flailes, stones, and Handgranadoes, casting in rize-busshes upon the
topp of it, to make a blind for the^: Lieutenant Gladstone seconded them, and
brook in again through the breach with diverse of his men: but the Ennemy
returning with a new fury upon the breach killed the Lieutenant, and some that
entered with him, and beat of the rest. Afterward Captain John Leuiston
mounted up to the breach with a few pikes: the discommodity of this passage was
such, that half his men could not come up, at length Captain Kilpatrick fell
on, with as many of his pikes, as he could get over, and was seconded with
some musketeers commanded by Lieutenant Blake, of Coronell Gorings Regiment,
with these Lieutenant Coronell James Henderson Captain Balford of Coronell
Sandalins Regiment, with Captain Williamson, Ensign Hamelton, Lieutenant
Turuill, all Volunteers, and seeking honor, charging upon the right hand with
a more furious charge then the former, striving to enter, entered and beat the
Ennemy to a retreat, from of the topp of the breach, where Captine Williamson
dyed valiantly, and the Ennemy finding themselves ouerprest with a more furious
assault then the former, were forced to retire from the breach, and turn their
backs: insomuch that we entered the work, and beat them up to their
Counterskarfe, out of all the trauerses they had cut of in their Horneworke,
but one which lay upon the lest winge of the Horne-worke, being both exceeding
high, and Canon proose with a moate of 16 foot broad, and water in yt before
it: from whence they flew our men with musketts and Handgranadoes, having no
deffense against it, neither were we able to offend them. And our commanded
men who should have cast up a Brestworke in some kind for our deffence, could
not come up through the discommodity of the passage, and though they could have
come up, yet our me^ had all be slain, ere they could have cast up a place of
defense for our safety, so that the impossibility of the mainteyning of the
work being such, did cause a retreat with the loss of 150 men slain, and
hurt, and diverse Officers, among whom was Licutenant Coronell James Henderson,
Captain Williamson Ensign Hamelton Ensign Fargeson all slain. Captain
Balford, Captain Kilpatrick, Ensign Niece, quartermaster Egmonds Inginier
hurt, Sariant Corbitt, Sariant Inglish, and Sariant Lindsay killed, and so
returning out of the Horne-worke, that night the Ennemy sensible of their
loss, and possessed with a fear, that the Duchess and Scocth would have
areuenge, and fall on with a more furious assault, Monsieur Puchler commanding
the next night, they quitted the work voluntarily, and leaving an number of
Arms and bagged behind them, we possessed the the Horne-worke quietly.

Upon Friday night the eleventh of September Coronell Herbert had the Command
in the Approaches, under whose Companic these worthy Volunteers marched down,
namely, Mr. Herbert Son unto the Lord Herbert Earl of Castle Island, and
Baron of Cberburie, Mr. Roper, Son unto the Lord Roper with diverse other
Gentlemen of quality. About this time also Sir Faithful Fortescue, Captain of
a Troop of Horse in his Majesty service in Ireland with Mr. Bryan came to the
Army and trailed pikes under his Company. This night and the day following the
work was well advanced and there was set up four posts in the English
Gallerie.

Upon Satterday the 12 of September, the French Gallerie being more forward,
then the English, who began theirs at the brinke of the moate, having this day
20 posts, the Ennemy with their Cannon beat down 5 posts, killed a
work-maister, and some two Soldiers more, but the next day all was repaired,
and the posts set up again.

On Satterday night the 12 it was Lieutenant Coronell Holles turn, to command
in the Approaches, and when he was relieved on Sunday night the 13, the English
Gallerie was advanced to 22 posts, and the French to 25.

On Sunday night the 13, Coronell Colepepper, relieved Coronell Gorings
Regiment, this night and the next day our men set up four posts more, so that
on monday night we had 26 posts in all.

This night a man was sent out of the Town from the Gouuernor, and taken with
a letter written to the Cardinal Infant in charactars, the contents whereof
were these, that unless his Highness could relieve the Town within fiucteene
days, he could not well hold it out any longer.

This Evening also the English, and the French Batteries with six half Canon
were ready, planted upon the Counterskarfe, and the brink of the moate, which
seowred along the moate, and curtain of the wall, to dismount the Ennemies
Canon, which played upon our Galleries.

Upon Monday night the 14, Lieutenant Coronell Thienen relielieued Coronell
Colepepper, this night and the day following a great many Ris-busshes, and a
great deal of Earth was cast into the moate and there was set up 29 posts in
the English Galerie.

On Tewsday night the 15, my Lord Morg an commanded in the Approaches, and
advanced the Gallerie very much, so that upon Thursday at night, when he was
relieved there was 33 posts set up, so that we were got 6 rodd into the moate.

This night Sir Simon Harcourt returned with the four English Companies, that
he had a long with him to the Army.

The French Gallerie this evening was advanced to 36 posts: And this day Count
William on his side had putt up 4 posts, and had got twelve foot into the
moate toward Anwerps Bulwark.

Upon wensday the 16, Count Solms relieved my Lord Morgan, this day the Ennemy
shot twelve Canon shot through our Gallerie, and had sunck one peeee so low
in their Bulwark, that they shot into the mouth of the Gallery, which Bullett
flew clean through it, and went out at the Entrance into the Gallery, and with
the very wind of it killed a man in the Gallerie, this night and the day
following the English Gallerie was advanced to 36 posts, and because the
Ennemie had men lurking in the Hathorne hedge, under the Bul-warke, and a long
the curtain, which shot diverse of our men, that wrought at the end of our
Gallerie, three Drakes were brought down, which shot cartridge shot, and
musket-bullets among them, to drive them from thence.

Upon Thursday night the 17, Coronell Herbert commanded in the Approaches, and
made a good nights work, for there was thrown from the end of the Gallerie
into the moate that night 750 Rize-busshes, each Soldier having fourteen
Rixdallers for the casting in of a hundred, and ere Coronell Herbert was
relieved they set up 5 posts, three foot distance on from an other in the
space of 24 hours. The next day Lieutenant Airs was shot through his
shoulder. This night and the day following also Count Williams Gallerie was
well advanced, my Lord Aumont commanding then in those Approaches, Monsieur
Couts his Lieutenant Coronell, received a grievous shot through his thigh,
which brake his thigh bone in pieces, of which wound he is not yet cured.

This day Count Harrie of Frizeland, attempted to fall on upon the Ennemies
Horne-worke on the Castle side, but the bridge breaking, our men with the loss
of some slain, and others drowned (the water being very deep) were driven to
retire into their works, his men gave fire exceedingly upon the Ennemy with
Cannon, and small shot, so that they could not choose, but loose a great many
men.

Upon Friday night the 18 of September, Lieutenant Coronell Holles relieved
Coronell Herbert, this night there were four hundred Rize-busshes, and a great
deal of earth cast into the moate, and the English Gallerie advanced to five
and forty posts: some three foot distant one from an other. The next day in
the morning old Sariant Goddard, Captain Killegrews Sariant, having the guard
and sitting at the end of our Gallerie, with the very wind of a half Cannon
Bullett of 24 pound weight, had his thigh bone broken, with out ever drawing a
dropp of blood from him.

This day there was brought into the Army one of the Ennemies Lieutenants and
some sixty prisonners, that were taken prisonners with him in Gulick-land.

Upon Satterday night, being the 19, Coronell Colepepper commanded in the
Approaches. This night for the advancing of the Callerie there were cast into
the moate above eleven hundred Rize-busshes, and many hundred wheel barrowes
of earth, so careful was the Coronell to advance the work, and yet (thanks be
to God) notwithstanding the Ennemy shot very much, he had but three men slain
and hurt.

The French likewise cast in a great many rize-bushes this night into the
moate, and came with them within three pikes length of the barme of the
Bulwark: which the Ennemie discovering what a great nights work they had
done, the next morning had sunck two pieces which shot just into the mouth of
their gallerie, that beat down six, or seven of their posts, which disaster
cast them a days work, behind hand, ere they could repair the Gallerie, and
set up their posts again.

On Sunday night the twentieth Monsieur Thienen the Lotd of Brederods Lieutenant
Coronell releiued Coronell Colepepper, and this night, and the day following
(besides the Earth that was cast into the moate) there was cast into it above
five hundred risebushes, and yet had but three, or four men slain and hurt.

This evening there was some of our Ledger boats brought down into the
Horne-worke, and launched into the moate of the halfemoone, behind the mortar
battery, and the next day there were great backs, or chests built upon the^,
with high oake^ boards musket proof and the chests filled with Rizebushes, and
earth with pluggs in the bottom of them, which being pulled out upon any
occasion, they sunck 6, 7, or 8 foot deep, and had likewise oars on both
sides of them, that the men which rowed them might be under, covert and shot
free,

This Afternoon Monfieur D'escard a worthy French Captain, who had carried
himself very bravely upon the first sallie, which the Ennemie made upon the
French Approaches before mentioned, received a dangerous shot into his mouth,
and throat, whereof within five or six days after he dyed, and was much
lamented.

Upon Monday night the 21 my Lord Morgan went down to command in the
Approaches, two of his own Company taking upon them to cast Rize-busshes into
the moate, for twelve Rixdallers a hundred were slain, and the Ennemie hanging
out two great lights over the wall, (not witstanding that our Canon and small
shot played much upon them) to see what our men did in their moate, yet they
slew, and hurt six or seven men more, howsoever toward morning there were
found some resolute Soldiers, which for 14 Rixedallers a hundred, cast in 250
Rize-busshes into the moate, and got 4 posts more set up, so that we had in
all 49 posts up, which reached more then half way over the moate, and we found
that the moate grew shallower, after we had passed over the midst of it.

This day the great chests, and boats above mentioued were made ready musket
proof, with thick oaken plankes, and oars fit to them, and the backs, or
chests filled up with rize-bushes and earth, and lay ready whenever his
highness should have occasion to use them.

The 22 being Tewsday night Count Solmes relieved my Lord Morgan, and (thanks
be to God) had but one man shot. He gave fire exceedingly this night upon the
Ennemie, with his musketeers from all Corpse de guards, and flanks, and being
moone-light our Cannon also played upon them, which kept them from peeping
over, and under covert. This night there were noe Ris-busshes cast, neither
into the English, nor the French Galleries, but our men cast in earth to fill
up the moate, and to get forward: so that this night we had one and fifty
posts set up in our English Gallery.

On wenscay night the 23 of September Coronell Herbert releiued Count Solms,
and advanced the work very much: for that night and day there were three posts
more got, making in all 54 and the French got likewise three or four posts
forwards. The prince gave the workemasters order, to cast noe rizebushes this
night into the moat, but should work out that which was cast into the moate
already, and set up posts in the French and English Galleries, till they came
to the end of the Rize, which lay in the water.

The Prince now every day going down into the approaches to view, encourage,
and advance forward the works, hazarded his person much, and escaped some
dangerous shot, that came near him: for Coronell Wynebergin this afternoon,
being in his Highness train, received a dangerous shot upon his Eybrow,
which if the bullet had perced a little deeper, it had slain him.

Upon Thursday night the 24, Lieutenant Coronell Holles relieved Coronell
Herbert this night the work was reasonable well advanced, but toward morning
the Ennemy having sunck new pieces, shot down three of our posts set up in
the English Gallerie, the day and night before.

On Friday night the 25 of September, Coronell Colepeper commanded, under
whose Company, as volunteers marched down ordinarely, Lieutenant Coronell
Thomas Essex, Sir Charles Slingsby, Mr. Campian, Mr. Fothers by, Ensign
Throghmorton, Mr. Brankard, Mr. Dauis, Captain Roockwood, Mr. Bradly, Mr
Parsons, Mr. Hankinson and diverse other Gentlemen, and on Satterday night, when
Coronell Colepeper was relieved, there were two posts more set up, and not aman
shot.

Upon Satterday night the 26 Lieutenant Coronell Thienen commanded in the
English and Dutch Approaches, and this night there was cast into the moate 550
Rize-busshes, and the Gallerie advanced to 65 posts, and the French Gallerie
also was well advanced.

Upon Satterday toward evening, the Ennemy shot a Granado of some seventy
pound weight, just into our Horne-worke, and fell close by our Battetie near
unto seven Barrels of Powder, it brake and toore a Mariners thigh all to
pieces.

The very same day also we shot a great Granado of 180 pound weight, which
flew into the Town almost as far as the great Church, and breaking with a
great violence, a piece of the bullet rebounded, and flew back again into our
Horne-worke.

Upon Sunday the 27, Count Harrie Gasimir Governor of Frizland, having made a
Gallerie of 21 posts over the moate of the Horneworke on his side, attempted to
have taken it in, but finding it not feisible at that time, leaving the
Horneworke, sapped forward toward the Counterskarfe of the maine moate before
the Castle, and there to lodge himself in it, and so to begin a gallerie over
the moate.

Upon Sunday night toward evening, when Lieuetenant Coronell Thienen was
relieved, the English gallerie had 68 posts set up, and the French 42. This
evening a Kicker (or a peeper) of Flushing a proper man, had his right Arm
shot of clean from his body with a Canon shot.

Upon Sunday night the 27 it was my Lord Morgans turn to command in the
approaches, our men shot exceedingly this night, and my Lord Morgan advanced
the work so much, that this night and the day following, there was set up
five posts more, so that there was in the English Gallerie 73 posts, in the
French 55, and in Count Williams gallerie 59.

On Monday night the 28 Count Solmes releiued my Lord Morgan: this night the
Ennemie, and our men shot much, yet notwithstanding, there were a great many
rize-bushes thrown into the moate, and ere Count Solmes was relieved, there
was 77 posts set up in the English gallerie.

Upon Tewsday night the 29 Coronell Herbert relieved Count Solmes, and
commanded in the Approaches, our men shot exceeding hard this night, and the
next day, for over, and above the ordinary powder, which was in the
musketeers bandeliers, and the powder bags they brought down, our
musketeers shot away that night and the next day eleven hundred pound of
powder extraordinary, as appeared by the Coronels hand. Toward morning the
Ennemie having sunck two half Canon upon the wall, lower then ordinary,
hoising up the briches of their Canon with an Instrument, and great cables,
they shot so low, that they shot, and brake down six, or 7 of our posts in
the English gallerie, and though our Ordinance shot much to dismount theirs,
yet they could not find them in the night.

This hindered the advancement of the English Gallerie much, and cast us behind
hand, but the carefulnes and the vigilencie of his highness was such, that
coming down into the Approaches, the next morning, he gave order that the
Gallerie should be repaired with all expedition, and new posts set up in their
places: which was done with all speed by ten a clock on wensday night
following.

Upon wensday also his highness gave order for the making of two new batteries,
for the finding and dismounting of the Ennemies Canon which played upon our
gallerie. The one was made upon the top of the Horneworke, not far from the
place where our English mine was sprung. The other where the Coronels Companies
held their grand Corpse de guard. These being planted beat upon the Ennemies
port holes, and put one of their half Canon presently to silence.

Upon wensday night the last of September, it was Lieutenant Coronell Holles
his turn to command in the Approaches. This night the work was so advanced,
that their was diverse Rize-busshes cast into the moate, and three posts more
set up. This night, also there was one John Trotter of Coronell Gorings
Company, that undertook the pyling of the moate from the end of our
Gallerie, to the barme of the Bulwark, and having stripped himself naked having a
long match bound about his Armeholes, he was let out at a hole on the right
side of the Gallerie, and being come to the end of our Rize-busshes, found the
water to be between five and six foot, and swiming two or three strokes
further felt ground, and came to four foot deep, and wading a little further
came to three foot water, and so got up upon the barme of the Bulwark, and
up to the quick set hedge, or Pallissado upon it. And then being pulled back by
those that were within the Gallerie, which held the end of the match came
safely back again, and found by the marks upon the match, that we wanted yet
a matter of some 40 foot, from the end of our Rize-busshes to the foundation
of the Bulwark, this Soldier for his discouuerie was rewarded with twenty
Rix-Dallers.

On Thursday morning the next day Captain Willmot my Lord Wilmots Son,
Captain of a Troop of Horse, going down into the Approaches, and looking too
long through our Muskett-basketts, received a dangerous shot, which grazed
along his right Jawbone, and so by his throat, whereof he is now recouuered.

This day also Iohu Williams, a Work-master of Gurcum, in giving some direction
about our Gallerie, was slain with a muskett-bullet.

Upon Thursday night the first of October, Coronell Colepepper relieved
Lieutenant Coronell Holles, the work was well advanced, notwithstanding that
the Ennemie shot much this night, both with their Canon, and small shot to
hinder us. This night also there was a planck bridge, on Count Harries side
laid over the moate of the Horne-worke, before the Castle, which twice had been
attempted before, in making a Dam, but was then not found fesible.

Upon Friday night the second, Lieutenant Coronell Thienen relieved Coronell
Colepepper, and advanced the work much, and this night there was a mine a
preparing on Count Harries side in the corner of the Horne-worke, where the
Ennemie had cut it of.

Upon Satterday the third, between eleven and twelve of the clock Count
Harries mine on the Castle side being ready, his Highness gave command, that
this mine should be sprung, and that Count Harrie, having sapt a long the
Horne-worke toward the Raueling, which lay before the Castle, should assault
both the Horn-worke, and the Raueling at once, and withal to give the Ennemy
work on all sides, gave order also that the French this day being come within
two pikes length of the Bulwark, should fill up the moate with Rize-busshes
from the end of their Gallerie, to the barme of the Bulworke. These two pieces
of service were to be done at one time. Count Harries mine being then sprung at
the time appointed, fell on bravely with his men upon the Horne-worke, and the
Raueling, which lay upon the side of it, and gave fire by whole volleys upon
the Ennemie for the space of an hour, beat the Ennemie out of their
Horne-work, and took in the Raueling, notwithstanding the Ennemie shot,
exceedingly from of the Castlewall, both with ordinance and small shot to
hinder them, so that they drove the Ennemie into the Town, turned up the
Raueling, and so had access to the Castle moate, to begin a Gallerie over it.
Upon this service Captain Roussell was slain. While this was a doing, on
Count Williams side, Coronell Balford having the command in the Dutch, and
Scotch Approaches commanded there the Cannoniers, and musketeers, to give
fire upon the Ennemie, and into the Town as fast as ever they could charge and
discharge, and in the French and English Approaches, while the French was a
filling, and damming up the moate from the end of their Gallerie all the Cannon
being some two and twenty on our side, and all our musketeers both from the
French, and the English Approaches, gave fire by whole volleys upon the
Ennemie, that under the favor thereof they might with the more safety fill up
the moate with Rize-busshes, which with much valor, and courage was performed
with good Success and laid them over, now on Satterday night following,
plancks was laid over the Rize-busshes for the better coming to the Bulwark
and blindes set up before the mouth of the Mine, and so began their mine that
night.

Upon Satterday night it was my Lord Morgans turn to command in the
Approaches: this night the English Gallerie was advanced, as far as it could
be, so that the next morning, our Rizebushes lay within two pikes length of the
foot of the Bulwark, and on Sunday morning, about eight of the clock, his
highness gave order to my Lord Morgan, to attempt the laying over of our
rize-bushes to the foot of the Bulwark, six resolute men were found out,
which undertook it for 20 Rixdallers a piece, and others to bring Rizebushes,
as fast as they could to fill up the moate. The end of the Gallerie being
opened, it was attempted, and my Lord Morgan commanded that our Canon, and the
musketteirs from all gardes, (especialy his own,) should give fire as fast as
they could, to favor our men that were a laying over the rize-bushes, but
lying so open to the Ennemies view, ordinance, the curtain and Fanks of the
Town, the most of the undertakers being all slain and hurt, it was not found
feisible at that time, till the obscurity of the night might afford more
shelter to our men.

Upon Sunday night the fourth of October, Count Solms commanded in the
Approaches, and this night while our men gave fire from all sides, our
Rize-busshes were luckely laid over to the very foot and barme of the Bulwark,
and blinds set up on the left hand of the Rize-busshes, as a shelter for the
Miners to come to the Bulwark, where they made also a blind of thick-oaken
plankes Muskett proof, and there began a mine in the bowels of the Bulwark.
The day following Monsieur Ro^meler, Count Solms his Ensign was slain. This
night also Count William on his side had laid over the Rize-busshes, and began
to mine.

Upon Monday night the fifth, Coronell Herbert marched down to command in the
Approaches, and gave encouragement for the hastening of the work, and the mine.
The Ennemie and our men shot exceedingly this night, and about three a clock
in the morning the Ennemy let fly three, or four pieces of Canon upon our
Gallerie, and works, which rowsedvp out Cannoniers, who till morning paid them
with their own coin, as fast as ever they could discharge and that our
musketeers could give fire, so that the Ennemie feareing his Highnesses mines
to be ready, and that he might be assaulted upon two or three breaches at
once, notwithstanding he had cut of Ginnekens and Anwerps Bulwarks most
dangerously against us, and had begun a Countermine, but (as it is reported)
wanted powder to lay in them, feareing the worst, and not daring to stand out
an Assault, our Gallerie being advanced to 81 posts, and the French Mine 18 and
the English 12 foot into the Bulwark.

On Tewsday Morning about seven of the clock, the Ennemie called for a parley,
the Drum beat first toward the English, and had command to do foe from the
Governor, but being shot through his hatt by an inexpert musketteir in the
English Approaches, not acquainted with such a buysinesse, turned to the
French, and was pulled down by a Sariant into the French Gallerie. This Morning
Mr. Herbert Kinsman to the Coronell, and son to my Lord Herbert, who was
shot before through his arm, received a second shot tearing his boot, and
raizing the flesh of his right toe along the bone. About eleven of the clock
that day Hostages came out of the town to his highness, and ours went in, what
followed upon it, the Articles of Composition hereuuto annexed, will give the
Reader to understand the particulars. And thus as truly, and as briefly as I
can, I have related unto you by what degrees it pleased the Lord of hosts by
his Almighty hand, and outstreched Arm through so many dangers, to lead the
Prince of Orange into his city and ancient inheritance again, to him be the
honor, and the glory of this action, now and for evermore Amen.

THE ARTICLES OF COMPOSITION, Granted by this highness the Prince of Orange to
the Governor GOMAR FOVRDINE Captains, and Soldiers within the Town of BREDA.
I. ARTICLE.

THat the Governor of Breda and all military Commanders, and Soldiers, of
what condition soever they be, none excepted, albeit that they had forsaken
the service of the high and mighty Lords the States General, and had taken
entertaynment on the Cardinals side, may depart without any molestation with
their arms, and baggage, with drums beating, flying colors, light matches
upon both ends, bullets in mouth, as they usually are wont to march, and all
their goods with a free conduct unto the City of Machlyne.

2. That the Governor at this present may take with him four pieces of
ordinance, and two Morters with their carriages, Equipage, and ammunition of
War at his pleasure, with twelve Charges for every piece.

3 Likewise they shall have Canon-Horses, Wagons, and Driuers Lent them,
sufficient to draw their ordinance with their train to the City above said.

4 That all ammunition of war, and victuals (belonging to the King of Spain)
shall be delivered without any fraud into the hands of those which his highness
shall appoint, saucing such as is sold before the sixth of October, when they
began first to parley. That which is sold shall remain sold, without any
inquiry, who has bought it.

5 Likewise all Officers and soldiers, as well sick as hurt, Lying in the
gesthouse, or else where, shall remain there, till they have recovered their
former health and then shall go to Machline, with free conduct, and wagons to
carry their arms, and baggage with them.

6 That also a number of horses, and wagons, as many as the Governor shall
require for his own particular use, as also for the officers, and soldiers
shallbe lent them to carry their baggage, and other goods to Machline,
including therein all manner of Arms, as also for the soldiers of the
garrison, absent, dead, sick, hurt, or runaway, and that the said wagons shall
in no wise be searched.

7 And those which desire to have their goods transported by shipping to
Machline, shall have good shipping appointed them to pass through Holland:
saueing all manner of wares, or Commodities. And it is granted them over and
above, to make choice of men that shall have a care of the bringing of their
goods, and baggage thither, which shall not be searched, nor arrested in any
place, under what pretense soever, but may pass freely to Machline.

8 That the Governor, Captains, Officers, Counselors of War, and
soldiers, taking pay from the King of Spain (as well Spiritual as Temporal
men) none excepted, as also widows, with their children, whosoever of them
which have any houses inheritances, rents in this City, or upon the States of
Brabant in this quarter, or have any houses in the Town, or any inheritances
of particular goods, may enjoy them two years after the date and sealing of
this composition, to transport them according to their desire, to sell them, to
morgage them, or otherwise to dispose of their goods, and during this time
shall enjoy the rents, and hires of their houses, and the fruits of their
goods, or such as they may get upon any condition Whatsoever.

9 That the officers, and soldiers in what service, or State soever they be,
may Leave their wives, and children in the Town, and that during the time of
two years shall dispose of their goods, moveable or immovable, lying within
this City, or else where, none excepted: so that noe man shall confiscate them
neither shall any confiscation take place of them.

10 Neither shall any officer or soldier be arrested, or stayed at this
present, or in future times, for the hire of their howses wherein they have
dwelt, neither their baggage for any debts, whither they march out with the
garrison or stay behind being sick or hurt, when they are well they shall
depart from hemce.

11 All soldiers prisoners, as well on the one side, as on the other, of what
quality soever they be, shall be set at liberty, without paying any thing for
their ransomes, but only for their diet, according to the taxation of the
quarter, as also the preachers and other prisonners shall be set free paying
their diet.

12 That all the boot which has bin made before, or since the seige shall not
be required of them, but shall remain their own.

13 That after the signing of the articles of this composition it is granted to
the Governor of Breda, that he may send an express Messenger to his highness
the Cardinal Infant, with free conduct, and safety to aduertize him of all
things, happened in this seige, which the Governor may do the very same day,
as these articles are signed.

14 These conditions being attested, the Governor and the soldiers shall have
two days respite given them at the least, to make themselves ready for their
departure, which time being expired, the Governor and Officers of the same
garrison shall promise to depart, to wit, upon Satterday next being the tenth
of October 1637 new Style-

15 With intention, that during the time of two days, none of the town shall
come into our army, nor any of our army go into the Town, to the end all
disorders may be prevented, and all men shall conteyne themselves within their
trenches, and fortifications without being permitted to approach nearer, or to
show any hostility one against an other, for the assurance whereof Hostages
shall be given on both sides.

16 That before and ere the garrison shall depart, two Sufficient Hostages
shall be given, who in the behalf of his highness, shall march with the said
garrison, arms, and Baggage to Machlin withthem, and on the otherside two
Hostages shall remain there from the Governor, till the two Hostages on his
highness side shall return back again with the wagons, and that his
highness shall send to them the aforesaid Hostages, remaining in the town
with free Conduct and assurance to Machline.

17 That the Officers, Soldiers, comprehended in the Articles of this
composition, having any arms, Barks, sloopes, or other equipage of war,
belonging to particular persons, may either sell, or transport them, without
being mosested, or stayed for any such things, as they shall have sold, or
will transport.

18 That there shall be made noe restitution of any horses, Arms,
Marchandizes, moueables, and other commodities sold, or held for boot, for
which no man shall be stayed.

Given in the Army before BREDA the 7. of October, 1637.Stilo Nouo.
THE COPY OF THE ARTICLES AND Demands propounded by the Spirituality, the
Drossard Schout, Burgomasters, Aldermen, and the Council of the city of
BREDA, to his highness my Lord the Prince of Orange, Lord and Baron of BREDA
with his highness Answer thereunto.
I. Demand.
IMprimis, that all fautes, enmity, and offenses, how great, and of what
quality soever they be, or may be held to be, without exception of any,
either of any spiritual or temporal men present within, or without the a
foresaid city, whither in general or particular which have been committed,
shall be forgotten and forgiven, as if they had never happened.

I. Answer.
His highness having seen, and examined the Articles above mentioned, has
declared, and declares by these, that he grants this Arcicle upon condition,
that all persons mentioned therein, shall hence forward carry themselves, as
they are bound to do.

II. Demand.
That in the above said city of Breda, now and allwaies the exercise of the
Catholic Romish Religion shall be publikly taught in the great Church in the
Cloisters, and Nunneries, as it has bin in use these last twelve years: so
that noe man of what quality soever he be, either civil or military, shall
give any hinerance, obstakle or scandal in Churches, or upon streets, by word,
or deed upon arbitriall punishment.

II. Answer.
The two Cloisters of Nuns shall be held in the same manner, as they were
before the year 1625. under the government of the high, and mighty Lords the
States General.

III. Demand.
That the Magistrates shall be made indifferent of persons, as well indifferent
of the Romish Catholics, as of those of the reformed Religion, and that all
permanent offices, yea those Administrations that were the year 1625. of men
now deceased, and afterward such as were conferred by Count John of Nassaw may
be continued.

III. Answer.
The Magistrates shall be chosen out of the best and qualifiest persons of the
city, according to the Laws, and Privileges of BRABANT, and of the city of
BREDA aforesaid.

IV. Demand.
That the Masters of the Chapter, with their Supposts, the Pryor, and the
Nuns Cloister of Saint Catherins-dale, the Pastor, the College of the
Society of Jesus, the Conuents of the Fathers Capuchians, the gray Friars, the
Nuns court, and the clergy of the Gesthowse, with all other spiritual men,
of what state, or order soever they be, who have been accepted by the city
before the date hereof, may continue in the peaceable possession off all their
goods, rents, donations tenths, and incomes whatsoever they be, as well within
as without the city without any exception, to receive them a new, or to
surrogate others, and as all and every one, have held possessed and enjoyed the
same heitherto, without doing any hindrance, damage, or hurt unto them, and
all Canonists, and Benefices, which shall come to be vacant, shall be given to
the Romish Catholics, according to to the fundamental Laws and Statutes
made thereof.

IV. Answer.
That all Spiritual persons shall enjoy, and have the administration of their
goods, as they had in the year 1625. And as for those which will depart out of
the City they may take their goods, and moueables a long with them, as also
if they have houses, or other things they may sell them as the Burgers do.

V. Demand.
The yearly reuenew of the goods belonging to the Orphans Hospital in the
said city, as well by inheritance, as by will and Testament, which they now
enjoy, or may enjoy hereafter, either by will, gift, purchase, or otherwise
gotten, shall be dristributed Prorate, and according as the number of the poor
Orphans shall be found of the one and the other religion, they shall have a
Lodging, and masters a part, and the goods, collections and alms of the Holy
Ghost, and the man-house upon the end of the Gest-house situated upon the Haghs
dicke, shall be governed, and distributed by persons, and given to the poor of
the one and the other Religion, as it has been to this day, on which side
soever the town was.

V. Answer.
That the goods, Collections, Alms, of every Almehouse mentioned above, shall
be employed, and administered as they were before the year 1625. without having
respect of what Religion soever the persons be, which shall be employed
thereto.

VI. Demand.
That the City of Breda, and the Jnhabitants thereof shall hold all their
privileges and freedoms, and that noe more taxations shall be imposed upon
them, then those which were instituted there from the year 1590. to the year
1625. during the time that it was under the Government of the united
Netherlands: and seeing the City with this hard seige is wholly ruinated, to
recover the decay thereof, that they may be free from paying of Licent for the
Space of two years.

The VI. Answer.
His Highness agrees unto this article: but for that, which concerns the
point of Licenses. He will recommend that for their good to the High and Mighty
Lords the States General.

VII. Demand.
That all Burgers, and Inhabitans of the before said city, as well such as are
present, as those which are absent and fledd, of what quality soever they be,
whether they were in the King of Spain his service, or no, according to the
tenor of this treaty, may depart out of it whither they will, with their
families, moueables, writtings, and other moveable goods, or if they desire to
continue their dwellings in it still they may for the time, of four years
next ensuing, and then to resolve within the said time whither they will
continue their habitation there or no. And during the before said time, that
they may freely converse, and go into the Country, to see if they can find a
place convenient for them to dwell in, according to their desire, as also for
other their particular affairs. And if so be that they within the foresaid
term of four years, or at the expiration thereof, resolve to depart the
Town, they may do it freely with their wives, children, and goods, whither
they please, either by water, or by land, without paying any toles, Licenses,
or searching of their shipping, yea allthough any one of them, during the time
of four years a boue said had bin in any particular ministration, and that
they may freely dispose of all their goods, make sail of them, morgage, or
make transportation of them, or by letters of attorney may entrust others with
their goods that may receive, and dispose of them, and if it should happen
that they come to decease, within or without the before said city; testate, or
intestate the same goods shall come unto their instituted Heirs, or to these
of their next blood and kindred ab intestato respective, and all their
moueables, goods, Marchandizes, and others, that they may carry them away at
their will, without seeking for any other pasport then this present treaty, and
those that will dwell in newtrall lands, or resolve to dwell in the plain
Country, may come to dwell again in the said city at their pleasure,
without desiring any other consent.

VII. Answer.
His highness grants this request, for the time of three years next
ensuing, especially for those that have left the Town, upon condition that
those, which shall dwell in newtrall Lands, or in the plain Country, and are
desirous to dwell again in Breda, shall be bound first to give his highness,
or the Gouuernour knowledge thereof.

VIII. Demand.
That those which are desirous for their particular affairs, to go into the
Countries, and towns under the command of the King of Spain, may do it
during the time of the aforesaid four years, as often as they please, and
every time may return freely again into the town, to remain there, or to
depart from thence as is abouesaid.

The VIII. Answer.
They may depart during the time of three years into the Enemies Countries,
and towns, and return again into Breda with the foreknowledge, and consent
of the Governor.

The IX. Demand.
Jn this Contract all Burgers, and Jnhabitants of the abouesaid city, shall be
included, as also all Pastors, and spiritual persons fled into the City, as
likewise all Pesants or husbandmen, which are fled into the Town, or else
where out of the Country, who, by virtue hereof may freely return into their
villages, and houses, or may remain in the town during the time of the four
years at their pleasure. And the Pastors of the Barronie of Breda, being
present, or absent, and their successors may return again unto their
parochial Churches, and Benefices, that they may exercise in them their
pastoral functious and ministry, and keep their incomes, as they did before
the retorsion was made.

The IX Answer.
This article is graunteds for so much as concerns the Burgers, but for the
Pastors, and other Spiritual persons mentioned herein, they may depart out of
the City, but afterward shall govern themselves, according to the edicts of
Retrosion, made by the Lords the Statess, until some other order be taken
touching that point.

The X. Demand.
That all sentences pronounced by the Magistrates of the aforesaid City, and
by the high-bench, from which noe appeal has been, shall continue in full
vigor, power, and effect, as likewise all contracts, made before, and during
the time of the seige, whatsoever they be.

The X Answer.
This article is granted, according to the contents thereof.

The XI. Demand.
That all Accovnts passed by the Town, and likewise all those which were made
by the Magistrates shall stand good, and be of valuation.

The XI. Answre.
This article is likewise aggreed unto, as it lies, upon condition that all
Charters, Records, and writings concerning fee-simples, Domaines others, either
touching spiritual, or temporal goods, and Lands: belonging to his Highness,
shall be delivered into the hands of those whom his Highness shall commit
thereunto.

XII. Demand.
That those which have rents and debts from the city, they may be paid them
every year without any deduction.

XII. Answer
This is Likewise condiscended unto.

XIII. Demand
That the city of Breda shall not be bound to make repair, or maintain the
walls, ramparts, Bridges, Corpse de Guards and other works of Fortification,
neither to give fire and candle light to the Corpse de guard, like as they have
benefree thereof these last 12. years under the government of the King of
Spain.

XIII. Answer.
Those of the city shall govern themselves herein, as it was before the year
1625.

XIV. Demand.
That the Soldiers of the garrison, which shall be laid in the said city, as
well foot as horsemen shall be lodged in Baracaes, or otherwise, without any
charge to the Town, and Burgesses thereof. And in case any Soldiers be
billitted upon the Burgers, that then they shall receive service money for them,
without any charge to the City.

XIV. Answer.
The Soldiers shall be lodged upon service money, as they are in other Towns
of the united Provinces.

Given thus in the Army before Breda the 7. of October, 1637. Stilo Novo.
THE ENNEMIES DEPARTVRE AND MARCH OVT of BREDA on Satterday the 10 of October
1637. New Style.
THe articles of Composition abouesaid, being signed on both side, a great many
of wagons, and karres to the numder of 800, were provided out of the Army, and
the Barronie of Breda, to carry the Ennemy away. Which over night and on
Satterday Morning the tenth of October, went into the City to load their
goods upon them. About eight of the Clock the Princes guard, and the Company
of Monsieur Witz Sariant Maiour General, came and stood before the Busseport.
where the Ennemie was to march out, with four troops of Horse, and five
Companies of foot, and from thence all along to the quarter of Count Harrie
Casimier Governor of Frizeland even to the village called Heusenhout, and so
to the utmost line of Circumvalation, there stood five or six Companies of
foot, of every Regiment in Battle, and troops of horse, beating their drums
and sounding their Trumpets, according to every Nations march, making a guard
for the Ennemy to pass through, having beside above 30 thousand Spectators,
Gentlemen, Gentlewomen, Burgers, women, and children, which came from all parts
to see them march out, as also the Princess of Orange came hirselfe with a
great suite of Ladies and Gentlewoemen in 3. Coaches, each Coach having six
goodly horses to draw them to the utmost trench, where upon a hill there were
tents pitch up, whither also came his Highness the Prince of Orange with his
Son the Young Prince accompanied with the Prince Elector, Prince Rupert,
Prince Maurice, Count William of Nassaw, Count Henry Cassimier, my Lo:
Brederode, my Lord Grandisson, and diverse other Nobles and men of quality, and
a brave troop of horse, standing upon the Crosse-way as you go to Heusenhout.

About eleven of the clock the Ennemy began to march out of the town, The
order of their march was thus, first there marched in their Avantguard 42
ranks of musketteirs five in rank, consisting of Burgonians, Walloons and
some other nations, all ranged under 16 Burgonian Coullours, which marched
altogether, and this was their first division, next unto them followed 50
ranks more of pikes, and musketeers of all sorts of nations under three
coullours, these two divisions made the Auantgard.

After them followed a number of wagons, laden with Officiers wives,
gentlewomen, women, children, and baggage.

Their Battaill consisted of 15 coullours, which marched altogether under which
they had ranked 53 ranks of Musketeers, pikes, and firelocks, among which
there were some, boys, and sick soldiers.

After them also followed many wagons, and Karrs loaded with piks, and
musketteirs, Casks, and other instruments and materials of war, haueing also
some Clergy men sitting upon them, and some others as Gray friars, and
Preaching priests which went a foot.

Next unto them followed three Coullors making 77 ranks, of Pikes and
musketteires.

After them came five Coullours, more making 89 ranks of pikes and Musketteirs

After these came a great number of Wagons, and six good pieces of ordinance
four of them were half Canon, and 2 Culuering, the two greatest had 29 horses
to draw them, and the two other demi Cano^ had 17 horses a piece to draw the^,
the two lesser pieces had eleven, after the Canon came two morters, the
greatest drawn with 13 horses, the lesser with nine having two empty Carriages,
and twelve Barrels of powder for their ordinance, with other necessaries
belonging to the war.

After these followed Monsieur Gomer Fourdine the Governor who was taken
prisoner by us, when Count John of Nassaw sailed from Antwerp with his fleet
in Sept. Anno 1631. (Who also was turned out of Skincksconce the last of April
1636, and now out of Breda this year 1637,) in a closse coach having bin sick
of a fever, but coming into the field near the prince, he came out of his
coach and got a horse back, and coming nigh unto his highness he light from
his horse, and two persons that was with him, the Prince seeing him coming
toward him, lighted likewise from his horse, and after some salutations, and
courtesies showed one to an other, having had some short speeches one to an
other, he took his leave of the Prince in most friendly manner: But the
Drossard of the city had longer conference with his highness.

After him followed a great many wagons, upon the foremost of them sat 10 or 12
Jesuits, who did not so much as once move their hats to the Prince: so much
they stood upon their pontificalibus, after them followed 30 ranks of
Soldiers under four Coullours, which marched together: then came a good many
of wagons again, and after them a procession of 16 Capuchian Friars, marching
with great devotion, the foremost of them bearing a redd wooden cross in sign
of the passion, having hanging upon yt, a rodd, a hamer, a pair of tongs,
nails, a sponge, and a crown of thorns, and these brought up their battle.

Lastly, their, Arriergard consisted of 150 Spaniards, and Nepolitans, ranged
into 27 ranks under six Coullours, which as before marched between the two
middle ranks, of the pikes. Alferus de Belle, that had acted the dead man's
part, and was taken prisoner in the Horne-worke, for the kind courtesy and
humanity, he had found from the English, especially, from Coronell Colepeper
and the Captains and officers of his Regiment, showed himself a gratefullman,
saluted all the officers, and thanked them all for the kind usage he had
received from them, saying, that if ever it was his fortune to take any of them
prisoners, they should find the like usage from him

The number of Coullours and men, which the Ennemy marched out of the town
were counted to be 51 Coullours with Dirick the Conestables making 1470 able
men in rank and file, besides officers, and between 5 or 6 hundred men that
attended the wagons, straglers, sick, and hurt men that satt upon wagons,
besides diverse others that stayed in the town all night, and a great many
sick and hurt men that were left behind them in the Town and Gesthouse, till
they had recovered their health: so that it is supposed the Ennemy that day
marched out of the Town about 22 hundred, able, sick, and hurt men besides
officers. Many of the Officers and soldiers were very souldierlike men with
stern countenances and all the officers having redd skarfes about them, and
the soldiers redd and blew ribbands: and thus thee Reere being past, they
marched toward a village called Gilsen, but the night ouertaking them (for it
was four a clock in the afternoon ere the last of their reere marched out of
the Town) they were saint to quarter that night upon the heath, under the
heavens canopie, and on the morrow being the Sabbath day at the creek of the
day set forward their march toward Machline, the Town they desired to go
unto.

It rests now that something be spoaken in what state we found the Town,
as soon as the Ennemy had drawn off their men, from Ginnekens Bulwark, in the
bowels whereof his highness had intended to have sprung to mines, and to have
made two breaches, our companies, which had the guard in the approches, had
order from the Prince every company according to their antiquity, to advance
and and mount up to the topp of that Bulwark, and to draw the foremost
companyes into the Market place. The Bulwark was cut of twice, and they had
made a Countermine in it, to have met with ours, but haueing not powder enough
to chamber in it, being reported they had but 24 Barrels left in all, the whole
town, they durst not venture any powder in their mine, nor stand out the
springing of ours, there was found upon the walls 43 pieces most of them brass,
six upon the Castle wall, and three upon the plain before the Castle.

The two streets which lies next Ginnekins port, and Antwerps port toward the
Hagh, the howses are miserably battered and beaten down and torn with our
ordinances, and great grenades of 170 and 180 pounds. The next day that the
Ennemie marched out being Sunday, there was a sermon preached in the great
Church about 10 of the Clock in the morning by D. N. preacher of Wick to
Duerstadt he took his text out of of the 40 Psalm and fifth verse, Many o
Lord my God, are thy wonderful works, which thou have done and thy thoughts
which are to usward they cannot be reckoned up in order unto thee, if I would
declare, and speak of them, they are more then can be numbered.

Before the sermon was sung the second part of the 66 Psalm, and after the
Sermon the second part of the 118 Psalm, and four children were Baptized. In
the after noone sermon his text was out of the 118 Psalm, and the 15 verse, to
wit. The voice of rejoicing, and salvation is in the tabernacle of the
Righteous: the right hand of the Lorddoth valiantly.

Before the afternons sermon was sung the second part of the 119 Psalm, and
after the sermon the 100 Psalm. The Church was as full as ever it could
throng, the poor haueing given them after these two sermons above 4000 gilders.

Over the South portall of the great Church, hung in a black board and white
letters, this inscription following.

Ambrosius Spinola. Vigilanta. Breda Expugnata.
The day before the Ennemie marched out off the Town, they pulled down all
their Images, and cleared the Church off them, and packt them up in fats, and
Caskes, and as soon as the Ennemy was gone out of the town, a saylor climed up
to the topp of the weather Cock, off that high steeple, and set up a great
Orang-flagg above the Cock which flew there three days till it was taken down
again.

Before this strong, and mighty City Marquis Spinola lay eleven Months, to
block it up before he could famish our men out off yt: for approches he durst
not venture on it, but his Highness the Prince off Orange made his line of
Circumualation firm in a month and by approches took it in, in 7 weeks and
one day in which time he shot 23131. Canon shot upon the out works, the walls
and into the Town, besides many grenades off 170 and 180 pound weight which
were cast into the Town, and which shattered and toore down many houses in
pieces.

A true List of the Officers, Gentlemen, and Soldiers Slain, and hurt before
the Seige of BREDA, 1637.
The Gards Slain. Hurt. Of His Highness Own Company 5. 6. Sariant Maiour
General Wits 7. 8. Of the English Tercia.
Companies. Slain. Hurt. The Regement of Coronell Morgan 11. 46. 83. Coronell
Herbert 11. 45. 70. Coronell Goring 11. 30. 50. Coronell Colepepper 10. 35. 55.
The Lord of Brederode 5. 21. 28. Count Solms 7. 19. 59. Summa. 55. 196. 344.

Officers Slain and Hurt of the English Tercia.
7. Officiers Slain.
Captain Crofts. Treymaine L. to Capt: Hamond. Lieu: Kiuet, Lieu: to Sariant.
Maiour Duick. Ensign Kirk Ensign to Captain Hamond. Ensign Carey, Ensign
to C. White Ensign Rommeler Ensign to Count Solms. Sariant Raymond.
15 English Officiers hurt.
My Lord Morgan. Coronell Goring. Captain Skippon. Captain Stanton. Captain
Meteren. Count Solmes his Cap: Lie: Loofe, Lieu: to Lieu: Cor: Thienen.
Lieutenant Baxter. Lieutenant Moyle. Lieutenant Aires. Ensign Mack Worth.
Ensign Harcourt. Ensign Squib. Sariant Sheldrake. Sariant Goddard.

Of the French Tercia.
Companies. Slain Hurt. The Regiment of Monsieur Chastillon 11. 37. 44.
Coronell Hauteriue 9. 25. 42. Duke de Candale 9. 26. 54. Maisonnefve 9. 31. 46.
Douchans 10. 35. 74. Count Maurice 5. 20. 26. Summa. 51. 182. 303.

Officers Slain and Hurt in his Highness Quarter of the French Tercia.
7. Officiers Slain.
Monsieur Charnaze Ambassador and Coronell. Captain de Cars. Mons. Sailly L.
to Capt: Valandre. Captain Barrier his Ensign. Monsieur Corafel his
Lieutenant. Des Mary's Lieut: to Mons: de Candale. Saint Sire Ensign to
Monsieur de Buat.
13. Hurt.
Captain Beauchaine. Captain Bantelu. Sauuet at Lieutenant to Monsieur
Beauchaine. Mr. Brot Lie: to Capt: de Gonne. Mons: Pisel. Lieutenant to Capt:
de Barriere. Saint Hermin, Ensign to Capt: Creuset. Mons: Lerbalde Lieut: to
L: Co: Capt: la Cappelle. The Ensign de Mons: la Cappelle. Remon Lieut: du
Capt: Estrade. Olomme Ensign to Sar: Maiour Autege. Hertain, Ensign to Count
Maurice his Company. Le Chevalier Vaucelar. La Board Sariant to Monsieur le
Mareschals Chastillons Company.

The Forces that came with Count Harrie Cassimier, Governor of Frizland.
Slain. Hurt. The 51 Companies under the command of Count Harry 171. 250. 8
Companies under the command of Lieut: Coron: Boshuysen 27. 32. 12 Under
Coronell Ferentz 8. 24. Sum: 71 Companies 206. 306.

Officers Slain, and Hurt in the quarter of my Lord Count Henry Casimir
Governor of Friezland.
5 Officers Slain.
Captain Nassaw. Captain vanden Brand. Captain Roussell. Hattem Lieut: to
Capt: Roussell. Slip Ensign to Capt: Slip.
12. Hurt.
Coronell Potter. Captain Huygens. Captain Asima. Captain Jacob Slip. Gesaw
Capt: Lieut: to the Coronell Lauwick Lieut: to Cap: Lauwick. Martin Lieut: to
Capt: Hoen. Escape Lieut: to Coronell Ogle. Capt: Dimers Lieutenant: Meger
Lieut: to Capt: Harsholt. Ockinga Ensig: of the Frieze guard The Inginier Slip.

Of Count Williams of Nassaws Tercia, Lord Marshall of the Field.
Companies Slain. Hurt. The Regiment of His Highness 9. 28. 39. Count
Williams 10. 37. 51. Coronell Erentruiter 9. 18. 35. The Lord of Beverward. 7.
19. 32. Coron: Wynebergen 7. 24. 43. Coronell Balford. 7. 32. 30. Lord Aumont
7. 19. 40. Coronell Sandalien 7. 47. 41. Summa. 63. 224. 316.

Officiers Slain and Hurt in Count Williams quarter Lord Marshall of the Field.
7 Officiers Slain.
Captain Schuiren. Captain Williamson. Sar: Ma: Caddet his Lieutenant
Stoltenburck L: to Ca: Ameronge^. La Grandiere Ensig: unto my Lord Beverweerd
Coronell. Hamelton Li. to Li. Cor: Erskins. Ensign Fargison Ensign to Capt:
Kilpatrick.
12 Hurt.
Coronell Sandalien. Coronell Wynebergen. Lieut: Coronell Couts. Captain
Balford. Capt: Kilpatrick. Sar: Maiour Erentruiter. The Lieutenant of the
Firelocks. Ensign Niece to Capt: Scott. Sar: Corbit. Ensign Drommont Sar:
Inglish. Sar: Linesey.
In Coronell Ferens quarter.
Capt. Boetzelar Hurt. Horse Captains Hurt. Sir John Connyers, Cap: Wilmot
Officers of the Field Hurt. Monsieur Percevall Quartermaster General. Monsieur
Abel Quartermaster Quart: Egmonds Inginier. Quartermaster Stephanus. Francis
Perceval Inginier.
4 Volunteers Slain.
Lieut: Coronell Henderson. Captain Crofts. Monsieur Stuuer. Monsieur
Coklemonde.
10 Volunteers Hurt.
My Lord Grandisson. Mr. Apsley. Mr. Oneall. Monsieur Rieux. Monsieur
Ferandiere. Monsieur Bardona. Monsieur Constantine. Monsieur vanden Brande.
Monsieur Dumorier. Monsieur Matinase. Officiers and Volunteers Slain 30. Hurt
70.

Summa Totaliis of the Soldiers, and Gentlemen Slain of these 246 Companies
820. 1283. Canon Shot upon the Town 23130. Powder Shot away in Canon and
Musketts. 320000.
The Charges Extraordinary of the Outworks, Approches Circumualation, Redoubts
Batteries, Stopping the Rivers, making of Dammes with the Galleries, and all
other Works and Trenches, during the siege of Breda Cost the States 500000.
Gilders

It is Recorded that while the Marquesso Spinila was a taking of this City,
it cost his Majesty, the King of Spain Eight Millions of Gilders.


