THE BRAZEN AGE, The first Act containing, The death of the Centaure Nessus,
THE SECOND, The Tragedy of Meleager: THE THIRD The Tragedy of Jason and Medea.

THE FOVRTH.

UVLCANS NET THE FIFTH.

The Labors and death of HERCULES: Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, for Samuel Rand dwelling near
Holborne-Bridge. 1613.

To the Reader.
THough a third brother should not inherit, whilst the two elder live, by the
laws of the Land, and therefore it might breed in me a discoragement, to commit
him without any hereditary means, to shift for it self in a world so
detractiue and calumnious, yet rather presuming upon the ingenious, then
afraid of the envious, I have exposed him to the fortunes of a younger brother,
which is, most commonly, bravely to live, or desperately to hazard: yet this is
my comfort, that what imperfection ^oeuer it have, having a brazen face it
cannot blush; much like a Pedant about this Town, who, when all trades failed,
turned Pedagogue, and once insinuating with me, borrowed from me certain
Translations of Ovid, as his three books De Art Amandi, and two De Remedio
Amoris, which since, his most brazen face has most impudently challenged as
his own, wherefore, I must needs proclaim it as far as Ham, where he now keeps
school, Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter honores, they were things which
out of my iuniority and want of indgement, I committed to the veiw of some
private friends, but with no purpose of publishing, or further communicating
the^. Therefore I would entreat that Austin, for so his name is, to acknowledge
his wrong to me in showing them, and his own impudence, and ignorance in
challenging the^. But courteous Reader, I can only excuse him in this, that
this is the Brazen Age.

Drammatis Personae.
HOMER.
Oeneus K of Calidon. Althea, and Her two brothers. Deyaneira. Meleager.
Hercules. Achelous. Nessus. Jason. Atreus. Tellamon. Nestor. Medea. Oetes.
Absyrtus. Adonis. Atlanta. Apollo. Aurora. ^upiter. Mercury. Juno. Mars. Venus.
Gallus. Vulcan. Lychas. Omphale. Her maids. Aeneas. Anchises. La^medon.
Hesione. Priam. Philoctetes. Water Nymphs. Castor. Pollux. Pyragmon.
The Brazen Age, CONTAINING The labors and death of Hercules.
Enter HOMER. AS the world grows in years ('it is the Heavens curse)
Men's sins increase; the pristine times were best:
The Ages in their growth wax worse and worse.
The first was precious, full of golden rest.
Silver succe^ded; good, but not so pure:
Then love and harmless lusts might current pass:
The third that follows we find more obdure,
And that we title by the Age of Brass.
In this more gross and courser mettal'd Age,
Tyrants and fierce oppressors we present.
Nephews that against their Uncles wreake their rag^,
Mothers against their children discontent,
A sister with her brother at fier^e war,
(Things in our former times not seen or known)
But vice with virtue now begins to jar,
And sins (though not at height) yet great are grown.
Still with our history we shall proceed,
And Hercules vistorious acts relate:
His marriage first, next many a noble deed
Performed by him: last how he yields to Fate.
And these, I hope, may (with some mixtures) pass,
So you sit pleased in this our Age of Brass.
Actus 1.
Scoena 1.
(...) Oeneus, King of Calidon, Queen Althea, Meleager, Deianeira, Pl^xippus,
and Toxeus, brothers to the Queen. K. Oen. Thus midst our brothers, daughter,
Queen and son,
Sits Oeneus crowned in fert^ll Ca^don
Whose age and weakness is supported only,
In those ripe joys that I receive from you.

Plex. May we long ftand supporters of your royaltyes,
And glad spectators of your age and peace.

Tox. The like I wish.

K. Oen. We have found you brothers royal,
And subjects loyal.

Althea. They are of our line,
Of which no branch did ever perish yet,
By Cankers, blastings, or dry barrenness.
But Meleager let me turn to thee,
Whose birth the Fates themselves did calculate,

Mel. Pray mother how was that? I have heard you say
Somewhat about my birth mi^aculous,
But never yet knew the true circumstance.

Althea. 'Twas thus: the very instant thou wast borne,
The sisters, that draw, spinne, and clip our lives,
Entered my chamber with a fatal brand,
Which hurling in the fire, thus said: One day, one date,
Betide this brand and child, even be their fate.
So parted they, the brand begins to burn:
And as it wasted, so did thou consume;
Which I perceiving, leap't unto the flame,
And quenching that, stayed thy consumption.
The brand I (as a jewel) have reserved,
And keep it in a casket, locked as safe
As in thy bosom thou maintainst thy heart.

Melea. Pray keep it well: for if not with my mother,
With whom dare Meleager trust his life?
But sister Deianeira, now to you.
Two worthy Champians must this day contend,
And try their emin^nce in Arms for you,
Great Achelous, and strong Hercules.

Deia. We know it: my love must be bought with blows,
Not Oratory wins me, but the sword:
He that can braueliest in the lists contend,
Must Deianeira's nuptial bed ascend.

Oen. Brothers, conduct these Champions to the lists,
Mean time Althea state thee on that hand,
On this side Deianeira the rich prize
Of their contention.

Melea. Clamors from a far,
Tell us these Champions are a dressed for war.

Enter at one door the river Achelous, his weapons borne in by Water-Nymphes.
At the other Hercules. K. Oen. Stand forth you warlike Champions, and express
Your loves to Deianeira, in your valors.
As we are Oeneus the Aetolians King,
And under us command whole Calidon.
So we contest we make her here the prize
Of the proud victor:

Ache. Dares the Theban bastard
Contend with us, as we are eldest son
Unto the grave and old Oceanus,
And the Nymph Nais, borne on Pindus mount,
From whence our broad and spacious currents rise?
So are we proud to coape with Hercules.
Nere let my streams wash A^arnania's banks,
Or we confin'de in Thous, our grand seat,
Till (by the ruin of Alcmena's son)
We lodge bright Deianeira in our arms.

Herc. Have we the Cleonean Lions torn?
And decked our shoulders in their honored spoils?
The Calidoni^ Boar crushed with our Club?
The rude Thessalian Centaurs sunk beneath
Our Iuiall hand? pierced hell? bound Cerber^?
And buffeted so long, till from the foam
The dog belch't forth strong Aconitum spring?
And shall a petty river make our way
To Deianeira's bed impassable?
Know then the pettiest stream that flows through Greece,
I Will make thee run thy head below thy banks,
Make red thy waters with thy vital blood,
And spill thy waves in drops as small as tears,
If thou presum'st to coape with Hercules.

Ache. What Is Hercules that I should dread his name?
Or what is he greater then Amphitri^'s son?
When we assume the name of Demi-god
Not Prote^s can trans-shape himself like us,
For we command our figure when we please.
Sometimes we like a serpent run along
Our medowy banks: and sometimes like a Bull
Graze on these strands we water with our streams.
We can translate our fury to a fire,
And when we swell, in our fierce torrents swallow
The Champian plains, and flow above the hills,
Drown all the continents by which we run;
Yea Hercules himself.

Herc. Me Achelous!
I can do more then this: love Deianeira,
Swin with her on my shoulders through thy streams,
And with my huge Club beat thy torrents back,
With thine own waters quench the infernal fires
Thy figure serpentine, flat on the earth:
And when thou art Bull, catch fast hold by thy horns,
And whirle thee 'bout my head thus into air.
Thou fair Aetolian dame, I cannot woo,
Nor paint my passions in smooth Oratory,
But fight for thee I can, against Achelous,
Or all the horrid monsters of the earth.

Melea. When 'gins your proud and hostile enmity?
Behold the prize proposed, the victors meed,
Champions your spirits inkindle at her eyes.

Ache. It is for her this bastard I despise.
Prepare thee Theban.

Herc. See, I am adrest
With this to thunder on thy captive crest.
I cannot bellow in thy bombast phrase;
Nor deaf these free spectators with my braues.
I cut off words with deeds, and now behold
For me, the echo of my blows thus scold.

Alarm. Achelous is beaten in, and immediately enters in the shape of a Dragon.
Herc. Be thou a God or hell-hound thus transhap't,
Thy terror frights not me, serpent or devil I Will pash thee.

Alarm. He beats away the dragon. Enter a Fury all fire-workes. Herc. Fright
us with fire? our Club shall quench thy flame,
And beat it down to hell, from whence it came.

When the Fury sinkes, a Bulls head appears. Herc. What, yet more monsters?
Serpent, Bull, and Fire,
Shall all alike taste great Alcides ire.

He tugs with the Bull, and pluckes off one of his horns. Enter from the same
place Achelous with his forehead all bloody. Ache. No more, I am thy Captive,
thou my Conqueror:
I see, no Magic, or enchanting spell
Have power on virtue and true fortitude.
No slight Illusion can deceive the eyes
Of him that is divinely resolute.
I lay me at thy feet, a lowly vassaile,
Since thou have reft me of that prccious horn,
Which tearing from my head in shape of Bull,
Thus wounded me. Take Deianeira freely,
Only restore me that rich spoil thou have won,
Which all the Nymphs and graces dwelling near,
Shall fill with redolent flowers, and delicate fruits,
And call it Cornucopiae, plenties horn,
In memory of Ach^lous loss,
And this high conqu^st won by Hercules.

Hercu. Had thou not stoopt thy horrid Taurine shape
I would have peece-meale rent, and thy tough hide
Torn into rags as thick as Autumn leaves:
Take thee thy life, and with thy life that spoil
Plucked from thy mangled front, give me my love,
I Will stoare no horns at winning of a wife.
Give me bright Deyanira, take that horn,
So late from thy disfigured Temples torn.

Deyan. I have my prayers, Alcides his desires,
Both meet in love.

Oen. Receive her Hercules,
The conquest of thy warlike fortitude.

Herc. We take but what our valor purchased us,
And beauteous Queen thou shall assure his love,
Whose puissant arm shall awe the triple world,
And make the greatest Monarchs of the earth
To thy diuinest beauty tributary.

Meleag. Will Hercules stay here in Calidon,
To solemnize the nuptials of our sister?
I Meleager, rich Aetolians heir,
Whose large Dominions stretch to Oeta Mount,
And to the bounds of fertile Thessaly
Will grace thy Bridals with the greatest pomp
Greece can afford, nor is it my meanest honor
To be the brother to great Hercules.

Herc. Thanks Meleager, soiourne here we cannot,
My step-dame luno tasks me to more dangers:
We take thy beauteous sister in our guard,
Whom by Jove's aid we straight will bear to Thebes.

O^n. A fathers wishes crown the happiness
Of his fair daughter.

M^l. And a brothers love
Comfort thee where thou go: If not with Hercules
Whom dare we trust thy safety.

H^rc. Not loves guard
Can circl^ her with more security.
Time calls us hence, Aetolian Lords farewell.

Oen. Adieu brave son, and daughter, only happy
In being thus bestowed, come Achelous,
With you we will feast, nor let your foil deiect you,
Or Deyaniraes loss; he is more then man,
And needs must he do this, that all things can.

Exeunt. Herc. Dares Deyaneira trust her persons safety
With us a stranger, only known by Fame.

Deyn. Were against the Lions in Chimera bred,
Or those rude Bears that breed in Caucasus:
The Hyrcan Tigers or the Syrian Wolves,
Nay against the Giants that assaulted heaven
And with their shoulders made those bases shake
That prop Olimpus: lived Enceladus
With whom love wrestled: even against those monsters,
I Would think me safe incircled in these arms.

Herc. Thou art as safe as if immured in heaven,
Pal'd with that Crystal wall that girts loves house,
Where all the Gods inhabit, built by fate,
Stay, I should know that Centaure.

Enter Nessus. Ness. That Is Hercules I know him by his Club,
Whose ponderous weight I felt upon my Skull
At the great Bridal of the Lapithes.
What lovely Lady's she that in her beauty
So much exceedes fair Hypodamia?

Herc, Oh Nessus, thou of all thy cloud-bred race,
Alone did escape by trusting to thy heels
At Hypodamia's Bridals, but we now
Are friends, are we not Nessus?

Ness. Yes great Hercules,
(Till I can find fit time for just reuendge)
Methinkes my brains still rattle in my skull)
What Lady's that in great Alcides Guard?

Herc. Deyaneira, daughter to the Aetolian King,
Sister to Meleager, now our Bride;
Won by the force of arms from Achelous,
The boisterous flood that flows through Calidon.

Ness. A double envy burns in all my veins,
First for revenge; next, that he should enjoy
That beauteous maid whom Nessus dearly loves.
Will Hercules command me? or his Bride?
I Will lackey by thee wheresoer'e thou go,
And be the vassal to great Hercules.

Herc. We are bound for Thebes, but soft, what torrent's this
That intercepts our way? How shall we pass
These raging streams?

Ness. This is Euenus flood,
A dangerous current, full of whirle-pooles deep,
And yet unsounded: dare thou trust thy Bride
On Nessus back? I Will undertake to swim her
Unto the furthest strond, upon my shoulders,
And yet not laue her shoe.

Herc. I Will pay thee for thy waftage Centaure, well,
And make thee Prince of all thy by-form'd race,
If thou willt do this grace to Hercules:
But ferry her with safety, for by Jove,
If thou but make her tremble in these streams,
Or let the least wave dash against her skirt;
If the least fear of drowning pale her cheek,
I Will pound thee smaller then the Autumn dust
Tossed by the warring winds?

Ness. Have I not swomme
The Hellesepont, when waves high as yon hills
Tossed by the winds, have crowned me, yet in spite
Of all their briny weight I have wrought my self
Above the topmost billow to ore-looke
The troubled maine: come beauteous Deyaneira,
Not Charon with more safety ferries souls,
Then I will thee through this impetuous foord,

Herc. Receive her Centaure, and in her the wealth
And potency of mighty Hercules.

Ness. Now my revenge for that inhumaine banquet,
In which so many of the Centaures fell,
I Will rape this Princess, having past the flood
Come beauteous Deyaneira, mount my shoulders,
And fear not your safe wastage.

Exeunt. Herc. That done return for us: fair Deianeira,
White as the garden lilly, pyren snow,
Or rocks of Crystal hardened by the Sun:
Thou shall be made the potent Queen of Thebes,
And all my Iouiall labors shall to thee
Be consecrate, as to Alcides love.
Well plundge bold Centaure, how thy boisterous breast
Plowes up the streams: thou through the swelling tides,
Sail'st with a freight more rich and beautiful,
Then the best ship crammed with Pangeous gold:
With what a swift dexterity he parts
The mutinous waves, whose waters claspe him round,
He plays and wantons on the curled streams,
And Deyanira on his shoulders fits
As safe, as if she stear'd a pine tree bark.
They grow now toward the shore: my club and arms
I Will first cast over the deep Euenus foord,
But from my side my quiver shall not part,
Nor this my trusty bow.

Deyan. Help Her^les.

Within. Herc. 'Twas Deyaneiraes voice.

Deyan. The Traitor Nessus
Seeks to despoile mine honor, Jove, you Gods:
Out traiterous Centaure: Help great Hercules.

Here. Hold, lust-burnt Centaure, it is Alcides calls
Or swifter then Jove's lightning, my fierce vengeance
Shall cross Euenus.

Deyan. Oh, oh.

Herc. Dare thou devil?
Could thou clime Heaven or sink below the Center
So high, so low, my vengeance should pursue thee,
Hold; if I could but fix thee in my gripes,
I de tear thy limbs into more Atomies
Then in the Summer play before the Sun.

Deyan. Help Hercules (out dog) Alcides help.

Herc; I Will send till I can come, this poisonous shaft
Shall speak my fury and extract thy blood,
Till I my self can cross this raging flood.

Hercules shoots, and goes in: Enter Nessus with an arrow through him, and
Deianeira. Ness. Thy beauty Deyaneira is my death,
And yet that Nessus dies embracing thee
Takes from my senses all those torturing pangues
That should associate death: to show I loved thee,
I Will leave thee, in my will, a legacy;
Shall stead thee more, then should thy father give thee
Unto thy Dower the Crown of Calidon.
Of such great virtue is my living blood,
And of such prize, that could thou value it,
Thou would not let one drop fall to the ground:
But oh I die.

Deyan. Teach me to rate it truly.

Ness. Now Nessus, in thy death be aueng'd on him
On whom in life thou could not wreake thy rage:
(My blood is poison) all these pure drops save,
Which I bequeath thee ere I take my grave:
I know thy Lord lascivious, bent to lust,
Witness the fifty daughters of King Thespeius,
Whom in one night he did adulterate:
And of those fifty begot fifty sons:
Now if in all his quests, he be withheld
By any Ladies love, and stay from thee,
Such is the virtue of my blood now shed,
That if thou dipst a shirt, steept in the least
Of all these drops, and sendst it to thy Lord,
No sooner shall it touch him, but his love
Shall die to strangers, and revive to thee,
Make use of this my love.

Deyan. Centaure, I will.

Ness. And so, whom Nessus cannot, do thou kill;
Still dying men speak true: it is my last cry,
Save of my blood, ^may steed thee ere thou die.

Deyan. Though I my love mistrust not, yet this counsel
I'lenot despise: this if my Lord should stray,
Shall to my desolate bed teach him the way.

Enter Hercules. Herc. After long struggling with Euenus streams,
I forced the river bear me on her breast,
And land me safely on this further strond,
To make an end of what my shaft begun,
The life of Nessus, lives the Centaure yet?

Deyan. Behold him grouelling on the senseless earth,
His wounded breast transfixt by Hercules.

Herc. That the luxurious slave were sencible
Of torture; not th'infernals with more pangues
Could plague the villain then Alcides should.
Ixions bones rackt on the torturing wheel
Should be a pastime: the three snake-hair'd sisters,
That la^h offenders with their whips of steel,
Should seem to dally, when with every string
They cut the flesh like razors: but the dead
We hate to touch, as cowardly and base,
And venge^ce not becoming Hercul^s.
Come Dey^eira, first to consumate
Our high ^owsals in triumphant Thebes,
That done, our future labors we will pursue,
And by the assistance of the powers Divine,
Strive to act more then luno can assign.

Exit. Enter HOMER. Fair Deyaneira unto, The^es being guided,
And Hercules espousals solemnized.
He for his further labors soon provided,
As Juno by Euritius had devised.
The Apples of Hesperia first he wan,
Mauger huge Atlas that supports the spheres:
And whilst the Giant on his business ran;
Alcides takes his place, and proudly bears
The heavens huge frame: thence into Scithia hies,
And their the Amazonian Baldricke gains,
By conquering Menalip (a br^e prise)
The warlike Queen that ^re the Scithians reigns.
That he supported heaven, does well express
His Astronomicke skill, knowledge in ^tarres:
They that such practice know, what do they less
Then bear heavens weight so of the Lernean wars.
Where he the many-headed Hydra slew,
A Serpent of that nature, when his sword
Pared off one head, from that another grew.
This showed his Logick^ skill: from every word
And argument confuted, there arise
From one a multiplicity, therefore we
Poets and such as are estee^ed wise,
Instruct the world by such ^rality.
To conquer Hydra showed his powerful skill
In disputation, how to argue well.
(By all that understand in custom still)
And in this Art did Hercules excel.
Now we the Egyptian tyrant must present,
Bloody Busiris, a king fell and rude,
One that in murder placed his sole content,
With whose sad death our first Act we conclude.
Enter Busyris with his Guard and Priests to sacrifice; to them two strangers,
Busyris takes them and kills them upon the Altar: enter Hercules disguised,
Busyris sends his Guard to apprehend him, Hercules discovering himself beats
the Guard, kills Busyris and sacrifices him upon the Altar, at which there falls
a shower of rain, the Priests offer Hercules the Crown of Egypt which he
refuses. HOMER. In Egypt there of long time fellnoraine,
For which unto the Oracle they sent:
Answers re^urn'd, that till one stranger slain,
Immou'd shall be the Marble f^rmament.
Therefore the Tyrant all these strangers kills
That enter Egypt, till Alcides came
And with the tyrants bulk the Altar fills:
At whose red slaughter fell a plenteous rain.
For he that stranger and usurper was,
Whose bloody fate the Oracle forespake.
But for a while we let Alcides pass,
Whom these of Egypt would their souer aigne make,
For freeing them from such a tyrants rage;
Now Meleager next must fill our stage.

Actus 2.
Scoena 2.
Enter Venus like a Huntresse, with Adonis. Venus. Why does Adonis fly the
Queen of love?
And shun this Iuory girdle of my arms?
To be thus scarft the dreadful God of war
Would give me conquered kingdoms: For a kiss
(But half like this) I could command the Sun
Rise before his hour, to bed before his time:
And (being loue-sicke) change his golden beams,
And make his sace pale, as his sifter Moon.
Come, let us tumble on this violet bank:
Prithee be wanton; let us toy and play,
Thy Icy fingers warm between my breasts;
Look on me Adon with a steadfast eye,
That in these Crystal glasses I may see
My beauty, that charms Gods, makes men amazed,
And stownd with wonder: does this roseat pillow
Offend my love? come, wallow in my lap,
With my white fingers I will clap thy cheek,
Whisper a thousand pleasures in thine ear.

Adonis. Madame, you are not modest: I affect
The unseen beauty that adornes the mind.
This looseness makes you foul in Adons eye:
If you will tempt me, let me in your face
Read blushfulnesse, and fear; a modest blush
Would make your cheek seem much more beautiful.
If you will whisper pleasure in mine ear,
Praise chastity, or with your loud voice shrill
The tunes of horns, and hunting; they please best:
I Will to the chase, and leave you to the rest.

Venus. Thou art not man; yet were thou made of stone,
I have heat to melt thee. I am Queen of love,
There is no practiue art of dalliance
Of which I am not Mistress, and can use.
I have kisses that can murder unkind words,
And strangle hatred, that the gall sends forth:
Touches to raise thee, were thy spirits half dead:
Words that can power affection down thine ears.
Love me! thou can not choose, thou shall not choose.
Am I not Venus? Had thou Cupids arrows,
I should have took thee to have been my son:
Art thou so like him, and yet can not love?
I think you are brothers.

Adonis. Madame, you woo not well, men covet not
These proffered pleasures; but loue-sweets denied:
What I command, that cloyes my appetite;
But what I cannot come by I adore.
These prostituted pleasures surfeit still,
Where Is fear, or doubt, men sue with best good will.

Venus. Thou can instruct the Queen of love in love.
Thou shall not ( Adon) take me by the hand;
Yet if thou needs wilt force me, there is my palm.
I Will frown on him (alas! my brow's so smooth
It will not bear a wrinkle:) hye thee hence
Unto the chase, and leave me: but not yet,
I Will sleep this night upon Endimions bank,
On which the Swain was courted by the Moon.
Dare not to come, thou art in our disgrace;
(Yet if thou come I can afford thee place.)

A^. I must begone.

Venus. Swee^ whither?

Ad^nis. To the Chase.

Venus. What does^ thou hunt?

Adonis. The Calidonian Boar,
To which the Princes and best spirits of Greece
Are now assembled.

Venus. I beshrew thee boy,
That very word struck from my heart all joy:
It startled me, me thinks I see thee dye
By that rude Boar. Hunt thou the be^sts that fly,
The wanton Squirr^ll, or the trembling Hare,
The crafty Fox: these pastimes fea^ clesse are.
The greedy Wolves, and fierce Bears armed with claws,
Rough shouldred Lions, such as glut their jaws
With herds at once, Fell Boares, let them pass by,
Adon, these look not with thy Venus ^ye.
They judge not beauty, nor distinguish you^h,
These are their prey; My pity, love and ruth
Lives not in them. Oh to thy self be kind,
Thou from their mouths, my kisses shall not find.

Wind horns within. Adonis. The summons to the chase, Venus adue.

Ven. Leave those, turn head, choose those thou may pursue

Adonis. I am resolved, I Will help to rouse yon beast.

Venus. Thou art to de^ his sauadge throat to feast.
Forbear.

Adonis. In vain.

Venus. Appoint when we shall meet.

Adonis. After the chase. Farewell then.

Venus. Farewell sweet.

Adonis. This kissing.

Venus. Adon, guard thee well, express
Thy love to me, in being of thy self
Careful and chary: they that raze thy skin
Wound me. Be wise my Adon.

Adon. Never doubt. So then

He kisseth her. Venus. But lip-labor, yet ill left out.

Exeunt. Wind horns. Enter with Iauelings, and in green, Meleager, Theseus,
Telamon, Castor, Pollux, Jason, Peleus, Nestor, Atreus, Tox^us, Plexippus.
Melea. The cause of this conuention (Lords of Greece)
Needs no expression; and yet briefly thus:
Oeneus our father, the Aetolians King,
Of all his fruits and plenty, gave due rights
To all the Gods and Goddesses, Jove, Ceres,
Bacchus, and Pallas; but among the rest,
Diana he neglects: for which enraged,
She has sent (to plague us) a huge sauadge Boar,
Of an vn-measured height and magnitude.
What better can describe his shape and terror
Then all the pittious clamours shrild through Greece?
Of his depopulations, spoils, and preyes?
His flaming eyes they sparkle blood and fire,
His bristles poynted like a range of pikes
Ranck't on his back: his foame snowes where he feeds
His tuskes are like the Indian Oliphants.
Out of his jaws (as if Jove's lightning flew)
He scortches all the branches in his way,
Plowes up the fields, treads flat the fields of grain.
In vain the Shepherd or his dog secures
Their harmless fowlds. In vain the furious Bull
Strives to defend the heard ore which he Lords.
The Collonies into the Cities fly,
And till immured, they think themselves not safe.
To chase this beast we have met on Oeta mount,
Attended by the noblest spirits of Greece.

Tela. From populous Salamine I Tela^n
Am at thy fair request, King Meleager,
Come to behold this beast of Calidon,
And prove my virtue in his stern pursuit.

Jason. Not Meleagers love, more then the zeal
I bear my honor, has drawn Jason hither,
To this adventure, yet both forcible
To make me try strange maisteries against that monster,
Whose fury has so much amazed all Greece.

Castor. That was the cause I Castor, with my brother
Pollux, arrived, and left our sister Hellen
Embraced by our old father Tyndarus,
To rouse this beast.

Pollux. Let us no more be held
The sons of L^da, and be got by Jove,
Brothers, and called the two Tyndarian twins
If we return not crimsoned in the spoils
Of this fierce Boar.

Nestor. To that end Nestor came.
Nestor, that has already lived one age,
And entered on the second, to the third
May I nere reach, if part of that wild swine
I bring not home to Pylos where I reign.

Atr. My young son Agamemnon, and his brother
Prince Menclaus in his swathes at home,
Without some honor purchased on this Boar,
May I no more see, or Myeenes visit.

These. Well speaks Atreus, and his noble acts
Still equalize his language. Shall not Theseus
Veoter as far as any? heavens you know
I dare as much against any mortal foe.

Tox. Where Is Hercules, that at this noble business
He is not present, being near allied
To Meleager, having late espowsed
His sister Deianeira?

Plex. He Is for Busiris, that Aegytian tyrant,

Mel. Else noble valor, he would have bin first
To have purchased honor in this hauty quest.

Enter Atlanta with a Iauelin, Horns winded. Atl. Hail princes, let it not
offend this troop,
That I a Princess and Atlanta called,
A virgin Huntresse, press into the field,
In hope to double guild my Iauelins point
In blood of yon wild swine.

Melea. Virgineam in puero, puerilem in virgin vultum

Aspicio. Oh you Gods! or make her mine,
Stated with us the Calidonian Queen,
Or let this monstrous beaft confound me quite,
And in his vast womb bury all my f^e.
Beauteous Atlanta welcome, grace her princes
For Meleagers honor.

Jason. Come, shal's vncupple Lords,
Some plant the toiles, others bravely mount,
To vn-^en this sauadge.

M^lea. Time and my bashful love
Admits no courtship, Lady rank with us.
I Will be this day your guardian, and a shield
Between you and all danger.

Atlant. We are free,
And in the chase will our own guardian be.
Shals to the field, my Iauelin and these shafts,
Pointed with death, shall with the foremost fly,
And by a woman's hand the beast shall dye.

Enter Adonis winding his horn. Melea. As bold as fair; but soft, whose
bugle's that
Which calls us to the chase? Ad^nis yours?

Adonis. Mine oh you noble Greeks, we have discovered
The dreadful monster wallowing in his den:
The toils are fixed, the huntsmen placed on hills
Pressed for the charge, the fierce Tbessalian hounds
With their flagge ears, ready to sweep the dew
From the moist earth: their breasts are armed with steel,
Against the encounter of so grim a beast:
The hunters long to vncupple, and attend
Your presence in the field.

Atlanta. Follow Atlanta.
I Will try what prince will second me in field,
And make his Iauelins point shake even with mine.

Melea. That Meleagers shall.

Tela. Nor Telamon
Will come behind Atlanta, or the Prince.

Jason. Charge bravely then your Iauelins, send them singing
Through the clear air, and aim them at yon fiend,
Den'd in the quechy bogge, the signal Lords.

All. charge, charge.

a great winding of horns, and shouts. Meleag. Princes, shrill your Bugles
free.
And all Atlanta's danger fall on me.

Enter Jason and Telamon. Jason. This way, this way, renowned Telamon,
The Boar makes through yon glade, and from the hills
He hurries like a tempest: In his way
He prostrates trees, and like the bolt of Jove,
Shatters where ere he comes.

Tela. Diana's wrath
Sparkles grim terror from his fiery eyes:
One Iauelin pointed with the purest brass,
I have blunted against his ribs, yet he vnscar'd,
The head, as darted against a rock of marble,
Rebounded back.

Jason. He shakes off from his head
Our best Thessalian dogs, like Summer flies:
Nor can their sharp phangs fasten on his hide.
Follow the cry.

A shout. Enter Castor and Pollux. Castor. Where Is noble Telamon?

Pollux. Or warlike Jason?

Jason. Here you Tyndarides,
Speak, which way bends this plague of Calidon?

Castor. Here may you stand him, for behold he comes
Like a rough torrent, swallowing where he spreads,
Over his head a cloud of terror hangs
In which lean death (as in a Chariot) rides,
Darting his shafts on all sides: amongst the Princes
Of fertile Gree^e, Anceus bowels lie
Strewed on the earth, torn by his ravenous tuskes:
And had not Nestor (by his Iauelins help)
Leap'^vp into an Oak to have escaped his rage,
He had now perished in his second Age.

Pollux. Peleus is wounded, Pelegon lies slain,
Eupalemon has all his body rent
With an oblique wound: yet Meleager still,
And Theseus, and Atreus, with the rest,
Pursue the chase, with Boare-speares cast so thick,
That where they fly, they seem to dark the air,
And where they fall, they t^reaten imminent ruin.

Jason. To these wee'^ add our fury, and our fire,
And front him, though his b^ow bare figured hell,
And every wrinkle were the gulf of Styx
By which the Gods contest: Come noble Telamon,
Diana's monster by our hands shall fall,
Or (with the Princes slain) let us perish all.

Exe^t. Horns and shouts. Enter Meleager, Atlanta. Meleag. Thou beauteous
Nonacris, Arcadia's pride,
How has thy valor with thy fortune joined,
To make thee stain the general fortitude
Of all the Princes we derive from Greece,
Thy lances point has on yon armed monster,
Made the first wound, and the first crimson drop
Fell from his side, thy aim and arm extracted,
Thy fame shall never dye in Calidon.

Atl. We trifle here, what shall Atlanta gain
The first wounds honor, and be absent from
The monfters death, we must have hand in both.

Melea. Thou have purchased honor and renown enough,
Oh stain not all the general youth of Greece,
By thy too forward spirit. Come not near
Yon rude blood-thirsty sauadge, lest he prey
On thee, as on Anceus, and the rest,
Let me between thee and all dangers stand.
Horns. Fight, but fight safe beneath our puissant hand.

Atl. The cry comes this way, all my shafts I Will spend.
To give the fury that affrights us, end.

Melea. And ere that monster on Atlanta pray,
This point of steel shall through his heart make way.

exeu^t. After great shouts, enter Venus. Venus. Adonis, thou that make Venus
a Huntresse,
Leave Paphos, Gnidon, Eryx, Erecine,
And Amathon, with precious metals big,
May thou this day live bucklerd in our wing,
And shadowed in the amorous power of love:
My swannes I have vnyoakt, and from their necks
Taken of their bridles made of twisted silk.
And from my chariot stuck with Doves white plumes
Lighted upon this verdure, where the Boar
Has in his fury snow'd his scattered foame.
A cry within. What cry was that? It was Adonis sure.
That piercesant shrike shrild through the musical pipes
Of his sweet voices organs, thou Diana
If thou have sent this fiende to ruin love,
Or print the least skarre in my Adons flesh
Thy chastity I will abandon quite,
And with my looseness, blast thy Cinthian light.

Enter Theseus and Nestor, bringing in Adonis wounded to death. These. There lie
most beauteous of the youths of Greece,
Who^e death I will not mourn, ere I revenge.

Nest. I Will second thee, thou pride of Greece adieu,
Whom too much valor in thy prime ore-threw.

Exit. Ven. You Are not mine eyes, for they to fee him dead
Would from their soft beds drop upon the earth:
Or in their own warm liquid moisture drown
Their native brightness: thou art not Venus heart,
For were thou mine, at this sad spectacle
Th'dst break these ribs though they were made of brass,
And leap out of my bosom instantly.
My sorrows like a populous throng, all striving
At once to pass through some enforced breach,
In stead of winning passage stop the way,
And so the greatest have, breeds the most stay.
Oh me! my multiplicity of sorrows,
Makes me almost forget to grieve at all.
Speak, speak, my Adon, thou whom death has fed on
Ere thou wast yet full ripe; and this thy beautie's
Devoured ere tasted. Eye, where is now thy brightness?
Or hand thy warmth? Oh that such lovely parts
Should be by death thus made unserviceable.
That (live then) had the power to intrance Jove:
Ravish, amaze, and surfeit, all these pleasures
Venus has lost by thy untimely fall.
And therefore for thy death eternally
Venus shall mourn; Earth shall thy trunk devour,
But thy lives blood I Will turn into a flower,
And every Month in sollemne rights deplore,
This beauteous Greek slain by Dianaes Boar.

Exit. The fall of the Boar being winded, Meleager with the head of the Boar,
Atlanta, Nestor, Toxeus, Plexippus, Jason, Thesus, etc. with their ia^ellins
bloudied. Mel. Thus lies the terror that but once to day
Awed all the boldest hearts of Calidon
Wallowing and weltering in his native blood,
Transfixt by us, but bravely seconded,
By noble Jason, Theseus, Peleus,
Telamon, Nestor, the Tyndarides,
And our bold uncles, al our bore-speares stained
And gory hands lau'd in his reeking blood,
To whom belongs this brave victorious spoil?

All. To Meleager Prince of Calidon.

Mel. Is that your general suffrage?

Jason. Let not Greece
Suffer such merit unregarded pass,
Or valor live vnguerdon'd, that fell Swine
Whom yet, even dead, the amazed people fear,
And dare not touch but with astonish^ent
Fell by thy hand.

Tell. Thou stodst his violence,
T^l thy sharp Iauelin grated against his broines,
Beneath his shield thou entred'st to his heart.
At that we guirt him till a thousand wounds,
He from a thousand hands received at once:
And in his fall it seemed the earth did groan,
And the fixed Center tremble under him.

Castor. The spoil is thine, the young Adonis death,
Anceus slaughter, and the massacre
Of Archas, Pelagon, Eupateinon
And all the Grecian Printes lost this day,
Thou have revenged, therefore be thine the fame,
Which with a general voice Greece shall proclaim.

Mel. Princes we thank you, it is mine given me free.
Which fair Atlanta we bestow on thee.

Tox. Ha, to a woman.

Plex. And so many men,
Engaged in it, call back thy gift again.

Cast. Greece is by this disparaged, and our fame
Fowly eclipst.

Pollux Snatched from that emulous Dame.

Mel. Murmur you Lords at Meleagers bounty,
We first bestowed it as our own by gift,
Yea, and by right, but now we render it
To bright Atlanta, as her own by due
As she that from the Boar the first blood drew.

Nest. We must not suffer this disgrace to Greece.

Atre. Let women claim amongst women eminence,
Our Lofty spirits, that honor have in chase,
Cannot digest wrongs womanish and base.

Cast. Restore this woman and thy sex envy
For fortitude, aim not at quests so hye.

Jason. Castor forbear.

Tella. He gives but what is his own.

These. It Is the Kings bounty,

Mel. By the immortal Gods,
That gave us this days honor, the same hand
By which the Calidonian terror fell,
Shall him that frowns or murmurs lanch to hell.

A^l. That will we try.

Mel. Then reskue for Atlanta,
This day shall ^all for thee, that art divine,
Monsters more sauadge then Dianaes ^wine.

A strange confused fray, Toxeus and Plexippus are slain by Meleager, Jason
and Tellamon stand between the two factions. Ias. No more, no more, behold
your uncles slain,
Save in this act two Noble Gentlemen,
Pursue not f^ry to the spoil of Greece,
And death of more brave Princes: let your rage
Be here confin'de, cut off this purple stream
In his mid course, and turn this torrent back
Which in his fury else may drowned us all.

Tell. I second Jason and expose my self,
Between these factions to compose a peace.

Mel. We have done too much already, ^mpious fury,
How boundless is thy power: uncircumcised
By thought or reason, thou art all violence,
Thy end repentance, sorrow and distaste:
How will Althea take her brothers death
From her sons hand, but rash deeds executed
May be lamented, never be recal'd
Shall the suruiuers be atton'd?

Atreus. So it be done with honor on both parts
We have swords to guard our fortunes and our lives,
And but an equal language will keep both
Thus at the point.

These. Join hands renowned Princes,
The fury of the Prince of Calidon
Has preyed but on his own, there let it end,
No further by your urgent spleenes extend.

Castor. We are appeased.

Jason. Lords freely then embrace.

Mel. First then, we will royally interre our uncles,
And spend some tears upon their funeral rites,
That done we will in our Palace feast these Princes,
With bright Atlanta, whom we will make our Queen.
Our Uncles once bestow'de into the earth,
Our mournings shall expire in Bridal mirth.

Exeunt. Enter K. Oeneus and Althea, meeting the bodies of their two brothers
borne. Oen. Come to the Temple there to sacrifice
For these glad tidings, since the Boar lies dead,
That filled our kingdom with such awe and dread.

Alth. What joy names Oeneus in this spectacle?
This of a thousand the most sad and tragic,
Whose murdered trunkes be these?

Seru. Your royal brothers, Prince Toxeus and Plexippus,

Althea. Speak, how slain?

Seru. Not by the Boar, but by your sons own hand.

Althea. By Meleagers, how? upon what quarrel?
Could the proud boy ground such a damned act.

Seru. Your son to fair Atlanta gave the prise
Of this days travel, which for, they with-stood
In mutinous arms they loss their vital bloods.

Alth. Shall I revenge or mourn them.

Oen. O strange fate.
An object that must shorten Oeneus days,
And bring these winter hairs to a sad Tomb
Long (...) ther^ da^; I sink beneath these sorrows
Into my black and timelesse monument.

Althea. My sorrows turn to rage, my tears to fire,
My prayers to curses, vows into revenge.

Oen. Peace, peace my Queen, let us bear the Gods vindiction
With patience, as we did Dianaes wrath:
Where Gods are bent to punish, we may grieve
But can our selves nor succor, nor relieve.
Come, let us do to them their latest rites,
Wait on their Hearses in our mourning black;
Their happy souls are mounted above the spheres,
We Will wash their bodies in our funeral tears.

Exit. Manet Althea. Althea. Althea what distraction's this within thee?
A sister or a mother will thou be?
Since both I cannot, (for these Princes slain)
Sister I choose, a mothers name disdain:
The fatal brand in which the murderers life
Securely lies, I Will hurl into the fire
And as it flames, so shall the slave expire.
Mischeife I Will heap on mischeife, bad on ill,
Wrong pay with wrongs, and slaughter these that kill.
And since the Gods would all our glories thrall,
I will with them have chief hand in our fall.
But he is my son: oh pardon me dear brothers,
Being a mother if I spare his life,
Though it be fit his sin be plaug'd with death,
And that his life lie in yon fatal brand,
'T will not come fitly from a mothers hand.
Is this the hope of all my ten months pain,
Must he by the hand of him that nursed him now be slain?
Would he had perished in his cradle, when
I gave him twice life: in his birth, and then
When I the brand snatched from the ravenous flame,
And for this double good, have thou with shame
And injury repaide me? I will now
A sister be, no mother, for I vow
Revenge and death; Furies, assist my hand
Whilst in red flames I cast his vital brand.

Exit. A banquet, enter Meleager, Jason, Theseus, Castor, Pollux, Nestor,
Peleus. Atreus, Atlanta. Meleag. For fair Atlanta, and your Honors, Lords
We banquet you this day: and to begin
Our festiuals we will crown this Iouiall health
Unto our brother, Theban Hercules
And Deyaneira, will you pledge it Lords?

Jason. None but admire and love their matchless worths,
Not fair Atlanta will refuse this health.

Atlan. You beg of me a pledge, I Will take it lason,
As well for his sake that begins the round,
As those to whom it is vowed.

Tell. Well spoke Atlanta, but I wonder Lords
What Province now holds Theban Hercules?

These. He is the mirror and the pride of Greece,
And shall in after ages be renoun'd,
But we forget his health, come Tellamon
Aim it at me.

A fire: Enter Althea with the brand. Althea. Assist my rage you stern
Eumenides,
To you this black deed will I consecrate.
Pity away, hence thou consanguine love,
Maternall zeal, peccentall piety.
All cares, loves, duties, offices, affections,
That grow 'tweene sons and mothers, leave this place;
Let none but furies, murders, paracides,
Be my assistants in this damned attempt:
All that is good and honest, I confine,
Black is my purpose; Hell my thoughts are thine.

Mel. To bright Atlanta this loud music sown'd,
Her health shall with our loftiest strains be crowned.

Althea. Drink, quaffe, be blithe; oh how this festiue joy
Stirs up my fury to revenge and death,
Thus, thus, (you Gods above, abject your eyes
From this unnatural act) the murderer dies.

She fires the brand. Mel. Oh, oh.

Atlan. My Lord.

Mel. I burn, I burn.

Jason. What sudden passion's this?

Mele. The flames of hell, and Pluto's fightlesse fires,
Are through my entrals and my veins dispierst, oh!

Tell. My Lord take courage.

Mel. Courage Tellamon?
I have a heart dares threate or challenge hell,
A brow front heaven; a hand to challenge both:
But this my paine's beyond all humane sufferance,
Or mortal patience.

Althea. What have thou done Althea? stay thy fury,
And bring not these strange torments on thine own
Thou have too much already, back my hand,
[She takes out the brand. And save his life as thou conferust this brand.

Atlan How cheeres the warlike Prince of Calidon?

Mel. Well now, I am at ease and peace within,
Whither's my torture fled? that with such suddenness
Has freed me from disturbance, were we ill?
Come sit again to banquet, music sownd,
Till this to Deyaneiraes health go round.

Althea. Shall mirth and joy crown his degenerate head?
Whilst his cold Uncles on the earth lie spread?
No, wretehed youth whilst this hand can destroy,
I Will cut thee off in midst of all thy joy.

She fires the brand. Mel. Again, Again.

Althea. Burn, perish, wast, fire, sparkle, and consume
And all thy vital spirits fly with this fume.

Mel. still, still, there is an Aetna in my bosom
The flames of Stix, and fires of Acheron
Are from the black Chimerian shades removed,
And fixed here, here; oh for Euenus flood,
Or some cool stream, to shoot his currents through
My flaming body, make thy channel here
Thou mighty flood that streamest through Calidon
And quench me, all you springs of Thessaly
Remove your heads, and fix them in my veins
To cool me, oh!

Jason. Defend us heaven, what fuddaine ecstasy
Or unexpected torture has disturbed
His health and mirth?

Mel. Worse then my torment,
That I must die thus, thus, that the Boar had slain me,
Happy Anceus and Adonis blessed,
You died with fame, and honor crowns your rest;
My flame increases still, oh father Oeneus
And you Althea, whom I would call mother
But that my genius prompts me thou art unkind,
And yet farewell, Atlanta beauteous maid,
I cannot speak my thoughts for torture, death,
Anguish and pains, all that Promethean fire
Was stolen from heaven, the Thief left in my bosom.
The Sun has cast his element on me,
And in my entralls has he fixed his Sphere,
His pointed beams he has darted through my heart,
And I am still on flame.

Althea. So, now'tis done,
The brand consumed, his vital thread quite spun.

Exit. Meleag. Now'gins my fire waste, and my natural heat
To change to Ice, and my scortch't blood to freeze.
Farewell, since his black ensign death displayes,
I dye, cut off thus in my best of days.

He dies. Jason. Dead is the flower and pride of Calidon.
Who would displease the Gods? Diana's wrath
Has stretched even to the death, and tragic ruin
Of this fair hopeful Prince, here stay thy vengeance
Goddess of chastity, and let it hang
No longer ore the house of Calidon:
Since thou have cropped the young, spare these old branches
That yet survive.

Enter Althea. Althea. She shall not, Jason no,
She shall not. Do you wonder Lords of Greece,
To see this Prince lie dead? why that is no novel,
All men must dye, thou, he, and every one,
Yea I my self must: but I Will tell you that
Shall stiff your hair, your eyes start from heads,
Print fixed amazement in your wondering fronts,
Yea and astonish all: This was my son,
Borne with sick throws, nursed from my tender breast
Brought up with femine care, cherisht with love:
His youth, my pride; his honor all my wishes,
So dear, that little less he was then life.
But will you know the wonder ('less) too true,
Him (all my sons) this my enraged hand slew,
This hand, that Dians quenchlesse rage to fill,
Shall with the slain sons sword the mother kill.

Althea kills herself with Meleagers sword. Tela. The Queen has slain
herself: who will bear these news to the sad King?


Enter a servant. Seru. That labor may be spared:
The King no sooner heard of his sons death,
(wrought by his mother in the fatal brand)
But he sunk dead: sorrow so changed his weakness,
And without word or motion he expired.

Jason. We Will see them (ere we part from Calidon)
Interred with honor: But we soiourne long
In this cursed Clime; oh let us not incurro
Diana's fury, our next expedition
Shall be for Colchos, and the golden Fleece,
Unto which (Princes) we inuit you all.
Our stately Argoe we have rig'd and trimmed,
And in it we will bear the best of Greece,
Styled from our ship by name of Argonauts.
Great Hercules will with his company,
Grace our adventure, and renown all Greece,
By the rich purchase of the Colchian Fleece.

Exit. HOMER. Let not even Kings against the Gods co^test,
Lest in this fall their ruins be expressed.
Think Hercules, from clensing the foul stall
And stable of Augeus, in which fed
Three hundred Oxen, (never freed at all,
Till his arrive) returned where he was bred,
To Thebes; there Deianeira him receives
With glad embraces, but he stays not long,
Jason the Lady of her Lord bereaues:
For in the new-rig'd Argoe, with the young
And sprighly Heroes, he at Colchos aims,
Where the rich Fleece must publish their high fames.
Enter Dei^neira and Lychas: to her Hercules, received with joy, after the
presentment of some of his labors. To them march in all the Argonauts, Jason,
Telamon, Atreus, Castor, Pollux, Theseus, etc. Jason persuades Heroules to the
adventure: he leaves Deianeira, and marches off with the Argnauts. Imagine
now these Princes under sail,
Stearing their course as far as high-rear'd Troy,
Where King Laomedon does much bewail
His daughter, whom a Sea-whale must destroy.
Observe this well: for here begins the jar
Made Troy racked after in a ten years war.

Sownd. Enter King Laomedon, Anchifes, young Priam, Aeneas, Hesione bound, with
other Lords and Ladies. Laomed. Hesione, this is thy last on earth,
Whose fortunes we may mourn, though not prevent:
Would Troy, whose walls I did attempt to rear,
Had nere grown higher then their ground-fils, or
In their soundation buried been, and lost,
Since their high structure must be thus maintained,
With blood of our bright Ladies: Oh Hesione!
The Only remainder of these female dames
Begot by us, I must be queath thy body
To be the food of Neptunes monstrous Whale.

Priam. Had you kept troth and promise with the Gods,
This had not chan^'t: You borrowed of the Priests
Of Neptune and Apollo, Sea, and Sun,
That quantity of gold, which to this height
And spacious compass, has immured great Troy;
But the work finished, you denied to pay
The Priests their due, for which enraged N^ptune
Assembled his high tides, thinking to drown
Our lofty buildings, and to ruin Troy:
But when the Moon, by which the Seas are governed,
Retired his waters by her powerful wane,
He left behind him such infectious slime,
Which the Sun poisoning by his persant beams.
They by their mutual power, raised a hot plague,
To slack this hot pest, Neptune made demand,
Monthly a Lady to be chus'd by lot,
To glut his huge Sea-mo^sters raueno us jaws:
The lot this day fell on Hesione
Our beauteous sister.

Laom. Priam it is too true,
Till now Laomedon nere knew his guilt,
Or thought the Gods could punish.

Hesio. Royal father,
Mourn not for me, the Gods must be appeased,
And I in this am happy, that my death
Is made th'attonement 'tweene those angry powers
And your afflicted people, though my Innocence
Never deserved such rigor from the Gods.
Come good Anchises, bind me to this rock,
And let my body glut the insatiate fury
Of angry Neptune, and the offended Sun.

Anchis. A more unwilling monster never past
Anchises hand.

Laom. Now, now the time draws nigh,
That my sweet child by Neptunes whale must dye,

Priam. The very thought of it swallows my heart
As deep in sorrow, as the monster can
Bury my fister.

A great showt within. Laom. Soft, what clamor's that?

Aeneas. A stately ship, well rig'd with swelling fails,
Enters the harbor, bound (by their report)
For Colchos^ but when they beheld the shores
Covered with multitudes, and spied from far,
Your beauteous daughter fastened to the rock,
They made to know the cause; which certified,
One noble Greek amongst these Heroes stands,
And offers to encounter Neptunes whale,
And free from death the bright Hesione.

Laom. Thou have ( Aeneas) quickened me from death,
And added to my date a second Age.
Admit them.

Enter Hercules, Jason, Castor, Pollux, Theseus, and all the Argonauts. Herc.
It Is told us that thy name's Laomedon,
And that thy beauteous daughter must this day
Feed a sea monster: how will thou reward
The man that shall encounter Neptunes whale?
Tugge with that fiend upon thy populous strond,
And with my club sowse on his armed scales?
Have thou not heard of Theban Hercules?
I that have awed the earth, and ransack't hell,
Will through the Ocean hunt the God of streams,
And chase him from the deep Abismes below.
I Will dare the Sea-god from his watery deepes
If he take part with this Leuiathan.

Laom. Thy name and courage warlike Hercules
Assures her life, if thou will undertake
This hauty quest: two milk white steeds, the best
Asia ere bred, shall be thy valors prize,

Herc. We accept them; keep thy faith Laomedon,
If thou but break'st with Ioue-borne Hercules,
These marble structures, built with virgins blood,
I Will raze even with the earth. When comes the monster?

Hesione. Now, now, help Jove.

Acry within. Herc. I see him sweep the sea's along.
Blow rivers through his nostrils as he glides,
As if he meant to quench the Suns brightfire,
And bring a palped darkness ore the earth:
He opes his jaws as if to swallow Troy,
And at one yawne whole thousands to destroy.

Lao. Fly, fly into the City.

Exeunt the Trojans. Herc. Take along
This beauteous Lady, if he must have pray,
In stead of her Alcides here will stay.

Jason. The heartlesse Trojans fly into the town
At fight of yon sea-diuell: here we will stand
To wait the conquest of thy Iouiall hand.

Herc. Gramercy Jason, see he comes in tempest,
I Will meet him in a storm as violent,
And with one stroke which this right hand shall aim,
Ding him into th'abisse from whence he came.

Hercules kills the Sea Monster, the Trojans on the walls, the Greeks below.
Priam. The monster's slain, my beautuous sister freed.

Jason. Be ever for this noble deed renowned,
Let Asia speak thy praise.

Telam. The Argonauts
A^e glorified by this victorious act.

Priam. All Troy shall consecrate to Hercules
Temples and Altars: lets descend and meet him.

Laom. Stay, none presume to stir, we will parley them
First from the walls.

Herc. Why does not Troy's King from those walls descend?
And since I have redeemed Hesione,
Present my travels with two milke-white steeds,
The prize of my endeavors?

Lao. Hercules we owe thee none, none will we tender thee,
Thou have won thee honor, a reward sufficient
For thy attempt: our gates are shut against thee,
Nor shall you enter, you are Greekish spies,
And come to pry but where our land is weak.

Priam. Oh royal father!

Laom. Peace boy: Greeks away:
For imminent death attends on your delay.

Herc. The Sea nere bred a monster half so vile
As this Land-fiend. Darft threaten Hercules?
Would universal Troy were in one frame,
That I might whelme it on thy cursed head,
And crown thee in thy ruin. Menace us?

Laom. Depart our walls, or we will fir^ your Argoe,
Lying in our harbor, and prevent your purpose
In the atchieuement of the golden fleece,

Herc. Laom^don, I Will toss thee from thy walls,
Batter thy gates to shiuers with my Club,
Nor will I leave these broad Scamander plains,
Til thy aspiring Towers of Illium
Lie level with the place on which we stand.

Jason. Great Hercules, th'aduenture falls to me,
Our voyage bent for Colchos, not for Troy,
The golden fleece, and not La^medon:
Why should we hazard here our Argonauts?
Or spend our selves on accidental wrongs?

Telam. Jason advises well, great Hercules,
We should dishonor him, and th'expectation
Greece has of us, delude by this delay.

These. Then let us from this harbor launch our Argoe,
To Colchos first, and in our voyage home
Revenge us on this false Laomedon.

Herc. You sway me princes: farewell treacherous King,
Naught, save thy blood, shall satisfy this wrong
And base dishonor done to Hercules.
Expect me; for by Olimpicke I^e I swear.
Nere to set foot within my native Thebes,
See Deianeira, or to touch in Greecs,
Till I'haue scaled these mures, invaded Troy,
Ransack't thy City, slain Laomedon,
And venge the Gods that govern Sea and Sun.
Come valiant Heroes, first the fleece to enjoy,
And in our back return to ransacke Troy.

Exeunt. Lao. We dread you not, we will answer what is done.
As well as stand against Neptune and the Sun.

Enter Oetes, King of Colchos, Medea, young Absyrtus, with Lords. Oetes. How may
we glory above other kings
Being (by our birth) descended from the Gods?
Our wealth renowned through the world tripartite,
Most in the riches of the golden fleece,
And not the least of all our happiness,
Medea for her powerful magic skill,
And Negromanticke exorcismes admired,
And dreaded through the Colchian territories.

Medea. I can by Art make rivers retrograde,
Alter their channels, run back to their heads,
And hide them in the springs from whence they grew.
The curled Ocean with a word I Will smooth,
(Or being calm) raise waves as high as hills,
Threatening to swallow the vast continent.
With powerful charms I Will make the Sun stand still,
Or call the Moon down from her arched sphere.
What cannot I by power of Hecate?

Absyr. Discourse (fair sister) how the golden fleece
Came first to Colchos.

Medea. Let Absyrtus know,
Phrixus the son of Theban Athamas,
And his fair sister Helles, being betrayed
By their cursed step-dame (...), fled from Greece,
Their Innocence pitied by Mercury,
He gave to them a golden-fleeced Ram,
Which bore them safe to the Syg^an sea,
Which swimming, beauteous Helles there was drowned,
And gave that sea the name of Hellespont,
That which parts Sestus and Abidos still:
Phrixus arriues at Colchos, and to Mars
There sacrificed his Ram in memory
Of his safe waftage, favored by the Gods.
The golden Fleece was by the Oracle
Commanded to be fixed there, kept and guarded
By two fierce Bulls, that breath insernall fires,
And by a wakefull Dragon, in whose eyes
Never came sleep: for in the safe conseruing
Of this divine and worthy monument,
Our kingdoms weal and safety most consists.

Oetes. And he that strives by purchase of this fleece,
To weaken us, or shake our Royalty,
Must taste the fury of these fiery fiends,
A shoot The novel: speak.

Enter a Lord. Lord. Upon the Cholchian shores
A stately vessel, manned it seems from Greece
Is newly lancht, full fraught with Gentlemen
Of brave aspects and presence.

Oetes. Whose their General?

Lord. Jason, he styles himself a Prince of Greece
And Captain over the noble Argonautes.

Oetes. Usher them in, that we may know their quest
And what adventure drew them to these shoares.

Sound, Enter Jason, Hercules, Theseus, Castor, Pollux, etc. Jason. Hail king
of Colchos, thou beholdst in us
The noblest Heroes that inhabit Greece
Of whom I, though unworthiest, style my self
The General; the intent of this our voyage
Is to reduce the rich and golden prise
To Greece, from whence it came, know I am come
To tug and wrestle with the infernal Bulls,
And in their hot fires double guild my arms
To place upon their necks the feruile yoke,
And bondage, force them plow the field of Mars,
Till in the furrows I have sowed the teeth
Of vipers, from which men in armor grow
To enter combat with the sleepelesse Dragon,
And mauger him fetch thence the golden Fleece.
All this Oetes, I am pressed to atchieue
Against these horrid tasks my life to engage
Bulls fury, Vipers poison, Dragons rage.

Medea. Such a bold spirit, and noble presence linkt,
Never before were seen in Phasis Isle,
Colchos be proud, a Prince demands thy Fleece,
Richer then that he comes for; let the Greeks
Our Phasian wealth and Oetes treasure bear,
So they in liew will leave me Jason here.

Oetes. Princes, you aim at dangers more in proffe
Then in report, which if you should behold
In their true figure, would amaze your spirits:
Yea, terifye the Gods; let me advise you,
As one that knows their terror, to desist
Ere you enwrap your seffe into these perils,
Whence there is no euafion.

Herc. Oetes, know
Peril's a babe, the greater dangers threaten
The greater is his honor that breaks through.
Have we in the Ago rowed with sixty oars
And at each Oar a Prince; pierced Samo-thrace,
The Chersoneson sea, the Hellespont;
Even to the waves that break on Colchos sho^res?
And Shall we with dishonor turn to Greece?
Know Oetes, not the least of sixty Heroes
That now are in thy Confines, but thy monsters
Dare quell and baffle.

Tellamon. Much more Hercules.

Oetes. Hercules.

Jason. Starts Oetes at the name of Hercules,
What would he do to see him in his eminence;
But leaving that, this must be Iasons quest,
A work not worthy him; where be these monsters?

Medea. May all enchantments be confinde to hell,
Rather then he encounter fiends so fell.

Oetes. Princes, since you will needs attempt these dangers
You shall; and if atchieue the Golden Fleece
Transport it where you please, mean time, this day
Repose your selves, w^l'e feast you in our Palace.
To morrow morning with the rising Sun,
Our golden prise shall be conseru'd or won.

Exit. Medea. If he attempts he dies, what is that to me?
Why should Medea fear a strangers life?
Or what is that Jason I should dread his fall?
If (...), my fathers glory waines,
And all our fortunes must reward his pains.
Let lason perish then, and Colchos flourish.
Our pristine glories let us still enjoy,
And these our brasse-head bulls the Prince destroy.
Oh! what distraction's this within me bred,
Although he die, I would not see him dead?
The best I see, the worst I follow still,
He nere wronged me, why should I wish him ill?
Shall the Bulls toss him whom Medea loves,
A Tygresse, not a Princess, should I prove?
To see him tortured whom I dearly love?
Be then a torteresse to thy fathers life,
A robber of the clime where thou wast bred,
And for some straggler that has lost his way,
Thy fathers Kingdom and his State betray.
Tush, these are nothing, first his faith I Will crave,
That covenant made, him by enchantments faue

Enter Jason. Jason. My task is above strength, Duke Peleus sent me
Not to atchieue, but die in this pursuit,
And to prevent the Oracle that told him
I must succeed; Jason bethink thee then
Thou come to execution, not to act
Things above man; I have observed Medea
Retort upon me many an amorous look,
Of which I Will studdy to make prosperous use.
If by her art the Enchantments I can bind
Immured with death, I certain safety find.

Medea. Shall I o're-whelme upon my captive head,
The curse of all our Nation, the Crowns ruin?
Clamours of men, and woemens loud exclaimes.
Burnings of children; the universal curse
Of a great people, all to save one man,
A straggler (God knows whence derived, where borne,
Or hither where Noble? let the proud Greek die,
We still in Colchos sit instated hye
Oh me! that look upon Medea cast
Drownes all these fears, and has the rest surpast.

Jason. Madam, because I love I pity you,
That you a beauteous Lady, art-full wise,
Should have your beauty and your wisdom both
Inuelopt in a cloud of Barbarism:
That on these barren Confines you should live,
Confined into an Angle of the world.
And never see that which is the world indeed,
Fertile and populous Greece, Greece that bears men,
Such as resemble Gods, of which in us
You see the most dejected, and the meanest.
How harshly does your wisdom sound in the ears
Of these Barbarians, dull, vnapprehenfible,
And such, in not conceiving your hid Arts,
Deprive them of their honor; In Greece springs
The fountains of Divine Philosophy,
They are all understanders; I would have you
Bright Lady with us, enter to that world
Of which this Colchos is no part at all.
Show then your beauty to these judging eyes,
Your wisdom to these understanding ears.
In which they shall receive their merited grace,
And leave this barraine, cold, and stirrill place.

Medea. His presence without all this Oratory
Did much with us, but where they both conioyne
To entrap Medea, she must needs be caught.

Jason. I long to see this Colchian Lady clad
In Hymen's stateliest roabes, whom the glad Matrones,
Bright L^dies, and Imperial Queens of Greece
Shall welcome and applaud, and with rich gifts
Present, for saving of their sons and kinsmen
From these infernal monsters: As for Jason
If you Medea shall despise his love,
He craves no other life then to die so,
Since life without you is but torturing pain,
And death to men distressed is double gain.

Medea. That tongue more then Medeaes spells inchants,
And not a word, but like our exoreismes
And power of charms preuailes, Oh lone! thy Majesty
Is greater then the triple Hecates,
Bewitching Circes, or these hidden skils,
Ascribed unto the infernal Proserpine.
I that by incantations can remove
Hills from their syts, and make huge mountains shake,
Darken the Sun at noone, call from their graves
Ghosts long since dead, that can command the earth,
And affright heaven, no spell at all can find
To bondage love, or free a captive mind.

Jason. Love Jason then, and by thy Divine aid,
Give me such power, that I may tug vnscorcht
Amidst the flames with these thy fiery fiends,
That I vnuenom'd may these Vipers teeth
Cast from my hand, through Morpheus leaden charms,
Over that wakefull snake that guards the Fleece,
For which live Iasons happy Bride in Greece.

Medea. A match, what herbs or spells, what Magic can
Command in heaven, earth, or in hell below,
What either air, or sea can minister,
To guard thy person, all these helps I Will gather
To girdle thee with saf^ty.

Jason. Be thou then
For ever Iasons, and through Greece renowned
In whom our Heroes have such safety found,
Our bargain thus I seal.

He kisseth her. Medea. Which I Will make good
With Colchos fall, and with my fathers blood.

Enter ^yrtus Absyr. Prince Jason, all the Heroes at the banquet
Inquire for you, twice has my father Oetes
Made search for you; Oh sister!

Medea. No word you saw us two in conference.

Absyr. Do you take me to be a woman, to tell all I see,
And blab all I know, I that am in hope one day to
Lie with a woman, will once lie for a woman,
Sister, I saw you not.

Jason. Remember; come Prince, will you lead the way?

Absyr. I have parted you that never parted fray
Come sir will you follow.

Exit. Manet Medea. Medea. The night grows on, and now to my black Arts,
Goddess of witchcraft and dark ceremony,
To whom the elues of Hills, of Brooks, of Groves,
Of standing lakes, and cauernes vaulted deep
Are ministers; three-headed Hecate
Lend me thy Chariot drawn with winged snakes,
For I this night must progress through the Air.
What simples grow in Tempe of Thessaly,
Mount Pindus, Otheris, Ossa, Appida^,
Olimpus, Caucas. or high Teneriff.
I must select to finish this great work,
Thence must I fly unto Amphrisus Foords,
And gather plants by the swift Sperchius streams,
Where rushy Bebes, and Anthedon flow,
Where herbs of bitter juice and strong sent grow;
These must I with the hairs of Mandrakes use,
Temper with Poppy-seeds and H^locke juice:
With Aconitum that in Tartar springs,
With Cypress, E^, and Veruin, and these mix
With Incantations, Spells, and (...)
Of wondrous power and virtue; oh thou night,
Mother of dark Arts hide me in thy veil,
Whilst I those banks search, and these mountains skale.

Sownd. Enter King Oetes, Absyrtus, and Lords. Oetes. Upon the safeguard of
this golden Fleece
Colchos depends, and he that bears it hence
Bears with it all our fortunes; the Argonautes
Have it in quest, if Lason escape our monsters
I Will rather at some banquet poison him,
And quaffe to him his death, or in the night
Set fire upon his Argoe, and in flames
Consume the happy hope of his return,
This purpose we, as we are Colchos King,
Absyrtus where is your sister?

Absyrtus. In her chamber.

Oetes. When you next see her give to her this noate,
The manner of our practice, her fell hand
Cannot be mist in this, but it shall fall
Heavy on these that Colchos seeks to thrall.
The hour draws nigh, the people throng on heaps,
To this adventure in the field of Mars,
And noble Jason armed with his good ^hield,
Is up already and demands the field.

Enter Jason, Hercules, and the Argonauts. Jason. Oetes, I come thus armed,
demanding combat
Of all those monsters that defend thy Fleece:
And to these dangers singly, I oppose
My person as thou see, when setst thou open
The gates of hell to let thy devils out?
Glad would I wrestle with thy fiery Bulls,
And from their throats the flaming dewlops tear.
Vnchaine them, and to Jason turn them loose,
That as Alcides did to Achelous;
So from their hard fronts I may tear there horns,
And lay the yoke upon their untamed necks.

Oetes. Yet valiant Greek desist, I, though a stranger
Pity thy youth, or if thou will persist
So dreadful is the adventure thou persuest,
That thou will think I shall vnbowell hell,
Vnmacle the fiends, and make a passage
Free for the Infernals.

Jason. I shall welcome all.
Medea now if there be power in love;
Or force in Magic; if thou have or will
Or Art, try all the power of Characters,
Virtue of Symples, Stones, or hidden spells,
If earth Elues, or nimble airy Spirits,
Charms, Incantations, or dark Exorcismes.
If any strength remain in Pyromancy,
Or the hid secrets of the air or fire.
If the Moons sphere can any help infuse,
Or any influent Star, collect them all
That I by thy aid may these monsters thrall.

Oetes. Discover them.

Two fiery Bulls are discovered, the Fleece hanging over them, and the Dragon
sleeping beneath them: Medea with strange fiery-workes, hangs above in the Air
in the strange habit of a Coniuresse. Medea. The hidden power of Earth, Air,
Water, Fire,
Shall from this place to Iasons help conspire.
Fire withstand fire, and magic temper flame,
By my strong spells the sauadge monster's tame:
So, that is performed, now take the Vipers teeth
And sow them in the furrowed field of Mars.
Of which strange seed, men ready armed must grow
To assault Jason. Already from beneath
Their deadly pointed weapons gin to appear,
And now their heads, thus molded in the earth,
Straight way shall teeme; and having fr^ed their fate
(The stalks by which they grow) all violently
Pursue the valiant Greek, but by my sorcery
I Will turn their armed points against themselves
And all these slaves that would on Jason fly
shoutes Shall wound themselves and by sedition die.
Yet thriues the Greek, now kill the sleeping snake
Which I have charmed, and thence the Trophy take,
These shouts witness his conquest, I Will descend,
Hear Iasons fears and all my charms take end.

Hercules. Oetes, ^ow is this rich and precious Fleece,
By Iasons sword repurchast, and must turn
Unto the place whence Phrixus brought his Ram.

Oetes. That practice by your ruins; I Will prevent,
And sooner then with that return to Greece,
Your slaughtered bodies leave with this rich fleece.

Jason. Since our adventure is atchieu'd and done,
The prize is ours, we ceize what we have wone.

Oetes. Enjoy it Jason, I admire thy worth,
Which as it has exceeded admiration,
So must we needs applaud it. Noble gentlemen.
Depart not Colchos, ere your worths and valor
We with some rich and worthy gifts present.
The conquest of our Bulls, and Dragons death,
(Though we esteemed them) yet they sad us not,
Since we behold the safety of this prince.
Enter our palace, and your praise sownd hye,
Where you shall feast, (or all by treafon dye.)

Exeunt Absyr. I have not seeene my sister to day, I muse she has not been at
this solemnity, me thinks she should not have lost this triumph; I have a note
to deliver her from my father. Here she comes.

Enter Medea. Sister, peruse this brief, you know the character,
It is my fathers. This is all.

Exit. She reads. Medea. Jason with his Argonauts this night must perish, the
fleece not be tra^sported to Greece -- Medea, your assistance.

This is my fathers plot to overthrow
Prince Jason, and the noble Argonauts,
Which I Will prevent: I know the King is sudden,
And if prevention be delayed, they dye:
I that have ventured thus far for a love,
Even to these arts that Nature would have hid
As dangerous and forbidden, shall I now
Undo what I have done, through womanish fear,
Paternall duty, or for filial love?
No Jason, thou art mine, and my desire,
Shall wade with thee through blood, through seas, through fire.

Enter Jason. Jason. Madam.

Medea. My Lord, I know what you would say,
Think now upon your life, the King my father
Intends your ruin, to redeem the fleece,
And it repurchase with your tragic deaths:
Therefore assemble all your Argonauts,
And let them (in the silence of the night)
Lanch from the Colchian harbor; I Will associate you
As Iasons bride.

Jason. You are my patroness,
And under you I triumph: when the least
Of all these graces I forget, the Gods
Revenge on me my hated perjury.
Must we then lanch this night? you are my directresse,
And by your art I Will manage all my actions.

Medea. Then fly, I Will send to see your Argoe trimmed,
Rig'd and made tight: night comes, the time grows on:
Hye then aboard.

Jason. I shall.

Exit. Medea. Now populous Greece,
Thank us (not Jason) for this conquered fleece.

Enter Oetes. Oetes. Medea, we are robbed, despoiled, dishonored,
Our Fleece raped hence, we must not suffer it,
Since all our ominous fortunes it includes,
I am resolved Jason this night shall dye.

Medea. Should he survive, you might be held unworthy
The name of King; my hand shall be as deep
As yours in his destruction.

Oetes. A strong guard
I will select, and in the dead of night,
When they are sunk in Leth^, set upon them,
And kill them in their beds.

Medea. I Will second you,
And laue my stained hands in their reeking bloods
That practice your dishonor.

Oetes. Jason then dies,
When he most hopes for this rich Colchian prize.

Exit. Medea. But ere the least of all these ils betide,
This Colchian strond shall with thy blood be died.
For Jason and his Argonauts I stand,
And will protect them with my art and hand.

Enter Jason with the Fleece, and all the Greeks muffled. Jason. Madam Medea^

Medea. Leave circumstance, away,
Hoyse up your sails, death and destruction
Attends you on the shore.

Jason. You Will follow Madam.

Exit. Medea. Instantly: Blow gentle gales, assist them winds and tide,
That I may Greece see, and live Iasons bride.

Enter Absyrtus. Absyr. How now ^ister, so solitary?

Medea. Oh happy met, though it be late Absyrtus,
You must along with me.

Absyr. Whither pray?

Medea. I Will tell you as we walk.
This lad between me and all harm shall stand;
And if the King pursue us with his Fleet,
His mangled limbs shall (scattered in the way)
Work our escape, and the Kings speed delay.
Come brother.

Absyr. Any where with you sister.

exeunt. Enter HOMER. Hom. Let none to whom true Art is not denied,
Our monstrous Bulls, and magic Snakes deride.
Some think this rich Fleece was a golden Book,
The leaves of parchment, or the skins of Rams,
Which did incl^ the Art of making gold
By Chimi^ke skill, and therefore rightly stild,
The Golden Fleece, which to attain and compass,
Includes as many travels, mysteries,
Changes and Chymicke bod^es, fires and monsters,
As ever Jason could in Colchos meet.
The sages, and the wise, to keep their Art
From being vulgar: yet to have them tasted
With appetite and longing, give those glosses,
And flourishes to shadow what they write,
Which might (at once) breed wonder and delight.
So did the Egyptians in the Arts best tried,
In Hierogliphickes all their Science hide.
But to proceed, the Argonauts are fled,
Whom the enraged Oetes does pursue,
And being in sight, M^dea takes the head
Of young Absyrtus, whom (unkind) she slew,
And all his other limbs strawes in the way
Of the old father, his pursuit to stay.
The Show. In memory of this inhumane deed,
These Islands where his ^ughtered limbs lie spread,
Were called Absyrtides: But we proceed
With King Laomedon, against whom are led
The Argonauts, Troy by Alcides rac'd,
Asks the next place, and must in rank be placed.

Enter Laomedon, Priam, Anchises, Aeneas, Hesione, etc. Lao. The Argonauts
returned?

Anchi. They are my Lord:

Lao. And landed?

Anchi. Landed.

Lao. Where?

Anchi. At Tenedos.

Lao. Could not those Colchian monsters in their bowels
Bury the Greeks, but must they all survive
To threat us with invasion. Speak Anchises,
March they toward Troy?

Anchis. In conduct of the mighty Hercules,
Wasting with sword and fire where ere they march:
Scamander fields they have strewn with carcasses,
And Simois streams already purpled are
With blood of Trojans.

Priam. Let us give them battle.

Lao. In vain, our forces are dispersed abroad,
Nor have we order to withstand their fury:
Best were we to immure our selves in Troy,
And trust unto the virtue of our walls.

Shouts. Aeneas. Do not delay your safety, you may hear
Their cries, and lofty clamors, threatening Troy:
They dog us to our gates, and without speed
And expedition, they will enter with us.
Come then, our threatened lives we will immure,
And think us in our strong built walls secure.

Exent. After an alarm enter Hercules, Jason, Theseus, Telamon, and all the
other Argonauts. Herc. Pursue the chase even to the gates of Troy,
Then call th'ingrate Loamedon to parlee.

Jason. The perjured King shall pay us for the wrong
Done to Alcides in his promised steeds.

Telam. Better he had the monster had devoured
His beauteous daughter, then to abide our furies.

Nestor. He did exclude our virtue from the City,
And now therefore he shall admit our fury.

Castor. These walls first reared at the great Gods expense,
We Will ruin to the earth: let us summon him.

Herc. We will call him to parlee.

A parlee. Enter upon the walls, Laomedon, Anchises, Aeneas, Priam, etc. Herc.
Laomedon, we do not summon thee
To parlee, but to warn thee guard thy walls,
Which (without pause) we now intend to scale.

Laom. Wilt hear me Hercules?

Herc. I listened thy periurious tongue too late.
Scale, batter, mount, assault, sack, and deface,
And leave (of Troy) naught save the name and place.

Alarm. Telamon first mounts the walls, the rest after, Priam flies, Laomedon
is slain by Hercules, Hesione taken, Enter with victory. Herc. Thus is the
tyrant, that but late awed Troy,
Buried amidst his ruins; he chastis'd,
And we revenged: the spoil of this rich Town
Rated as high as Iasons Colchian prize,
You shall divide: but first these lofty walls,
Builded by perjury, and maintained by pride,
We Will ruin to the earth: Who saw young Priam?

Jason. He Is fled, and took the way to Samo-thrace,
With him Anchises, that on Venus got
The young Aeneas, they are fled together,
And left the spoil of all the town to us.

Herc. Which shall enrich Thebes, and the towns of Greece,
And Telamon, to do thy valor right,
For mounting first over the walls of Troy,
The first and choice of all the spoil be thine.

Telam. Then let Alcides honor Telamon
With this bright Lady, fair Hesione,
Sister to Priam, daughter to Laomedon,
Whose beauty I prefer before the state
And wealth of Troy.

Herc. Receive her Telamon,
She is thine own by gift of Hercules.

Telam. A present more delighting Telamon,
Then were I made Lord of high Illiums Towers,
And heir unto the dead Laomedon.

Hesio. I am a Princess, shall my fathers ils
Fall on my head? If he offended Hercules,
He has made satisfaction with his life.
Oh be not so severe, to stretch his punishment
Even after life; have thou from death redeemed me,
To give me captive, and to slave my youth?
Things worse then death: rather let Hercules
Expose me to the rock, where first he found me,
To abide the wrath both of the Sea and Sun.
Oh! rather make my body food for monsters,
Then brand my birth with bondage.

Telam. Fair Hesione,
I will not loose thy beauty, nor thy youth,
Nor part with this my honor, could thou give me
For ransom of them, both our Argoes crammed
With gold and gemmes; you are my valors prize,
And shall with me to populous Salamine.

Hesione. Can you so wrong the daughter of a king,
To give her as a Dukes base Concubine?
Touch me not Telamon, for I divine,
Ifere my brother Priam re-build Troy,
And be the king of Asia, he will revenge
This base dishonor done Hesione;
And for his sister, rauish't hence perforce,
Do the like outrage on some Grecian Queen,
In just revenge of my injurious wrong.

Herc. Should all the kings in Asia, or the world,
Take part with Priam in that proud design,
Like fate, like fortune with Laomedon
They shall abide: renowned Telamon,
She is the warlike purchase of thy sword,
Enjoy her as the gift of Hercules.
And now brave Grecian Hero's, lets toward Greece
With all these honored spoils from Colchos brought
And from the treasures of defaced Troy.
Fair Deianeira longs for us in Thebes,
Whom we will visit next, and thence proceed
Unto our future labors. Cacus lives
A bloody tyrant, whom we must remove:
And the three-headed Gerion swayes in Spain,
Notorious for his rapes and outrages;
Both these must perish by Alcides hand,
And when we can the earth from tyrants clear,
In the worlds utmost bounds our pillars rear. ex^

HOMER. Loath are we (courteous auditors) to cloy
Your appetites with viands of one taste,
The beauteous Venus we must next employ,
Whom we saw mourning for Adonis last.
Suppose her still for the young Adon sad,
But cheered by Mars, their old loves they renew,
And she, that (whilst he lived) preferred the Lad,
Has quite forgot him, since the Boar him slew.
Mars is in grace, a meeting they devise,
Jealous of all, but fearing most the Sun,
He that sees all things from his first vp-rise,
And like a blab, tells all that he knows done.
Our mortals must a while their spleenes assuage,
And to the Gods, for this Act, leave the Stage.

Enter Mars and Venus. Mars. I knew loves Queen could not be long unkind,
Though (whilst I absent, to teach Arms in Thrace)
You took th'aduangtage to forget your Mars,
To doat on Adon, and Anchises too;
Yet (those worn out) let us renew our loves,
And practice our first amorous dalliance.

Venus. How can I hate; that am the Queen of love?
Or practice ought against my native power?
As I one day, played with my Cupids shafts,
The wanton with his arrow razed my skin.
Trust me, at first I did neglect the smart:
At length it rankled, and it grew unsound,
Till he that now lies wounded, cut'd my wound.

Mars. Come shall we now, whilst Vulcan plyes his forge,
Sweats at his Anuill, choakes himself with dust,
And labors at his bellows, kiss and toy?

Venus. Why met we else? Here is a place remote,
An obscure cave, fit for our amorous sport:
In this dark cauerne we will securely rest,
And Mars shall add unto my Vulcans crest.
But how if we be spied?

Mars. Whom need we fear?
Unless the Sun, who now the lower world
Lights with his beams; I mean the Antipodes,
The tell-tale blab is busy now elsewhere:
And I will set to watch at the caves door,
My trusty groom, who (ere the Sun shall rise
With his bright beams to light our Hemispheare)
Shall waken us.

Venus. For all the world I would not have the Sun
Discover our sweet sport, or see what is done.

Mars. Be that my charge. Where Is Gallus?

Enter Gallus. Gal. At hand fir: I am not that Gallows that is made of three
trees, or one that is never without hangers on: nor that Gallus that is latin
for a Frenchman; but your own Gallus gallinacius, servant and true squire to
God Mars.


Mars. Syrrah, you know this Lady.

Gallus. Yes, Mistress Vulcan, she is as well known in Paphos here for her
Meretrix, as any Lady in the land, she was the first that devised stewed
meat, and proclaimed pickle-oysters to be good for the back; she is the
first that taught wenches the trade of Venery, and such as were borne to
nothing but beauty, she taught them how to use their Talent: Yes, I know her I
warrant you.


Mars. Syrrah attend, this night yon Queen and I
Must have some private conference, in yon cave,
Where whilst we stay, 'tmust be thy care to watch
That no suspicious eye pry through these chinks,
Especially I warn thee of the Suns.

Gallus. I smell knavery, if my Lady Venus play the whore
What am I that keep the door?

Mars. See thou do call us, e're the Sun vprise,
But sleep not for by all my Arms I swear,
If by thy careless floth, or negligence
We be describe, thy body I Will translate,
To some strange Monster.

Gallus, I Am hard fauor'd enough already, you need not
Make my face worse then it is.

Mars. Com enter then fair Queen, we are secure,
Now safely may thou claspe the God of war,
Spite of Sun, Moon, or a jealous star.

Venus. Love answers love, desire with ardor meets,
Both which this night shall taste a thousand sweetes.

Exeunt. Gallus. I see you can make shift to go to it without sheets: How
shall I pass this night away till morning, I am as drowsy as a dormouse, the
very thought that I must wake, charms me a sleep already, I would I durst
venture on a nap; Hey ho, sure I may wake again before they rise, and never the
wiser, I will stand to it, there is not a more sleepy trade in the world then a
watchman, nor one that is more acquainted with deeds of darkness, tell me of
the Sun! the Sun will not rise this two hours; well, let them watch that
will, or can, I must have a nod or two, God night to you all, for here am I
fast till morning.


Enter Aurora, attended with Seasons, Days, and Hours. Aurora. The day star
shines and calls me blushing up.
From Tithons bed to harness Phoebus Steeds.
My roseate fingers have already stroakt
The element where light begins to appear,
And straight Apollo with his glistering beams,
Will guild the East, the Seasons, Months, and Dai^
Attend him in the palace of the Sun.
The Hours have brought his Chariot to the gate
Of Crystal, where the Sunne-God mounts his throne,
His fiery Steeds have all their traces fet,
Th'vnruly stalions fed with Ambrosy
(With their round hoofes shod with the purest gold)
Thunder against the Marble floores of Heaven,
And wait till Phoebus has but don'd his beams,
Which I the blushing Morning still put on.
And now is the hour (for thus time fleeteth still)
That the Suns up to clime the Eastern hill.

Enter Phoebus to them, kisses Aurora, and they all exeunt. Phoebus. Beauteous
Aurora, for full twice twelve hours
Till in my sphere I have compast round the world
Farewell, I with my beams will dry these tears
Thou shedst at parting; we have chac't hence night,
And frighted all the twinkling stars from heaven,
And now the steep Olimpus we must clime,
Till from the high Meridian we peruse
The spacious bounds of this large universe,
And thence decline our Chariot toward the West,
Till we have washed our Coach-steeds and our self
In Isters icy streams: We with this eye
Can all things see that mortals do on earth,
And what we find inhumane, or to offend,
We tell to Jove, that he may punish sins.
For this I am termed a tel-tale and a blab,
And that I nothing can conceal abroad.
But let spite spit the worst and wrong me still,
Day hates sins, and light despises ill.
He ^pies Mars and Venus. And now behold a most abhorred deed,
Mars beds with Venus, shall not Vulcan know it?
By my light he shall; I have seen, and I will tell,
The Sun hates sin but crowns them that do well.

Exit. Enter Mars. Mars. Venus awake, we have ore-slept our selves,
The Sunne's above in his diurnall task,
I saw his piercing beams pry through a cranny,
And cast his right eye full upon our bed.

Enter Venus. Venus. We are betraide, the blab will tell the Smith,
Our love will come to the ear of ^upiter
And all the other Gods, what will Diana
Say when she hears of our inchastity?
Or how will Juno take this spouse-breach from us?

Mars. Nay rather, how will Vulcan taste our sport?
He might suspect, but never prove till now,
Where is the villain Gallus set to watch?

Venus. See where he snorts, the slave is dead asleep.

Mars. Awake thou drowsy Groom, thy chaflisement
Shall exceed torture.

Gallus. Hey ho, what is the matter there, ha?

Mars. Look, have thou eyes? is not the Sun two hours
Mounted aloft? has he not seen theesleeping
At the Caves door, Yea beheld us too?

Gallus. More shame for him to look in at any bodies window.

Mars. Speak, how can thou excuse this?

Gallus. Oh great God Mars.

Mars. Behold, this is thy doom, thy negligence
Thus I Will chastise, thou shall thy humane shape
Henceforth forgo, I will translate thy body
Into a bird shall ever bear thy name,
Be Gallus still, a Cock, and be thy nature
Ever hereafter this; to watch the Sun,
And by thy crows and clamours warn the world
Two hours before he rise, that the Sun comes
Clap with thy wings, and with thy shrieking loud,
Proclaim his coming when thou thrice have crowed.

Gall^s sinkes, and in his place rises a Cock and crows. Venus. The slaves
right served, let this his punishment
Live to all ages, and let Gall^s name
Thy just revenge to all the world proclaim.
But whither shall we now?

Mars. I will to Thrace, go you to Lemnos.

Venus. Will you leave me then
To Vulcans rage, no let us once more meet
In Paphos, and if Vulcan needs will chide
Give him some cause.

Mars. Content fair Queen of love.
For more, he cannot be much more displeased,
Let Us score on still, and make our reckoning full,
As yet^ alas fair Queen, the debts but small,
Make up the sum, and answer once for all.

Venus. Content sweet Mars, and since that he was borne
To be a Cuckold, let us augmennt his horn.

Exeunt. Enter Vulcan with two Ciclops, Pyragman, and Berontes. Vulcan. Make
have with that shield, see^ hammered well,
For when it is done I Will giue't my father Jove,
It Is of the purest metal Lemnos yields.

Pyrag. I shall sir, must the plate of two cubes high,
Be put into the Forge?

Vulcan. Pyragmon yes, that mass must be wrought well
And soundly tempered, bid your fellow Cyclops
Work lustily, it must be soon dispatched.

Pyrag. When saw you my Lady Venus?

Vulcan. No matter when, the Huswiffe's too fine fingered,
And says, the very smoke my Fordge does cast
Choakes her, the very air of Lemnos (man)
Blasts her white cheeks, she scarce will let me kiss her,
But she makes vergisse faces, says my visadge
Smug'd thus with cole-dust, does infect her beauty,
And makes her wear a beard, she is, sure, in Paphos,
Cypress, or Candy, she is all for play
Whilst we Jove's thunders hammer hard all day.

Pyrag. I heard her once mock that polt-foote of yours
How came it pray?

Vulcan, I Will tell thee man, I was when I was borne
A pretty smug knave, and my father Jove
Delighted much to dance me in his lap.
Upon a time as he was toying with me
In his high house above, that Phaeton
Had at that instant set the world a fire,
My father when he saw heavens bases smoke,
The Earth burn, and Neptunes broth to sees with heat;
But startles up to thunder-strike the lad,
And lets me fall: down tumbled I toward the earth:
I fell through all the Planets by degrees,
From Saturn first, so by the Moon at last:
And from the Moon down into Lemnos Isle
Where I still live, and halt upon my fall,
No marvel if it lamed me, for, Pyragmon.
How high I tumbled, who can guess aright,
Falling a Summers day from morn to night?

Pyrag. 'Twas marvel you did not break your neck.

Vulcan. Had I not been derived from God-like seed,
Trust me Pyragmon I had don't indeed.
The Cock crows and enter Phoebus. But to the Forge, for I Appollo spy,
He that sees all things with the days bright eye.
Good morrow Phoebus, what is the news abroad^
For thou see all things in the world are done,
Men act by daylight, or the sight of Sun.

Phoebus. Sometime I cast mine eye upon the sea,
To see the tumbling Seal, or Porpoise play,
There see I Merchants trading, and their sails
Big bellied with the wind; sea fights some times
Rise with their smoke, thick^ clouds to dark my beams.
Sometimes, I fix my face upon the earth
With my warm fervor, to give metals, trees,
Herbs, plants, and flowers life; here in gardens walk
Loose Ladies with their lovers arm in arm,
Yonder the laboring Plowman drives his Teeme.
Further, I may behold maine battles pitched,
And whom I favor most (by the winds help)
I can assist with my transparant rays.
Here, spy I Cattle feeding, Forests there
Stored with wild beasts; here Shepeheards with their lasses
Piping beneath the trees, whilst their flocks graze.
In Cities, I see trading, walking, bargening,
Buying, and selling, goodness, badnesse, all things.
And shine alike on all.

Vulcan. Thrice happy Phoebus,
That whilst poor Vulcan is confined to Lemnos
Have every da^ these pleasures. What news else.

Phoebus: No Emperor walks forth, but I see his State,
Nor sports, but I his pastimes can behold,
I see all Coronations, Funerals,
Marts, Faires, Assemblies, Pageants, Sights; and Shows.
No hunting, but I better see the chase
Then they that rowse the game, what see not I?
There Is not a window but my beams breaks in,
No think or cranny but my rays pierce through,
And there I see (oh V^lcan) wondrous things.
Things that thy self nor any God besides
Would give belief to.

Vul. What, good Phoebus speak.

Phoe. Here, wantons on their day-beds, I see spread
Clasping their amorous lovers in their arms,
Who even before my face, are not sometimes
Ashamed to show all.

Vulcan. Could not god Phoebus bring me to see this pastime.

Phoebus. Sometimes even mean fellows
A bed with noble Ladies whom they serve,
Servant with servant, married men with maids,
And wives with Batchelours.

Vulcan. There Is simple doing.

Phoebus. And shall I tell thee Vulcan, the other day
What I beheld, I saw the great God Mars.

Vulcan. God Mars.

Phoebus. As I was peeping through a cranny; a bed.

Vulcan. A bed; with whom? some pretty wench I warrant.

Phoeb^. She was a pretty wench.

Vulcan. Tell me good Phoebus,
That when I meet him^ I may floute God Mars,
Tell me, but tell me truly on thy life.

Phoebus. Not to dissemble Vulcan, 'twas thy wife!

Vulcan. Out on her whore, out on him Cuckold-maker,
Phoebus I Will be reuendge on great God Mars,
Who, whilst I hammer here his swords and shields,
Hammers upon my head, I will complain
To Jove, and all the Gods, and tell them flat
I am a Cuckold.

Phoe. Vulcan be advised,
I have had notice where they use to meet,
Could not devise to catch them by some wile?
And lay their guilt, wide open to the Gods,
Then might thou have fit color of complaint.

Vulcan. Enough, I have devised a secret snare,
A draw-net, which I Will place upon the Couch
Where they still use to bed, a wire so tempered,
And of such finenesse to deceive the eye.
So catch them when they are at it, and by this
I may presume, and be sure I am Cuckold.

Phoebus. That Is the way to be satisfied.

Vulcan. If I can catch them, all the Gods I Will call
To see my wrongs, there sports I Will near to mar,
And venge me on that letcherous God of war.

Enter the Nymph, Cloris, with two more, with flowers in their laps. 1. Nym.
Cloris, you are the Nymph whose office is
To strew fair Venus bed with herbs and flowers,
Here is the place she means to sport her self.

Clo. I am the hand-maide to the Queen of love,
And unto all her pleasures minister,
When she drinks Nectar, it is from Cloris hand,
If feed on sweet Ambrotia, or those fruits
That Cornu-copia yields, I serve them up,
Come let us with fresh Roses strew her Couch
With pances and the buds of Eglantine,
Her pillow is the purple Violet bank,
About whose verges the blancht Lillies grow,
Whose bodies twined about with wood-byne leaves
Make a confused sweetness, so it is well,
Come Venus when she please to take her rest,
Her Arbour's dight, and all things well addressed.

Enter Vulcan and Pyragmon with his net of wire. Vulcan. By her baud Charis,
this I know the place,
Which with adulterate pastimes they pollute.
Here will I set my pit-fall for these birds,
And catch them in the closure of this wire,
So, so, all is fit, my snare in order placed,
Happy the time, that I this Charis trac't.

Enter Mars and Venus. Mars. Once more in spite of Phoebus and these eyes,
That dog our pastimes, we are closely met,
And whilst the Cuckold Vulcan blows the fire,
Our amorous souls their sportiue bliss conspire.

Venus. He Is limping thus, and like a cripple halts
From Forge to Furnace; where were Venus eyes,
When she made choice of that foul polt-foote Smith,
He smells all smoke, and with his nasty sweat
Tawnies my skin, out on him ugly knave,
Mars is my love, and he my sweets shall have.

Vulcan. Gramercy my kind wife.

Venus. Come God of war,
I Will teach thee a new skirmish, better far
Then thy stern battails, meet me with a kiss
Which I retort thus, there is spirit in this,
What Is he would play the coward and turn face,
When such sweet amorous combats are in place?
My hot incounters, leave me wound nor skarr^
Yet naked I dare meet the God of War.

Vulcan. Out of her Whore.

Mars. I am armed for thee, prepare thee, for this night
I Will breast to breast dare thee to single fight.

Venus. Come tumble in my lap, great Mars I dare
To do his worst.

Vulcan catches them fast in his net. Vul. It Is well, your sports are fair.

Mars. Betrayed? bound? caught? release me, or by Jove,
Thou dy'st what ere thou art.

Vul. God Mars, good words;
This is a fight in which you use no swords.
You have left your steel behind.

Ven. Sweet vulcan.

Vulc. No more.

Venus. Can thou use Venus thus?

Vul. Away you whore,
I Will keep you fast, and call the Gods to see
Your practice, Neptune, Jove, and Mercury,
Phoebus and Juno, from your spheres look down,
And see the cause I wear a forked crown.

All the Gods appear above, and laugh, Jupiter, Juno, Phoebus, Mercury,
Neptune. Mars. The Gods are all spectators of our shame,
And laugh at us.

Venus. Oh! I could cry for anger.
Sweet Vulcan let me loose. Vulc. When Gods and men
Have seen thy shame, but (strumpet) not till then.

^up. See how Mars chafes.

I^. But Venus weeps for rage

Nept. Why should Mars fret? if it so tedious be,
Good God of war bestow thy place on me.

Merc. By all the Gods, would she do me that grace,
I would fall to it even before Vulcans face.

Vul. To Gods and men let it be fully known
I am a Cuckold.

All. Vulcan is no less.

Vul. Now since red shame your cheeks with blood has died,
I am revenged, and see my net's vnti'd.

Phoeb. The Gods have laughed their fill, Vulcan's revenged,
And now all friends: speak, are we?

Iup. Mars still frowns,

Juno. And Venus scarce well pleased.

Vul. For my part (oh you Gods!) what is past is past,
And what is once done, cannot be recald:
If Vulcan in this jest has pleased the Gods,
All his own wrongs he freely can forgive.
Venus we are friends, to Lemno^ we will have,
And never more record what is done and past.

Ven. No fool, before I did offend with fear,
My guilt was but suspected, but not proved:
And therefore I selected priuacy,
Closeness of place, and bashfully transgrest;
But since both Gods and men now know my sin,
Why should I dread to say I love God Mars?
What help have thou in proving thy wife false?
Only to make me do with impudence,
What I before with fear did, on thy self
Brought a most certain shame, where it before
Was but suspected.

Vul. Venus speaks good sense,
That Is certain now, which was before suspense.

Ven. Now fare well jealous fool, for my disgrace,
Him whom I love, I blushlesse thus embrace,
And may all such as would their wives so take,
(Although they might) be served thus for thy sake.

Vul. I am undone, be warned by me oh men,
Although you know your wives false, where and when,
Take them not in the manner, though you may:
They that with fear before, now blushlesse stray,
Their guilt it is better to suspect then know,
So you may take some part of that you owe.
Where I by seeking her good name to thrall,
Have made my self a scorn, and quite left all.

Iup. To Lemnos then, to make our Thunders fit,
Which against mortals we have cause to use,
Mars, you to Thrace, Venus in Paphos stay,
Or where you please, we to our several spheres.
Vulcan, thy morrall this good use contriues,
None search too far th'offences of their wives.

Exeunt HOMER. Our last Act comes, which lest it tedious grow,
What is too long in word, acc^pt in show.
Think Hercules his labors having ended,
The Spanish Gerion killed, and Cacus slain,
As far as Lydea he his palm extended,
Where beauteous Omphale this time does reign.
He that before to Deianeira sent,
As presents, all the spoils that he could win,
Now fills her heart with jealous discontent,
She hears how Hercules does card and spin
With Omphale, and serves her as a slave.
(She quite forgot in Thebes) her grief to cheer,
Th'assembled Princes with their Counsels grave,
Are come to comfort and remove her fear.
By these all his stored labors he has sent
To call him home, to free her discontent.

Ashew. Enter Deianeira sad, with Lychas: to her Jason, Telamon, Castor,
Pollux, Nestor, etc. They seem to comfort her, she sends Lychas, who brings
the Trophies of his twelve labors, she delivers them to the Princes, to bear
to her husband. They part several ways. Hom. Jason, and the other Hero's for
her sake,
Travel to Lydia, to persuade him thence
And by his twelve known labors, undertake
To move him, quite t'abandon his fair wench.
Further then this her jealousy extends,
Afar worse present she by Lychas sends.

Enter Deianeira, and her servant Lychas. Lych. Madam, these sorrows are too
violent
For your weak sex, I do not think it is true,
Your husband can prefer that Omphale
Before your beauty.

Deian. He Is forgot in Greece.
Greece that was wont to clangor with his fame,
Is now all silent, who but Jason now,
And Telamon, that scaled the walls of Troy,
Alcides is a name for got amongst us,
And Deianeira too forgot with him.
Oh! that I had the tempting strumpet here
That keeps my Lord away, confining me
Unto the coldness of a widowed bed.

Lyc. Madam, these presents sent, and so well known
Coming from you, must needs prevail with him.
These Princes have great interest in his love,
And can persuade much.

Deia. But that strumpet more.
Lychas, he doates upon her tempting looks,
And is so much with her enchantments blear'd,
That he is turned woman: woman Lychas, spinnes,
Cards, and does chare-worke, whilst his mistres sits
And makes a cushion of his Lions skin,
Makes of his club a rock. I loose my self
In thismy sorrow, and forget the means;
I still keep by my me, to restore my love,
Lychas, fetch me the shirt within my chamber,
I have bethought me now.

Lych. Madam I shall.

Dei. This shirt (in blood of Centaur Nessus dipped,
And since washed out) I Will send my Hercules,
Which has the power to make his hot love dye
To any stranger, and revive to me.
This (as his last) the dying Centaur spoke,
To this I Will trust, all other hopes forsake.

Enter Lychas Lych. Madam the shirt.

Dei. This as my best and dearest,
Present me (trusty Lychas) to my Lord,
Entreat withal, that if he have not quite
Put off my love, he will daine to put on this.
If he despise my gift, return it back,
And in it my death.

Lych. Fear not fair Princess,
I hope to prove as fortunate as faithful.

De^. Farewell, prove as thou speak. If my gift fail,
I have sentenced all my sorrows to one death,
Whilst Deianeira has a hand to use,
She Will not live hated where she once did choose.

Exit. Enter Omphale, Queen of Lydia, with 4 or 5 maids, Hercules attired like
a woman, with a distaffe and a spindle. Omph. Why so, this is a power infused
in love,
Beyond all magic; Is It not strange to see
A woman's beauty tame the Tyrant-tamer?
And the great Monster-maister ouer-match?
Have you done your task?

Herc. Beauteous Queen, not yet.

Omph. Then I shall frown.

Herc. Before that (lovely fair)
Augment my task, unto a treble chare.
For one sweet smile from beauteous Omphale,
I Will lay before thee all the monstrous heads
Of the grim tyrants that oppress the earth.
I that before, at Juno's strict behest,
The hundred giants of Cremona slew,
Will twice five hundred kill for Omphale.
Find me a Cacus in a cave of fire,
I Will dragge him from the mountain Auentine,
And lay his bulk at thy victorious feet.
Find me me another Gerion to captive,
All his three heads I Will tumble in thy skirt.
Bid me once more sack hell, to bind the furies,
Or to present thee with the Gods in chains,
It shall be done for beauteous Omphale.

Omph. Leave prating, ply your work.

Herc. Oh what a sweetness
Lives in her looks! no bondage, or base slavery
Seems servitude, whilst I may freely gaze
(And uncontrolled) on her: but for one smile,
I Will make her Empress ore the triple world,
And all the beauteous Queens from East to West,
The Lydians vassails, and my fellow-slaues.
There is no Lord but Love, no vassailage
But in affection, and th'Emperious Queen
Does tyranize ore captive Hercules.

Enter a maid. Maid. Madam, some Dukes of Greece attend without,
And crave to see your captive Theban here.

Omph. Admit them, they shall see what pomp we have,
And that our beauty can the loftiest slave.

Enter Jason, Telamon, Cast^r, Pollux, Nestor, Atreus, etc. Jason. Our
business was to Thehan Hercules,
'Twas told us he remained with Omphale,
The Lydian Queen.

Tell. Speak, which is Omphale? or which Alcides?

Omph. We are queen of Lydia,
And this our vassaile. Do you know him Lords?
Stoop slave, and kiss the foot of Omphale.

Herc. I shall.

Nest. Oh wondrous alteration!

Cast. Till now I trusted this report was false,
And scarcely can I yet believe mine eyes.

Pol. Lady, our purpose was to Hercules,
Show us the man.

Omph. Behold him Greeks there.

Atreus. Where?

Omph. There at his task.

Jason. Alas! This Hercules?
This is some base effeminate groom, not he
That with his puissance frighted all the earth:
This is some woman, some Hermophrodite.

Herc. Has Jason, Nestor, Castor, Telamon,
Atreus, Pollux, all forgot their friend?
We are the man.

Jason. Woman we know thee not.
We came to seek the Ioue-borne Hercules,
That in his cradle strangled Juno's snakes,
And triumphed in the brave Olimpicke games.
He that the Cleonean Lion slew,
The Eremanthian Boar, the Bull of Marathon,
The Lernean Hydra, and the winged Heart.
He that dragged Cerberus from hell in chains,
And stownded Pluto in his Ebon Chair.
That Hercules, by whom the Centaurs fell^
Great Achelous, the Stymphalides,
And the Cremona giants? Where is he?

Tell. That traitorous Nessus with a shaft trans-fixt,
Strangled Antheus, purged Augeus stalles,
Wan the bright Apples of the Hesperides,
And whilst the Giant Atlas eased his limbs,
Bore on his shoulders the huge frame of heaven.

Herc. And are not we the man? see Telamon,
A woman do this? we would see the Theban,
That Cacus slew, Busiris sacrificed,
And to his horses hurled stern Diomed
To be devoured.

Pol. That freed Hesione
From the Sea-whale, and after ransackt Troy,
And with his own hand slew La^medon.

Nest. He by whom Dercilus and Albion fell,
He that Oecalia and Betricia wan.

Atr. That monstrous Gerion with his three heads vanquished
With Linus, Lichas that vsurp't in Thebes,
And captived there his beauteous Megara.

Jason. He that the Amazonian Baldricke wan,
That Achelous with his club subdued,
And wan from him the pride of Calidon
Bright Deianeira, that now mournes in Thebes
For absenc of that noble Hercules.
To him we came, but since he lives not here,
Come Lords, we will return these presents back
Unto the constant Lady, whence they came.

Herc. Stay Lords.

Jason. Amongst women?

Herc. For that Thebans sake
Whom you profess to love, and came to seek,
Abide awhile, and by my love to Greece,
I Will bring before you that lost Hercules,
For whom you came to enquire.

Jason. On that condition (Princes) lets stay a little.

Tela. It works, it works.

Herc. How have I lost my self?
Did we all this? where is that spirit become
That was in us? no marvel Hercules,
If thou be strange to them, that thus disguised,
Art to thy self unknown. Hence with this distaffe
And base effeminate chares.

Omp. How slave? submit and to thy task again.
Dare thou rebel?

Herc. Pardon great Omphale.

Ias. Will Telamon persuade me this is Hercules
The Libian Conqueror, now a ssaues slave.
He lived in midst of battles, this amongst truls:
This welds a distaffe, he a conquering Club.
Shall we bestow fair Deianeiraes presents
On this (heaven knows) whether man or woman?

Herc. Who named my Deianeira? Jason you?
How fares my love? how fares my beauteous wife?
I know these presents, did they come from her?
What strumpet's this that has detained my soul?
Captived my fame, trans-shap't me to a fool?
Made me (of late) but little less then God,
Now scarce a man? Hence with these womanish tyres,
And let me once more be my self again.

Tell. Keep from him Omphale, be that your charge,
We Will second these good thoughts.

Omph. Alcid s hear me.

Cast. By your favor madam.

Herc. Who spoke?

Jason. Think that was Deianeira's voice,
Tha^ calls thee home to dry her widowed tears,
And to bring comfort to her de^olate bed.

Herc. Oh Deianeira.

Om. Hear me Hercules.

Herc. Ha Omphale?

Pollux. You shall not trouble him.

Ias. 'Twas she that made Alcides womanish,
But Deianeira to be more then man.
For thy wives sake thou art renowned in Greece,
This Strumpet has made Greece forget thee quite,
And scarce remember there was such a man.
Thebes that was wont to triumph in thy glories,
Is now all silent. Tyrants every where
Begin to oppress, thinking Alcides dead
For so the fame's already. Shall a Strumpet
Do this upon the Theban Hercules?
And Deyaneira, fair, chaste absolute
In all perfections, live despised in Thebes?

Herc. By Jove she shall not, first I Will rend these eyes out,
That sotted with the love of Omphale
Has transhapt me, and deeply injured her.
Come we will shake off this effeminacy
And by our deeds repurchase our renown.
Jason and you brave Greeks, I know you now,
And in your honors I behold my self
What I have been, hence Strumpet Omphale,
I cast thee off, and once more will resume
My native virtues, and to prove this good
This day unto the Gods I Will sacrifice
To grace which pomp, and that we may appear
The same we were, before us shall be borne
These of our labors twelve, the memory,
Unto Jove's Temple, grace us worthy Heroes
To assist us in this high sollemnity.
Whilst we upon our manly shoulders bear
These massy pillars we in Gades must rear.

Exeunt. Manet Omphale. Ompale. We have lost our servant, never yet had Lady
One of the like rank. All King Thespius daughters,
Fifty in number, childed all one night,
Could not prevail so much with Hercules
As we have done; no not fair Yole
Daughter to Cacus, beauteous Megara,
Nor all the fair and amorous queens of Greece,
Could slave him like the Lydian Omphale.
Therefore where e're his labors be renowned,
Let not our beauty pass vnregistred.
Bondaging him that captived all the earth,
Nor will we leave him, or yet loose him thus
What either beauty, cunning, flattery, tears
Or woman's Art can, we will practice on him.
But now the Priests and Princes are prepared
For the great sacrifice, which we will grace
With our high presence, and behold aloof
These rights unto the gods performed and d^ne
We Will gain by Art, what we with beauty won.

Enter to the sacrifice two Priests to the Altar, six Princes with six of his
labors, in the midst Hercules bearing his two brazen pillars, six other
Princes, with the other six labors, Hercules stays them. Herc. Now Jove
behold us from thy sphere of Stars,
And shame not to acknowledge us thy sons.
Thus should Alcides march amidst his spoils,
Inguirt with slaughtered Lions, Hydraes, Whales,
Boares, Bulls, grim Tyrants, Hel-hounds, Monsters, Furies,
And Princes his spectators: oh you Gods,
To whom this day we consecrate your prayers,
And dedicate our sacred orisons,
Daine us your cies, behold these sholders bear
Two brazen pillars, trophies of our fame,
That have eased Atlas, and supported heaven,
And had we shrunk beneath that heavenly structure
The Spheres, Orbs, Planets, Zeniths, Signs, and Stars,
With loves high Palace, all confusedly
Had shattered, fallen, and o're-whelm'd earth and sea,
We have done that, and all these labors else,
Which we this day make sacred, lune see
These we surrender to thy love and thee.

set on. As they march over the Stage, enter Lychas with the shirt. Lych. From
Deianera I present this gift,
Wrought with her own hand, with more kind commends
Then I have measured steps to Lydia
From Thebes, which she entreats you wear for her.

Herc. More welcome is this gift to Hercules
Then Iason's Fleece, Laomedon's white Steeds,
Or should Jove grace me with eternity,
Here stand our pillars, with non vltra insculpt,
Which we must rear beyond the Pyrene Hills
At Gades in Spain ( Alcides utmost bounds)
Whilst we put on this shirt, the welcome present
Of Deyianeira, whom we dearly love,
Lychas thy hand, In this we will sacrifice
And make our peace with her and Jupiter.

Jason. Never was Hercules so much himself,
How will this news glad Deyaneiraes heart,
Or how this sight inrage fair Omphale?

Tell. All his dead honors he reuiues in this,
And Greece shall once more echoe with his fame.

Hercules puts on the shirt. Herc. With this her present, I put on her love,
Witness heaven, earth, and all you Peers of Greece,
I wed her once more in this ornament,
Her love and her remembrance sit to me
More near by thousands then this roabe can cleave.
So now before Jove's Altar let us kneel,
And make our peace with heaven, atone our self
With beauteous Dyaneira our chaste wife
And cast away the love of Omphale.

All the Princes knele to the Altar^ Priest. Princes of Greece assist us with
your thoughts,
And let your prayers with ours ascend the Spears,
For mortals ori^ons are sons to Jove,
And when none else can, they have free access
Unto there fathers ear, hail son of Saturn,
To whom when the three lots of heaven, of sea,
And hell were cast, the high Olimpus fell.

Herc. Oh, oh.

Priest. That with a nod can make heavens collomes bend,
And the earths Center tremble, whose right hand
Is armed with lightning, and the left with fear.

Herc. No more, are all the furies with their tortures,
Their whips and lashes crept into my skin?
Has any sightlesse and infernal fire
Laid hold upon my flesh? when did Alcides
Thus shake with anguish? thus change face, thus shrink?
Shall torture pale our cheek? no, Priest proceed,
We will not feel the pain, thou shall not breed,

Jason. What alteration's this? a thousand pangues
I see even in his visage, in his silence
He does express even hell.

Priest. Thou sacred Jove
Behold us at thy Altar prostrate here
To beg atonement 'tweene our sins and thee,
Lend us a gracious ear and eye.

Herc. Priest no more,
I Will rend thy Typet, hurl Jove's Altars down,
Hauock his Offerings, all his Lamps extinguish,
Raze his high Temples, and skale heaven it self
Unless he stay my tortures.

Jason. Warlike Theban,
Whence comes this fury? is this madness forced,
That makes Alcides thus blaspheme the Gods.

Tell. Patient your self.

Herc. I will not Jason, cannot Tellamon,
A stipticke poison boyles within my veins,
Hell is within me, for my marrow fries,
A vulture worse then that Promotheus feels,
F^ers on my entrails, and my bulk in flames.

Jason. Yet be your self, renowned Hercules,
Strive with your torture, with yourrage contend
Seek to ore-come this anguish.

Herc. Well, I will,
See Jason, see renowned Tellamon
I will be well, I Will feel no poison boil,
Though my blood skal'd me, though my hot suspires,
Blast where I breath like lightning, though my lungs
Sees in my blood, I will not pale a cheek,
Nor change a brow, I will not, spite of torture
Anguish, and pain, I will not.

Omp. What strange fury
Has late possessed him to be thus disturbed?

Jason. Why this is well, once more repair Jove's Altar.
Kindle these holy Tapers and proceed.

Herc. To pluck the Thunderer from his Crystal thron^
And throw the Gallaxia, by the locks,
And amber tresses, drag the Queen of heaven.

Nestor. Alcides.

Herc. Princes, Jason, Tellamon,
Help me to tear of this infernal shirt,
Which rawes me where it cleaues, vnskin my brawnes,
And like one nak't rolled in a Tun of spikes
Of thousands, make one universal wound,
And such is mine: oh Deyaneira false,
Treacherous, unkind, disloyal; pluck, tear, rend
Though you my bones leave naked, and my flesh
Frying with poison you cast hence to dogs.
Dread Neptune, let me plundge me in thy seas,
To cool my body, that is all on flame.
Or with thy tri-sulke thunder strike me Jove,
And so let fire quench fire, vnhand me Lords,
Let me spurn mountains down, and tear up rocke^
Rend by the roots huge Oaks, till I have dig'd
A^way to hell, or found a skale to heaven.
Something I must, my torments are so great,
To quench this flame and qualify this heat.

Exit. Jason. Let us not leave him Princes least this outrage
Make him lay violent hands upon him self.
If Deyaneiraes heart, were with her hand,
She is her sexes scandal, and her shame
Even whilst Time lives, shall every tongue proclaim.

Exit Omph. I Will follow to, and with what Art I can,
Strive this his rage and torture to allay.

Exit. Lych. What Is in this shirt unknown to me that brought it?
Or what has jealous Deyaneira done?
To employ me, an unwilling messenger,
In her Lords death: well, whosoever it prove
My innocence I know, I Will, if I may
Look to my life, and keep out of his way.

Enter Hercules. Herc. Lychas, Lychas, where is he that brought this poisoned
shirt,
That I may tear the villain lim from lim.
And flake his body small as Winters snow,
His shattered flesh shall play like parched leaves,
And dance in the air, tossed by the summer winds.

Lychas. Defend me heaven.

Herc. Oh that with stamping thus,
I could my self beneath the Center sink,
And tomb my tortured body beneath hell.
Had I heavens massy columns in my gripes,
Then with one sway I would or'e-turne yon frame,
And make the marble Elementall sky
My Tombe-stone to enterre dead Hercules.
Oh father Jove thou laist upon thy son
Torments above supporture, Lichas, oh!
I Will chase the villain over Oetaes rocks,
Till I have nak't those hills, and left no shade
To hide the Traitor.

Lichas. Which way shall I fly
To escape his fury? if I stay I dye.

Hercules sees him. Herc. Stay, stay, what is he that creeps into yon cave?
Is not that Lycas Dyaneiraes squire,
That brought this poisoned shirt to Hercules?
I thank thee Jove, yet this is some allayment
And moderation to the pangues I feel,
Nay, you shall out fir Lychas by the heels.

Hercules swings Lychas about his head, and kills him. Thus, thus, thy limbs
about my head I twine,
Eubaean sea receive him, for he is thine.
Enter Jason, Tellamon, and all the Princes, after them Omphale. Ias. Princes,
his torments are above Physic help,
And they that wish him well, must wish his death,
For that alone gives period to his anguish.

Tell. In vain we follow and pursue his rage,
There Is danger in his madness.

Nest. Yet aloof,
Let Us observe him, and great Jove implore
To qualify his pains.

Phy. As I am Philoctetes I Will not leave him,
Until he be immortal, Princes hark,
Hercules within Cannot these groans pierce heaven and move to pity
The obdure Juno.

Omph. Beneath this rock where we have often kissed,
I will lament the noble Thebans fall,
The Lydian Omphale will be to him
A truer Mystresse, then his wife, whose hate
Has brought on him this sad and ominous fate.
Nor hence, for any force or prayer remove,
But die with him whom I so dearly love.

cry within. Cast. His torments still increase, hear oh you Gods,
And hearing pity.

Enter Her^ from a ^cke above, tearing down trees. Herc. Down, down, you
shadows that crown Oeta Mount,
And as you tumble bear the Rocks along.
I will not leave an Oak or standing Pine
But all these mountains with the dales make even,
That Oetaes self may mourn with Hercules.
Hah! what art thou?

Omph. I am thy Omphale.

Herc. Art thou not Deyaneira come to mock
Alcides madness, and his pangues deride?
Yes, thou art she, thou, thou have fier'd my bones,
And make me boil in poison, for which (minion)
And for (by fate) thou have shortened my renown,
Behold, this monstrous rock thy death shall crown,
Hercules kills Omphale, w^h a piece of a rock. So Deyaneira and her squire are
now
Both in their sins extinct.

These. What has Alcides done? slain Omphale,
A guiltless queen that came to mourn his death.

Herc. Torment on torment. But shall Hercules
Dye by a woman's hand? No, aid me Princes,
(If you have in you any generous thoughts)
In my last fabric: Come, toss trees on trees,
Till you have reared me up a funeral pile,
Which all that is mortal in me shall consume.

Cast. Princes, let none deny their free assistance,
In his release of torture. There Is for me.

Pol. My hand shall likewise help to bury him,
And of his torments give him ease by death.

All the Princes break down the trees, and make a fire, in which Hercules
places himfelfe. Her Thanks, thus I throne me in the midst of fire,
And with a dreadlesse brow confront my death.
Olimpicke thunderer now behold thy son,
Of whose divine parts make a star, that Atlas
May shrink beneath the weight of Hercules.
And step-dame (...), glut thy hatred now,
That have been weary to command, when we
Have not been weary to perform and act.
I that Busiris slew, Antheus strangled,
And conquered still at thy unkind behest,
The three-shap't Gerion, and the dog of hell,
The Bull of Candy, and the golden Heart,
Augeus and the fowls of Stymphaly,
The Hesperian fruit, and bolt of Thermidon,
The Lernean Hydra, and Arcadian Boar,
The Lion of Naemea, Steeds of Thrace,
The monster Cacus; thousands more then these,
That Hercules in death dares thee to chide,
And shows his spirit, which torments cannot hide.
Lie there thou dread of Tyrants, and thou skin,
He burns his Club, and Lions Skin. Invulner'd still, burn with thy masters
bones:
For these be arms which none but we can weild.
My bow and arrows Philoctetes take,
Reserve them as a token of our love,
For these include the utmost fate of Troy,
Which without these; the Greeks can nere destroy.
You Hero's all farewell, heap fire on fire,
And pile on pile, till you have made a structure
To flame as high as heaven, and record this
Though by the Gods and Fates we are ore-throwne,
Alcides dies by no hand but his own.

Jupiter above strikes him with a thunderbolt, his body sinkes, and from the
heavens discends a hand in a cloud, that from the place where Hercules was
burnt, brings up a star, and fixes it in the firmament. Jason. Juno thou
have done thy worst; he now defies
What thou can more, his fame shall mount the skies.
What heavenly musicke's this?

Tell. His soul is made a star, and mounted heaven,
I see great Jove has not forgot his son:
All that his mothers was is changed by fire,
But what he took of Jove, and was divine,
Now a bright star in the high heavens must shine.

Enter Atreus. Nest. We all have seen Alcides deifi'd.
But what news brings Atreus?

Air. A true report of Deianeira's death,
Who when she heard the tortures of her Lord,
And what effect her fatal present took,
Exclaimed on Nessus, and to prove herself
Guiltless of treason in her husbands death,
Witth her own hand she boldly slew herselse.

Pel. That noble act proclaimed her innocent,
And cleares all black suspicion: but fair princes,
Let universal Greece in funeral black,
Mourn for the death of Theban Hercules.

Ias. Who now shall monsters quel, or tyrants tame?
The Oppressed free, or fill Gr^ece with their fame.
Princes your hands, take up these monuments
Of his twelve labors in a marble Temple
(We will erect and dedicate to him)
Reserve them to his lasting memory:
His brazen pillars shall be fixed in Gades,
On which his monumentall deeds we will grave.
Armed with these worthy Trophies lets march on
Toward Thebes, that claims the honor of his birth.
His body's dead, his fame shall nere expire,
Earth claims his earth, heaven shows his heavenly fire.

Exeunt omnes. HOMER. He that expects five short Acts can contain
Each circumstance of these things we present,
Me thinks should show more barrenness then hraine:
All we have done we aim at your content,
Striving to illustrate things not known to all,
In which the learnd can only censure right:
The rest we (...), whom we unlettered call,
Rather to attend then judge: for more then sight
We seek to please. The ^erstanding ear
Which we have hitherto most gracious found,
Your general love, we rather hope then fear:
For that of all our labors is the ground.
If from your love in any point we stray,
Think HOMER blind, and blind men miss their way.

FINIS.

