THREE EXCELLENT POINTS OF CHRISTIAN DOCTRINE:

I. The Nativity of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. II. His bitter sufferings for the
sins of his people. III. The fruits flowing therefrom, to those that by
Faith apprehend him.
ALL PROPHESIED BY ZACHARIAH in the 8. 9. and 10. Verses of the third Chapter
of his Prophecy, and explained in three Sermons, preached at Edinburgh by
Master PETER HEWAT being Minister there.

JOHN 5. 29. Search the Scriptures, for they testify of me. 1 PET. 1. 10. 11.
10 Of which salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched diligently, who
prophesied of the grace that should come unto you. 11 Searching what or what
manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was to come did signify. When it
testified before hand the suffering of Christ, and the glory that should
follow.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by ANDRO HEART. Anno 1621.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE DAVID AIKINHEID LORD Provest: And to the right
Worshipful Robert Dowgall, John Maknaght, William Dick, and Henry Morison
Baillies: John Byres Deane of Gild, Peter Somervell Thesaurer, and to the
remnant of the Council, representing the body of the good Town of EDINBVRGH.
COmfortable and powerful is that confirmation to our faith in the Messiah,
which is drawn from ancient Scripture, when we see that all which was
fore*shadowed in the Law, and fore-spoken by the Prophets, has the due and
full accomplishment in our Lord Jesus Christ. Who being God manifested 1 Timothy
3. 16
in the flesh, was in the fulness of time for the sins of his people crucified
at Jerusalem. And thereafter declared Romans 1. 4
to be the Son of God, with power, according to the Spirit of holiness by the
resurrection from the dead. To this end it is, that the Lord Jesus himself
bids us search the Scriptures, for they testify of him. He means there
John 5. 29
of ancient Scripture, whereof there is no part which bears not clear and
evident testimony of him. To Adam he Genesis 3. 15
was promised. Noah made petition for his son Iaphet, that he might be
persuaded to come to the tents of Sem: Genesis 9. 27
that is, to the Church and family of the Messiah. Abraham John 8. 56
saw his day, and rejoiced in it. Isaac was a special type of him, who as he
was the son of laughter and gladness: Genesis 22. 6 John 19. 17
so Jesus Christ was the joy of the sons of men. And as he bare on his
shoulders the timber wherewith he should have been burnt in a sacrifice: So
Jesus Christ bare on his back the Cross whereupon he was crucified. Jacob
spoke Genesis 49 *
notably of him, and from his seed the Scepter did not depart till he came in
the flesh. Moses prayed to send him who Exodus 4. 13
was to be sent. Iehoshua has but the name of a Savior in type, who fighting
the Lords battles, and leading the people through Jordan to the promised Land,
resembles our strong and mighty Chiftan, that Lion of the tribe of Judah, who
subdueth his enemies, leads captivity captive, and carries his people
through the raging and swelling Jordan of the troubles of this life to that
promised rest. All the refreshment which the people had under Judges, fighting
for them, and rescuing them from their oppressors, was but a shadow and a
glass to look unto that rest which is to be found under the Messiah, who
puts his people in such safety, that the red Dragon with his power cannot
come Apoc. 12. 9
near to pursue. The holy line is kept, and closes the book Ruth 4. 18
of Ruth with David the son of Iesse for no other purpose but to point at the
Messiah the Son of David according to the flesh. Samuel by the direction of
God, anointed 1 Samuel 16. 13
David to be King, who was the type of Jesus Christ in his actions and
sufferingt. But the servant of Jesus Christ as he is the Messiah. And therefore
he acknowledges him to be Psa. 110. 1 2 Samuel, 23, 1
his Lord. He is called the sweet singer of Israel. And they who will look
earnestly to his Psalms, shall find how secretly he tuneth his harp, and how
heavenly and melodious his song is, when he sings of the Messiah to come, his
kingdom, his subiests, and the great benefit which his people enjoy under him.
The Queen of Seba came to visit Solomon Math. 12. 4^
the son of David, to see the ordor of his house, and found her sight above the
report. But behold Jesus Christ greater then Solomon. Ezra writing the history
of seven of Daniel his weeks, which make forty nine years, is Dan. 9. 25
leading the people to look to the end when shall come the holy One, who shall
make an end of sin, and finish transgression, to make reconciliation for
iniquity, and to bring an everlasting righteonsnes. Nehemiah goes on in the
same course, writing the history of seventy years. In the eighteen years
history of Esther, is it not remarkable to this purpose, that while as the
sword was above the heads of the people of God, ready drawn as it were, to cut
off their memory, Esther 7
Esther is raised up as a comfortable instrument of their delivery. So when the
sword of Gods vengeance was drawn, to cut off the whole race of Adam with an
everlasting destruction, in comes Jesus Christ not looked for of* Angels, nor
expected of man, who sets his people at freedom, and delivers them who
were subject to that Luc. 1. 74.
fear. Job was afflicted many ways in his goods, in his children, in his
wife, in his body, in his conscience, yet is his head holden up, and he kept
from despair by the faith which he has in the Messiah, still hoping with the
eyes of his Job 19, 25. 26. 27
soul and body both, to see his Redeemer. When the Prophets come in, is not
this the sum of all their Prophecy. He that reads Esaias, may read in him all
the points of the Evangell of Jesus Christ. Every one of the succeeding
Prophets. holding fast the same point. And the nerer they draw to the time of
the rising of that bright Star, the more clearly Malach. 4. 5
they spoke of him. So that the last of the Prophets being Malachie, his last
breath is of John the Baptist, the forerunner of Jesus Christ. And so Christ
himself tells you that all the Prophets and the Law prophesied unto John,
Math. 11. 13
and that by Elias, of whom Malachie spoke, is understood John. When the Lord
Jesus came himself, all his actions, and especially his sufferings, were the
accomplishment of Math. 17. 1
Scripture, which was written of old. Upon the mountain of his transfiguration
there is seen talking with him Moses and Elias, to testify the sweet concent
and harmony betwixt him, the Law and the Prophets. And the subject of Luc. 9. 31
their conference says Luke, was of his death which he should accomplish at
Jerusalem. After his resurrection in that powerful Sermon of his, which made
the hearts of the hearers to burn within them. Did he not begin at Moses Luc.
24. 27
and the Prophets, and expound unto them in all the Scriptures these things
that were written concerning him, it would take a long time, and fill many
pages to go through all. These few words to them that are wise in the
knowledge of God, may be sufficient. Amongst the rest of the Prophets, our
Prophet Zachary (being the last except one before Zach. 3
the coming of Christ) he does most clearly point him forth. He is in this
Prophecy that great Angel who takes the filthy garments from Iehoshua. It is
he only who takes from us the filthy garment of our sin, and cloatheth us with
the white garment of his righteousness. It is he who puts wickedness in an
Epha, and has cast a weight of Zach. 5. 8
Lead upon the mouth of it. For let us bury our sins where we will, they will
rise again, except they be buried in the burial of Jesus Christ, from whence
they shall never rise to our confusion here, nor condemnation after this. He is
Zach. 6. 12
that Branch who builds the spiritual Temple of GOD. Yea our Prophet is so
special in his Prophecy of the Messiah, that he will tell you of his coming
in to Jerusalem riding on an Ass. He will tell you of the very price for which
Zach. 9. 9
he was sold and betrayed, even thirty pieces of silver. And Zach. 11. 13
in end he will conclude his Prophecy with making mention of that glorious
coming to Judgment.

These three Sermons following, are upon the last three verses of the third
Chap. of this Prophet Zachary, where. in you shall find excellent Prophetical
speech of the Messiah. Here have you his Nativity, being that Branch of the
root of Iesse. 2. His suffering, being that Stone which the Lord of Hosts
himself did ingraue. 3. The fruits flowing there from, which are, the removing
of sin, peace of conscience, and the inioying of all sort of good.

I was not of purpose that these Sermons should have seen the light, being
conscious of my own insufficiency, neither presuming upon anything that can
flow from me. But being overcome by the importunity of a kind and loving
friend, who by accident saw my papers, to whom I could resuse nothing that was
lawful and possible for me, I was content to be requested, yea in a manner
commanded. And seeing they must come forth, to whom can they more properly
belong then to your L. and town of Edinburgh, they being my first fruits of
this sort. I had with you my birth, I was educat in your schools of learning,
I served (although unworthy) twenty years in your public Ministry, From which
now being removed, since I can do you no good by public preaching, I shall be
glad if by writing, or any other means which lies in me, I may prove in any
sort stedable. Of these Sermons you were also auditors, they being amongst the
last which I preached there. And so may be best judged of by you, if they be
not the same which were delivered.

It may please your L. Baillies and Council in name of the good Town, to
accept this small propine from one of your own, with the like heart and love
wherewith it is offered. Whereby if I shall but rub off me the note of
ingratitude, and that your L. does in any sort like of these travels, I have
gained what I would, and will be hereby encouraged to use my pen oftener, that
if any good by me can redound unto others, the praise thereof under God may be
yours, with whom I was bred and brought up. Thus praying God* to bless your
travels, and make your government prosperous by the propagation of the Gospel
among you, and procuring the good of your town and Commonwealth, I rest

Yours as it becomes of bounden duty Mr PETER HEWAT.

To the Reader.
Loving and Christian Reader, I know that the great light and knowledge of this
age has bred itching ears, so that he who will give forth any thing in
public, must expect of his travels more carping and censuring, than profiting.
The food which in the self is wholesome for the soul, being drawn from the
pure Word of GOD, is not savorie meat to every man's taste. They must have
strange sawces to waken their appetite and desire of reading. But let men
wander in their conceits, as they please, this remains sure, that they who
lay not the foundation of Faith in divinity upon the Scripture, build not upon
the Rock. They who presume to understand above that which is written, remember
not the Apostles precept, Romans 12. 13. And they who think the Scriptures too
shallow to wade in, as not affording sufficient matter for their wits to work
upon, sink in a sea of absurdities and errors. You shall not expect in these
Sermons following the large handling of these great common places of divinity,
mentioned in the Title, for that you know, would require a large volume. But a
plain opening of the text adhering thereunto without digression. Wherein I
will desire you not so much to regard my rude and simple doing, as my affection
being willing to cast in my myte in the Church Treasure, the conscience of my
doing, being to me a sufficient guard against all calumnies. Thus far only I
am bold to say, that if you will take pains to read, you shall find all that
is set down here, able to abide the touchstone of holy Scripture. And if in
any thing I have erred and gone astray (as who can plead perfection) then I
say with holy David Psalm. 141. 5. Let the righteous smite me, and it shallbee a
kindness. Let him reprove me, and it shall be an excellentoyle, which shall not
break my head. The Spirit of GOD lead you in all truth. Farewell.

LECTORI and AVTHORI.
DVlce novum veteri tibi si componere foedus,
Cernere and eventis sit rata dicta suis;
Mesiae ortum, obitum, fructum tibi and inde fluentem
Hic lege: sunt tria te judice, digna legi.
Lectaque digna feres: mea ni sententia fallat,
Lecta feres fidei non malefida tuae.
Perge, HEWETE, Sacri sic mystica pandere Verbi;
Linguaque si sileat, sic tua penna sonet.
PATRICIVS SANDAEVS.

Ad D. PETRVM HVATTVM Sermones editurum.
QVod diae assiduis sacris operere Sionis,
Laudibus adijciet posthuma fama tuis.
Scriptaque quod mandes nervosa nepotibus, aetas
Nescia noctis atrae te repetita canet.
Durabunt dum Luna micat tua dogmata, numen
Indidit eloquiis pondus HVATTE tuis.
Faenerat exigui corpus dona ampla, libelli
In parvo magnum munere munus inest.
Io. HALLVS F.

VErbis Suada tuis, sensu Hermes ludit HVATTE,
Sicque tuum plenum est numine opus duplici.
Dulce sonant, dulce and sapiunt haec scripta, nec vlli
Non sapient si non invido and insipido.
GVLIELMVS HALLVS.

THE FIRST SERMON.
ZECHARIAH, 3. Chap. 8. 9. and 10. verses. 8 Hear now O Iehoshua the high
Priest, thou and thy fellows that sit before thee. For they are men wondered
at. For behold I will bring forth my servant the BRANCH. 9 For behold, the
stone that I have laid before Iehoshua: upon one stone shall be seven eyes;
behold I will engraue the grauing thereof, says the Lord of Hosts, and will
remove the iniquity of that land in one day. 10 In that day says the Lord of
Hosts, shall ye call every man his neighbor under the vine, and under the
sigge tree.
THe Prophet in this Chapter goes on in comforting the people of God with the
assured hope and expectation of the accomplishment of that work of their begun
delivery from the captivity of Babylon, encouraging them to go forward in the
building of the house of God not looking to, nor regarding the outward face and
appearance of things, how unlikely soever, but lifting their eyes to the
consideration of h^ infinite wisdom, power and love, who Romans 11. 3^. (...)
10. 17. Psalm. 103. 11.
has promised unto them this pledge of his favor, that his Temple shall be
again set up in the mids of them, and they shall enjoy these same outward
ensigns of his blessed presence. All which for their sins in their
banishment and captivity, were Psalm. 94.
utterly put down and defaced.

Among the rest of these things which were in the peoples eyes, and occurred to
their consideration to discourage them, this was not one of the least: the
Psalm. 94 91.
present estate and condition of the Priesthood, which had lost all the former
glory and dignity, and to them it appeared a thing altogether impossible, that
ever their Priest and Priesthood should recover the wonted beauty. To meet
with them in their doubtful cogitation, and to raise their hearts with comfort
in this same particular: There is in the beginning of this chapter, a vision
concerning Iehoshua their high Priest who although he be (as in the vision he is
represented) vile and contemptible, partly in regard of the malice Apoc. 12.
10.
of Satan that pursues him, partly in regard of his own pollution and
sins, which are the matter of Satan's assaults and accusations. Yet is the
Lord him ^ Ioh, 2. 1.
self, even the Messiah, the great Mediator and Advocat of his Church brought
in pleading for him. And in this pleading so prevailing, that Satan gets the
foil, and is rebuked. Iehoshua is made free and absolved. His filthy garments
are taken from him, a crown for his head, and the ornaments besitting the
Priesthood are rendered to him.

In the Chapter containing this heavenly and comfortable vision, there are two
chief and principal points. The one is the speech of God in the mouth of his
Prophet anent Iehoshua the high Priest* And the second is the translation of
his speech from Iehoshua the Type to the great high Priest of the House of God,
JESUS CHRIST. Wherein is set down the happy estate and condition of his Church
and people under him. But leaving the first part of the Chapter, let us deal
with the last three Verses, wherein that which has been formerly spoken of
the Leviticall Priesthood, to be restored in the person of Iehoshua, is now
declared to have the accomplishment in the person of Jesus Christ then to come
and now exhibit, of whom Iehoshua was the type: for the Lord our God would not
have his people abide or rest in the external shadow of that ministry, but
that in it they should consider what was figured, and look to JESUS CHRIST who
was to come. And herein may be considered. 1. That the Majesty and dignity of 1
that Priesthood before the captivity was very great. 2. In the time of the
captivity, the honor of that 2
Priesthood was laid as it were in the dust, and casten to the ground. The
visioun representing that time brings in Iehoshua, cled in filthy garments, in
a base and vile estate. 3. After the captivity, the Lord as a sign 3
of his merciful return to his people, he restores the Priesthood again. And
yet neither the glory of Priest nor Temple was thought answerable to that which
was of before.

Here therefore comes in the peoples consolation to look in through all these
Types, to the glory and dignity of the Priesthood of JESUS CHRIST to come, with
which in dignity and majesty cannot enter in comparison, the Leviticall
Priesthood then standing, and now abolished. 1. The Priest and Priesthood then 1
was glorious in their own form of glory and splendour: Heb. 7.
But all the glory which they had, was but a shadow. And the end of it was to
point at the glorious Priesthood of JESUS CHRIST. 2. That Priesthood 2
with the glory of it, was subject to alterations and decays: But the
Priesthood of JESUS CHRIST remains unchangeable, and is everlasting. 3. That
the 3
people should not rest upon these shadows, and to comfort them against all
mutatio^s whatsoever. There is no solid nor steadfast way but one, look to
JESUS CHRIST. In him, as the Father has declared, himself Math. 3. 17. Math.
17. 5.
well pleased. So in him only does the soul of the believer find sound peace
and contentment.

The Lord our God who typed JESUS CHRIST in the Law, and delivered him in
figures to the people in that Leviticall service, although he has removed the
types. And we have JESUS plainly and simply delivered to us in the Word and
Sacraments: Yet remains there in his Church some teaching of this kind and
nature, wherein by outward, we are led unto inward, and by earthly, we are
carried unto spiritual things. And in things concerning this life, is shadowed
unto us things eternal, and which concerns the life that is to come. The
glory of the Temple of old was great But what was it in comparison of the glory
and beau Psalm. 45* 2.
ty of the spiritual House of JESUS CHRIST, who is fairer then the children of
men. The glory and Majesty of the high Priest of old was great: but what was it
compared with the glory and Majesty of our high Priest. But these types are
away. What remains yet, and shall remain in the Church to the end of the
Psalm. 19.
World, of that kind of doctrine. Even thus much. Have thou any delight or
pleasure in the beautiful shape or frame of this World, or any of the
Creatures that are therein. Should thou rest there? No: 1 Cor. 7. 31. ^ Ioh. 2.
17 2 Cor. 4. 18.
This World and the shape and fashion of it will go away. But think that all
these things being but shadows, they cannot by many degrees come to the
rese^blance of that delight, and these everlasting pleasures in the life to
come: for the which as thy soul should earnestly seek, so except thou get
assurance to be partaker of them, it had been better for thee never to have
been borne. The glory and Majesty of earthly Psalm. 49. 1^ Apoc. 3. 5. Apoc. 7.
9.
Kings is great, yet all their glory follows them but to their grave. But O,
how great is that glory, to be crowned in Heaven, to be clothed with fine
white robes, having palms in their hands in sign of victory. And all this
glorious estate is promised to the Luc. 12, 32.
meanest subject of the Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST. Bread is comfortable to an
hungry body, but as the hunger of the body may make thee say to him: Lord,
give us this day our daily bread: So knowing the Math. 6. 11 John 6. 32. Apoc.
2. 17.
want of thy soul, should thou not run with a petition for it to him, who has
said, I have hid Manna to give you. And of whose House it may be well said,
There is in it bread enough, large mercies and comforts to Lue. 15. 17
the hungry and wearied soul that comes to seek them. Drink is good for a
thirsty body, but will thou not remember of thy soul, and hear him who has
said, I have drink to give, whereof whosoever Joan. 4. 14
drinks, shall never thirst again. If we have no appetite but natural, of
things concerning the body, what difference betwixt us and the beast? But a
spiritual and renewed man, is he not known in his spiritual appetite and
desires, such as was that man according to Gods own Heart, expressing his
spiritual Psalm. 42. 1
appetite this way: As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of waters, so pants my
soul for thee O God. Garments are steedable to the naked; But remembering thy
soul, hear him who calls you to come and buy of him garments, to cover your
filthy nakedness, Apoc 3. 18
that ye be not a spectakle of shame in the sight of God, Man and Angel.
With which garments whosoever shall not be found cled in that Day, shall cry
(but Apoc. 6. 16
in vain) to hills and mountains to fall upon them, and cover them from the
face of the Lamb. Gold is profitable, having for this life the own necessary
uses; But Apoc. 6. 18
harken to him who has to give thee fine gold tried by the fire, even that
better and enduring substance, Luc. 10. 22
which cannot be taken from thee again. So as the Lord led his people of old
from things temporal, to things spiritual. and from types to truth: so let
him take us by the hand, and by him let us be led from these earthly things, to
spiritual things. And from the things of this life, to the consideration and
earnest desire of the better things of that life to come.

There is another word also to be marked here, There fell out many changes
which were grievous to this people, their own sins bred them great disquiet.
As change in their policy, desolation in their cities, and great change in the
face of their Church, and upon their Priesthood. And when their Temple and
Priesthood was restored again, it was a grief to such as remembered the days
of old, to see the last no ways answerable to the glory and beauty of the
first. This doctrine therefore proponed by the Prophet, is to comfort them
against all such griefs, and to settle and establish their hearts against all
changes whatsoever, and it is this, cast the eyes of your faith toward JESUS
CHRIST the great High Priest to come, and there your souls shall find rest;
JESUS CHRIST who was represented in the figure of the Law, and is exhibit in
the fulness of 1 Timothy* ^. 15
time. As he came in the world for this end, to save sin* ners, so is he the
only stay of the Hearts of sinners, and in him is perfect remedy against all
those griefs and tentations that rise here in this world, by reason of sin to
oppress the hearts of sinners. Here all things are subject to change and
alteration, he that is knit to him, stays upon a rock, with a defiance of all
these worldly changes, although the world should be turned vpside down, and the
mou^tains rolled in the mids of the Psalm. 125* 1*
great deep, yet can he not be moved. In no thing that is here can there be
found co^tentment, in him the soul has full delight. And when a man is as it
were chased and hu^ted with griefs on all hands, with his many sins, with the
devils tentations, sometimes with the ingratitude and malicious doing of men. It
is even upon such a wearyed and distressed body that Christ calls, saying,
Come to me, and I will ease you and refresh Math. 11. 28
you: we would therefore hearken to the sweet call of JESUS CHRIST, and labor
to follow the Saints and servants of God, seeking only and finding this way
contentment to our souls. Here God by his Prophet wills his people to look
over all that black cloud of ceremonies, to JESUS CHRIST. I desire, says
Paul, to know nothing but JESUS CHRIST and him Phil. 1. 25
crucified, he is to me both in life and death an advantage. Whom have I, says
David, in Heaven but thee, Psalm. 73. 26.
and there is none upon earth that I desire besides thee. My flesh and my heart
fails, but God is the strength of my heart and portion for ever. Where shall
we go to? says Peter, have not thou the words of eternal John 6. 68 Luc. 2.
29.
life? What further can I wish, says old Simeon, having gotten Christ in the
arms of my body and soul both, and s^ene my salvation in him. Now let thy
servant go in peace. Therefore as this is noted to be the great solicitude and
care of the Church to inquire for him. Tell me, O thou whom my soul loves
Gant. 1. 7.
where thou feedest. So if thou will prove thy self a true member of this
Church, and be partaker of this only consolation, inquire for him, seek him
out while he may be found, be homely with him, seek Esaias 55. 6.
to be daily farther conjoined with him, in him shall ye find perfect ease
and contentment.

In these three Verses comes to be considered first the preface that is used,
next the speech which is delivered, containing so many excellent points,
concerning the Messiah, both in his person and office. In the Preface Iehoshua
and his fellows, they are bidden hearken and advert unto that which is to be
spoken. Iehoshua was immediately of before wakened to attention, when the Lord
having absolved him, gives his direction to him, speaking unto him with
vehement and earnest protestation. Now he is wakened to attention Verse 6
again, and bidden give ear to the grave speech following, concerning the
Messiah. Although this with the former be but one continued Sermon, he that
heard of before, has need to hear still, he that was wakened of before, has
need to be wakened again. And these grave and great mysteries uttered by the
mouth of God himself, they crave upon our part great attention. When God
speaks, our ears should psalm. 40. ^
be ready to hear. In the volume of thy Book, says David, it is written of
me. This volume of the Book of God, is the Law of God: The first words whereof
Deuteronomy* 5. 1 apoc* 2. 3
is, Hearken Israel. The seal of all the letters written to the seven Churches
is, Let him that has an ear hear what the spirit says to the Churches. No
man has his care so ready to hearken, but he has need continually to be put
upon, to waken him unto attention. And the means of this doing are many upon
the Lords part, his word a principal, his word sometimes Psalm. 8. 2
in the mouths of old men, sometimes in the mouths of young men to waken thy
hearing. Sometimes it comes with a mourning sound, sometimes with a joyful
sound to waken thy hearing. Sometimes Mat. 11. 7
it comes in a mystery, as a sealed letter, and sometimes the mystery is
revealed, and the book opened to waken thy hearing. Sometimes he that cries in
thy ear, takes a rod in his hand of some inward or outward affliction,
wherewith he choppes upon thee, to waken thy hearing, and sometimes there may
arise^ (for the sins of people) the strange noise, and horrible sound of the
Antichristian Locusts, to waken men's hearing, to bring the^ to remorse of their
former careless Apoc. 9* 3
hearing, and make them think and say; O how vile and blasphemous things are
we compelled with our cares to hear? who would not hearken to the voice of our
God in his pure and holy Word. The Psalm. 137. 3
people were thus way handled at the rivers of Babel, being forced to hear the
despightfull words of their enemies, reproaching their service of GOD, and
that because they did not hearken to the voice of their GOD, being at home in
their own Land. Thus it is manifest, that no man has his care so ready and
bent, but he has need still to be wakened and stirred up to hear what GOD
says to him. Moreover there is no man so perfect a Scholar in the School of
CHRIST, but has need daily to hear, and in hearing to learn als long as he
lives. And should not (as it is in this Text) the gravity of the matter, and
the great and weighty mysteries, coming from God to us, in the mouths of his
servants, provoke us diligently and attentively to hear? My heart, says
David, is indyting a good Psalm* 45. ^
matter, I speak of the things which I have made touching the King, hearken
says he, for my mouth will utter wisdom, and statutes divine. Hearken Psalm.
49. 1* 2. 3
says the Lord here to Iehoshua. And the argument is in the matter, proponed
in the words following, being a speech of the Messiah, of his person, his
office, his sacrifice, and the good that shall come thereby to his people.

This word of the Preface wakening Iehoshua to attention it would be marked;
first for descriuing of a great and common sin, so common, that who can Heb*
^. ^
say he is free of it. GOD has spoken, and his Son JESUS CHRIST by whom he
has spoken in these last times. has cried alowd unto us, but we have not
heard him. This is the depraved condition of the ear of all the sons of
Adam; The smallest whisperings Genesis (...)
of the Devil that old serpent, are good language to us, to which we harken
readily. But the loud cryings and callings of our God, are past with a deaf
care. And that to God we have not hearkened, is it not evident in this? no man
has turned out of his way. It may be well said, that it will be the
superscription of our plague and judgment when ever it shall come, because we
would not hear the Lord speaking to us. A sin which not only brings on plague
and judgment, but a thing worse nor the plague, even the stopping of the Lords
ear, that he will not hear thee calling to him in the Day of thy Judgment.
For albeit a man be plunged in a great deep, yet so long as he may have
commoning with God, and interchange speech with him, his estate can not be
counted hard. Jonas lying in the deep of the Sea, enclosed in the belly of the
whale, yet herein was his comfort, My voice came to God, and he heard me. But
they that wilfully close Jonas 2
their ear, and will not hear GOD when he speaks, they close upon
themselves the door of comfort, God has promised a meeting this way, They
shall cry to me even in the day of their trouble, Prove. 1. 28. Zach. 7. 13
but I will not hear them. Let us seek from him the touching and opening of
our ear, which has been so long closed. Ler us seek the reformation of our
ear, that we who have been swift to hear the Devil speaking to our great
hurt in soul and body, may once resolve to hear our God speaking to our well.
If thou be one of the Israel of God, remember it Deuteronomy. 5. 1
is written of thee in the first words of the book of God. Hearken Israel:
Sacrifice and burnt offering he psalm. 40. 6
craves not of thee. Happy is he that may come in and say* a bored and
prepared ear thou have given me to hear thy Law. It was a sign of a
perpetual servitude Exodus 21. 6
of old, the boring of the ear. So it is a sign of that service wherein is
true freedom and liberty, a ready and open ear to hear, and in hearing, to
follow the counsels and directions of God. And we that have so long sleeped,
and either mistaken or misregarded the voice of our God: Would God we once
learned the lessoun that old Eli gave to Samuel, that we might ^ Sam. 3. 9
come before him with this disposition, and say. Speak Lord, for we thy
servants are ready to hear.

Another use would be made of this discourse concerning the hearing of the
Lords voice, that seeing trouble and affliction is one of the Lords means, by
which he opens the ear: Then should it draw every man and woman to a careful
examination of them selves, how they have profited in the school of
affliction, and profited in this lesson of better and more careful hearing of
the Word of God. None want their own visitations and afflictions. And although
Gods end in inflicting be, as has been said, to open the ear to hear better,
yet it may be said of us all, we have come out of this furnace als deaf and
dull in hearing as ever we were of before. Pharaoh made many Exodus 8. 8 v. ^5.
27. cap. 10. v. 16. 17 cap. 12. 30, 31
fair promises in the days of his calamity, that if the judgment were
removed, he would hear better, and hearken to the voice of God in Moses,
bidding him let the people go. Yet the judgment being removed, he returned to
his own fashion, and counts as little of Gods Word, as he did before his
trouble* When troubles particular has not mended our hearing, it argues our
disease to be great, when the presages of such change and alteration, as may be
the removing of our candlestick, being before our eyes, yet mendeth not our
hearing, an argument of a farther confirmed disease. Shall none of these move
us? The psalm. 76. ^ 1 Samuel 2* 23 1 Samuel 3. ^ 1
Lord he can speak louder yet, and has a voice to put forth, that can make
the earth and the inhabitants thereof to tremble. The voice of Eli to his
sons was but soft, but God told him he had a voice to put forth, the sound
whereof would make all their ears to tingle. And as the Disciples, who in
their drowsines, would not be wakened with their masters voice, were wakened
with the staves and swords of their enemies: Math. 26. 27
So where the sound of the word has past* as a base thing, and when all Gods
doing has not mended men's hearing, what wonder although the time come, when he
that spoke as a Lamb, shall roar as a Lion. And when the Lion roares, the
beasts of the Amos 3. 8
forest tremble. And that the Lord so put forth his voice in his Judgment, as
no flesh shall be able to repel the sound of it. Who can expect otherwise?

There is a sort of hearers, who in their hearing are so dainty, whose ears
are so itching, and are so continually attending novelty, that if they hear
not each day a new tune, a new form, some new and uncouth point of Doctrine,
at least delivered in an new and uncouth form: They weary of hearing, and have
no pleasure in it, to whom let this serve for answer. There are in the Word
many repetitions of one and the selfsame thing, and they are not idle, nor in
vain* For 1. the repetitions of the 1
Word serve to help thy understanding, and confirm thy knowledge. 2. Although
thy knowledge 2
and understanding were good, yet is not thy memory weak and ill, able enough
to retain ill, but to let good things slip through. The repetition therefore
of the Word serves to help thy memory, and strengthen the same. 3. Albeit
thou would say, I 3
understand well enough, and my memory is good enough, yet who is able to say,
my affection is good enough, and the obedience of my will is good enough. And
als long as they are not conform, repetition of the same points of the Word is
needful, and thy affections has need daily to be beaten by the same hammer of
the Word, till they be brought under obedience. But for these who weary in
hearing because of repetition, and would each day hear some new thing, Let
this be an answer. Albeit thou hear every day that same thing, and this day
that same thing which thou heard the last day, yet thou hear every day a new
thing, insomuch as at every hearing thou gettest sometimes a new exhortation to
an old virtue, sometimes a new threatening for an old sin, a new advertisement
to learn the old lessoun of repentance. All which shall so be put in the
accounts of God against thee as new, that if thou shall Heb. 6. 7. 8
remain the old man, every hearing bringing on a new hardness, shall induce
a new conviction, and procure at Gods hands, an new and further Judgment.

To this attention and hearing are called not only Iehoshua himself, but the
text says, his fellows that sat before him, for they are men wondered at. By
the fellows of Iehoshua may be understood the whole Church and people of God,
for all, both Priest and people are called to be auditors of the voice of God,
and of this Sermon, the subject whereof is the Messiah, in him ye know there is
no exception of persons. There is not one way for the Priest, and another way
for the people: But one common way of salvation Deuteronomy. 10. 17 Act. 10. 3. 4 Romans
^. 11 1 pet. 1. 17 Jude 3
to all, and that is in the same Messiah. The Priest is said to hear two
ways. First, hear the Word from GOD, as that Word by which he 1.
looks to be safe himself. Secondly, so hear 2.
from GOD, as he who must be Gods mouth again to the people, to deliver to
them evidently and faithfully his Oracles. The people are so to hear and
embrace, as there is no way of safety to soul and body, but this which is
proponed from the Mouth of God. Let not therefore the Priests say, It is enough
for us if we instruct the people, and tell them what they should do; no, thou
must sit down and learn, and hear thy self, if thou thy self would be
saved. Neither let the people say, Let the Priests or the Preachers who have
their maintenance thereby, seek the knowledge of these mysteries. If thou be
seeking eternal life, to thee it is spoken. Search the Scriptures, it is they
that bear testimony of JESUS John 3. 39 acts 17. 11
CHRIST, and in him only is life to be sought and found.

By the fellows of Iehoshua may be understood the rest of the Priests that
were fellow laborers with him; And as they come in called to hearing under
this style and title of Iehoshua his fellows, it is to tell us, that albeit
Iehoshua was high Priest, and in that place a Type of JESUS CHRIST to come, yet
he was not set there, that in pride he should lift up himself above his
brethren: but remember they were fellows in that same work of God with him.
The Popish pride is Deuilish, his usurped singularity he has not of Peter,
whose successor he will needs be, he calls himself 1 peter 5. 1
a fellow elder with the rest. And the Pope will be a god on earth, to give Law
to all the rest. Albeit it may be thought meet for orders cause that some
preside in the reformed Church of God, yet they would remember, Presbyters are
to them as the rest of the Priests were to Iehoshua, of whom it is said, thou
and thy fellows. And three things in this kind of superiority 1
would ever be eschewed. 1. Pride, for God sets 1 Timothy* 3. 5
up no man, that he should swell in conceit, that is the 2
brood of the Devil. 2. Tyranny or dominion over 1 pet. 5* 3
their brenhren and the Lords inheritance. Thirdly, 3.
idleness, for they are not set there to look to themselves, and the enlarging
of their own estate, but to look to the flock and people, which JESUS CHRIST
Acts 20* 28
has redeemed by his Blood. That from the Preface we may come to the words
themselves, mark the last words, wherein these fellows of Iehoshua are called
men of wonder, or men wondered at. If ye retain the first interpretation,
understanding by the fellows of Iehoshua, all the faithful people of God, then
is there here a certain description of the Church and people of God, used
also in other places of Scripture. Esaias has it in his eight Chapter, 18 verse.
Behold, I Esaias 8. 18
and the children which the Lord has given me, are as signs and wonders in
Israel. And the people and children of God are called men of wonder, or wondered
at, that is, men contemned and despised of the World; yea they are wondered at
in their conversation 1 Cor. 1. 28
and doing, as mad men that should follow a course by the rest of the World,
and not to go on with 1 Pet. 4. 4
them, drinking in all sort of sin with greedines. Heb. ^1. 24. 25. 26
Moses in leaving the honors and pleasures of the Court of Pharaoh, and
choosing rather to be afflicted with the people of God, was he not herein a
man greatly wondered at? For men to account all folly in respect of JESUS
CHRIST, is not this to the worldlywise Phil. 3. 8
a matter of wonder? The mortification of the flesh, The contrition and dolor
of the heart for sin, Romans 6. 13 psalm. 51. 17 psalm* 6. 6
The tears of repentance, are they not to the prophan of the World matters of
wonder? It is indeed in it self a matter wonderful, coming from the rich
mercy Romans 11* 33
and bounty of God, which indeed of us is to be admired that any should be
taken out of the rotten race of Adam, and entered in this way that leads to the
Kingdom of Heaven. It is unto the profane of the World a matter of wonder to
behold this separation; not that herein they observe Gods goodness. but that all
things seem strange to them which savor not of the flesh and of this present
World. But let each one here, as it were, stand wondering at others. The
natural and fleshly man wondering at the doings of the Children of God. The
renewed man that has received illumination from above, wondering to see men
with such pleasure and delight, run upon their own everlasting destruction.
The day of decision is coming, when these who were here in the eyes of the
World, men wondered at, and of contempt shall be made in the eyes of these same
men, men wondered at for the greatness of that glory which they shall enjoy. And
the comparing of these two together shall be one of the stripes of the wicked,
and a degree of their torment. Are not these the men whom we so despised, and
in contempt wondered at? and now how wonderful is the glory and blessed estate
which they are brought unto? The Priests and they that serve at the ^ Cor. 4. 13
Altar of God, may be here also in a special manner called men wondered at.
For if contempt follow the general calling of Christianity, surely in the
highest degree it follows that special calling. And if ye regard the subject
of their ministry: It is the matter of wonder to man and Angel. The substance
of all, both in old and new testament, being these same points of the mystery
of godliness, which Paul reckons forth in the first of Timothy. Of the which
subject, because 2 Timothy* 3. 16
the verses following speak clearly and comfortably, Let us having now but
shortly past over this Preface, come to speak of them.

This speech concerning Messiah his coming and suffering, and the fruits of
it: He begins with a Behold: Behold, I will bring forth my Servant the
Branch. Esaias speaking of his Conception and Birth, Esaias 7. 14
begins his speech also with a Behold: Behold a Virgin shall conceive and
bear a Son. The Angel of Luc. 2. 9. 10
the Lord sent to the sheepheards to declare his Birth, mentions the same
with a Behold. Behold I bring unto you tidings of great Joy, which shall be to
all people: for unto you is borne this day in the City of David, a Savior
which is CHRIST the Lord. When old Simeon, who waited for the Consolation of
Israel, got CHRIST in his arms, he spoke of him to his Parents Luc. 2. 34.
Joseph and Mary thus: Behold this Babe is appointed for the falling and rising
of many in Israel. When John the Baptist his forerunner sees him approach
unto him, he wakens the hearts of all that were there to an earnest
consideration of his Person and office with a Behold. Behold the Lamb of God
which takes away the sins of the World. All this John 1. 29
is to signify as concerning the Messiah these things. First, that his sending
in the World, his Incarnation 1
and the manner of it, his execution of his Priestly office, being both the
Priest, and the sacrificed Lamb: for the Father says to him, Thou art to me a
Priest for ever, after the order of Melchisedec. And ye have Psalm. 1 10. 4
heard John say of him, that he is the Lamb that takes away the sins of the
World. All these were a disclosing and revelation to the World of the greatest
mystery that ever was. And therefore the Spirit by his Prophets and servants
cries so often. Behold it, look to it, and consider of it. This mystery
although it began to be revealed to Adam in that first promise of the seed of
the Woman to tread down the Genesis 3. 15
head of the serpent: Yet in regard of the fuller manifestation, it remained
then but a secret. This mystery all the time of the Legal service, and
obscure ceremonies Apoc 5. 4
thereof it was but as a sealed book. And as John says, when he saw there
was none to open the sealed book, he weeped, till the Lamb came. So all
mankind might have weeped for ever, if the Lamb had not come in the fulness of
time and opened this Book, and revealed this mystery. That now that same may
be the song of the Church and people of GOD which ye have in the Apocalypse 5,
Chapter. 13. verse. poc. 5. 13
Blessing, and glory, and honor, and power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever. Secondly in this Book, behold 2
we are sent to look to the degrees of the revelation of this mystery, his
Conception marvailous, his Nativity although in a base place, yet glorious: The
Angels of Heaven singing about the same, his office, my Math. 2. 1 Luc. 2. 13,
14
Servant, says God; The Servant of the Father in a special kind of Service.
his suffering, he was that engraven Stone: The fruit of his suffering, I will
take away the iniquity of my people in one day. Thirdly 3
by this behold, we are led in all this Mystery as in a clear mirror to
look and consider 1. the deepnes 1.
of the Wisdom of God, in finding out such a way of man's safety, which was the
wonder of Man and Angel. 2. The deepnes of the love of God to man, 2.
whereof there could be no such demonstration as Iud. 3* 16
this: To give his only begotten Son to be his ransom. 3. The deepnes of
the Fountain of the refreshing 3.
Zach. 13. 1
mercies of God, opened in the House of David for uncleanness. Here is first
matter of reproof 1.
to us all, that we being called to behold this great Mystery, kept close in
former time, we care no more for it, nor account no more of it, then if it were
a common 2.
and base matter. 2. As GOD has proceeded and gone on in the degrees of this
revelation, so the World has gone on in the degrees of ignorance and contempt:
And so old Simeon his prophecy will prove true, This Babe is appointed for
wrack and falling of Luc. ^. (...)
many, and that upon their own default. Thirdly, we 3*
being so often called upon by the Spirit, to behold this great Mystery; And in
this Mystery revealed so many great things, ye must not think that we are
called to an idle contemplation and beholding: But we must so behold him, and
look to him, as we may be blessed in our sight. He is in his Temple, stand not
amassed to Luc. 2. 29
behold him afar off. But if thy soul with Simeon wait for the consolation
of God, come near, take him in thy arms, embrace him by faith, so shall thy
soul go in peace when God calls for it, thou shall be blessed in thy life,
blessed in thy death, and blessed for ever after this. For they that once
truly apprehend him, he will never part with them till he bring them to that
same place whereof he spoke to the thief that hang on his right hand, even the
Paradise Luc. 23. 43 ^ Cor. 1. 23 John 0. 27
of God. He is in the preaching of the Word, as it were, lifted on his Cross.
Behold him not afar off, but come near hand, put thy finger in the hole of
his side, in the print of the nail: that is, let thy soul by Faith so rest
upon his mercies and passion, that thou John 20. 28
may say, My Lord, my God, my Savior. He is among you, not that ye should be
alienated from him, standing John 3. 23
afar off as idle gasess, but come near hand, and lay thy head in his
bosom, I mean not bodily, 1
but spiritually this way. First let thy faith rest upon 2
him as the perfect sacrifice for thy sins. Secondly, let thy Will, Reason,
Judgment and all, be subject to 3
him. Bring all captive under his obedience. Thirdly, in the day of whatsoever
grief, lay thy head in his bosom, that is, rest upon him. Is thy waters like
the waters of Mara, bitter, here a tree, his cross, behold Exodus 15. 25
it not afar off, but take it, and use it. Cast it in with thy trouble,
season it with the meditation of his suffering, and thy waters shall become
sweet unto thee. In speaking now of the Messiah, the Lord gives unto him two
Names; first he calls him his Servant. Secondly 1
he calls him the Branch. The first Name, 2
the Name of a Servant, is in diverse places of Scripture Esaias 11. 42
given to the Messiah. Esaias eleventh Chapter, 42. ver. 51. Of which Name given
to him, there is sundry reasons: First he is so called for his obedience, done 1
and performed to his Father. In servants obedience and sidelity is required,
The eyes of the servants, Psalm. 123* 2
(says David) are toward their Masters, to wait upon their will, and perform
their Commandments. No servant was ever found so faithful and Heb. 3. 2
obedient to his Master, As JESUS CHRIST this great Servant in the House of GOD
was to his Father obedient, he was even unto the death of the Genesis 22. 9
Cross. The obedience of Isaac is commended, that suffered himself without
resistance to be bound of his Father. But to JESUS CHRIST, of whom Isaac was
the Type, there needs no bonds. His Fathers will and pleasure was his meat and
drink, he knowing that it was his Fathers will that he should die for the
sins of his people, most willingly he went to John 4. 34
the Cross, and protested of his willingness, saying, No man takes my life
from me, but I lay it down John 10. 18
2
willingly. Secondly, he is called the Servant of God, in regard of the
assumption of the humane Nature in time, albeit the Son of GOD from all
eternity, yet made the Servant of GOD in time, because he Gal. 4. 4
was made man, made of a woman, and made under the Law. Thirdly, the Servant of
GOD, even for the 3
form and shape of a Servant, which he carried in the time of his exinanition
and lurking of his Divinity, of which Paul speaks clearly in the second to
the Philippians and 7. verse. And himself says, Matthew Phil. 2. 7 Math. 20.
28
20* Chapter, that he came not to be served, but to serve. This style given to
JESUS CHRIST would be considered of; first for our consolation, that we may
safely and with confidence commit our selves 1
unto him, who for our cause has undertaken such service, that although he be
now glorious in the Heavens, yet is not this a kind of Service for us, That he
interceedes for us, to whom we may boldly approach, having no need of the
service and intercession 2
of Saints. Secondly it serves for example to us, that we should learn of
Christ to serve, to be faithful, to be obedient, to submit our will to the
Will of God, to make his Word, and not our affections, the rule of our service.
And it is well said we are servants. 1
1. By the right of creation are we not servants to him, acts 17* 28*
of whom we have life and all things necessary. Secondly 2
we are servants by right of redemption, for we 1 pet* 1* 18. 19
being captive, the Son of God has redeemed us, not with the ransom of gold,
silver, or corruptible things, but with his own precious Blood. Thirdly, 3
we are servants by right of poverty. Nothing brought Job 1. 21 1 Timothy 6. 7
genesis 18. 20* 21
we with us in this World, all that we have is Gods. Jacob vowed service to
God, if so be he would give 4
him food and raiment. Fourthlie we are servants by right of infirmity, we
were not able to help our selves. CHRIST is become our Counselor, he has
learned us what to do, he has instructed us in that apo^. 3. 18
which is meet for soul and body. Let us seek to serve and obey him.

The second name or title given to the Messiah, he is called the Branch. He is
so called* having respect to the former Prophecies and promises that were made
of him, that it may be known he is no other but the same that was
fore-prophecied and promised of before, who was to spring and come of David.
Jeremy 23 Thus is it said of him: Behold the days come, says I^em. 23. ^
the Lord, that I will raise unto David a zealous Branch, a King that shall
reign and prosper, and shall execute Justice and Judgment upon earth, he
shall save Israel, and shall be called the Lord our righteousness. The Esaias 53. 2
Prophet Esaias in his 53 Chapter, has these words of him: He shall grow up as
a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground. The meaning is, When the
family and House of David is become so weak, Esaias 11. 1
that it is as a dry stock, when all appearance of springing or succession that
way is gone, then the Lord mindful of his promise, and able to perform that
which he has said, makes of the same dry stock this Branch to spring, and
makes him as concerning the flesh coming of the Royal race, the most
comfortable King that ever the World saw.

But to consider a little of this word the Branch, he is so called for these
reasons. First, as a Branch is but 1.
a tender and fragill thing, so was he borne in infirmity, under great peril.
There was no place to lay him Luc. 2 7 Math* 2. 3
in but the Crib, and there is he not free of danger, but his life incontinent
sought. Secondly, as sometime 2.
contrary our expectation, of a dry stock or root a branch will bud out, that
will flourish and be green: so did he contrary the expectation of man, bud out
of that dried stock of the house of David, a green and a 3.
flourishing Branch. Thirdly, because in him, as in a green and flourishing
branch, there does flourish and spring the flowrs and the fruits of al
excellent virtues. And this the Prophet Esaias told of him in his eleventh Esaias
11* 2
Chapter; The Spirit of the Lord shall rest on him. and it shall flourish this
way: The Spirit of wisdom, the Spirit of understanding, the Spirit of
counsel, the Spirit of truth, the Spirit of peace, and all such excellent
virtues. Fourthly, because as a branch 4
that has life in it, grows and takes increasse from day to day. So this
Branch coming forth in the World, Luke says of him, As he grew in stature,
so he grew in wisdom, and knowledge, in grace with God Luc 2. 40
1
and man. Fifthly, although he came out as a small Branch, and was in the eyes
of men, of no reputation, yet of a Branch is he become a great tree; and we as
dry and withered branches, are to be transplanted out of the old stock, and by
faith be ingraft in him, from whom we draw spiritual life and nourishment. So
says he himself John 15. I am the Vine, and ye are John 15. 56
the branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
fruit.

In this style given to him, and that the Lord brings him out as a Branch,
ye may learn, that if ye look to the manner of his springing, if ye look
to his outward form, if ye consider the growth and incresse that he took, if
ye consider what he calls us John 18. 36
to, to be ingraft in him, that we may be fruitful in our soul; then shall ye
easily sea that his kingdom is not Heb. 1, 2 Psalm. 3. 8
of this World. Although he be the Heir of all, and his Father has said to
him, Ask of me, and I will give thee the ends and coasts of the earth for
thine in heritance, yea there is no creature can exeeme it self from his
subjection. Yet the kingdom that he came to administer here, is not earthly,
but spiritual, the manner of administration is not earthly, but spiritual,
the desires that he would waken in his own, is Col. 3. 1
not of earthly, but of spiritual things. The reward that he brings with him
to his own is not earthly, nor of corrupted things, but an incorruptible Crown
Apoc. 2. 8. (...) 17. 26. 27 Apoc. 3. 5. 12 21
of everlasting glory, which shall never fade away.

Uses to be made hereof are these. 1. a foolish and 1
fleshly conceit of the restitution of their earthly kingdoms, Acts 1. 16 Luc.
24. 11
blinded the eyes of the Jews, and made them mistake the Messiah: But now the
mystery of the kingdom, being so clearly revealed, our blindness must be
far beyond theirs, if we should think that Christ's coming is to establish
an earthly or worldly Monarchy, or to give his servants over Kings earthly and
temporal jurisdiction. Secondly, although CHRIST 2
ought to be followed and waited upon for bodily provision (for the eyes of
all things look to him, and Psalm* 145. 15
it is he who satisfies them.) yet that is not the chief thing which is to
be sought in him. It is true that CHRIST allured many to follow after him by
these temporal gifts, some he fed, and some he healed. But the end was, that
from the earthly, they should be led to the heavenly, and be moved to seek
of him a better thing. In the order of the petitions of that perfect Math. 8. 9
Luc. 11. 2
form of Prayer which he has given us. He knowing that we are earthly,
yields as it were this far unto us, that the first petition for our selves
is for our daily bread, but will not have us therewith to be content: But
remembering he is a spiritual King, seek the blessing of the Kingdom, seek
spiritual grace to thy soul. And so he has learned thee in the next place to
say, Lord forgive me my sins. Thirdly, he 3
being a spiritual King, dispensing grace spiritual to his subjects: Then
comparison being made, there is no choice, but he is more worthy to be
followed then any whatsoever. Moses was a Prince, mighty in deed and in word*
worthy to be followed, for in the Acts 7* 22
following him, the people were easily fed, they neither tilled, nor labored,
but were fed with Manna: but what was that? Our Master CHRIST in his own words
will tell you, your fathers did eat Manna, and they died: But he gives unto us
himself, the Bread John 6. 49 John 6. 35
of Life, of which who so eats, shall live for ever. Jacob, the father of the
Patriarchs, a great Prince; So that the woman of Samaria speaking to JESUS
CHRIST, asks the question, Art thou greater then Jacob? what did he? he gave
us this Well, yes, he John 4. 12 John 4. 14
is greater: for I have, says he, water to give: of which who so drinks,
shall not thirst again.

Secondly, this point would yet be further considered CHRIST the Branch, for as
herein is set out the manner of his coming forth, growth, incresse and
perfection: So has this been also the manner of the beginning, spreading and
growing of his Kingdom upon the face of the earth, yea, and in the hearts and
souls of his own. Has he not out of a dry stock, and of no appearances,
raised instruments, that of small beginnings have brought his kingdom to a
mighty growth? And how from small beginnings, the Evangell, which may be called
the Chariot of this King, carrying him to Nations and Countries, has gone
through, is more then evident. And in the hearts of Math. 13. 31 Marc. 4. 30
Luc. 13. 19
his people is not the first beginning of the kingdom of Heaven, comparable to
one grain of mustard seed? but afterward grows as it were, to a great tree
so fast rooted, that the hand of the Devil cannot pull it forth again. This
is a point serving to these uses. First, think not that it is a kingdom that
can be overturned 1
or overthrown. No, although it were brought in appearance to a very stock, yet a
branch shall ay bud forth and flourish, even as of old he made the blood of the
Martyrs, the seed of the Church. Secondly, 2
nourish in thy heart the small seeds of grace, and they were als small as the
smallest grain of faith, of love, water thy heart now and then with the tears
of repentance, seek from God the dew of Heaven, the former and the latter
rain, and thou shall find thy small beginnings shall come to a good
perfection. Thirdly, 3.
seeing this King is so marvailous a worker, that out of a dry stock he can
make a flourishing branch to spring* Let no greatness of trouble, or tentation,
make thee ever to despair of him, although thy eye can not perceive by what
means thy deliverance should come: Jonas 1. 17.
He can make a Whale wait upon Jonas. He can make a bush catch a Ram by the
horns in the day of Abraham's Genesis 22. 13
great perplexity. He can open Hagars eyes in the wilderness to see a
fountain of water, when she had Genesis 21. 19
thrown away the child* desparing of his life; he that made his Son spring of
a dry stock* can make that same rock yield waters of consolation for thee. His
power is infinite, he is able, his wisdom is infinite, he can find out
means anow, his love is infinite, whereby he is exceeding willing to help all
that seek unto him. Als long as these pillars stand (and they stand
unchangeable) Let us never give over, nor despair, but let us uphold and
underprop our faith in holy patience, to await the time of Gods comfort and
deliverance. 4^
Fourthly, this Branch is become a tree, and in this tree we must be ingraft,
that is, by faith we must be imped in him, from whom drawing life, it is known
this way, by our flourishing in all sort of Christian ^ Pet. 1. 5
virtue. Of this flourishing the Apostle Peter makes mention in his first
Epistle, 1, chapter. 5, verse. Whereof it is evident, that a Christian
(respecting all persons and in all estates) be in what condition he will, his
faith ever flourishes, and brings forth some fruit. if he look to God, his
faith flourishes, and brings Tit 2. 12
forth godliness, if he look to himself either in prosperity or adversity his
faith flourishes in prosperity 1 These. 5. 8 1 Pet. 5. 8 Heb. 10. 36
bringing forth temperance, and in adversity bringing forth patience. If he
regard his neighbors, they are either such as are more nearly conjoined to
him, being of the same family of faith, and here his faith flourishes, and
brings forth brotherly kindness, or John 13. 34 John 15* 17 1 John 4. ^1
then they are more estranged from him, being not of that society: and yet here
his faith flourishes, bringing forth even toward them Charity. He that this
way Math. 5. 44 Luc. 6. 27
flourishes, he is imped in the Stock JESUS CHRIST: he that flourishes not,
he is (says the Apostle) blind 2 Pet. 1. 9.
and cannot see far off. He has forgotten that he was purged from his old
sins.

THE SECOND SERMON.
ZECHARIAH, 3. Chap. 9. and 10. verses. 9 For behold the Stone that I have laid
before Joshua: upon one stone shall be seven eyes: behold I will engraue the
grauing thereof, says the Lord of hosts, and I will remove the iniquity of
that land in one day. 10 In that day, says the Lord of hosts, shall ye call
every man his neighbor under the Vine, and under the fig tree.
IN these last two Verses are set down five excellent points concerning the 1
Messiah. First a new Name given unto him, and it is a name of strength and
firmness, whereas the former two appeared names of weakness, a Branch, and a
Servant. This is a name of strength and solidity, he is a Stone, and a Stone 2
laid down by the hand of GOD himself. Secondly a new picture and prefiguring
of this Stone: upon this Stone shall be 7 eyes. 3. A proper word of the sufferings
3
of JESUS CHRIST, whereas his father is brought in saying, And I will ingraue
the grauing thereof, says the Lord of hosts. 4, The comfortable fruit and 4.
effect of his passion, in the remission of sins. I will says the Lord,
remove the iniquity of the Land in one day. 5. The great tranquillity and
peaceable estate 5.
that the subjects of this Kingdom shall enjoy under this gracious King, set
down in a borrowed speech: In that day shall every man call his neighbor
under the Vine, and under the fig tree. The first point is of this new Name
given to the Messiah; he is now called a Stone, and a Stone laid by Gods own
hand. A Stone upon which whosoever is not solidely builded, he shall break the
neck of his soul, and perish eternally. This name was given to him of before
by Esaias 28. 16
Esaias in his 28 Chapter, Behold, says the Lord, I lay in Sion, a Stone a tried
Stone, a sure foundation, he that believes shall not make haste. And the
Apostle Peter in his first Epistle and second Chapter, brings 1 pet. 2. 6 Math.
21. 41 Acts 4. 11
in the Lord speaking of him Behold in the same manner, Behold I lay in Sion a
chief corner Stone, elect and precious, he that believes in him, shall not be
confounded. This Stone Gods hands laid before Iehoshua, to signify that the
ground and foundation of the 1 Cor. 3. 11
heavenly Jerusalem, is JESUS CHRIST? 2. He laid him before Iehoshua the high
Priest, who served in the Leviticall sacrifice. First to signify, that the eye
of Heb. 11* 3*9
their faith should be perpetually toward him. 2. That all that service and
daily shedding of blood should so respect him, that unless it be builded on
this ground the Messiah the Lamb to be slain, his Blood that is only able to
pacify the wrath of God, if all be not laid upon this Altar, and upon this
stone which God himself has laid down, it is all but foolish and in vain.

We must here a little examine the reasons of this Name given to the Messiah
both in the Old and New Testament, which may be taken up this way* First, he is
called a Stone, because he is the maine scope of all Scripture: whatsoever was
formerly prefigured to the Patriarchs by stones or a stone, is in him truly
fulfilled and accomplished. We read in the 28 Chapter Genesis 28. 11
of Genesis, of a stone that the Patriarch Jacob, being weary in his Journey,
laid his head upon, and sleeping there, he saw that heavenly vision of the
Ladder, the one end whereof touching the ground, the ^oppe of it reached to the
Heaven, whereupon he saw ascending and descending the Angels of God. This Stone
is CHRIST, unto whom we are sent in all our wearines Psalm. 37. 5 prove. 16. 3
Math. 16. 25
to lay our head upon him, and there to rest. Cast thy care upon God, and he
shall provide for thee, commit thy way to him. Although this Stone unto the
World appear to be but a hard resting place, yet there is soft resting upon
it. He that casts his care upon him, and reposeth upon this Stone, he shall
find him first a ready 1.
access to heaven, a Ladder whose top reaches to Heb. 10. ^*
Heaven, CHRIST himself is that Ladder. Secondly, 2.
he that casts his care upon him, and reposeth upon Heb. 1. 14.
him, shall find the Angels ready to minister unto him. Thirdly, he that
rests this way, and casts his care upon him, shall find by him strength to
prevail against 3.
all the mutations and tedious things of the world. It is a word serving 1. to
slay in us faithless care. 2. to direct ^en. (...). 2^ Math. 6. 25^ Math. 11.
(...)
us the right way to seek rest and ease to our souls against both tormenting
cares, and cruciating fears. And 3* here is our great comfort, that the
writing on this Stone, are even these same words of God, spoken to Jacob in his
wearisome Journey: for he that lays his head this way, and commits
himself to God through JESUS CHRIST, he shall even read upon this Stone these
comfortable words: I am with Genesis 2^. 1^*
thee, I will keep thee, I will not leave thee, until I have done that which
I have spoken unto thee*

A second Stone we read of in Exodus 17 Chapter, (...). 17. (...)
when Moses praying for Israel, that they might prevail against Amalek, he
being wearyed, and his hands waxing heavy, they took a Stone, and put it under
him, and he sat thereon: And Aaron and Hur supporting his hands, his hands
were steadfast until the going down of the Sun. This Stone has also a
representation of JESUS CHRIST, who is called here, The Stone that the Lord
has laid. Our prayers must be upon this Stone, founded upon this ground, upon
Jesus Christ his Commandment, his merit, or else (...) 14. (...)*
they are but weak and feeble, and can do no good. If our faith take fast hold
on him, and our hearts be lifted toward him, then do we prevail against
Amalek, the devil, the world, and the flesh. But when our faith waxes feeble,
and our heart falls downward, then do they prevail against us. And of the
example of Moses we are to make these uses. First, to consider that by reason
of the great burden of flesh and corruption which we carry, we are subject to
great weariness in the best and most spiritual exercises. Heb. 1^. (...)
Secondly, means of wakening and stirring up would 2
be used. Aaron at the one hand, and Hur at the other: a Sermon this day,
another the next day: the Word at the one hand, the Sacramentat the other:
hearing sometime, conference at another. And all such means would be used to
hold up the heart that grows faint Heb. 10. 24
and feeble in spiritual exercises. Thirdly, although 3
there be much weariness, many imperfections, great infirmity, yet here is
the supply of all: Art thou set upon the right Stone, upon Jesus Christ? he
shall make thee overcome: it may be with fighting and combat, even to the going
down of the Sun, to the end of thy life, yet in the end thou shall prevail.
And as the going down of the Sun is Joyful to the man that has been wearied
in the fields with labor all day long, for then he goes to his rest: So shall
the Io^ ^. 7^
Lord make the latter end of his own joyful, after their wearisome combat in
this life, they shall then Apoc. 14. (...)
rest from their labors, and be in glory for ever.

A third stone or rock we read of, Number. 20. chap. In the day when the people
wanted waters, and were ready Number. 20* ^
to perish for thirst, Moses striking that rock with his rod, forthwith there
came abundance of water, whereof the people drank, and were satisfied. we cannot
err in the signification of this stone: for the Apostle Paul in 1 Cor. 10 cha.
gives us the same in expres words, affirming 1 Cor. 1^. ^
that this stone or rock is Jesus Christ. And hereby 1.
are we informed of these things, 1. that al mankind should have perished for
ever: And for them not a drop of refreshment could have been found, if the
Lord himself had not demonstrate and pointed out 2.
this Rock, even JESUS CHRIST his Son. Secondly, John 7. 38
from him flows rivers of spiritual waters, even abundance of consolations, to
refresh the weary heart. Thirdly, as Moses got no water from the Rock, till he
3
touched it with his Rod: So must thou stretch out the Rod of thy Faith, and
therewith touch CHRIST, or else thou can draw no virtue from him: although Luc.
8. 46*
he be a Rock for abundance of spiritual waters in him, yet he is not so
called, as though he were hard and intractable, and that it were hard to get
any good from him. No, he is meek and gentle, easy to be entreated. Though he
be a Rock, yet the smallest touch of Faith will draw healing virtue from him.
Although Luc. 8. ^4 Math. 12. 20 Esaias 42. 1
the Rod of thy Faith be weak and small like a bruised reed, yet he will not
break the bruised reed, nor extinguish the smoking flax. Stretch out thy
withered Math. 12. 13
hand, and touch him with thy weak faith, thou shall draw waters of
refreshment and comfort from him.

Fourthly, we read in the 4 Chapter of Iehoshua, of (...) 4. 5
a heap of stones which Joshua set up in a testimony that Israel had past
with dry foot through Iordane. These stones are also a representation of JESUS
CHRIST tovs, who is set up as a great sign of God to us, by whom we have
passage to eternal life, by him we shall escape all dangers, by him shall we
go with dry foot, without fear, through the valley of Psalm. 23. 4
death, and shall be brought to that Land of rest, even that promised Land. Fear
not (says he) little flock. It is my Fathers will to give you the Kingdom.
Luc. 12. 31


Fifthly, we read in the first book of Samuel and 17 Sam. 27. 49
Chapter, of a stone wherewith David killed Goliath. This stone also has a
representatio^ of JESUS CHRIST psalm 68. 18 Ephesians. 4. 8
who has overthrowen the Devil, led captivity captive, bound that strong one:
And it is he in whose strength we are able to prevail.

Sixthly, in the second Chapter of Daniel we read Dan. 2. 45.
of a stone was hewed out of the mountain without hands, wherein there is
proper resemblance of his nativity and manner of bringing forth in the World,
H^b. 7. ^ Math. 1. 2^.
being brought from the Womb of the Virgin, without the company of man, by
the work of the Holy Ghost.

It is not my purpose to digress. Let it therefore be sufficient that all
these places have been mentioned to make out this first reason, wherefore
JESUS CHRIST is called a Stone: Even, because in him is truly fulfilled all
which by a stone or stones in the old Testament was prefigured.

The second reason why JESUS CHRIST is called a Stone, is, Because he is that
Rock upon which his Church is founded and builded. This the Apostle tells us
in the first to the Corinthians and 3 Chapter: Another foundation can no man
lay, then that 1 Cor. ^. 1^
which is already laid, that is, JESUS CHRIST. Let the Papists abuse as they
please, it is of himself he means when speaking to Peter, he says, Thou art
Peter, and Math. 16. 1^
upon this Rock, that is, upon me that am the Rock, will I build my Church,
upon which she being builded, the gates of Hell shall not prevail against her.
The words of the confession of Peter referres us to CHRIST himself, Thou art
says he, the Son of the living God. Math. ^6. 16
Upon him the Son of the living God, who is God, made man in time, is founded
and builded the ^ Tim. 3. 16
Church. It is of him that these words of David are to Psalm. 11^. 22
be understood in the 118 Psalm. The stone which the builders refused, is made
the head of the corner. He is D^n. 2. 45
in his birth Daniel his Stone, hewn out of the mountain without hands. In
his passion he is this graven Stone of Zachary, and all full of eyes. In his
resurrection he is Esaias his Stone, a Stone laid in Sion, that whosoever ^say
2^. 16
believes in him shall not be confounded. He is to us the rock of our faith and
that fundament whereupon the true Church, and every member thereof is built.

This reason would be well considered, whereby 1. ^.
ye may perceive that this has been of before, the craft and malice of the
Devil, to make them who by profession were the builders of the House of GOD,
misknow the foundation, and neglect the principal Stone of the building. Was
not Caiphas and his Priests, the professed builders for the time, and what did
they? they rejected with despite, and cast away Math. 27. 16
Jesus Christ, so that Barrabbas was of more account Romans 1. 4
in their eyes then he. But in his resurrection he was lifted up and declared
to be the chief Stone of the building. This same craft and malice of the
devil does still rage in the world. Is it not to be seen in the Antichristian
Church, making them to reject and cast aside the chief Stone and foundation of
the building, even Jesus, and to build upon the foolish inventions and
traditions of men, a building although it appear to rise high, yet shall it be
Babell, it shall come to confusion. Let it be far from us to think that
flesh and blood can be sufficient for the Church to build upon. There is no
foundation but this pointed by the Finger of God, Behold the Stone that I have
laid, the same is Jesus Christ the Lord.

Secondly, as the Church in general is a building 2
set upon this Stone and foundation, so every member of the Church is a
builder. And he would take heed how he builds. The instrument of thy building
is Faith, he cannot build that wants Faith, having Faith, build upon the
right ground* let thy Faith take hold of Jesus Christ. The more thou growest in
Faith, the faster thou art built upon this foundation. And therefore Jude
says, Edify your selves in your most holy Jude v. 20 2 pet. ^. 5
faith. We are therefore to study to the daily incres of faith, and adorn our
faith with Christian virtues, and so are we well built our selves, and by our
example we also edify others. Thirdly, this point would also be considered, 3
telling us how sure the foundation is, and how strongly he builds, who
builds upon it. Our Master expresses the surenesse of this foundation, and
of a man's estate built this way, when he says, that the gates of hell shall
not prevail against him. And 1. sin ^
that draws to hell, shall not prevail to thy condemnation, Math. 16, (...)
for there is no sin that can divide thee from the foundation, Jesus Christ. 2.
the devil, the master torturer 2
of hell, he shall not prevail against thee, for he Romans 8. 35*
is stronger who holds thee, and upon whom thou Math* 1^. (...)*
art built, then the Devil is, who would pull thee out of his hands. 3. Hell
it self although it enlarge the 3
mouth, and it be open wide, yet that is no thing ^say (...)*
against thee, for this building is a building of honor* and not of confusion.

It would be also here remembered, that the Lord JESUS who is the foundation of
this building in the 6. Luc. 6. (...). 49
Chapter of Luke, he says, that in hearing ye are building. And as there are
two sort of hearers, so is there two sort of builders. And as they differ in
the foundation, so the day shall try every man's building, and every man's
hearing. If ye be idle hearers, ye are foolish builders. Ye must therefore
labor to hear so, that in hearing you may be building upon the Rock; The day
of trial will come, the showers of trouble and tentation, and at last death it
self, that will try every man's hearing, and every man's building; firm and sure
will the estate of that man prove to be: who is founded upon the Rock, and by
faith cleaves to JESUS CHRIST. The fall of hypocrisy, in the end will be such
as there shall be no more recovery. Let us build upon this Rock if we build by
faith on him here, he has a fair building for us in the Heaven. Albeit the
outward building 1 Cor. 5. 1
of the body be daily falling down and decaying, yet we being builded in the
inward Man upon JESUS CHRIST, we have assurance of a fair building and house
prepared for us in the Heavens.

The third reason. CHRIST is called a stone, because he is our only refuge,
our only comfort and stay in the day of whatsoever trouble or tentation. There
is 1 Samuel 2, 1
no Rock like our God. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower, and the
Righteous run to it, and are prove. 11. 11
safe. This Stone which the Lord has laid down, is firm and sure, you may
trust to him* you may boldly build on him, he will not fail, what ye lay on
him is sure, lay the whole repose of your soul upon him. Here David may have
sure footing, Thou have set psalm* 40. 2 Exodus 17. 12 Genesis 28. 11 psa. 121. ^
my feet upon a rock. Here Moses has uphold for his hands. Here Jacob has
rest for his head. By him shall thy feet be preserved from sliding, Thy head
from dangerous and sorrowful conceptions, and thy hands shall be strengthened to
good, and lifted up in prayer to God.

Last here CHRIST in comparing himself to a Stone, would recommend to us
three things in imitation of him. 1. humility, a Stone is but an humble and
base thing. 2. firmness and stability, Be ye so humble, that ye be also
strong in the faith. 3. Patience, a Math, 11. 29 1 pet. 5. 9 Coloss. 2. 5 Esaias
53. 7 Iam. 5. 7. ^ psa. 39. 9
Stone will endure much* and who ever endured so much as he? And was still as a
Stone not moved, to learn us patience under the Hand of our God, and in the
day of whatsoever cross or trouble, to be silent, and still from murmuring,
because he has done it. There is a special point here, wherein you must
remember that the comparison holds not, and in which we must be most unlike
to stones. For although we should be as a Stone in humility, soliditie, and
patience, yet must we not be as Stones in senslesnesse and stupiditie, for all
the stones of this building they are 1 pet. 2* 5
lively and sensible of the lively grace and operation of God. Men senseless
not understanding nor, believing, are comparable to stocks and stones. And
they who are senseless of Gods grace, in this day of the dispensation of Gods
grace, when it comes to the day of trouble, or ill tidings, they are as
Stones, they are stupide and confounded, they are void of resolution. Their
heart within them is as a stone cold and comfortless. Ye read of Nabal in the
first of Samuel 25 Chap. In the morning when the wine was out of his head,
remembering his former folly, he became as a 1 Samuel 2^. 37
stone, that is, he was a senseless beast, he knew not whereupon to resolve,
nor where to turn him: his heart was cold as a stone, and void of comfort. We
must be as lively stones, founded upon the Rock. And let the showers come, and
storms blow, we shall stand Luc. 6. 48
fast, and not be moved.

And forasmuch as all are stones either undressed or vnhewen, as we came out of
Adams quarry, or then dressed, prepared, and made lively stones of the building
Math. 3. 9
of God. Of the one we are to say, God make of these stones children to
Abraham: And of the other let him that is once built grow in faith, and be
still more holy and righteous, and still grope faster Jesus Apoc. 22. 11
Christ. And as he although once very low, yet was exalted psalm. 118* 22
and made the head of the corner. So although thy estate be base, and thou
subject to great trouble, yet shall this hand who has placed thee in the
building, one day lift thee high, and give thee a glorious place 2 Cor. 5
in that building, whose craftesman and builder is not man, but the living God
himself. Thus have ye seen the reasons of this Name given to the Messiah, he
is called a Stone.

The second point is a new kind of picture or figuring of this Stone. And it is
this, upon this one stone shall be seven eyes. In the Scriptures of God, eyes do
commonly signify knowledge, wisdom and understanding. Where wisdom and
knowledge is, the eyes of the mind are said to be illuminate. And where
wisdom and understanding is not, they are darkened and put out. It goes in the
Scripture for the description of a wise man, his eyes are in his head. As the
eye Eccles. 2. 14
signifies knowledge and wisdom: So the number of seven imports perfection:
so the seven Candlesticks, and seven Spirits of God mentioned in the
Revelation, Apoc. 1. 4. 12
they are the number of perfection. Then the sense goes this way. Upon this
one Stone the Messiah shall be seven eyes, that is, upon him shall rest, and he
shall be filled with the perfect measure of wisdom and knowledge, and with all
the rest of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, for in him is hid and laid up
the treasure of all heavenly knowledge and wisdom. The Prophet Esaias speaks
this of him in the eleventh Esaias 11. ^
Chapter. The rod that shall come out of Iesse, and the branch that shall
spring from that root, there shall rest upon him the spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the spirit of counsel and might, the spirit of knowledge and of
the fear of the Lord. And of this abundance that is in him, the Prophet
speaks in that excellent Song, Psalm. 45. God has anointed thee with psalm.
45. 7, 8
the oil of gladness above thy fellows, All thy garments smell of myrrh,
aloes and cassia: he coming forth of his yvorie palace of Heaven, down to the
earth to save man, there was nothing found in him but a sweet smell and savor
of heavenly influence, and of the gifts and graces of the holy Ghost, which he
received in such fulness. Look also about this matter to his own words Luc. 4.
who being in the synagogue Luc. 4, 16
having in his hands the book of Esaias his Prophecy, And reading that
excellent place, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because he has
anointed me to preach the Gospel to the poor, he has sent me to heal the
broken hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight
to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the
acceptable year of the Lord. He having closed the book, and the eyes of all
that were in the Synagogue being fastened upon him: he has upon that text this
Sermon; This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: that is: I am he
who am come with that fullness of graces of the Spirit, whereof Esaias
fore-prophecied.

Then this word, upon a Stone shall be seven eyes, would be marked, telling us
first, That the Father sending CHRIST to so good a turn, to be as he was
called of before, his Servant in such a weighty business, as Col. ^. 19
was matter of wonder to Man and Angel, he sent him out well furnished in his
humanity, so filled and replenished, as never man received the Spirit in that
fullness that he did receive. And of this great furniture there are two great
reasons. First he had the greatest 1.
work in hand and turn to do that ever was or shall be done in the world. 2. he
had many to serve. This behooued 2
to be an everlasting fountain, because the streams thereof were to run to
the refreshment of all that should be saved. And of this fullness of his we all
John 1. 16
do receive of. This fullness that was and is in CHRIST, learn you fully and
perfitely to acquiesce in him, as Cant. 1. 3
he who has fully and perfitely finished the work of our redemption. He has
drunk out this Cup, tread Math. 26. 9 Esaias 63. ^
forth that Wine Press, he has done it himself alone, and there was none to
help him, being perfitely filled and replenished from Heaven to do the turn.
Set not Moses nor Elias in a Tabernacle with him, Bring not in Mary, who her
self has need of a Savior, Math 17. 4 Luc. 1. 47
nor the Saints to be partners with him in this work. His Father sent him so
perfitely furnished, and he so perfitely has done the turn, that as the
Father has said of him; He is my well-beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
So all that shall be safe cannot but say, Math. 3. 17 Math. 17. 5
and in him only my soul has perfect rest and contentment.

2. In this we are also to learn, how the calling of God is never fruitless
nor in vain, he that sending his Son in the flesh to this great turn, so
replenished him with the graces of the Spirit, he sends no man to his turn,
but he manifests his calling by spiritual unction, giving the man whom he
sends, such measure agreeable, as he sees meet. And for the greater work,
the greater gifts. The calling by men, may be void and ineffectuall, the
calling of God is not so. Where the gifts are not, although men have called
thee, God has not called, where the spiritual unction and gifts are, there is
the declaration of the calling of God. 3. There is a lessoun for all men, not
to be afraid to go where God bids him: for albeit the way may be hard, and
he send thee to great trouble and affliction, yet will he send no man to
undergo straitness and difficulty without furniture. If God Exodus 24. 12
say to thee with Moses, Come up the mountain, thou may come up upon his
warrant, and enjoy good things. If he bid thee go off the mountain Exodus 32.
7
where thou will behold things grievous to thy soul, and so change thy estate,
thou must also obey, he will be with thee. He that comes and goes this way
at the direction of God, resting upon the furniture of God, he shall one day
call him to come up to that mountain of glory, from which he shall never
descend, Math. 25. 34
to taste any more of sorrow or trouble.

Fourthly, it would be remembered of us, that JESUS CHRIST was thus way
replenished, that of his fulness we might all receive. And so they that would
go to Heb. 7. 25
God. must go to him: And all that would be refreshed Zach. 13. 1
must go to him as the Fountain. He is that Fountain of the House of David:
he was resembled by Aaron, whose ointments powered on his head, ran down to
the border of his garments. He comes in his Church psalm. 133. 2 psalm. 45. 8
with a fair Priestly garment, all his garments smell of myrrh, aloes and
cassia: To him as to the Fountain Heb. 9. 13. 14
we are to repair. By him as our great High Priest, we are to be sprinkled,
the sweet savor of his garments Cant. 1. 3
shall allure us to follow after him, And herein also is a rule of examination
for men to try and examine how the garments of Christ, I mean the Cross of
Christ, his death and suffering, and the graces which he has brought with him,
do smell and savor to thee. He that wants the sense of bodily smelling,
although there should be broken before him a box of the most precious ointment
that can be componed, yet has he no comfort of it. God has sent forth in his
Son to the world, a rich Box of spiritual ointment: And in his suffering this
Box may be said to have bin broken. And yet to the most part of the world
wanting the sense to 1 Cor. 1. 23
discern what is the cross of Christ, it is but an unsavory thing. The trial
of thy faith is the smell that thou have of the ointments of Jesus Christ. The
Father has filled him with the oil of spiritual grace. This Box is broken in
the Church, to make it savory to the sons of men. The preaching of the Evangell
is the carrying throw of this box and perfume, that it may smell to men. And
howsoever to the carnal and worldly minded it be an unsavory thing, yet they
that have faith, are able to Psalm. 45. 8
say with David, that his garments smell of myrrh, aloes and cassia. Isaac
smelled the savor of his Genesis 27* 27
son Jacobs garments, as the smell of a field which the Lord had blessed.
Thus does the garments of Christ sweetly smell to the faithful, who allured
with this sweet savor draw near to him, are blessed of him, and their hearts
are lifted up with the Song of blessing and thanksgiving to him again.

By these seven eyes may also be here understood a number finite for infinite
of Christian men and women, that with clear light and saving knowledge shall
see, and by faith embrace and apprehend Christ the Messiah and Savior of the
world, and in that knowledge of him they shall be safe. My righteous Servant
says Esaias 53. 11
Esaias in his 53. Chapt. through the knowledge of him shall lustify many. This
is life eternal to know God, John 17. 3
and whom he has sent Jesus Christ. And here let the number of seven, be
still as the number of perfection. To signify unto us all that ever shall be
saved. They shall be safe by no other way but this, by fixing the eyes of their
souls upon this Stone that is here laid down, that is, by receiving and
embracing by faith, JESUS CHRIST. And here it is properly said, their eyes
shall be upon him. It is not said, the eyes of Luc. 6. 49 Iam. 1. 22 ^ Math. 7. 21
many, nor the mouths and tongues of many. Many are hearers, whose hearing
will be unprofitable. And as for the mouths and tongues of men, not all that
say Lord, Lord, shall enter in the Kingdom, but surely all that have their
eyes upon him, the eyes of their mind and faith fast fixed this way, they
shall be safe. It is of this blessed and saving sight that Simeon speaks in his
song, Now let thy servant go in peace. because my eyes have seen my salvation.
And then he Luc. 2* 29, 30 31, 32 John 8. 56 John 20, 29
says of him: whom thou have prepared a light to the Nations. With this kind
of sight Abraham saw the day of his Savior, and rejoiced in it. And blessed
are they who believe and never saw, says our Master to Thomas, that is, never
saw him in his flesh with their bodily eyes: but the eyes of their soul are
fixed upon him. Then upon this Stone shall be seven eyes, The eyes of all that
ever attained or shall attain to life and salvation. Adam was safe in this
sight of him promised Gen* 3, 15 Romans 4* 3 1 Cor* 10. 3. 4 1 pet* 1* 10, 11
to him. Abraham was safe by this sight. Of Israel Paul says, they all did
eat the same spiritual meat and drink that same spiritual drink. The
Prophets they searched in to know of his afflictions, and the glory that should
follow. The Apostles in all their doctrine will tell you, There is no name
given us under heaven wherein to be saved, but the Name of JESUS. The Martyrs
with this sight were content with their blood Acts 4* 12
to seal that truth which they professed. And so there is no way of salvation
but this only, by fastening the eyes of thy faith upon this JESUS CHRIST. This
was figured of old in the brazen Serpent, It was John 3* 14, 15
lifted up in the wilderness that the people might look to it, and by looking
to it, and trusting to Gods promise, they were cured; so by fastening the eyes
of thy soul upon JESUS CHRIST the promised Redeemer, thou art spiritually made
whole, and restored to life.

This point would be marked, telling us 1 the great desire we should have to
see him with this spiritual Cant* 2. 14
sight, which brings with it rest and contentment. Secondly, it is a sight
not gotten without striving and overcomming of such impediments as shall hinder
us Luc* 19. 23
to come by it. Zacheus had a desire to see CHRIST, but there was two great
impediments. The one without himself, the other in himself: without him the
great preasse of the multitude: In himself, the lowness of his stature. He
sets himself ye see in his great desire to see Christ, against these
impedime^ts. To eschew the multitude he runs before, and because of his low
stature, he takes the help of a tree that grew by the way, and climmeth upon
it, and that not only the eyes of Zacheus body, but of his soul was fixed
upon JESUS CHRIST, appears that the Lord says to him, This day salvation is
come to thy house, thou art Luc* 19. ^
made the child of Abraham, that is, thou have seen me with that same sort of
sight wherewith Abraham saw me, and my day, and rejoiced therein. Thus must
thou strive with the impediments that would hinder John 8. ^6
thee to come to the sight of JESUS. And they are many both within and without
thee. The great helps given of God, whereby thou may overcome these
impediments, are the word and Sacraments, hear diligently, receive reverently:
And thus way shall thou attain to that saving sight of him. Thirdly, thou 3
that attainest to this saving sight of JESUS CHRIST. In him thou shall see all
these things. 1. perfect satisfaction 1
for thy sins. 2. thy perfect reconciliation 2
with God. 3. perfect delivery from hell, and the 3
power of the devil. 4. Thou will see and feel in 4
him perfect rest and ease to the conscience, and a ready Heb. 13 Heb. 7. 25
Luc. 1. 74 Romans 5. 1 Heb. 4. 11
way and passage for thee to enter in the Kingdom of heaven.

As we are to be careful to come by this sight, so must we be careful to grow
in it: forasmuch as perfection is withheld from us in this life. The man
whom CHRIST restored to his sight in the 8 chapt* of Marc. 8. 22
Mark. was restored by degrees. At his first touching he saw, but obscurely,
men walking like trees: at his second touching he saw clearly: So shall this
same JESUS CHRIST do with thee that waitest on him for the illumination of the
eyes of thy mind. He shall cure thee by degrees, and at the end of thy life
shall so Acts 7. 56
clear thy eyes that thou shall see the heavens ready open to receive thy
soul. The word of God is the honey of God out of the rocks. And David calls it
sweeter then the honey and the honey comb. Put forth thy Psalm. 19. 10
rod of faith, and taste of the sweetness of it. Let thy hearing be mixed with
faith: And thou shall find by the word and gracious promises thereof, thy sight
Heb. 4. 2
cleared, so that after diligent hearing, thou shall be able to say, Now I see
better then of before, my own salvation, my life laid up in Jesus Christ, and
my happiness 1 Samuel* 14* 27
in him. Jonathan being feeble and faint, put forth his rod, and tasted of the
honey that dropped from the rocks, and his eyes that before were dim, waxed
clear. Let faint and wearied hearted sinners taste of this sweet honey of the
promises of God, it shall clear their sight and make them see better their
salvation in JESUS CHRIST, then of before.

The third general point set down in these words, is about the sufferings of
JESUS CHRIST. The word expressing his suffering is this: Behold, I will ingraue
the grauing thereof, says the Lord of hosts: Which albeit they be taken by
some men, to be spoken of the Nativity of CHRIST, God himself being the
immediate framer and former of his Body, in the womb of Math. 1* 20
the Virgin, yet they do most properly concern his Passion, as appears of
the words immediately following, subioyned unto his suffering. The proper effect
thereof, which is, to transfer and take away the sins of the people. Of the
sufferings of Christ there is here two words. 1. they were according to the
determinat counsel and appointment of his Father: for speaking of them he
says, I grave the grauing of this Stone. 2. his sufferings were weighty and
grievous: if ye consider first the hand that laid them on, it was the Hand of
God, angry for the sins of man. If ye consider next the manner and measure,
there was no light nor superficial doing here, but it was a profound and
deep sinking and ingraving.

As for the first word, albeit in the sufferings of Christ there were many
agents and instruments, The Devils John 13. 2 Math. 27. 25 Math. 2. 14 Marc.
14. 12 Luc. 22. 7 Math. 26* 26 Math, 26. 27
malice, the Jews rage, Judas treason, Pilate his seeblenesse in yielding to
their unreasonable desire, the soldiers spite, of whom he suffered many
things, yet this remains always firm and sure: Nothing befell unto him but
according to the determinate counsel and decree of his Father. The Apostles
although they were a long time very blind in the matter of his Kingdom, and
understood not, that his way to triumph was by the Cross, yet after his
ascension having received according to his promise the Holy Ghost, look to the
testimony that they gave of his sufferings, in the 4 of the Acts, speaking to
God in Acts 4. 27, 2^
their prayer, they say, Against thy holy Child JESUS, whom thou have anointed,
both Herod and Pontius Pilate. with the Gentiles and people of Israel were
gathered together, but what to do? to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel
had determined before to be done. Then here is the Father, giving CHRIST to
this suffering, and CHRIST giving himself, which would be well marked and
considered of us, for otherwise we can have no solid comfort of his Cross.
The Father giving him, he whose providence stretches John ^. 16 1 John 4. 9.
Math, 10. 29
it self to the meanest things of the earth, without whose will, a sparrow
(whereof two are sold for a farthing) falls not to the ground. Think ye
that without his special will and decree, one drop of that blood which was
more precious then all the Creatures of the world could fall to the ground?
CHRIST that says truly of himself, The Father and I am John 10. 30
one: and, If I please, I may call for Legions of Angels Math. 26. 53
to defend me from the malice of men. Think ye that the power of the devil or
man could have made him subject to such pain, if he had not willingly submitted
himself to it? That ye may therefore have comfort in his suffering, hear him
tell you, No man takes my life from me, but I yield it heartily, and lay it
down willingly for your sake. It is a great providence of God, that rules the
work of his Sons suffering, according to his determinate Counsel, that
hereby thou may learn to bow the knees of thy soul, and worship him: As GOD
almighty, who having made man of nothing, was able, when he had lost himself,
to find out the way of his safety. 2. As GOD infinitely Romans 11. 33
wise, that found out a way how his justice might be satisfied, and man also
saved, and so you may have recourse to him still, as that Fountain of all
good, the streams of whose mercy are ever flowing, and can never be dried up:
for here may thou reason with the Apostle. He that without thy knowledge and
deserving, gave his own Son to endure such suffering for thee, if thou have
gotten his Son, and if thou be in him, what can he deny thee that thou shall
ask in Rom* 8. 34
his Name? But let us consider in this word (Behold I says the Lord of hosts,
do grave the grauing of this Stone) The weight and gravitie of the suffering
of CHRIST. In this work of man's redemption there was no collusion betwixt the
Father and the Son. But the Father laying him before him, as the object of
his wrath, by reason of our sins, the burdens whereof Esaias 53. 3 ^
he took upon him, he spares him not, he strikes at him, and wounds him
deep, and to the heart with the weapons of his wrath and judgment, and he
leaves him not until his Justice be satisfied to the full, he forbeareth him
not, nor suffers him to get up his Head, till he has paid the last farthing
of the John 19. 30
debt, and say upon the Cross, consummatum est. The pleasure that our first
Parents took in sinning, he paid well for them by pains and suffering. For
their wandering and lustful eyes, lusting after that forbidden Genesis 3 6 Heb. 5*
7 Gen* 3. 12 Math. 27, ^9 Genesis 3. 6 psalm* 69* ^2 Math. 27, 48
fruit, his eyes shed many tears. Their heads were lifted up in pride against
God, his Head was crowned with a crown of thorns, to the effusion of his
Blood, for their delicacie in their taste, he got vinegar in his thirst to
drink. But all this may be thought but external: for their drinking of the cup
of sin, to the impoysoning of their soul; he had a cup set to his Head, of the
hot wrath and anger of God, which made him cry Math, 26. 39
out, Father if it be thy will, let this cup depart from me.

This is a doctrine would be marked of us, to tell us 1
1. that man having sinned, there is no remeed but the Justice of God must be
satisfied to the full. Which satisfaction man not being able to make himself,
God takes it of his own Son. And therefore it is a co^fortles doctrine, that
would have thee turn thy eyes any other way, or would put in any thing betwixt
the eye of thy soul, and that perfect satisfaction that he has taken of his
own Son for thee. Secondly, Christ's suffering 2
to the full, the Hand of God lying upon him, and his wrath to the extremity,
which made him a heavy soul, yet his Fathers love was not separat from him,
Math. 3. 27 Math. 17. 5
that oracle remained always true. He is my beloved Son, his soul was never
far from God, but he is able Psalm. 22. 1 Math. 27. 46
in his greatest agony to say, My God, my God. And the like of this shall
never come to pass in any man, that shall be sent to suffer for his own sins:
for in Gods breast there is no spark of love nor favor toward them, that is an
absolute sentence which can admit no mitigation. Math* (...). 4^
Go ye to the devil and his angels: and in their breast there is no spark of
trust to say, My God, but a perpetual desperation, and an eternal separation
of the soul from God. And therefore if the rich glutton is brought Math* ^6* ^7
in, being in hell, pitying the souls of his brethren upon Math. 16 29
earth: Learn much more every one, while it is time to pity your own souls.
Hear Moses and the Prophets, hear Christ himself, and while his Arms are
stretched out, run unto him, that he may hide thee from the wrath of God, and
save thee from that place of torment, where there is no comfort nor end of
pain. Thirdly, all these sufferings of Christ, although they are 3
infinite in weight, yet are they finite in time, and therefore the love of his
Father, and his hard handling could well subsist, because he was to get up his
head, and to wrestle out from under all this pain and grief. And herein is
offered to us a great word of comfort, Acts 2. 24
that seeing all the troubles that we sustain in this life, are finite, both
in weight and time: For what is our life but a moment? And the Lord who
afflicts Psalm* 103* 14
us, knows our mould and our shape, that we are but dust: Then although the
Lord to thy sense, entreat thee hardly, yet he is still to thee a loving
Father, in regard of that glorious end that he has appointed for Romans 8. 18
thee, whereunto momentanean troubles shall succeed an infinite weight of Joy
and glory.

As the gravitie of Christ his sufferings is pointed at in the inflictor, God
himself, so also in the phrase of speaking, whereby his suffering is imported,
it is not a light nor superficial going over, but a deep sinking and graving
so deep, that of him are the words of Jeremy to be understood, Consider ye
that pass by if Lament. 2. 12
there be any dolor like unto my dolor. The words of David in the 129 Psalm.
The plowers have drawn Psalm. 129. 3
deep furrows upon my back. And the words of Esaias Esaias 50. 6 Math. 26. 67*
in his 50 Chapter, I give my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair. The deep ingrauing of this Stone, look to it this way,
The Math. 26. 29 Math. 26. 26 psalm. 22* 16 John 19. 33
thorns making impression in his Head, the scourges making deep furrows in
his back, the nails piercing his hands and feet, the soldiers spear going
through his side to his Heart, so that water and blood came forth. And yet a
deeper ingraving then all this, the plough of the wrath of God went deeply
through Luc. 22. 44
his Soul, and made so deep a furrow, that he did sweat Blood for water.

Now look to and consider the graven Stone, and therein see great matter of
fear, there being here the most fearful declaration of Gods w^ath against
sin, that ever was given great matter of love being herein. Math. 3* 16
The greatest declaration of love that could be offered 2
to mankind. Secondly, he was so deeply graven, that although his pain and
suffering be away and ended, yet the print of his suffering is not away, but
remains fresh in the eyes of his Father as meritorious for Heb. 7. ^7
all them that shall be safe. Thirdly, he was so graven, 3.
that he might take us, and grave us upon his breast, and upon the palms of his
hands, never to be forgetful *Esaias 44* 16
of us, but to present us blameless before his Father. Let the sufferings
therefore, and Cross of JESUS Christ be drawn in our hearts, not lightly nor
superficially, but deeply graven, that we may say with the 1 Cor. 2. 2
Apostle, We desire to know nothing but Jesus Christ and him crucified.

The fourth thing mentioned in these verses, is the happy fruit and effect
that follows upon the suffering of JESUS CHRIST; it is expressed this way. I
will (says the Lord) remove the iniquity of the Land in one day. The grauing
of Christ although painful to him for a time, yet pleasant and comfortable to
his Church for ever. For it is by reason of his sufferings that God his Father
has given this declaration, I will take away and put forth of my remembrance
the iniquity and sins of all that repent and believe in him, his stripes were
many, his grauing deep, his sufferings infinite in weight, although not in
time. Therefore Esaias 1. 18 Romans 8. ^
though thy sins were never so many, and thy iniquities never so great, they
are all well paid for. Thou being in him, need not to fear death, hell, nor
condemnation. In the words expressing this benefit of taking away the peoples
sins, two things are to be marked, The one is of the perfection of the
work, All 3
sin and iniquity shall be taken away. And the other 2.
is of the circumstance of time, in that day. As for the first there is
promised here, the perfect taking away of sin and iniquity. And how does this
agree with the manifold complaints of the Saints in the Scripture, of the
abiding of iniquity, and with the experience even of these who believed
remission of sins, and taking away of iniquities in the Blood of Jesus
Christ. Do not the Saints in Scripture complain of sin, cry out under the
burden of sin, craving daily the renovation and purgation of their heart.
And who has not reason with David to say, If I should Psalm. 40. 12 Psalm. 19. 12
reckon my iniquities, they are more in number then the hairs of my head, And
who knows the errors of his life. Has there been, and is there manifold
sins even in the best children of God? how does God then perform this
promise, saying, that the day of his Sons death shall be a day wherein he will
take away all the sin and iniquity of his people? for answer to this. When God
is said in Scripture to take away the sin and iniquity of his people two
things are imported. The one is, that which has the proper respect of sin,
which accuses and condemns us before God, the guiltiness of it, that is
taken away. And so to take away sin, is to forgive sin, to cover sin, not to
impute sin. In the mean time there remains in the corrupt nature of man; the
matter of sin, the nourishments of sin, sinful concupiscences wherewith the
Elect of God have a daily strife, not suffering this remnant sin to reign in
their mortal bodies. Secondly by the words of this promise is imported, Rom* 6.
12
that the remission of thy sins, that great benefit acquired by the death of
Christ, is full, absolute and perfect, although the renovation be not as yet
perfect. His merit takes away all the guiltiness of thy sin, so that thou
art free of condemnation, although at the first all corruption be not mortified
and slain into thee. So that both these are the speeches of a renewed man: the
one of the assurance of faith, there is no Rom* 8. 1
condemnation to me: the other of the complaint of sin, the flesh lusts
against the spirit. and this holds Gal. 5. 17
them in a continual exercise, striving to a daily mortification, till in end
sin, as it is perfectly forgiven, so it may be perfectly slain and abolished,
and left as a carcass, without motion, life or senses.

The other word here is of the circumstance of time, God says, he will do
this in one day: And the day meant of here, is the day of the slaughter and
sacrificing of his Son. It may then be demanded, was there no remission of
sins till the day of his Apoc. 13* 8
death? Is he not that that Lamb spoken of in the Apocalypse 13. that was
slain from the beginning, was not the sins of faithful Patriarchs,
Prophets, and Servants of GOD taken away in the virtue of that same Blood,
although the day of the actual shedding of it was not as yet come? For laying
open this matter ye must consider about the suffering of Jesus Christ, four
things. 1. The ordaining of it by God the Father 1
as the mean of man's redemption. 2. the typing and figuring 2
of it, by the ceremonies of the Law, and Leviticall 3
sacrifices. 3. The merit and efficacy of it. And last that 4
very act it self, when his body was at Golgotha affixed to the Cross. Now
although this act of his suffering was in the last time, yet in the decree and
ordinance of GOD, it was from the beginning. In the ceremonies of the Law, he
was typically slain before their eyes and the merit and efficacy of his death
extended the self to all that was safe from the beginning, and does extend to
all that shall be safe to the end of the world. These words of the promise of
taking away sin and iniquity, being narrowly looked into, you will find they
contain these necessary points that thou must know and believe in this
comfortable Article of the remission of sins, as here you are led to
consider. 1. the Author of the benefit, I will take them away 1.
says the Lord. Sin being the offense of God, none has power to forgive or
take away his offense but himself. And whereas God is the Author of this
benefit, then has it these properties. First it is sure. Secondly 1
perfect. Thirdly it is unchangeable, and never 2
comes under revocation. Thy memory may forget 3.
thy sins for a while, and cast them up again, thy conscience may loose
feeling of them, and cast them up again. But if God take them away, they shall
never meet thee, neither to thy shame here, nor condemnation after this, A
necessary point of trial for men to examine what way they are made quite of
their bypast sins: For although thou have drowned them in oblivion, and put
them away in forgetfulness, yet are they not soundly taken away, till GOD take
them away, that thou be able to say, God for Jesus Christ his sake has
forgiven me them. Secondly, in these words is pointed out unto us the means,
by ^
which, remission of sins is obtained; and that is clear by joining these
words with the former. He said before, I will grave the Stone, I will sink it
deeply, I will lay great weight of suffering upon the back of my Son. What
then shall follow upon it? this same gracious effect: I laid this great burden
of pain upon him, that I may take off the great burdens of iniquity. The mean
is then whereby remission of sins is purchased, his bloody Passion, the grauing
of the Stone, his painful sufferings. If you ask at John in his first
Epistle, 1 John 1. 7
and first Chapter, how men are freed of their sins, he will answer you, The
Blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all our sins. If you ask at Peter in
1 Pet. 1. 18, 19
his first Epistle, and first Chapter, how and by what means we are redeemed,
he will tell you, not with gold nor silver* but with the precious Blood of the
Son of God. And if there were no more but this, Sinners are sent to rest upon
Jesus Christ and his Blood, because it is the only mean of our relief,
which GOD himself has devised and found out. I will, says he, grave the
Stone, and by that means take away all thy iniquity. He that would present to
Gods eye, any other thing meritorious of the remission of his sins, but this
graven Stone Jesus Christ crucified, he must remain comfortleffe, if it were
for no other way but this, he misknoweth that way of his peace, which GOD
himself has devised and appointed.

Thirdly in these words of the promise we are to 3
consider of the persons to whom belongs this great benefit of taking away
their iniquity. And it is here said, The iniquity of all the Land. A general
to be restrained to the Church and people of God, the eyes of whose faith (as
was said of before) shall be fastened upon this Stone. Thus says Esaias in his 33
Chapter, The people that dwell therein (meaning of the Esaias 33. 24
Church) shall have their sins forgiven. And in his 62 Chapter. They shall be
called an holy people, the redeemed Esaias 62. ^2
of the Lord, a city soght out, and not forsaken. By the Arc of Noah, which
was a type of the Genesis 6* 14
Church. It was told us none would be safe, but they that are within the
compass of the Church. And now the builder of the Church saw this, and Genesis 9.
27
therefore made a good prayer for his son Iaphet: God persuade Iaphet to dwell
in the Tents of Sem, that is, make him a member of the Church, to whom this
promise is made, I will take away all thy iniquity. Fourthly, to make this
comfort that is in the promise 4
of remission of sins firm and sure, he does not give to sin the common word
of sin, but he gives it a name more expressing the weight of it, and calls
it iniquity. Wherein he would allure us to apprehend the comfort of the
promise this way. Let no man by reason of his sin and iniquity despair,
when he considers these two things. First, It is I says the Lord of 1
hosts, that am the doer, that takes away iniquity, come and reason with me.
Albeit thy sins be many and great, is it not easy to me to take them away.
I that said to Light, and to all the rest of the Creatures, Esaias 1* 18
let them be. I that can fold up the heavens as a garment, Genesis ^. 3 Psalm.
102* 26 Esaias 6. 5
cannot I make thy iniquities pass away. Esaias was lamenting his impuritie, and
crying, Woe is me. But how easy was it to the Lord to send him comfort, when
an Angel with a slight came to him, with a coal taken from the Altar touching
his lips, and telling Lu^ 22, 43
him that his sin was taken from him. The thief that did hang on the right side
of Christ, had experience of this, who having uttered but a few words of remors
for his sin, his iniquity was instantly taken away, his 2
soul made ready for the Paradise of God. 2. As looking to God the Author of
this work, men should not despair. So considering the medicine how precious it
is, how can sinners distrust and go away comfortless? here is a stone deeply
graven, much blood shed. And whereas one drop of that precious blood (being the
Blood of GOD) might have bin a ransom for all the world, behold streams of
blood flowing from him, that thou may ever therein as it were bath thy soul.
And although thy sins were never so great, yet here is the medicine so large,
it goes beyond and above all. Last 3
of all, you would mark here the phrase of speaking used here. I will says
the Lord, take away the iniquity of the Land. In the former Chapter speaking to
Iehoshua, he said to him, I have caused thy iniquity to pass from thee. God is
said to take away our sins, when for the merit and suffering of his Son,
he accounts of them as if they had never been committed. And to ingraue this
consolation in the hearts of penitent and believing sinners, diverse phrases,
and sundry forms of speeches are used by God in Scripture. David psalm* 32, ^
in his 32 Psalm. says not, Blessed is the man that is not a sinner, no man is
blessed that way: but blessed is he whose sins are covered, to whom the Lord
imputes not his iniquity. I have put away thy transgressions like a cloud,
and thy sins like a mist, Esaias 44 Esaias 44. 22
Chapter. Clouds and mists which appear for a time, are by the brightness of
the Sun utterly dispersed. When God looks upon thee, through the bright Son
of Righteousness JESUS CHRIST, all thy sins like a mist and cloud goes
away. The King Ezechiah says Esaias in his 38 Chapt. That the Lord had casten
Esaias 38. 17
his sins behind his back. That thing a man will not remember nor regards
not, he turns away his face from. This is the gracious doing of our God with
his people, his amiable face is toward their persons, his back is turned upon
their sins. They shall never come in his eye, nor be remembered of him. The
Prophet Micah 7. 19
Micah in his seventh Chapter says. That the Lord casts the sins of his
own in the bottom of the Sea, alluding to Pharaoh and his chariots, whom he
drowned in the red Sea, so that they were never seen again alive to trouble
his people. So will the Lord drown in everlasting oblivion the sins of his
own, that they shall never meet them to effray or disquiet them. Here is then
the comfortable fruit of the sufferings of Christ pointed out unto us. God
himself the engrauer of this Stone has as it were with his own finger written
upon his cross Remission of sins, and taking away the iniquity of all that
believe in Genesis 3. 6
him. Adam and his wife put forth their hands, and took of the fruit of that
forbidden tree, whereupon followed nakedness and shame. Stretch out thy hand,
and take of the fruit of this tree, Remission of sins, which grows upon
the Cross of Jesus Christ. Righteousness and life eternal shall follow
Remission of sins, that great and maine benefit earnestly to be sought for
of us all. For since all are borne sinners, and live in sin, if a man obtain
not remission of sins, it had been better* for him never to have been
borne, or being borne, it had bin better for him to have been a beast nor a
man: for the death of the beast, is the end of all misery to it. But the death
of a man dying in his sins, is the beginning of such misery and woe as shall
never have an end. There is no burden nor weight comparable to the burden of
sin that hangs so fast on, and presses down. The burden of sickness, of long
and heavy sickness, Heb. 12. 1
is a heavy burden. The burden of shame and ignominy, a heavy burden, which
makes David so earnestly cry to God in his 119 Psalm, to deliver him Ps. 119.
12. 39
from that shame which he feared, and his sin had deserved. The burden of
disdain and contempt, a heavy burden. We are counted, says the Apostle, the
offscowrings of the World. The burden of poverty and 1 Cor* 4. 13
want a heavy burden. And therefore Jacob vowed that God should be his God, if
he would give him food and raiment. And Agur the son of Iakeh, desired the
Prove. 30. 8, 9
Lord not to press him with the burden of poverty, lest he should blaspheme
him. But of all these burdens none of them can compare with the burden of
sin, lying upon a man's conscience unpardoned. And that made the Kingly
Prophet, laying aside his royalty and earthly pleasures of his Kingdom, to
cry out, Blessed is the man whose sins are forgiven. Seeing therefore psalm.
3^* 1
we have often at the desire and entisements of the devil eaten of the bitter
fruits of sin, which although they look pleasant at the first, yet shall prove
bitter as gall and wormwood. Let us resort to this tree, to JESUS CHRIST
crucified, and eat of this fruit, and live, even remission of sins in his
death. And that thou may know that thou have true lie tasted of this fruit* and
that it is no presumption, but the assurance of faith that draws in this
comfort to thy soul of the 1
remission of sins. Consider first if thou can look to God the Author of it,
who for Christ's sake has taken 2
away thy sins, and forgiven thy iniquity. Secondly by daily tears,
humiliation, mourning and weeping for sin, labor to increase thine assurance.
I water my bed with tears, says David. Thirdly, let psa. 6* 6
every one that says, he has gotten from God remission 3
of sins, of many sins, and great sins, change the tenor of his life,
endeavor to walk more holy lie. And then although death when it comes,
strip thee Romans ^, 1
naked of all the pleasures that are here, yet thou being made naked and free
of sin, thou shall not be found in that great day, as the wicked are, but
shall be covered with the white raiment of the righteousness (...), 3, ^8
of JESUS CHRIST.

THE THIRD SERMON.
ZECHARIAH, 3. Chap. and 10. verse. 10 In that day, says the Lord of hosts,
shall ye call every man his neighbor under the vine, and under the figtree.
THe last point contained in these words is in the last verse, and that is of
the happy estate of the Church and Kingdom of Christ under him so gracious
and comfortable a Head. As remission of sins, and taking away iniquity, is a
consequent of his suffering, and of this deep engrauing of the stone: so this
peaceable estate is a necessary consequent of remission of sins: for all that
have remission of sins in the death Romans 5* ^
and suffering of Christ, of necessity they must have peace with God, peace in
their own heart and soul, Heb. 4, 3
which passes understanding: tranquillity and rest, which is the beginning of
heaven here, for we who believe, do enter presently in our rest.

The words of the verse, if they shall be considered with some respect to the
temporal delivery of the people from Babylon, and their full restitution from
the captivity, as was both prophesied and performed, then they offered this
comfort unto them, that albeit the days by past have been unto them days of
woe psalm. 137
and misery, days of weeping and lamentation, wherein they have been brought
in a strange country, at the rivers of Babel to shed tears, for hearing the
enemies deride their Hebrew songs, and in the remembrance of Sion, that was of
before so beautiful and glorious: yet when the Lord should return to show
himself the captain and Defender of his Church, and should loose their yoke and
bonds: that day and time of their liberty, is to bring with it a great and
glorious change, being brought to their own home and country, where before they
were in Babel. Lying under their own Vine and Figtree, where before they lay
at the rivers of Babel, each neighbor speaking comfortablie to an other, where
of before they were forced to hear the railing and out-cryings of the children
of Babel. And all these in the appointed time of God, did so graciously come to
pass, that albeit in the days of their captivity, their sorrow was exceeding
great, yet the day of their delivery brought with it greater abundance of joy,
and a gladness more exceeding. psalm. 126. ^
And thus they confess themselves in the 126 Psalm. When the Lord (say they)
brought again our captivity, we were as men in a dream. It was a work so
far beyond our expectation, that we doubted whether we were waking or
sleeping. Our mouths were filled with laughter. our tongues and words did show
us joyful men: yea the work was so great and marvailous, as at the sight
thereof, the very Heathen was amassed, and moved to cry out and say. Surely the
Lord has done for this people marvailous and great things.

In the signification of the words, as they are referred to the glad day of
the delivery of the people from their bodily trouble and captivity, these
things would be observed. First, as it is true of Christ and his suffering, 1
so is it also of his members and people. The day of his ingraving, a dark
day. The day of his suffering upon the Cross, a black day, the Sun covered
his Math. 27* 44
face, but the day of his resurrection a glorious day, and Romans 1. 4
such a day, says Paul, as in it he was manifestly declared to be the Son
of God. It was so with this people here. They had a black day of captivity,
but a glorious day of delivery. It is true of all his people, and these that
are in covenant with him. Although they psalm. 112. 4
have a dark day of trouble and affliction, yet there 1 John 3. 2
succeedes unto it, a clear day of comfort. Albeit they lying in the grave of
affliction, it appear not what they are, yet being raised by Gods hand, it
shall be not only sensible to themselves, but manifest to others, that they are
the children of God. Secondly, although all this life were an continued day of
trouble, yet there is a day coming that shall recompense all, which is the day
of the glorious liberty of the Sons of God. Let us therefore hold fast these
comforts, Romans 8* 2^
which David out of his own sense, and inspired by the Spirit, has laid in
register to us. To the righteous (that is, to them that are made righteous in
JESUS CHRIST) there shall arise Joy in trouble, light in psa, 112. 4
darkness. God will not always frown upon his own: but though weeping be in
the evening, Joy Psalm, 30. 5
shall come in the morning. Thus the people lived in an hard and miserable case
being in Babel: yet in regard of the promises made to them, many of them lived
in hope of the clear day of their deliverie. And therefore they can say in
their mournful song at the rivers of Babel, Let my hand forget to touch the
harp, psalm. 137. 5
and my tongue cleave to the roof of my mouth, if I joy before I see the
deliverance of Jerusalem past. But when the day came, according as it was
promised, then are they not only joy full in their own deliverie, but in that
same 126 Psalm, they register out of their experience, a sentence to stand to
the perpetual comfort of the Church, and all the members thereof, that shall
go under whatsoever cross here. They that sow in tears, shall reap in Joy.
Take it therefore psa. 126. 5
and use it as an undoubted consolation. The tears of the Saints shall have a
succeeding Joy, This is not so general as all tears shall have comfort, and
all that weep shall have joy. Esau had tears, and Judas had Heb. 12. 17
tears, and the hand of the Lord upon most wicked men will express tears.
But mark the phrase of the Church here. It is not they that sow tears, but
they that sow in tears, or with tears. They that in the day of Gods
visitation do sow with tears the confession of their sins, they that sow
with tears a true acknowledgement of their own deserving. Heb. 5^7
They that sow with tears their prayers and supplications to GOD, from whom
comes the Heb. 5. 7
relief of his own, They that sow with tears their holy promises and vows
of amendment. Assuredly although the seed-time* be dolorous, the harvest shall be
fruitful and pleasant, they shall reap remission of sins, they shall find
from GOD a joyful deliverie. The LORD in the beginning after he had destroyed
the World with water, being again pacified, he sets down in the 8.
Chapter of Gen, 8. 2^
Genesis, a vicissitude of these things while the world lasts. There shall be
seed-time and harvest, cold and heat, summer and winter, day and night, als
long as the earth remains. It is even so with the Church of GOD and members
thereof. Als long as the earth remains, cold and heat, summer and winter,
darkness of trouble, light of deliverie, weeping and rejoicing, till in end
they be brought to that perpetual day, and all tears Apoc. 7. 17 21. 4.
be wiped from their eyes. But leaving this of the temporal deliverie,
because the speech has been hitherto of the Messiah and his Kingdom. Here
mention is made of the secure and peaceable estate of the subjects thereof. And
that this may be the more clear, comparison is borrowed from the peaceable
and quiet estate of subjects dwelling in a temporal and earthly Kingdom,
under a temporal and earthly King. The peaceable estate of subjects in a
worldly Kingdom is set out this way. When a man may without harm or
interruption, call his neighbor under his Vine, and under his Figtree. In the
days of war or time of oppression of enemies, men draw apart to holes and
holds, and have not these free meetings. In the days or time of pestilence,
neighbor does not call neighbor, but neighbor skarreth with neighbor, yea
the friend with his friend, the father with the son, the man with his wife.
In the days or time of famine, neighbor does hardly call or invite neighbor,
lest as the wise Virgins Math, 24* 9
said to the foolish, there be not sufficient for us and you both. But here
is the peaceable and happy estate of a Kingdom, when openly without fear,
when familiarly without danger, when under the vine and figtree, in plenty
without scarcity having the Creatures of God, not only to necessity, but to
delectation a neighbor may invite and call his neighbor, and peaceably enjoy
the benefit of God. As this is in general, the description of the peaceable
estate of the subjects dwelling in a Kingdom, and under a King, whom God does
bless with peace. So have you a notable example, agreeable to the same
description in the Kingdom of Solomon. Of which it is said in the first Book
of the Kings, and fourth Chapter, That all Israel from Dan to Beersheba, dwelt
safely 1 Kings 4. 18
under his vine, and under his figtree all the days of Solomon, Before we
come to the translation of this speech, to the Kingdom of Christ, something
would be spoken of the comparison, that forasmuch as the Spirit of God does
here borrow and take comparison from the peaceable estate of earthly Kingdoms,
to shadow out the peaceable and prosperous estate of the spiritual Kingdom of
the Messiah, that therefore outward and worldly peace in a worldly and civil
kingdom, is a good thing in it self, and a special blessing of GOD, he gave
it Solomon as a special blessing, he has bidden men seek peace, and inquire
after it, he has bidden so far as is possible, keep peace with all Romans 12.
18 Heb. 12. 14
men. And it is even this outward peace which David prays for to Jerusalem,
for the Churches cause, Psalm. 122. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity
within thy palaces. This peace, a benefit it is in it self, Psalm. 122. 7
but unto men inioying it, it is not always a benefit. 1. when men in their
peace acknowledge GOD the 1
Author of it. Secondly, when the time of peace is a 2
time of the flourishing of Religion and virtue. Thirdly, 3
when men's outward peace draws not upon them such deadnes and hardness of
heart, that they neglect their inward and spiritual peace with GOD. Surely the
peace outward as a good thing in it self, so good also to them that enjoy it:
but because this same peace has oftentimes drawn with it all these
inconvenients, forgetfulness of God, decay of Religion, fatness of heart and
stupiditie: therefore this outward peace is such a benefit as the Lord has not
always seen meet for his Church. But where outward peace has made her like
standing water, putrify, he would rather break her peace, and cast her in
affliction, then that her outward peace should make her lose her spiritual
life. It is a word that would be 1*
marked and considered of us this way. First we al seek these outward things so
far as our judgment or affection apprehends them to be good, without
leaving to God how far they are expedient or inexpedient for us. Peace,
prosperity, wealth and health we would have, and we say, O how good things are
these? But none of these things (although good in themselves) are to be sought
absolutely, but in so far, as he who knows what is meetest for us, sees they
may tend to our chief well and good. And therefore Agur he craves a
moderation of his estate, since in both the extremities, he knew there was
danger to his soul, Lord I crave not outward prosperity and abundance, for I
know the mischief of my nature, it may well make me to misknow thee, and I
crave that Pro. 30* 8. 9
thou would not tempt me, neither with overgreat want, for there my corruption
lies also at the wait, I fear it make me blaspheme thee. Here is therefore
a good rule of Christian desires, to seek these things that are absolutely
good, absolutely and earnestly, and of this nature is faith, love, repentance,
and such gifts 1 Cor. 22. 31
as concern the Kingdom of GOD. And in other things which are not absolutely
good, to lay down thy desires at the feet of God, that of them his hand may
dispense so far unto thee, as he thinks meet forthy well. Secondly, ye
would consider here of his 2
outward peace and rest, how dangerous it may prove to them that are not in
peace with GOD. Men may have great outward peace, when in the mean time the
very sword of Gods wrath is hanging over their heads. In the 1. Chapter of this
Prophecy, the Angels are directed to go through the earth, and to search and
try what the inhabitants thereof are doing. They come Zach. 1. 11
back with their report and say, we have walked to and fro, and behold all the
earth sits still, and is at rest, although they were guilty at that time of
spilling much of the Saints blood, yet they thought no more of it, nor if such
thing had never bin done. But when they are now in ease, in what estate are
they with God? Luc. Verse 15.
15 verse. I am sore displeased, says the Lord, with the heathen that are at
ease: while they are at ease, the wrath of God is above their heads, and
therefore let no man in his rest and ease, be drawn from this trial and
examination in what estate he stands with God, whether under his favor or
not, otherwise his ease and rest will prove a perilous thing to him. If Jonas
his gladness of heart (of whom it is said, he was exceeding glad) had been in
his God, as it was in his gourd, exceeding faintnes of heart, would not have
overtaken Jonas 4* 6. 7, 8
him for the withering of a gourd, the favor of God never fades nor falls
away. And if men would strengthen their hearts against the fear or sorrow that
may come of the many changes that are in a man's life (for what is all but a
gourd that grows up in a night, and withers in a night.) Let the joy and
gladness of thy heart be in thy God, who although Josh. 1* 5 Heb. 13. 5
thy gourd wither, yet he shall not leave thee, nor forsake thee. Where there
is with outward peace, a growing Church, Religion flourishing, the enemies
decaying and holden down, we may then look for, and expect the continuance of
it. But where the contrary of these are, the Lord will rather loose our peace
before he lose his honor, and will rather power us, and turn us from veshell
to veshell, then suffer us to sit still Ierem. 46. 1^
upon our dregs, till we lose all sense and taste of godliness.

We come now to the translation of this speech. This outward and peaceable
estate of the subjects of a peaceable Kingdom, is to forgive and shadow out
the happy estate of the subjects of this Kingdom of Christ. And of the
subjects of the Kingdom. In this comparison four things are pointed out unto
us. 1.
First their peace and tranquillity, none to molest the^, as in a peaceable
Kingdom there is none to hinder a man from lying under his own Vine and
Figtree. Secondly, 2*
their safety and protection, they are under the shadow of JESUS CHRIST as
under the Vine, and under the Figtree. Thirdly, their sweet repast and 3
feeding figured by the Fig and Vine. And last their 4
spiritual friendship and communion among themselves, figured in the
invitation or calling each one of his neighbor under the Vine and Figtree. The
first is then, to the subjects of this Kingdom of the Messiah, is promised
peace. It was said of before, that upon his graving, should follow the removing
of sins, and taking away the iniquity of his people. Now upon the removing of
sins, follows peace and quietness. He whose sins are taken away, is
justified, and being justified, we have peace with God, Romans 5. The Angels at
the birth of JESUS, they sunga song of peace. The people at his entry in
Jerusalem, Rom* 5. 1 Luc. 2. 14 Luc. 19* 38 John ^4. 27
they sung a song of peace that comes by him. The great Legacy that he has
left unto his Church and people is, My peace I leave unto you. And in a word he
is the Author of this peace, he is the purchaser of this peace, and he is the
effectual worker of this peace: for to the conscience of a distressed sinner,
it is not the voice of the Law, it is not the voice of a man's merit, it is not
the voice of an Angel, it is not the voice of the world, nor of any thing that
is in the world, that will bring quietness. It is the voice of JESUS CHRIST come
from Edom with Esaias 6;
his red garments dyed in his Blood that quieteth the heart, saying, peace be
unto thee. And no rest to a disquieted soul, till she come to take up this
voice, and say: I know it is the voice of my beloved. The great Cant. 2. 8
end of Christ's coming in the world, was to deliver Luc. ^. 74
men from fear, and put them to rest. Before this peace come to a man, where
can he turn him, or what way can he look but he has cause of great fear?
If he look up, he has cause of great fear, is not God his enemy? Is it not a
fearful thing to fall Heb. 10* ^1 Heb. 12. 29
in his hands who is a consuming fire? The man that is not in Christ, and
partaker of this peace, how dare he look to God? If he look below, has he
not matter of fear? for hell enlarges it self, and opens the Esaias 5. 14
mouth wide. If he look behind him, has he not matter of fear? for then is
the multitude of his bypast sins following him like an army. If he look
before him, has he not matter of fear? for O how fearful is death to a man
that is not reconciled with God. If he look to the creatures either above or
beneath, what has he but matter of fear? for how can they be in friendship
with him, who is not in friendship with their GOD and Creator. But a man
coming to Jesus Christ, and by a true faith ingraft in him, as a branch in the
stock. He has peace within that passes understanding. When he looks to God
in Christ, he is his Father, and so he is at peace with him, his Father to whom
he may safely trust and commit Romans 8 15
himself, to whom in his end, and at his death he may say, Father into thy
hands I commit my spirit. Psa. 31. 5 Luc. 23. 46 Romans 8. 1
When he looks to hell, it troubles not his peace, because there is
registrat in his soul this sentence infallible, There is no condemnation to me
that am in Jesus Christ. When he looks to his sins, they may appear as
Pharaohs host to follow him, but they shall never overtake him. The Lord has
drowned them in the bottomless depth of his mercy. When he looks Micah 7* 19
to death, death troubles not his peace, death can no^sting him, death can not
take his peace from him. But by death shall he come to a more full possession 1
Cor. 15. 55
of his peace, if he look to the Angels, they are his guard, if he look to
the inferior creatures, they are his servants, and in league and covenant with
him. And so as it is said here of the subjects of a peaceable Heb 1. 14
worldly Kingdom. Every man shall call his neighbor under his Vine, and under
the Fig Tree, so that man that is a subject of the spiritual Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, he may say: I will lay me down quietly, Psa. 4. ^
and rest in peace, for thou art my Lord and my God, thou have reconciled me to
thy Father. Since thou art with me, I fear not the world, the flesh, sin,
nor the devil.

Now for as much as all men are such lovers of external peace, that rather or
men dwell under a King, and in a Kingdom where there is daily found bellicous
instruments, the trumpet and the drum, the thundering of the canon, the
pitiful cry of them that are put to the edge of the sword, they would choose
rather with the loss of their commodity, to go and dwell where they may have
peace. And many upon this same respect, have changed their residence. Let us
learn this point of wisdom for our soul, that we may say rather then we live
under the noise of the Law, and thunder of the threatenings of it, the noise of
Gods Judgment, the fearful cry of our conscience, we will rather go and
choose to dwell in this Kingdom, and be subjects of this King, where there is
such peace and rest. Happy is he that is already a subject of this Kingdom:
seek to draw to it, for there is no true rest, peace nor tranquillity but here.

The second thing pointed at here of the subjects of this Kingdom, is their
safety and protection, and that is figured by lying under the shadow of a
tree, a vine or a fig tree. As the two former are conjoined. The Lord forgiueth
sin, upon which follows joy and peace of heart, so whom the Lord forgiueth,
and to whom he gives peace, them he takes as his own in his protection, so
that they rest safely under the shadow of his wings. These the Prophets
conioyneth in his 84 Psalm. The Lord is a Sun and shield to his own: by the
one signifying that he is comfort and Psalm. 84. 11
joy to his own: and by the other signifying, that he is their safety and
protection, all they upon whom has shined the beams of the loving countenance
of God, and to whom* God has shown his pleasant face, they Psa. 4. 6
live under his tuition, in security against all dangers and assaults. The same
two, as conjoined, are comfortably expressed in the words of the 27. Psalm. The
Lord is my light and my salvation, he has shined upon me like a bright Sun:
Then follows Psalm. 27. 1
his security by reason of this divine protection, Who^ shall I fear? when the
wicked, even my enemies come against me, they stumbled and fell, though an
host should come against me, I will not fear, though war should be raised,
yet in this will I trust. He that dwells in the secret of the most high, he
shall rest Psalm. 91* 1*
under the shadow of the Almighty. And to tell how sure this protection is,
he brings in example of one of the most fearful and dangerous evils that
can come to man, that is, the pestilence. And to express the terror of it, he
gives it many names, it is called the fearful pestilence, it is called the
snare of the Fowler, it is called the fear of the night, and the arrow that
slieth by day, And yet there is promised to the man that trusts in God,
safety and protection in the midst of the rage of the plague. From this
particular he would draw a general, he that rests in the secret of the most
high, he who is a member of this Kingdom of Jesus Christ, he dwells in
safety, he lies under the shadow of his own tree, free from all sort of
evil. But this appears to be against common sense and experience, for they
who have inward peace, have not always outward quietness. And the dearest
children of God have been, and are subject to great outward mutations and
troubles. How stands this doctrine of their protection and safety from
outward evils with their day lie experience in the contrair, may (...)*
not a godly man die by the sword, by famine, by pestilence? Does a man's
Religion and the fear of God put a man in that assurance, that he may say, I
can not fear the sword, famine, nor pestilence. For answer to this. The
protection of the godly from these outward evils under the shadow of Christ, it
stands in three things. First, they shall fear none of them. Secondly, 1
none of them shall come near them, as a 2
plague. Thirdly, they shall be assured of a joyful deliverie 3
from them: either they shall not touch thee, or if they touch thee, they shall
not harm thee. They shall not harm nor hinder thy abiding here als long as
God has appointed. Although they take away thy natural life, they shall not
harm thee, they but hasten thee to thy happiness, and make thee interchange
this life with a better.

Then, he who rests under the shadow of the most high, dwells in safety and
freedom from all these outward evils. First, because he is void of the 1
fear of them: for this is a sure word, he that fears God with a sonnely
fear, he needs fear no other thing in the world with that beastly and
slavish fear that tormenteth men's hearts. But he that fears not Genesis 15* 1
Deuteronomy, 28, 67
God, every thing in the world, sometimes the shake 2
of the leaf of a tree is fearful to him. Secondly, in all these outward
evils, they are free of fear, because the great fear being taken away, the
fear of hell, what needs a man fear any other thing. Thirdly, a 3
man fearing God, and being under this shadow, all these outward things he
fears them not, because he is assured none of them can come near him without
the appointment of his heavenly Father. And he will find nothing by the^ but
that which is for his well. For Math. 10* 29 30
does not all things work to the best to them that love God. Secondly, a man
dwelling and resting under this shadow, he has safety and protection, for he
is sure no plague can come near him* That is a sure word of the Psalm. If
thou lie under the covert of Psalm. 91. 10
Gods wings, no plague shall come near thy Tabernacle. I call a plague, a
punishment and vengeance of God for sin, begun here upon the wicked to be
continued after this life, and for ever. In this sense no plague can come near
him: Was not this Stone which God laid before Iehoshua, deeply graven and
sunken for thy sins, so that God in his Justice can never punish thee for them*
The pestilence may come near thee, but it is no plague to thee. The King
Ezechias had a Esaias 38* 11
pestilentiall byle, yet it was no plague to him, but a sweet messenger to make
him turn him to the wall, weep unto his God, and shed tears for his sins. Fam
in Verse 2 Genesis 42. 1.
may come near to thee, as it did to the house of Jacob, it was no plague to
him, it was a messenger to send him to Egypt, where he might learn and
consider the marvailous works of God toward him. Sickness may come to thee,
as to David. it was not to him a Psalm. 41. 3. 4
plague, it was a mean to sharpen his prayer, and make him say to his God,
Lord be merciful unto me, heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee. And
in end death may come near thee, and a violent death, as unto Steven, but who
can say it was a plague to him, when through that death he sees the Heavens
ready Acts 7. 56
and open to receive his soul. Thirdly, a man resting under this shadow, he
dwells in safety, and has sure and good protection, because if any of these
outward evils or calamities touch him, he is assured of one of these two
deliueries. First if God have further to employ him here, he can and will give
him temporal deliverie. Is not he Master and Commander of all these evils that
are evil to the sense of flesh and blood. Although the sword were as near thy
Gen* 22* 10
throat, as the knife was to Isaac, when his father Abraham was ready to kill
him, and offer him a sacrifice to GOD: yet if he have farther to do with thee,
he can say, hold. Although the pestilence were not only in thy house, but upon
thy body, as it was upon Ezechiah, he can say unto it, stay. Although Esaias 38.
21
thou were brought down to the gates of death, and of the grave, he can (if he
think meet) Psalm. 30* 3
bring thee back again. Secondly, if he be not 2
fred and delivered temporally here, he is sure of an eternal freedom and
deliverie, whereby being perfectly freed of all evil, and all tears wiped
from his eyes, he shall enjoy the Face of GOD, in his Psalm. 36. 9
light, see light with full comfort and contentment for ever. And thus by lying
under the Vine and the Fig Tree is shaddowed unto us, the safety and
protection of the members of this Kingdom of JESUS CHRIST. It is a point would
be marked for this cause. First, men seek many shifts, and use sundry 1.
means that they may dwell in safety, and be free of fear and danger. But
seek where they will, there is no true safety bur here: he that rests in
the secret of the most high, shall be sure under the shadow of the Psalm. 91. 1
Almighty. As for all other starting holes, if God be thy enemy, his hand can
draw thee forth of them. But out of the clift of this rock covered by the
Hand of God himself, the hand of man, nor the power of flesh Exodus 33. 22
and blood cannot draw thee. Then happy is the man who comes to the
resolution of David, Who is Psalm, ^8. 31
God save the Lord? and who is a rock save our God? And can say with him in the
32 Psalm, Thou art my Psalm. 32* 7
secret place, Thou preseruest me from trouble, and compassest me about with
joyful deliverance. Secondly, this same doctrine of Gods protection would 2
also be marked and considered of you, forasmuch as there is here some rule
whereby to know if you have been made partaker of the former great benefit,
the spiritual peace that flows of the remission of sins, whereby you are
delivered from the fear of hell, even if you fear none of these outward evils
with a base and servile fear. Where a man's fear is excessive in outward
troubles or calamities, our Master himself will thereby judge of the weakness
of his faith. So that his Disciples being afraid upon the stormy Sea, Math. 8.
26. Luc. 8. 25
he says to them, O ye of little faith. But you would discern here betwixt
fleshly boldness and presumption, and godly security in regard of this divine
protection. Some out of a fleshly humor and carnal presumption, will with
great and lofty words, set at defiance all sort of trouble, they care not the
sword, they fear not the pestilence, no man, say they, can die before his day.
All this as it is but swelling vanity, so have they no true nor solid comfort
in their soul, who are puffed up therewith. But remember that thy security in
the midst of these evils must be grounded this way, and go on by these
degrees. First no thing (...)*
can befall to me of accident, for God is the ruler of Psalm. 24* 1
all, and als long as he has the guiding (and that will be evermore) I that am
his child, need not to fear. Secondly, nothing can come to me that is evil,
because 2.
I am Christ's, and he will suffer no evil, as evil, to come near thee.
Thirdly, nothing coming to 3
me, can separate me from the love of God in Jesus Romans 8* 38* 39
Christ. The third thing pointed at in these words of the comparison, is the
sweet repast that the members of Christ find in him, and this is expressed by
two trees, the Fig Tree and the Vine. The one is meat, and the other is drink,
the meat is sweet, the drink is comfortable. So all the members of Christ have
in him and by him sweet repast and feeding, not only for necessity, but also
for delectation, not only meat for their hunger, but Physic and medicine for
all their sicknesses and diseases. If any man (says Christ to the Apoc. 3. 20.
Church of Laodicea) open unto me when I knock, I will come in unto him, and
suppe with him, and he with me: where by supping is signified two things:
First, the great familiarity of the Christian soul with 1
Christ. Secondly, the feeding and nourishment of the 2
soul with Christ, and upon his Passion and merit. Here by comparison from
earthly things, our feeding 1
upon him is resembled. He is to us both the Fig Tree and the Vine, meat and
drink. He is complete and perfect nourishment to the soul. 2. he is to us the
Figtree, 2
no fruit so sweet to the bodily taste, As the apprehension of Jesus Christ and
his merits to the forgiveness of sin, is sweet to the soul: he is to us the
Vine-tree. No such strength or refreshment can come of the Wine to a wearied
and languishing body, as is the strength and comfort which comes of the Blood
of Christ to a wearied soul, loadened with the burden of sin. Thirdly, he is
to us the Fig Tree and 3
the Vine, both meat and medicine; meat to feed us, medicine to cure our
disease. And therefore using this same comparison, the Church says to him in
the second Chapter of the Canticles, Stay me with thy flagons, and comfort me
with thy apples, for I am sick of Love. Cant. 2. 5


The uses of this point of doctrine are first, Seek 1
thy perfection in Christ only, and rest upon him as thy only and perfect
Savior, in whom is thy perfect nourishment, and all that thou stand in need
of: that in so doing thou may be able to meet that heavenly Oracle of the
Father, sounded from Heaven. As he has said, he is my well-beloved Son in whom I
Math. 17* 5
am well pleased: so thou may say, In him my soul has perfect contentment
and satisfaction. Secondly, 2
seeing nothing here that* concerns the body and nourishment thereof can
sufficiently shadow out the sweetness that is in CHRIST, and of the food which
the soul finds in him. And seeing he offers himself to you in his Word
and Sacraments. Then learn to believe, not because we say out of his Psa. 34.
8 1 Kings 10* 7
Word, it is so: But because you your selves have tasted and felt how sweet the
Lord is. And as the Queen of Seba coming to see Solomon, found her sight to
go beyond all the report that she had received: so if you your selves taste,
you shall find the sweetness that is in CHRIST, to be above all that is
reported thereof. What sweetness is in the Cup? None: but they that drink
truly of it can tell, when the soul drinks by faith the Blood of JESUS
CHRIST to the full remission of sins, and perfect reconciliation with God.
Thirdly, the sicknesses and diseases of the soul 3
are many, but here is medicine for all. Hardness of heart a great disease.
There is nothing to soften it but this medicine, being bathed in the Blood of
JESUS CHRIST that was shed for thy sins. Spiritual sopor and drowsinesse is a
great disease of the soul, nothing so powerful to waken it, as to drink of
this wine, even the Blood of JESUS CHRIST. The too quick and sharp sense of
sin, is a sickness in the soul that may make a man very sad and dolorous,
there is nothing to restore him but these flagons, this medicine of the death
and sufferings of JESUS CHRIST. Ardent thirst and desire to be rid of trouble,
yea and sometimes to be dissolved is a pain in the soul. O but says the
Church, stay me with thy flagons. In the apprehension of Christ and his merits,
we rest contented with the gracious dispensation of our God.

Thus they that are members of the spiritual kingdom of Christ, they find
into him sweet and comfortable repast and feeding. And Christ is to them the
Vine and the Figtree. And now in the days of the preaching of the Evangell,
and ministering the Sacraments thereunto annexed, is verified in our sight that
which the Church says in the second Chapter of the Canticles. The figtree
puts forth her green figs, and the Vines with their tender grapes, give a
good smell. Arise my love, my fair one, and come away. Let us not shift nor
make excuses, but being so fairly invited, let us come to the Supper of the
great King when all things are ready, all that we Luc, 14* 17
stand in need of, or may render us perfect delight. Let each one of us say
with the Church there, and say with the earnestnes of our soul. Lord let us
hear thy Cant. 2* 14
voice, for it is sweet, let us see thy face, for it is comely. There is a word
here yet that we would be remembered of, lest any man should think this a
doctrine of too great liberty, as though we had no more ado, but come eat of
Christ's fruit, and no fruit were ^raued of us, no; As Christ is compared to
these trees, so are we also in the Scripture compared to trees, and to the
Vinetree, to the Fig Tree, upon which should grow Luc. 13. 6 John 15. 5*
fruit to the glory of him who has called us. These two cannot stand nor agree
together, that thou should eat of the sweet figs of Christ, and drink of
his comfortable wine. And in his hunger offer him nothing Esaias 5. 4 Psalm. 69. 21
but sour grapes, in his thirst give him vinegar, and for food gall: that is,
to meet all his desires of thy holy conversation with no other thing but with
new sins and daily offenses, by which he is continually grieved. Remember
therefore the Lord seeks good fruit of you, as trees planted in his own
garden. If ye be like that fig tree in the 13. Chapter of Luke, that
notwithstanding all the pains that is taken upon it, Luc. 13* 6
still remains barren, and will yield no fruit: at last there will pass from
him a commandment to cut thee down: and in what Airth the tree falls, there
(...). 11. ^
it lies. If it fall to the North, it lies in the North: if to the South, it
lies in the South. Look in what estate death overtaketh thee, in that same
estate shall thou remain for ever. If thou fall in the cold North, void of
that warming heat of the consolation of Jesus Christ, in a cold and comfortles
estate shall thou remain for ever. If thou fall in the warm South, even in
the arms of JESUS CHRIST, reconciled to God by him, in that happy estate
shall Math. 21. 19
thou remain for ever and ever. You read of that cursed figtree in the 21
Chapter of Matthew, which having a show of leaves, yet Christ in his hunger
could not find one fig upon it. There is nothing more grievous and offensive
to God, then the fair leaves of a profession, wanting all true fruit of
godliness, and a curse more grievous is upon them, who have great show with no
substance, then they who openly make known what they are. Let us labor to be
that in deed, which we are by profession, that being trees in the garden of
God, we may be fruitful. A good fig to a hungry man, is better then ten
thousand leaves: So is a good fruit of our profession better and more
acceptable to God, then great ostentation, multitude of words, men having the
show of godliness, but denying 2 Timothy 3. 5
the power of the same.

The last point is, there is here also shadowed and resembled unto us the
pleasant communion and fellowship that the members of Christ have amongst
themselves, that as in the peaceable estate of a worldly kingdom, neighbor
does call and invite neighbor under the Vine, and under the Figtree: So in the
kingdom of Christ there is harmony, there is agreement among the members, and
there is sweet and heavenly communion: Communion of the Saints is an article of
the Creed, and I refer it to that place. There is two parts of this
Communion. Communion with the head, and communion among themselves. These words
of the text are of the last. Again, of this communion among the Saints there is
also two parts. The one is of the living with the living: and the other is, of
the living with the dead. It is of the first of these two that mention is made
here. This communion of the living with the living, stands in communion of
affections, communion of spiritual gifts, and in some cases communion of
temporal gifts. As for communion of affection, they are all of one heart to
God, to Christ, and among themselves. Thus is it said in the Acts 4 31
fourth Chapter of the Acts, That the multitude of believers were all of one
heart. And of this it comes Gal. 6. 2
to pass, that they continually bear the burden one Romans 12. 15
of another, they mourn with them that are grieved, and rejoice with them that
rejoice. 2. When each man communicates the grace that he has gotten, 1 Thessalonians.
5* 11
to the well and profit of his neighbor. And this is done when one edifieth
another by example, that they may say, I will do as yonder man does, by
admonition each one admonishing another, by exhortation each one provoking and
stirring up one another unto good, by consolation. A word in season to a Prove.
25. 11 ^am* 5* 16
man in distress, is like apples of gold and pictures of silver. By prayer
when we pray one for another. And this communion is well resembled in this
speech, when neighbor calls neighbor under the Vine, and under the
Fig Tree, that is, each member is a stirrer up of another to come to Christ,
and taste of his sweetness. I rejoiced, says David, when I heard neighbor call
neighbor, each one saying to another, Let us go psa. 122. 1
up to the house of God. And you have this same man Psalm* 34. 11
this way communicating his grace in the 34 Psalm. Come hither, and I shall
tell you what God has done for my poor soul, that is, I shall communicate my
experience with you, that ye may taste of the like. There is again communion
of temporal gifts, when according to thy power thou helpest the necessity of
thy poor brethren. All this proceeds from communion with God, and he that
says, he has communion with 1 John 4* 20
God and with Christ, and has not this communion with his members, he is a
liar. To testify therefore thy communion with him, keep this communion with
the Saints, love all them that love the Lord Jesus, be careful not Math. 18. 6
to give offense to any of these little ones that appertain to him. Let the
word of exhortation to thy brother be in thy mouth seasoned, so that he may see
thou love him. Let the word of comfort be in thy mouth to a wearied body.
That is a singular comfort that a man has who is of this communion, when he is
so heavy and sick, that he can scarce pray himself, yet he may say, I have the
prayers of all the members of this body, and the prayer of Jesus Christ is
effectual for us John 17
all. Let us walk in this communion of Saints, that may testify vntovs that we
have such communion with CHRIST our Head in this life. As when this life is
ended, we shall be brought to reign in glory with him. To whom with the Father
and the Holy Spirit be all honor, praise and glory for ever and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

