THE Fair Maid of the Exchange: With The pleasant Humors of the Cripple of
Fanchurch.

Very delectable, and full of mirth.

LONDON Printed for HENRY ROCKIT, and are to be sold at the shop in the
Poultrey under the Dyall. 1607.

Eleauen may easily act this Comedy.
Berry an old man for one. Bobbington for one. Gardener for one. Officers for
one. Mall Berry for one. Flower an humorous old man for one. Bennet for one.
Scarlet for one. Ralph for one. Cripple for one. Barnard for one. Flowers wife
for one. Vrsula for one. Boy for one. Anthony Golding gentleman for one.
Ferdin. Gold. gent. and Wood. for one. Frank Golding gentleman. for one.
Bowdler an humorous gallant. for one. Phillis the fair Maid for one. Fiddle
the Clown. for one.
Prologue.
THe humble Socke that true Comedians were,
Our Muse has don'd, and to your favoring eyes,
In lowest Plaine-song does her self appear,
Borrowing no colors from a quaint disguise:
If your fair favors cause her spirit to rise,
She to the highest pitch her wings shall rear,
And proud quothurnicke action shall devise,
To win your sweet applause she deemes so dear.
Mean while shore up our tender pamping twig,
That yet on humble ground does lowely lie:
Your favors sunneshine guilding once this sprig,
It may yield Nectar for the gods on hie:
Though our Invention lame, imperfect be,
Yet give the Cripple alms for charity.
Exit. The fair Maid of the Exchange.
Scene. I.
Enter Scarlet and Bobbington. EVen now the welcome twilight does salute
The Approaching night clad in black sable weeds.
Black as my thoughts, that harbor naught but death,
Thefts, murders, rapes and such like damned acts,
The infant babes to whom my soul is nurse:
Come Bobbinton, this starre-bespangled sky
Bodeth some good, the wether's fair and dry.
Bob. My scarlet-hearted Scarlet, gallant blood,
Whose bloody deeds are worthy memory
Of after ages, let me embrace thee: so,
So, now me thinks I fold a richer iemme,
Than wealthy India can afford to Spain:
There lies my treasure, and within thy arms
Security that never breeds harms.

Scar. Brave resolution, I am proud to see
So sweet a graft upon a wormwood tree,
Whose juice is gall, but yet the fruit most rare:
Who wreakes the tree, if that the fruit be fair?
Therefore resolve, if we a booty get,
It boots not whence, from whom, when, where, or what.

Bob. Well (God forgive us) here lets take our stands,
We must have gold although we have no lands.

Enter Phillis and Vrsula. Phil. Stay Vrsula, have you those futes of Ruffes,
Those stomachers, and that fine piece of Lawne,
Marck'd with the Letters C C. and S.

Vrsula. I have.

Phil. If your forgetfulness cause any defect,
You Are like to pay for it, therefore look unto it.

Vrsu. I would our journey had as safe an end,
As I am sure my Ladies ruffes are here,
And other wares which she bespoke of you.

Phil. It Is good; but stay, give me thy hand my girl,
It Is somewhat dark, come, let us help each other:
She past her word one of her gentlemen
Should meet us at the bridge, and that's not far,
I muse they are not come, I do assure thee,
Were I not much beholding to her Ladyship
For many kindenesses: Mile-end, should stand
This gloomie night unvisited for us.
But come, me thinks I may discern the bridge.
And see a man or two, in very deed
Her word, her love and all is honorable.

Bob. A prize young Scarlet, Oh, a gallant prize,
And we are Pirots that will seize the same
To our own uses.

Scar. But hold man, not too fast:
As far as I can gather by their words,
They take us for my Ladies Gentlemen,
Who as it seems should meet them on their way,
Then if thou say the word we will seem those men,
And by those means withdraw the^ from their way.
Where we may rifle them of what they carry,
I mean, both goods, and their virginity.

Bob. It Is well aduisde, but Scarlet, give me leave
To play the Gentleman and welcome them.

Scar. Enjoy thy wish.

Bob. Welcome you sacred stars,
That add bright glory to the sable night.

Scarl. Excellent, by heaven.

Bob. I am sorry your beautie's so discomfited,
Treading so many tedious weary steps,
And we not present to associate you.

Scar. Oh, blessed Bobbington.

Phil. Sir, I do thank you for this taken pains,
That as your worthy Lady promisde me,
We now enjoy your wished company.

Scar. She Is thine own boy, I warrant thee.

Bob. And I am proud, too proud of this imployme^t,
Come M. Scarlet take you that pretty sweet,
You see my Ladies care; she promisde one
But has sent two.

Phil. It Is honorably done.

Bob. This is your way.

Phil. That way, alas sir no.

Bob. Come, it is: nay then it shall be so.

Phil. What mean you Gentlemen?

Vrsu. O he will rob me.

Phil. Look to the box Vrsula.

Phil. and Vrsu. Help, help, murder, murder.

Enter the Cripple. Crip. Now you supporters of decrepite youth,
That mount this substance twixt fair heaven and earth,
Be strong to bear that huge deformity,
And be my hands as nimble to direct them,
As your desires to waft me hence to London.

Phil. and Vrsu. Help, help, heel ravish me.

Crip. My thinks I hear the sound of rauishment.

Phil. and Vrsu. Help, help.

Crip. Marry and will, knew I but where, and how.
What do I see?
Thieves full of lust beset virginity!
Now stir thee cripple, and of thy four legs
Make use of one, to do a virgin good:
Hence ravening curres: what, are you at a prey?
Will nothing satisfy your greedy chappes
But virgins flesh? I Will teach you prey on carrion, Fight and beat them away.
Pack damned rauishers, hence villains.

Phil. Thanks, honest friend, who from the gates of death
Has set our virgin souls at liberty.

Crip. Give God the glory that gave me the power.

Phil. I do, kind Sir, and think my self much bound
To him above, to thee that treads this ground,
And for this aid, I Will ever honor thee;
My honor you have saved redeemed it home:
Which were not done, by this time had been gone.

Crip. Hereafter more of this; but tell me now
The cause of these events, the effect, and how.

Phil. I Will tell you sir; but let us leave this place,
And onward on our way.

Enter Scarlet and Bobbington. Bob. It shall be so, see where they walk along,
I Will cross the other way and meet them full,
Keep thou this way, and when thou hearst us chat,
Come thou behind him snatch away his crutches,
And then thou know he needs must fall to ground,
And what shall follow leave the rest to me. Exit. Bobb.

Scar. About it then.

Crip. Y faith she is an honorable Lady,
And I much wonder that her Ladyship
Gives intertaine to such bad men as these.

Enter Bobbington. Bob. Stand thou that have more legs than nature gave thee.

Crip. Mongrell, i will choose.

Scar. Then go to sir, you shall.

All, All. Murder murder.

Enter Frank Goulding. Frank. Stay there my horse:
Whence comes this echo of extreamitie?

All. Help, help.

Frank. What do I hear, a virgin call for help?
Hands off dam'nd vilaines, or by heaven I swear,
I Will send you all to hell. Fight and drive them away.

Crip. Hold, forbear.
I came in rescue of Virginity.

Phil. He did, he did, and freed us once from thrall.
But now the second time they wrought his fall.

Frank. Now you distressed objects, do you tell
Upon what mount of woe your sorrows dwell.

Phil. First get we hence away, and as we go,
Kind gentleman, our fortunes you shall know.

Crip. Thanks worthy sir, may but the Cripple be,
Of power to gratify this courtesy,
I then shall think the heavens favor me.

Phil. No more now for Gods sake, let us hence.

Crip. If I do live, your love I Will recompense. Exeunt.

Enter Mall Berrie. Mall. NOw for my true-loues hand-kercher; these flowers
Are pretty toys, are very pretty toys:
O but me thinks the Peascod would do better,
The Peascod and the Blossom, wonderful!
Now as I live, i will surely have it so.
Some maids will choose the Gilliflower, some the Rose,
Because their sweet cents do delight the nose,
But very fools they are in my opinion,
The very worst being drawn by cunning art,
Seems in the eye as pleasant to the heart.
But here is the question, whether my love or no
Will seem content? I, there the game does go:
And yet i will pawn my head he will applaude
The Pescod and the flower, my pretty choice.
For what is he loving a thing in heart,
Loves not the counterfeit, though made by art?
I cannot tell how others fancy stand,
But I rejoice sometime to take in hand,
The simile of that I love; and I protest,
That pretty pescod likes my humor best.
But i will unto the Drawers, heel counsel me,
Here is his shop: alas, what shall I do?
He Is not within, now all my labor's lost,
See, see, how forward love is ever crossed,
But stay, what Gallant's this?

Enter M. Bowdler. Bow. A plague on this Drawer, he is never at home:
Good morrow sweetheart, tell me, how thou do?

Mall. Upon what acquaintance?

Bow. That Is all one, once I love thee, give me thy hand and say, Amen.

Mall. Hands off, sir Knave, and wear it for a favor.

Bowd. What? do thou mean thy love pretty fool?

Mall. No fool, the knave, O gross;
A gentleman and of so shallow wit!

Bowd. I know thou camst to the drawer.

Mall. How then?

Bowd. Am not I the propperer man?

Mall. Yes, to make an ass on.

Bowd. Will you get up and ride?

Mall. No, i will lackey by his side, and whip the ass.

Bowd. Come, come, leave your jesting, I shall put you down.

Mall. With that face! away you want-wit.

Bowd. By this hand, I shall.

Mall. By the asse-head you shall not.

Bowd. Go to, you are a woman.

Mall. Come, come, ye are a man.

Bowd. I have seen as fair.

Mall. I have heard as wise.

Bowd. As fair as Mall Berry.

Mall. As wise as young Bowdler.

Bowd. As M. Bowdler.

Mall. Hoida; come up.

Bowd. Go thou down then.

Mall. No good ass, bate an Ase of that.

Enter Barnard. Bar. What M. Bowdler, will it nere be otherwise?
Still, still a hunting, every day wenching?

Bowd. Faith sir, the modest behauior of this Gentlewoman,
Has insinuated my company.

Mall. Lord, how eloquence flows in this Gentleman!

Bowd. Faith, I shall put you down in talk, you were best to yield.

Mall. No sir, I will hold out as long as I may,
Though in the end you bear the fool away.

Bowd. Mean you by me? you gull me not?

Mall. No by this night, not I.

Bowd. For if you did, I would intoxicate my head.

Mall. Yea, I dare swear you will go a fool to bed.

Bowd. Mean you by me? you gull me not?

Bar. No, I dare swear the Gentlewoman means well.

Mall. And so I do indeed, himself can tell:
But this it is, speak Maidens what they will,
Men are so captions the 'ile ever conster ill.

Barn. To her sir, to her, I dare swear she loves you.

Bowd. Well then fair Mall, you love me as you say.

Mall. I never made you promise, did I, I pray?

Bowd. All in good time you will do, else you lie,
Will you not?

Mall. No for-sooth not I.

Bowd. Barnard, she gulles me still.

Barn. It Is but your mis-conceit, try her again:
You know by course all women must be coy;
To her again, then she may happily yield.
Not I, in faith.

Mall. Then mine shall be the field:
Wisdom, adue, once more faint heart farewell;
Yet if thou see the Drawer, I prithee tell him,
Mall Berry has more work for him to do;
And for your self, learn this when you do woe,
Arm you with courage, and with good take heed,
For he that spares to speak must spare to speed,
And so farewell. Exit.

Bowd. Call her again, Barnard.

Barn. She Is too swift for me:
Why this is the right course of gullerie,
What did you mean having so fair an aim
So fondly to let slip so fair a game?
Bowdler become a man for maids will stand,
And then strike home, art thou not young and lusty,
The minion of delight, fair from thy birth,
Adonis play-pheere, and the pride of earth?

Bowd. I know it, but a kind of honest blood
Tilts in my loins, with wanton appetites,
She bade me do a message to the Drawer,
And I will do it; there will come a day,
When Humfry Bowdler, will keep holiday,
Then Mall look to your self, see that you be sped,
Or by this light I Will have your maidenhead.

Larn. Spoke like a gallant, spoke like a gentleman, spoke like your self:
Now do I see some sparks of manhood in you,
Keep in that key, keep in the self same song,
I Will gage my head you will have her love ere long. Exeunt.

Enter Ferdinand, and Frank. Frank Will thou not tell me (brother Ferdinand)
Now by this light I Will haunt thee like a sprite,
Until I know whence springs this melancholy.

Ferd. O brother!
Thou art too young to reach the depth of grief,
That is immured within my hearts deep closet,
A thousand sighs keep daily centinell,
That beat like whirle-winds all my comfort back,
As many sobbes guard my distressed heart,
That no relief comes near to aid my soul,
Millions of woes like bands of armed men,
Stop up the passage of my sweet relief:
And art thou then persuaded that thy words,
Can any comfort to my soul afford?
No, no, good Frank, dear brother then forbear,
Unless with grief in me you will take a share.

Fran. Grief me no griefs, but tell me what it is
Makes my (sweet Ferdinand) thus passionate:
I Will conjure grief, if grief be such an evil,
In spite of Fortnne, Fates, or any Devil.

Ferd. Will thou not leave me to my self alone?

Fran. Brother, you know my mind,
If you will leave your dumpish melancholy,
And like my self banish that puling humor,
Or satisfy my exspectation,
By telling whence your sorrow does proceed
I will not only cease to trouble you,
But like a true skillful physician,
Seek all good means for your recovery.

Fer. Well brother, you have much importuned me,
And for the confidence I have in you,
That you will prove secret, I will now unfold,
The load of care that presses down my soul:
Know then good Frank, love is tke cause hereof.

Frank. How, love! why what is that love?

Ferd. A child, a little little boy that's blind.

Frank. And be ore-come by him! plagude by him!
Driven into dumps by him! put down by a boy!
Mastered by love! O, I am mad for anger:
By a Boy! is there no rosemary and bays in England
To whip the Ape? by a boy!

Ferd. I, such a boy as thou can never see,
And yet ere long may feel his tirranie:
He Is not visible, yet aims at the heart,
Woe be to those that feel his wounding dart;
And one of them I am: wounded so deep,
That in my passions I no mean can keep:
Unhappy time, woe to that dismal hour,
When love did wound me with fair Phillis flower:
O Phillis, Phillis; of flowers sweetest flower,
That ever garnished any princely bower:
Farewell, farewell, my woes will never remove,
Till I enjoy fair Phillis for my love. Exit.

Frank. What Is here, Phillis and love, and love and Phillis:
I have seen Phillis, and have heard of love;
I will see Phillis, and will hear of love:
But neither Phillis, nor the power of love,
Shall make me bond-slaue to a woman's beck.
Enter Anthony. Who Is here, my second brother malcontent?
I Will stand aside and note his passions.

Ant. O love, that I had never known thy power.

Frank. More lovers yet! what the devil is this love?

Anth. That these my wandering eyes had kept their stay;
That I my self had still been like my self;
That my poor heart had never felt the wound,
Whose anguish keeps me in a deadly sound:
Oh how deluding dreams this night ore-past,
Drenched my sad soul in pleasures floting sea!
Me thought I clasped my love within my arms,
And circling her, saved her from threatening harms;
Me thought there came an hundred in an hour
That sought to rob me of my sweetest flower:
But like a champion I did keep her still
Within this circle, free from every ill:
But when I waked and missd my Phillis there,
All my sweet joys converted into fear.

Frank. What brother Anthony, at prayers so hard?
Tell me what saint it is thou inuocates?
Is it a male, or female? howsoever,
God bless thee brother, thou art in a good mind,
But now I remember me, thy saint is blind.

Anth. How, blind?

Frank. I brother, blind, I heard thee talk of love,
And love is blind they say.

Anth. I would it were as blind as Ebon night,
That love had never hit my heart so right;
But what is love in your opinion?

Frank. A voluntary motion of delight,
Touching the superficies of the soul;
A substance less divine then is the soul,
Yet more then any other power in man
Is that which loves, yet neither is enforced,
Nor does enforce the heart of man to love:
Which motion as it vnbeseemes a man,
So by the soul and reason which adorn,
The life of man it is extinguished,
Even at his pleasure that it does possess.

Anth. Thus may the freeman jest at mannacles,
The furre-clad citizen laugh at a storm,
The swartie Moore diuing to gather pearl,
Challenge the scalding ardor of the sun;
And aged Nestor sitting in his tent,
May term wounds sport, and war but merriment.

Frank. It Is true, fore God it is, and now me thinks,
My heart begins to pity hearts in love:
Say once more, Anthony, tell me thy griefs,
Let me have feeling of my passion,
Possess me deeply of thy melting state,
And thou shall see.

Anth. That thou will pity me,

Frank. No by my troth, if every tale of love,
Or love it self, or foole-bewitching beauty,
Make me crosse-arme my self; studdy ay-mees;
Defy my hat-band; tread beneath my feet
Shoo-strings and garters; practice in my glass
Distressed looks, and dry my liver up,
With sighs enough to win an argosie.
If ever I turn thus fantastical,
Love plague me, never pity me at all.

Enter Phillis. Anth. Yonder she comes that holds me prisoner.

Frank. What? Phillis, the fair maid of the Exchange?
Is she god Cupids judge over men's hearts?
Brother, i will have one venny with her tongue,
To breathe my wit, and jest at passion:
By your leave Mistress Flower.

Phil. Your rude behavior scarce offers you welcome.

Frank. I prithee tell me Phillis, I hear say,
Thou keepst love captive in thy maiden thoughts.

Phil. That is a thought beyond your reach to know.

Frank. But shall I know it?

Phil. On what acquaintance? then might you deem me fond,
If (as you say) love be at my command.

Frank. May not your friend command as great a matter?

Phil. I Will know him well first, for that friend may flatter.

Frank. Why, I hope you know me.

Phil. That Is a question.

Frank Well, if you do not, you shall before I stir.
Know you yonder lump of melancholy,
Yonder bundle of sighs yonder wad of groans,
The same and I were chickins of one brood,
And if you know him, as I am sure you do,
Being his brother, you needs must know me too.

Phil. I partly have a guess of yonder Gentleman,
His name is Master Golding as I take it.

Ant. Golding I am, and thine sweet fair I am,
And yet not thine, but a most wretched man,
Thou know my cause of grief, my wound of woe:
And knowing it, why will thou see it so?
Put salues of comfort to my griefs unrest,
So may thou heal my sore of heaviness.

Frank Hark you fair maid, are you a Surgeon?
I prithee give my brother Anthony
Somewhat to heal the love sore of his mind,
And yet it is pity that he should have help:
A man as free as air, or the Suns rays,
As boundless in his function as the heavens,
The male and better part of flesh and blood,
In whom was powrde the quintessence of reason,
To wrong the adoration of his Maker,
By worshipping a wanton female skirt,
And making Love his Idol: fie dotard, fie,
I am ashamde of this apostacy,
I Will talk with her to hinder his complaints.
Phillis, a word in private ere you go,
I love ye sweet.

Phil. Sour, it may be so.

Frank Sour, and sweet; faith that does scarce agree.

Phil. Two contraries, and so be we.

Fra. A plague on this courting, come, we will make an end.

Phil. I am sorry for it since you seem my friend.

Frank I, but thou can not weep.

Phil. Then had I a hard heart.

Frank How say you? come brother, now to your part.

Ant. At your direction: no, this merry glee,
(Good brother) sorts not with my melancholy,
Love couets private conference, so my sorrow,
Craves your absence which I feign would borrow.

Franck. No marvel then we say that love is blind,
If it still revel in obscurity,
I will depart I will not hinder love,
I Will wash my hands fare well sweet turtle dove. Exit.

Phil. In Faith your brother is a proper man.

Franck. What Is your will with me.

Phil. Even what you please.

Franck. Did you not call me back?

Phil. Not, to my knowledge.

Franck. No, god's blood somewhat did, farewell, farewell.

Phil. He is a very very proper man.

Franck. I am in haste pray urge me not to stay.

Phil. The man does dote pray God he hits his way.

Franck. Fore God there is not a maid in all this town,
Should sooner win me, but my business calls me,
Give me thy hand, next time I meet with thee,
Lesser entreaty shall woo my company.

Phil. In Faith in faith.

Franck. In Faith, this was the hand, what means my blood,
Do I not blush, nor look extremely pale?
Is not my head a fire, my eyes nor heart?
Ha, art thou here? I feel thee love I faith,
By this light, well via farewell, farewell. Exit.

Antho. Now he is gonne, and we in private talk,
Say, will thou grant me love, will thou be mine?
For all the interest in my love is thine.

Phil. Your brother Ferdinand has vowed as much,
Na more, he sweres what man so ere he be,
Presumes to be corriuall in his love,
He will revenge it as an injury,
And clothe the thief in basest obloquie.

Antho. I, is my brother my competitor?
I Will court my love and will solicit thee,
Were Ferdinand himself in company.
What say thou to my suit?

Phil Time may do much, what I intend to do
I mean to pawse upon.

Ant. Let it be so;
If that my brothers hinderance be all,
I Will have thy love though by my brothers fall. Exit

Phil. Two brothers drowned in love, I and the third
For all his outward habit of neglect,
If I judge rightly if I did not dream,
Has dipped his foot too in Loves scalding stream.
Well, let them plead and perish if they will;
Cripple, my heart is thine, and shall be still. Exit.

Frank I am not well, and yet I am not ill,
I am, what am I? not in love I hope?
In love! let me examine my self, who should I love? who did I last converse
with, with Phillis: why should I love Phillis? is she fair? faith so so: her
forehead is pretty, somewhat resembling the forehead of the sign of the maiden
head in, etc. What Is her hair? faith to Bandora wiars, there is not the like
simile: is it likely yet that I am in love? What Is next? her cheeks, they have
a reasonable scarlet, never a Diars daughter in the town goes beyond her.
Well, yet I am not in love. Nay, she has a mole in her cheek too: Venus mole
was not more natural; but what of that, I am Adonis, and will not love. Good
Venus pardon me. Let us descend: her chinne, O Helen, Helen, where is your dimple
Helen? it was your dimple that bewitched Paris, and without your dimple I will
not love you Helen, No, yet I am safe. Her hand, lettes handle that, I saw her
hand, and it was lilly white, I touched her palm, and it was soft and smoothe:
and then what then? her hand did then bewitch me, I shall be in love now out of
hand. In love! shall I that ever yet have prophand love, now fall to worship
him? Shall I that have ieasted at lovers sighs now raise whirle winds? shall
I that have flowted ay-mees once a quarter, now practice ay-mees every minute?
shall I defy hat-bands, and tread garters and shoostrings under my feet?
shall I fall to falling bands and be a ruffin no longer? I must; I am now liege
man to Cupid, and have read all these informations in his book of statutes,
the first chapter, page millesimo nono, therefore, hat-band avaunt, ruff
regard your self, garters adue, shoo-strings so and so; I am a poor
enamorate, and enforcde with the Poet to say, Love orecomes all, and I that
love obey. Exit.


Enter M. Flower. Flow. Now before God a very good conceit,
But too much sleep has over taken me,
The night has played the swift-foote runne-away:
A good conceit, a very good conceit,
What Fiddle, arise Fiddle, Fiddle I say.

Enter Fiddle. Fid. Here Is a fidling indeed, I think your tongue be made of
nothing but fiddlestrings, I hope the fiddle must have some rest as well as the
fiddle-sticke: well Crowde, what say you to Fiddle now?


Flow. Fiddle, it is a very good conceit.


Fid. It is indeed, Master.


Flow. What do thou mean?


Fid. To go to bed again Sir.


Flow. No, Fiddle, that were no good conceit Fiddle,


Fid. What a fidling do you keep, are you not ashamde to make such music; I
hope sir, you will christen me anew shortly, for you have so worn this name,
that never a wench in all the town but will scorn to dance after my fiddle.


Flow. Well Fiddle, thou art an honest fellow.


Fid. That's more than you know, Master.


Flow. I Will swear for thee Fiddle.


Fid. You Will be damned then, Master.


Flow. I love thee Fiddle.


Fid. I had rather your daughter loved me,


Elow, It Is a rare conceit in faith.


Fid. I hold with you Master, if my young mistress would like so well of my
music, that she would dance after no bodies instrument but mine.


Flow. No Fiddle, that were no good conceit.


Fid. A shame on you, I thought you would not hear on that side


Flow. Fiddle, thou toldst me, M. Golding was in love with my daughter.


Fid. True, master; therein you say well.


Flow. And he entreats me to meet him at the star in cheap, to talk
concerning the match.


Fiddle True still master.


Flo. And I have sent for my neighbor M. Berry to bear me company,


Fiddle True, all this is most natural truth.


Flo. And now Fiddle, I am going on my way.


Fiddle Nay that's a lie, that has marrd all, was your conceit so tirde you
could tell troth no longer?


Flo. Why Fiddle, are we not going?


Fiddle No indeed sir, we are not, we stand still, your conceit failde in that.


Flo. Fore God it is true, I am not ready yet: what is he?


Enter Bobbington. Bob. By your leave sir, I would crave a word in secret sir.


Flo. At your pleasure, heeres none but my man Fiddle,


Fiddle I sir, master Fiddle is my name, sir Laurence Syro was my father.


Bob. Sir, this is my business, my name is Racket, I have a ship of my own
upon the river.


Flo. By your leave sir, captain Racket is your name.


Bob. Some call me so indeed sir.


Flo. It is a good conceit, I pray proceed.


Bob. Sir, I am now bound to sea, and wanting some money for the better
furnishing of my wants.


Flo. O, you would borrow money of me.


Bob. That's my suit indeed.


Flo. That's no good conceit.


Bob. Na, hear me sir, if you will supply me with ten pound til my return from
Barbary, I will leave in your hands a diamond of greater value than the money.


Flo. A Diamond, is it a Diamond, or but a counterfeit?
Fiddle, my spectacles.

Bob. It Is right, I assure you sir.

Flo. Then it is a good conceit: my spectacles.

Fiddle Here sir.

Flo. Where sir?

Fiddle You cannot see master, but I can.

Flo. O it is good, it is a good conceit: well sir, ten pound,
You are content if at three months end,
You bring me not ten pound in English coin,
This diamond shall be my proper own.

Bob. I am sir, shall I receive the money now?

Flow. I, here it is, and it is a good conceit.
Will you go near sir? Fiddle, make him drink.

Fiddle Will you approach caualiero, if I speak not in season, it is because I
was never in the salt country, where you sea captains use to march.

Bob. You are very eloquent sir, i will follow you.

Fiddle Let me alone then for leading my men.

Exeunt Bobbington and Fiddle. Flo. A diamond worth forty for ten pound,
If he return not safe from Barbary,
It Is good, a very good conceit. Enter M. Berry.

Berry By your leave master Flower.

Flow. Welcome good master Berry, I was bold to entreat your company to speak
with a friend of mine,
It is some trouble, but the conceit is good.

Berry No trouble at all sir, shall we be going?

Flo. With all my heart sir, and as we go,
I Will tell you my conceit, come master Berry. Exeunt.

Enter at one door Cripple, at the other Bowdler. Bow. Well met my dear
bundle of rue, well met.


Crip. As much to thee my humorous blossom.


Bow. A plague on thee for a dog, have I found thee? I hate thee not, and yet
by this hand I could find in my heart: but sir, Crutch, I was encountered.


Crip. Who became your bail?


Bow. Ye filthy dog, I was encountered by a wench I say.


Crip. In a wenches counter! I thought no less: what sir did thou lie in
the Knights ward, or on the masters side?


Bow. Neither, neither in faith.


Crip. Where then, in the Hole?


Bow. By this hand Cripple i will bombaste thee!


Crip. My crutch you mean for wearing out my clothes.


Bow. Thy nose dog, thy nose, a plague on thee, I care not for thee, and yet
I cannot choose but love thee. Sir, Mall Berry was here about work thou
have of hers, had thou been here to have heard how I spurrd the wench with
incantations, thou would have given me the praise for a jeaster.


Cripple True master Bowdler, I yield it you, I hold you for the absolutst
jeaster; O mis-take me not, I mean to jest upon, a juggling gull, a profound
seeing man of shallow wit, that Europe, na the world I think affords.


Bow. Well, thou art a Jew sir, I Will cut out that venomous tongue of thine one
of these days.


Cripple Do it in time, or I Will crush the heart of thy wit till I have straind
forth thy infectious humor to a drop in faith.


Enter Mall Berry. Bow. Here comes my amorous vessel, i will boorde her in faith:
Well encountered Mall, how do thou wench, how do thou?


Mall. What Is that to you sir?


Bow. Why I ask thee in kindness.


Mal. Why then in kindenes you are a fool for asking.


Bow. Is the fool your liuerie?


Mal. Not so, for then you wearing that liuerie, would term your self my
fool.


Bow. Meaning me? you gull me not, if you do:


Mal. What then?


Bow. O vile! I would take you down.


Mal. Alas it wants wit, his wit is too narrow.


Bowdler I Will stretch my wit but I will take you down.


Mal. How, upon the tenters? indeed if the whole piece were so stretched, and
very well beaten with a yeard of reformation, no doubt it would grow to a
goodly breadth.


Bow. By this hand.


Mal. Away you ass, hinder not my business.


Crip. Finely put off wench in faith.


Mal. By your leave master Drawer.


Cripple Welcome mistress Berry, I have been mindful of your work.


Mal. Is it done?


Crip. Yes, and here it is.


Mal. Here is your money.
Cripple, ere long i will visit thee again,
I have some ruffes and stomachers to draw.

Crip. At your pleasure.


Bow. By thy leave Mall, a word.


Mal. Away you bundle of nothing, away. Exit Mal.


Crip. She has a wit as sharp as her needle.


Bowdler Alas, my self have been her whetstone with my conference in
The Exchange any time these many years.


Crip. In The Exchange! I have walked with thee there, before the visitation of
my legs, and my expense in timber, at the least a hundred times, and never
heard thee speak to a wench.


Bow. That's a lie, thou were by when I bought these gloves of a wench.


Cripple. That's true, they cost thee an English shilling at a word, mary it
follows in the text, that your shilling proou'd but a harper, and thou were
shamefully arraignd for it.


Bow. Good, but I excusde my self.


Crip. True, that thou thoughtst it had bin a shilling, mary thou had never
an other, nor so much as a shilling more to change it. Thou talk in
The Exchange!


Bowdler Indeed my best gift is in the morning when the Maids visit my
chamber, with such necessaries as I usually buy of them.


Crip. O thou art one of those, that if an honest Maid be sent to thy chamber
with her Mistress goods, and return as honest and chaste as the moon: Sir,
you are one of those that will slander the poor wenches, by speaking
liberally of their pronenesse to love; and withal, brag how cheap you have
bought their ware metaphorically, when indeed they depart as honest as they
came thither, and leave you all the day after to sigh at the sight of an ill
bargain.


Bowd. When will thou spit out this serpents tongue of thine?


Crip. When will thou cast off this anticke garment of ostentation? do it, do
it, or by the Lord I will impresse thy vanities, and so anotomize the very
bowels of thy absurdities, that all the world shall take notice of thee for a
fool, and shun thee as the pox or the pestilence.


Enter Barnard. Barn. News, news, news.

Bowd. Sweet rogue, what is the matter?

Barn. By Jesus the rarest dancing in christendom.

Bowd. Sweet rascal, where, O do not kill my soul
With such delays, tell me kind rogue, O tell me where it is.

Barn. At a wedding in Gracious street.

Bow. Come, come, away, I long to see the man
In dancing Art that does more than I can.

Bar. Than you sir! he lives not.

Bow. Why I did understand thee so.

Bar. You only excepted, the world besides
Cannot afford more exquisite dauncers
Than are now capring in that bridale house.

Bow. I will behold them, come crutch, thou shall with us.

Crip. Not I.

Bow. Down dog, i will have thy company.

Crip. I have business.

Bow. By this hand thou shall go with us.

Crip. By this leg I will not.

Bow. A lame oath, never stand to that.

Crip. By this crutch but I will.

Bar. Come, you loose time, supper is done long since,
And they are now a dancing.

Enter master Berry and Fiddle. Berry Stay Fiddle with thy torch, Gentlemen,
good eeuen.

Barn. Master Berry!

Bow. Master Berry, I wish you well sir: master Fiddle I am yours for a
congee.

Fiddle After the French salutation I am yours for the like courtesy.

Berry Master Barnard, to morrow is your day
Of payment sir, I mean the hundred pound,
For which I have your bond, I know it is sure,
You will not break an hour; then if you please
To come to dinner sir, you shall be welcome.

Barn. Sir, I did mean to visit you at home,
Not to pay down the money, but entreat
Too months for-bearance.

Ber. How! forbear my money?
Your reason, why I should forbear my own?

Barn. You know at first the debt was none of mine,
I was a surety, not the principal:
Besides, the money that was borrowed
Miscarried in the venture; my friend died,
And once already have you prisoned me,
To my great charge, almost my ouer-throw,
And somewhat raisde the debt by that advantage:
These things considered, you may well forbear
For two months space, so small a sum as this.

Ber. How! I may forbear; Sir, I have need of money:
I may indeed sit monilesse at home,
And let you walk abroad spending my coin.
This I may do, but sir you know my mind,
If you do break your day, assure your self,
That I will take the forfeit of your bond.

Crip. The forfeit of his bond!

Ber. I sir, the forfeit; it is no charity
To favor you that live like Libertines:
Here Is a Crew!

All. A crew; what Crew?

Ber. A crew of unthrifts, careless dissolutes,
Licencious prodigalls, vilde tauern-tracers.
Night watching money-wasters, what should I call ye?
O I want words for to define you rightly;
But this I know, London never fostred such
As Barnard, Bowdler, and this paltrie crutch.

Crip. And you want words sir, i will teach thee words;
Thou should have come to every one of us
As thus: thou wretch, thou miser thou vilde slave
And drudge to money, bondman to thy wealth,
Apprentice to a penny, thou that hourds up
The fry of silver pence and half-penies,
With show of charity to give the poor,
But putst them to increase, where in short time
They grow a child's part, or a daughters portion.
Thou that inuents new clauses for a bond
To cousin simple plainness: O not a Dragon,
No, nor the devils fangs are half so cruel
As are thy claws; thus, thus thou should have railde:
The forfeit of his bond, O I could spit
My heart into his face; thou blood-hound that do hunt
The dear, dear life of noble Gentry.

Berry. Cripple, it is known I am an honest man;
But for thy words, Barnard shall fare the worse:
As for thy self.

Fid. Who he sir, never regard him, I know the vildest thing by him, O it is
abominable!

Ber. Do thou so Fiddle, speak, hold, take thou that speak of his shame,
speak freely, i will protect thee.

Fid. I tell you sir, twill make your hair to stand on end as stiff as a
Rubbing-brush, to hear his villainies.
What Is this you have given me?

Ber. A shilling Fiddle.

Fid. Have you any skill in Arithmeticke?

Ber. Why do thou ask?

Fid. Sir, I would have you to multiply; could you not make this one shilling
two or three? I would not be known to beg, but if out of your cunning you can
do this trick of multiplication, I shall speak the better.

Ber. O there is another shilling for thee, now let me hear what villainies thou
can charge the Cripple with.

Fid. So sir, this is multiplication, now sir, if you know the Rule of addition
you are an excellent Scholar: can you not add?

Berry. What do thou mean?

Fid. An other shilling sir.

Ber. There is another shilling; now Fiddle speak.

Fid. Why then attend you Hills and Dales, and stones so quick of hearing,
this Cripple is.

All. What is he villain?

Fid. An honest man, as any is in all the town.

Ber. An honest man!

Fid. I by this silver, and as good a fellow as ever went upon four legs, if
you would multiply till midnight, I would never speak otherwise.

Ber. Fiddle, thou art a knave, and so is he:
Come let us home; Barnard, look to thy bond,
If thou do break thy day, I do protest,
By yon chaste Moon.

Fid. The chaste Moon, why the Moon is not chaste.

Ber. How prou'st thou that?

Fid. Why sir, there is a man in the middle of her, how can she be chaste then?

Berr. Then by my life I swear, i will clap him up
Where he shall see neither the sun nor moon,
Till I be satisfied the utmost penny,
And so farewell. Exit.

Fid. Gallants goodnight; if time and place were in prosperity, I were yours
for an hours society, I must after yon mulbery with my torch: adue dear
hearts, adue. Exit.

Bowd. Come Barnard, lets to the dancing, lets tickle it to night, For to
morrow thy heels may be too heavy.

Barn. Alls one; my heart shall be as light as fire.
Come, shall we go?

Bowd. Cripple, will you along?

Crip. My business stays me here.

Bowd. Farewell then dog of Israel, farewell. Exeunt.

Crip. Als one, my heart shall be as light as fire:
Sblood, were I endebted a hundred pound,
My fortune faild, and fled as Barnards are,
Not worth a hundred pence as Barnards is:
I shoud be now devising sentences
And Caueats, for posterity to carue
Upon the inside of the counter wall:
Therefore I Will now turn provident; I Will to my shop
And fall to work.

Enter Phillis. Phil. Yonder Is his shop, O now you gods above
Pity poor Phillis heart, that melts in love;
Instruct the Cripple to find out my love,
Which I will shadow under the conceit
Of my invention for this piece of work;
O teach him how to yield me love again,
A little little love, a dram of kind affection,
His many virtues are my true direction:
By your leave M. Drawer.

Crip. Welcome Mistress Flower, what is your pleasure?

Phil. My cause of coming is not unknown to you,
Here is be spoken work which must be wrought
With expedition, I pray have care of it;
The residue I refer to your direction:
Only this hankercher, a young Gentlewoman,
Wishd me acquaint you with her mind herein:
In one corner of the same, place wanton love,
Drawing his bow shooting an amorous dart,
Opposite against him an arrow in a heart,
In a third corner picture forth disdain,
A cruel fate unto a loving vain:
In the fourth draw a springing Laurel tree,
Circled about with a ring of poesy: and thus it is: Love wounds the heart and
conquers fell disdain,
Love pitties love, seeing true love in pain:
Love seeing Love how faithful Love did breath,
At length impala love with a Laurel wreath.

Thus you have heard the Gentle-womans mind,
I pray be careful that it be well done:
And so I leave you, more I feign would say,
But shame forbids and calls me hence away. Exit.

Crip. Sweet fair, I pity, yet no relief
Harbors within the closet of my soul:
This Phillis bears me true affection,
But I detest the humor of fond love:
Yet am I hourly solicited
As now you see, and feign she would make known
The true perplexion of her wounded heart:
But modesty checking her forwardness
Bids her be still; yet she in similies
And loue-comparisons, like a good Scholar
By figures makes a demonstration
Of the true love enclosed in her heart.
I know it well, yet will not tell her so,
Fancy shall never marry me to woe;
Take this of me, a young man's never marred,
Till he by marriage from all joy be barred. Exit.

Enter Frank singing, Frank. Yo gods of Love that sits above, and pity Lovers
pain,
Look from your thrones upon the mones, that I do now sustain.
Was euerman thus tormented with love?
Song.
Ye little birds that sit and sing
Amidst the shadie valleys,
And see how Phillis sweetly walks
Within her Garden alleyes;
Go pretty birds about her bower,
Sing pretty birds she may not lowre,
Ah me, me thinks I see her frown
Ye pretty wantons warble.
Go tell her through your chirping bills,
As you by me are bidden,
To her is only known my love,
Which from the world is hidden:
Go pretty birds and tell her so,
See that your notes strain not too low,
For still me think I see her frown,
Ye pretty wantons warble.
Go tune your voices harmony,
And sing I am her Lover;
Strain loud and sweet, that every note,
With sweet content may move her:
And she that has the sweetest voice,
Tell her I will not change my choice,
Yet still me thinks I see her frown,
Ye pretty wantons warble.
O fly, make haste, see, see she falls
Into a pretty slumber,
Sing rownd about her rosy bed
That waking she may wonder,
Say to her, it is her lover true,
That sends love to you to you:
And when you hear her kind reply,
Return with pleasant warblings.
Auaunt delusion, thoughts cannot win my love;
Love, though divine, cannot divine my thoughts:
Why to the air then do I idle here
Such heedles words far off, and never the near;
Hie thee young Frank, to her that keeps thy heart,
There let sweet words they sweeter thoughts impart.
But stay; here comes my mellancholly brothers both,
I Will step aside, and hear their conference. Exit aside.

Antho. What? is my brother Ferdinand so near?
He is my elder, I must needs give place;
Anthony, stand by, and list what he does say,
Haste calls me hence, yet I will brook delay.

Ferd. Shall I exclaim against fortune and mishap.
Or rail on Nature who first framed me?
Is it hard chance that keeps me from my love?
Or is this heap of loathd deformity,
The cause that breeds a blemmish in her eye?
I know not what to think, or what to say,
Only one comfort yet I have in store,
Which I will practice though I never try more.

Anth. Oh, for to hear that comfort I do long,
I Will turn it to a strain to right my wrong.

Ferd. I have a brother rival in my love;
I have a brother hates me for my love;
I have a brother vows to win my love;
That brother too, he has incenst my love,
To gain the beauty of my dearest love;
What hope remains then to enjoy my love?

Anth. I am that brother rival in his love,
I am that brother hates him for his love:
Not his but mine, and I will have that love,
Or never live to see him kiss my love;
What thou erst said, I am that man alone,
That will depose you brother from loves throne;
I am that man, though you my elder be,
That will aspire beyond you one degree.

Ferd. I have no means of private conference,
So narrowly pursues my hinderer,
No sooner am I entered the sweet court
Of lovely rest, my loves rich mansion,
But rival love to my affection
Follows me, as a soon enforced straw,
The drawing virtue of a sable jeat:
This therefore's my determination,
Within the close womb of a sealed paper,
Will I right down in bloody Characters,
The burning zeal of my affection:
And by some trusty messenger or other,
Convey the same into my loves own hand;
So shall I know her resolution,
And how she fancies my affection.

Antho. Yet subtle Fox, I may perchance to cross you:
Brother, well met; whither away so fast?

Ferd. About affairs that do require some haste.

Antho. It Is well done brother, you seek still for gain.

Ferd. But you would reap the harvest of my pain:
Farewell good brother, I must needs be gone,
I have serious business now to think upon:
Yet for I fear my brother Anthony,
I Will step aside and stand a while unseen,
I may perchance discry which way he goes;
Thus policy must work twixt friends and foes. Aside.

Anth. So, he is gone, I scarsely trust him neither;
For it is his custom, like a sneaking fool,
To fetch a compass of a mile about,
And creep where he would be; well, let him pass,
I heard him say, that since by word of mouth
He could not purchase his sweet mistress favor,
He would endeavor what his wit might do
By writing, and by tokens; O it is good
Writing with ink; O no, but with his blood.
Well, so much for that, now I know his mind
I do intend not to be far behind:
Heel send a letter, I will write another,
Do what you can, i will be before you brother;
I Will entercept his letter by the way,
And as time serves, the same I will bewray:
Mine being made, a Porter I Will procure,
That shall convey that heart-inticing lure;
About it then, my letter shall be writ,
Though not with blood, yet with a reaching wit. Exit.

Ferd. And shall it so, good brother Anthony?
Were you so near when we in secret talked?
Wilt never be otherwise? will you dog me still?
Enter Frank. Welcome sweet Frank; such news I have to tell,
As cannot choose but like thee passing well:
Thou know my love to Phillis?

Frank. Brother, say on.

Ferd. Thou likewise art acquainted with my rival,
And I do build upon your secrecy.

Frank. Sblood, and I thought you did not, I Would retire:
Brother you know, I love you as my life.

Ferd. I dare profess as much, and there-vpon
Make bold to crave thy furtherance, in a thing
Concerns me much.

Frank. Out with it brother;
If I shrink back, repose trust in some other.

Ferd. Then thus it is; my brother all in haste
Is gone, to write a letter to my love,
And thinks thereby to cross me in my suit,
Sending it by a Porter to her hand;
If ever therefore thou will aid thy brother,
Help me in this, who seeks help from no other.

Frank. By the red lip of that dainty saint, I Will aid thee all I may.

Ferd. It is enough; then brother I Will provide
A Porters habit, alike in every point,
Will you but so much humble your estate,
To put your self in that so base attire,
And like so mean a person wait his coming,
About his door which will not be ore long,
Thou shall for ever bind me to thy love.

Frank Brother, it is a base task, by this light,
But to procure a further force of love,
I Will doot, in faith I will sweet Ferdinand,
About it then, provide thee some disguise,
But see you stay not long in any wise,
Here shall you find me, go, dispatch.

Ferd. For this i will love thee everlastingly.

Frank Mean time i will cross your love and if I can.
Heeres no villainy twixt us three brothers:
My brother Ferdinand he would have the wench,
And Anthony he hopes to have her too:
Then what may I? faith hope well, as they do.
Neither of them know that I love the Maid;
Yet by this hand I am half mad for love.
I know not well what love is, but it is sure,
I Will die if I have her not, therefore
Good brothers mine beguile you one an other,
Till you be both gulld by your younger brother.

Enter Ferdinand. Ferd. Here is a Porters habit, on with it brother.

Frank Your hand then brother for to put it on,
So now it is well, come brother, what is my task?

Ferd. This first, that thou make haste to Anthonies,
Ask for a burden and thou shall be sure
To have his letter to my dear love Phillis,
Deliver it not, but keep it to thy self,
Till thou have given this paper to her hands,
Whose lines do intimate thy chaste desires.
This is the sum of all, good Frank, make haste,
Love burns in me, and I in love do waste. Exit.

Frank Waste still, but let me in my love increase,
Now would not all the world take me for a Porter?
How strangely am I metamorphosed?
And yet I need not be ashamed neither,
Jove when his loue-scapes when he attempted ever
Transformd himself, yet ever sped in love,
Why may not I then in this strange disguise?
This habit may prove mighty in loves power,
As beast, or bird, bull, or swanne, or golden shower.

Enter Anthony. Antho. Within the center of this paper square,
Have I wrote down in bloody characters,
A pretty poesy of a wounded heart,
Such is loves force once burst into a flame,
Do what we can we cannot quench the same,
Unless the tears of pity move compassion,
And so quench out the fire of affection,
Whose burning force heats me in every vain,
That I to Love for safety must complain:
This is my Orator whose dulcet tongue
Must plead my love to beauteous Phillis.
Now for a trusty messenger to be
Imployd herein betwixt my love and me,
And in good time I see a Porter nie,
Come hither fellow, dwellst thou here about?

Frank Sir, my abiding is not far from hence,
And Trusty John men call me by my name.

Anth. Can thou be trusty then, and secret too,
Being imployd in weighty business?

Frank Sir, I was never yet disproou'd in either.

Anth. Then mark me well, in Cornhill by The Exchange,
Dwells an old Merchant, Flower they call his name,
He has one only daughter, to whose hands,
If thou conveniently can give this letter,
I Will pay thee well, make thee the happiest Porter
That ever undertook such business.

Frank Sir, give me your letter, if I do it not,
Then let your promisde favor be forgot.

Anth. Anthony Golding is my name, my friend,
About it then, thy message being done,
Make haste to me again, till when, I leave thee. Exit.

Frank And so fare thee well loving brother,
It had bin better you had sent some other,
Let me consider what is best be done,
Shall I deliver his letter? No:
Shall I convey it to my rival brother? Nor so:
Shall I tear the same? No not for a million:
What shall I then do? mary like a kind brother,
Open the book, see what is written there,
If naught but love, in love have thou a share.
Brother, by your leave I hope you will not deny,
But that I love you: God bless my eie-sight,
A Sonnet it is in verse, now on my life
He has perusde all the impressions
Of Sonnets since the fall of Lucifer,
And made some scuruy quaint collection
Of fustian phrases, and vplandish words.
A Letter.
Fair glory of virtue, thy enamorate
Pleades loyally in pure affection,
Whose passion Love do thou exonorate,
And he shall live by thy protection:
Nor from thy love shall he once derogate,
For any soul under this horizon,
Yield thou to love, and I will fail in neither,
So love and truth shall always live together.
Yours devoted, Anthony Golding.




Before God, excellent good Poetry,
God's Blood what means he by this line?
For any soul under this horizon?
No matter for his meaning, mean what he will,
I mean his meaning shall not be delivered,
But for my other trust my other letter,
That shall come short too of fair Phillis hands,
There is a Cripple dwelling here at hand,
That's very well acquainted with the Maid,
And for I once did rescue them from thieues,
Swore, if he liude, he would requite that kindness,
To him I will for council, he shall be
My tutor by his wit and policy. Exit.

Enter Boy in a Shop cutting of square parchments, to him enter Phillis. Phi.
Why how now sir, can you find naught to do,
But waste the parchment in this idle sort?

Boy I do but what my mistress gave in charge.

Phi. Your mistress! in good time: then sir it seems
Your duty cannot stoop but to her lewre:
Sir, I will make you know, that in her absence
You shall account to my demand, your mistress
And your mistress will is thus, and thus you will do:
But answer to the motion I have made,
Or you shall feel you have another mistress now:
Speak, why when I say?

Boy Indeed I know your glory.
Your pride's at full in this authority:
But, were it not for modest bashfulnesse,
And that I dread a base contentious name,
I would not be a byword to The Exchange,
For every one to say (my self going by)
Yon goes a vassal to authority.

Phil. You would not sir: had I the yeard in hand,
I Would measure your pate for this delusion,
And by my maiden chastity I swear,
Unless Reach for the yeard, and the boy stay her hand.

Boy What unless! I know your wilfulnes,
These words are but to show the world your humor.
I often use to square these parchment pieces
Without occasion: I am sure you are not witting
The Lawnes you lately bought of master Brooks
Are new come home, brought by the Merchants servant:
I know you are short membred, but not so short
Of your remembrance, that this is news to you.

Phil. You Are best to brave me in a taunting humor.
Wilt please you open the door? where is Vrsula?
Oh heeres good stuff, my backe's no sooner turned
But she must needs be gadding, and where I pray?

Boy. She Is gone to M. Pawmers on the other side.

Phil. On great occasions, sir, I doubt it not.

Sit and work in the shop. Enter M. Richard Gardener booted, and M. William
Bennet, two gentlemen, at one end of the stage. Ben. Kind Dicke, thou will
not be unmindful of my duty
To that same worthy Arts-master, Lyonell Barnes.

Guard. Thy love, sweet Will, has chainde it to my memory.

Ben. Then with this kind embrace I take my leave,
Wishing thou were as safe arrived at Cambridge,
As thou art at this present near the Exchange.

Guard And well remembered, kind Will Bennet,
Others affairs made me obliuious
Of mine own; I pray thee go to the Exchange,
I have certain bands, and other linen to buy,
Prithee accompany me.

Ben. With all my heart.

Guard. Sure, this is a beauteous gallant walk.
Were my continual residence in London,
I should make much use of such a pleasure:
Me thinks the glorious virgins of this square
Gives life to dead struck youth; Oh heavens!

Ben. Why how now Dicke?

Guard. By my sweet hopes of an hereafter bliss,
I never saw a fairer face then this:
O for acquaintance with so rich a beauty.

Ben. Take thy occasion, never had thou better.

Guard. Have at her then.

Phil. What lack you Gentlemen?

Guard. Faith nothing, had I thee.
For in thine eye all my desires I see.

Phil. My shop you mean sir, there you may have choice
Of Lawnes, or Cambricks, Ruffes well wrought, Shirts,
Fine falling bands of the Italian cut-worke,
Ruffes for your hands, wast-cotes wrought with silk,
Night-caps of gold, or such like wearing linen,
Fit for the Chap-man of what ere degree.

Guard. Faith virgin in my days, I have worn and out-worne much,
Yea, many of these golden necessaries;
But such a gallant beauty, or such a form
I never saw, nor never wore the like:
Faith be not then unkind, but let me wear
This shape of thine, although I buy it dear.

Phil. What has the Tailor plaide his part so well,
That with my gown you are so far in love?

Guard. Mistake not sweet your garment is the cover,
That vailes the shape and pleasures of a lover.

Phil. That argues then, you do not see my shape,
How comes it then you are in love with it?

Guard. A garment made by cunning Arts-mens skill,
Hides all defects that Natures swaruing hand
Has done amiss, and makes the shape seem pure;
If then it grace such lame deformity,
It adds a greater grnce to purity.

Phil. Oh short lived praise! even now I was as fair
As any thing; now fouler nothing.
Dissembling men, what maid will credit them?

Guard. How misconstruction leads your thoughts awry.

Ben. I prithee Dicke adone; think on thy journey.

Phil. You counsel well sir, I think the Gentleman
Comes but to whet his wit, and it is but need;
It Is blunt enough, he may ride far upon it.

Guard. Mary gip Minx.

Phil. A fine word in a Gentleman's mouth;
It Were good your back were toward me,
There can I read better content, then in the face of lust.

Guard. Now you display your virtues, as they are.

Phil. What am I, you, Cipher, parrenthesis of words,
Stall-troubler, prater, what sit I here for naught?
Bestow your lustful court-ships on your minions,
This place holds none; you and your companion
Get you down the stairs, or I protest
I Will make this squared walk too botte for you.
Had you been as you seemd in out-ward show,
Honest Gentlemen, such terms of vilde abuse
Had not been proffred to virginity;
But Swains will quickly show their base desent.

Guard. This is no place for brawles, but if it were,
Your impositions are more then I would bear.

Ben. Come, she is a woman, I prithee leave her.

Exeunt Guard. and Ben. Phil. Nay sure a maid, unless her thoughts deceive her.
God speed you well: sir boy.

Boy. Anon.
Got to the Starchers for the suit of ruffes,
For M. Bowdlers bands, and M. Goldings shirts,
Lets have a care to please our proved friends:
As for our strangers, if they use us well,
For love and money, love and ware we will sell. Exeunt

Enter Frank. The Cripple at work. Frank. Now fortune be my guide, this is
the shop;
And in good time the Cripple is at work:
God speed you sir.

Crip. Welcome honest friend; what is thy will with me?

Frank. I would entreat you read a letter for me.

Crip. With all my heart:
I know the maid to whom it is directed.

Frank. I know you do Cripple, better then you think.

Crip. I pray you, what Gentleman writ the same?

Frank. Sir, a Gentleman of good learning, and my friend;
To say the truth, it was written for my self,
Being somewhat overtaken with fond love,
As many men be sir.

Crip. Why art thou persuaded, or haste thou any hope,
So beautiful a virgin as she is,
Of such fair parentage; so virtuous,
So gentle, kind, and wise as Phillis is,
That she will take remorse of such base stuff,
I think not so: but let me see, what is thy name?

Frank. Trusty John men call me sir.

Crip. How comes it then your blinded Secretary,
Has writ another name unto the letter?
Yours devoted Anthony Golding.
But sure this letter is no right of thine,
Either thou foundst the same by happy chance,
Or being employed as a Messenger,
Plaid'st legerdemain with him that sent the same:
Wherefore the maid (well known unto my self)
I will reserve the letter to her use,
That she, if by the name herein set down,
She know the Gentleman that does wish her well,
She may be grateful for his courtesy.

Frank. Nay then I see I must disclose my self:
Sir, might I build upon your secrecy,
I would disclose a secret of import.

Crip. Assure thy self I will not iniure thee.

Frank Then Cripple know, I am not what I seem,
But took this habit to deceive my friend:
My friend indeed, but yet my cruel foe;
Foe to my good, my friend in outward show:
I am no Porter, as I seem to be,
But younger brother to that Anthony;
And to be brief, I am in love with Phillis,
Which my two elder brothers do affect:
The one of them seeks to defeat the other:
Now if that I, being their younger brother
Could gull them both, by getting of the wench,
I would requite it with loves recompense.
Cripple, thou once did promise me thy love,
When I did rescue thee on Mile-end Green,
Now is the time, now let me have thy aid,
To gull my brothers of that beauteous maid.

Crip. Sir, what I promisde I will now perform;
My love is yours, my life to do you good,
Which to approve, follow me but in all,
We Will gull your brothers in the wench, and all.

Frank. Say thou me so friend, for that very word
My life is thine, command my hand and sword.

Crip. Then let me see this letter; it should see me
You undertook to carry from your brother
To the maid.

Frank I did, and from my brother Ferdinand,
This other letter to the same effect.

Crip. Well, list to me, and follow my advise,
You shall deliver neither of them both;
But frame two letters of your own invention,
Letters of flat denial to their suits,
Give them to both your brothers as from Phillis,
And let each line in either Letter tend
To the dispraise of both their features;
And the conclusion I would have set down,
A flat resolve bound with some zealous oath,
Never to yield to either of their suits:
And if this sort not well to your content,
Condemn the Cripple.

Frank But this will ask much time,
And they by this time look for my return.

Crip. Why then my self will fit you presently,
I have the Coppies in my custody,
Of sundry Letters to the same effect.

Frank Of thy own writing?

Crip. My own I assure you, sir.

Frank Faith thou have robbed some Sonet book or other,
And now would make me think they are thine own.

Crip. Why, think thou that I cannot write a letter,
Ditty, or Sonnet with judicial phrase,
As pretty, pleasing, and patheticall,
As the best Ouid-immitating dance
In all the town.

Frank I think thou can not.

Crip. Yea, i will swear I cannot,
Yet sir, I could conny-catch the world,
Make my self famous for a sudden wit,
And be admirde for my dexterity,
Were I disposde.

Frank I pre thee how.

Crip. Why thus there lived a Poet in this town,
(If we may term our modern Writers Poets)
Sharpe-witted, bitter-tongd, his pen of steel,
His incke was temperd with the biting juice,
And extracts of the bitterst weeds that grew,
He never wrote but when the elements
Of Fire and Water tilted in his brain:
This fellow ready to give up his ghost
To Luciaes bosom, did bequeathe to me
His Library, which was just nothing,
But rolls, and scrolles, and bundles of cast wit,
Such as durst never visit Paul's churchyard:
Amongst them all, I happened on a quire
Or two of paper filld with Songs and Ditties,
And here and there a hungry Epigramme,
These I reserve to my own proper use,
And Pater-noster-like have kon'd them all.
I could now when I am in company,
At ale house, tavern, or an ordinary,
Upon a theme make an extemporall ditty,
(Or one at least should seem extemporall)
Out of th'aboundance of this Legacy,
That all would judge it, and report it too,
To be the infant of a sudden wit,
And then were I an admirahle fellow.

Frank This were a piece of cunning.

Crip. I could do more, for I could make inquiry
Where the best witted Gallants use to dine,
Follow them to the tavern, and there sit
In the next rowme with a calves head and brimstone,
And over hear their talk, observe their humors,
Collect their jeasts, put them into a play,
And tire them too with payment to behold
What I have filcht from them. This I could do:
But O for shame that men should so arraigne
Their own fee simple wits, for verbal theft!
Yet men there be that have done this and that,
And more by much more than the most of them.

Frank But to our purpose Cripple to these letters.

Cripple I have them ready for you, here they be,
Give these to your two brothers, say that Phillis
Delivered them with frowns, and though her name
Be not subscribde (which may not well be done)
It may perhaps give them occasion
To think she scornd them so much grace and favor.
This done, return to me, and let me know
Th'occurrants of this prastise as they grow,
And so farewell, I can no longer stand
To talk with you, I have some work in hand. Exit.

Frank Farewell mad Cripple, now Frank Golaing sly,
To put in practice this new policy:
But soft, here comes the Maid, I will assay
Euter Phillis and Fiddle. To plead my own love by a stranger way,
By your leave sir.

Fid. Porter, I am not for you, you see I am perambulating before a female.


Frank I would crave but a word with you.


Fid. Speak in time then Porter, for otherwise I do not love to answer you,
and be as brief as you can, good Porter.


Fran. I pray you sir, what Gentlewoman is this?


Fiddle. Certes Porter, I serve a Gentleman, that Gentleman is father to this
Gentlewoman, this Gentlewoman is a maid, this maid is fair, and this fair
maid belongs to the Exchange, and the Exchange has not the like fair maid
now Porter, put all this together, and tell me what it spells.


Frank I promise you sir, you have posde me.


Fid. Then you are an ass Porter, it is the fair Maid of the Exchange.


Fran. Her name I pray you sir.


Fiddle. Her name Porter requires much poeticalitie in the subscription, and no
less judgment in the understanding; her name is Phillis, not Phillis that
same dainty less that was beloved of Amyntas, nor Phillis she that doated on
that comely youth Demophoon, but this is Phillis, that most strange Phillis,
the flower of the Exchange.


Phil. What, would that Porter any thing with me?

Frank Yes Mistress, since by chance I meet you here,
I Will tell you, though it not concerns my self,
What I this morning saw; there is a Gentleman
One master Golding the youngest of three brothers,
They call him Frank; O this man lies very sick,
I being at his house perchance enquired
What his disease was of a servant there,
Who said, the doctors cannot tell themselves,
But in his fittes he ever calls on Love,
And prays to Love for pity, and then names you,
And then names Love again, and then calls Phillis,
And sometime startes, and would forsake his bed,
And being asked whither, he says he would go to Phillis,
My business called me hence, but I heard say
His friends do mean to entreat you to take the pains
To visit him, because they do suppose,
The sick man loves you, and thence his sickness grows.

Phi. Porter, is this true?
Or art thou hired to this, I prithee tell me.

Frank Mistress, not hired, my name is Trusty John.
If I delude you, never trust me more.

Phi. I thank thee Porter, and thank Love withal,
That thus has wrought the tyrant Goldings fall,
He once scornd Love, jeasted at wounded hearts,
Challengde almighty beauty, raild at passion,
And is he now caught by the eyes and heart?
Now by Dianaes milk white veil I swear,
The goddess of my maiden chaste desires.
I am as glad of it as glad may be,
And I will see him, if but to laugh at him,
And torture him with jeasts; Fiddle, along,
When we return, if they do send for me,
I Will arm my self with flowts and cruelty.

Fiddle Porter, we commit you, if you be a crafty knave, and lay in the
wind for a vantage, you have your answer: mark her last words, i will arm my
self with flowtes and cruelty. Exeunt.

Frank. I Will arm my self with floutes and cruelty.
Will you so Phillis, what a state am I in?
Why I of all am furthest from her love:
Sblood, if I now should take conceit at this,
Fall sick with love indeed, were not my state
Most lamentable? I by this hand were it:
Well heart, if thou will yield, look to thy self,
Thou will be tortured, well what remedy.
Enter Anthony. Here comes my brother Anthony, I am for him.

Anth. Porter, what news? spoke you with Phillis?

Frank. I too late, to my grief,
Spoke with her, sir, In Faith I think I have;
Here Is a letter for you, and by that
You shall be judge if I did speak with her;
Now Cripple, shall we prove your learned wit?

Anth. Zounds am I mad, or is she mad that writ this?
I Will read it over again:
A Letter.
SIr, I did never like you, I do not now think well of you, And I will never
love you: I choose my husband with my eyes, and I have seen some especial
fault in you; as the color of your hair, the eleuating of your head, to an
affected proportion, as if you fainted for want of air, and stood in that
manner to suck it into your nose, your neck is too long: and to be short, I
like no part in or about you: and the short and the long boy, is, that I will
never love you, and I will never marry but one I love.

Not yours, but her own.





Antho. Blancke, I am struck blancke, and blind, and mad withal,
Here is a flat denial to my suit,
A resolution never to be won:
What shall I do? assist me God of love,
Instruct me in thy schoole-tricks; be my guide
Out of this laborinth of love and fear,
Unto the palace of fair Phillis favor:
I have it; I will intimate her mother
In my behalf, with letters and with gifts,
To her i will write to be my advocate:
Porter farewell, there is for thy pains,
Thy profit by this toil passes my gains. Exit.

Frank. You have your answer, and a kind one too;
Cripple i will make thee chrutches of pure silver
For this devise, thou have a golden wit;
Now if my brother Ferdinand were here
To read his absolution, here he comes.
Enter Ferdinand. Brother.

Ferd. Frank.
What have thou given the letter to her hand,
And staid my brother Anthonies withal?

Frank I have done both, and more then that, behold
Here is an answer to your letter brother.

Anth. Frank, I will love thee, whiles I live for this.

Frank. Scarce, when you read what there contained is.
A Letter.
GAllant, that write for love, if you had come your self yon might perchance
have sped; I do not counsel you neither, to come your self, unless you leave
your head at home, or wear a vizard, or come backe-wardes, for I never look
you in the face but I am sick: and so praying God to continue my health, by
keeping you from me, I leave you.





Ferd. O unkind answer to a Lovers letter;
Let me suruay the end once more: For I never look you in the face but I am
sick: and so praiing God to continue me in health, by keeping you from me.
Is she so far from yielding? is this fort
Of her chaste love yet so impregnable?
What shall I do? this is the furthest way,
A labor of impossibilities:
This way to win her? I will once again,
Challenge the promise that her father made me;
To him i will write, and he I know will plead
My love to Phillis, and so win the maid. Exit.

Frank. Farewell poor tortured heart; was ever known
Two loving brothers in such misery?
Let me consider of my own estate:
What profit do I reap by this delusion?
Why none; I am as far from Phillis heart
As when she first did wound me with her eyes:
Cripple, to thee I come, it is thou must be
My counselor in this extreamitie. Exit.

Enter Cripple, Bowdler, and Barnard. Crip. Sir Bowdler, what makes thee in
this merry vain?


Bowd. O Lord sir, it is your most elevated humor to be merry, to be concise,
set up the collar, and look thus with a double chinne, like Diogenes peering
over his Tub, is too cymicall, the sign of Melancholy, and indeed, the mere
effect of a salt rhume.


Crip. Who would think this Gentleman yesterdayes distemperature should breed
such motions? I think it be restoratiue to actiuitie, I never saw a gentleman
caper so excellent, as he did last night.


Bow. Mean you me sir?

Crip. Your own self, by this hand.

Bowd. You gull me not.

Crip. How, gull you!
Me thinks a man so well reputed of,
So well commended for your quallities
In Schools of nimble actiuenesse,
And places where diuinest Querristers
Warble enchanting harmony, to such
As think there is no heaven on earth but theirs:
And knowing your self to be the Genius
Of the spectators, and the audience hearts,
You wrong your worthy self intollerably,
To think our words savor of flattery.

Bowd. Sir dog, how did thou like my last caper, and turn a the toe?

Crip. Before God passing well.

Barn. I know his worship made it, it is so excellent,

Bowd. It was my yesterdayes exercise.

Crip. After the working of your purgation, was it not?

Bowd. What purgation, you filthy curre?

Crip. After the purging of your brain Sir.

Bow. Be still dog, bark not, though by misfortune
I was last night somewhat distempered:
I will not be vpbraided; it was no more
But to refine my wit; but tell me truly,
How do thou like my caper?

Crip. Far better than I can commend it.

Bowd. Now as I am a Gentleman
My Tutor was not witting of the same;
And in my opinion it will do excellent:
O this air! here is a most eloquious air for the memory,
I could spend the third part of my Arms in silver,
To be encountered by some good wit or other.

Crip. What say you to your sweet heart, Mall Berry?

Bowd. Peace Cripple, silence, name her not, I could not endure the carrire of
her wit, for a million, she is the only she Mercury under the heavens; her
wit is all spirit; that spirit fire, that fire flies from her tongue, able to
burn the radix of the best invention; in this Element she is the abstract and
brief of all the eloquence since the incarnation of Tullies I tell thee
Cripple, I had rather encounter Hercules with blows, than Mall Berry with
words: And yet by this light I am horribly in love with her.


Enter Mall Berry. Crip. See where she comes, O excellent!

Bowd. Now have I no more blood than a bull-rush.

Barn. How now; what aile you sir?

Crip. What Is the matter man?

Bowd. See, see, that glorious angel does approach,
What shall I do?

Crip. She is a saint indeed; Zounds to her, court her, win her, wear her,
wed her, and bed her too.

Bowd. I would it were come to that, I win her! by heaven, I am not furnished
of a courting phrase, to throw at a dog.

Crip. Why no, but at a woman you have; O sir, seem not so doultish now, can
you make nofustian, ask her if she will take a pipe of Tobacco.

Bow. It will offend her judgment, pardon me.

Cri. But hear you sir? reading so much as you have done,
Do you not remember one pretty phrase,
To scale the walls of a fair wenches love?

Bow. I never read any thing but Venus and Adonis.

Crip. Why that's the very quintessence of love,
If you remember but a verse or two,
I Will pawn my head, goods, lands and all twill do.

Bow. Why then have at her.
Fondling I say, since I have hemd thee here,
Within the circle of this iuory pale,
I Will be a park.

Mal. Hands off fond sir.

Bow. And thou shall be my dear;
Feed thou on me, and I will feed on thee,
And Love shall feed us both.

Ma. Feed you on woodcockes, I can fast awhile.

Bow. Vouchsafe thou wonder to alight thy steed.

Crip. Take heed, she is not on horseback.

Bow. Why then she is alighted,
Come sit thee down where never serpent hisses,
And being set, i will smother thee with kisses.

Ma. Why is your breath so hot? now God forbid
I should buy kisses to be smotherd.

Bow. Mean you me? you gull me not?

Ma. No, no, poor Bowdler, thou do gull thy self:
Thus must I do to shadow the hid fire,
That in my heart does burn with hot desire:
O I do love him well what ere I say,
Yer will I not my self self love bewray,
If he be wise he will sue with good take heed:
Bowdler, do so, and thou art sure to speed:
I will fly hence to make his love the stronger,
Though my affection must lie hid the longer.
What master Bowdler, not a word to say?

Bow. No by my troth, if you stay here all day.

Ma. Why then i will bear the bucklers hence away. Exit.

Crip. What master Bowdler, have you let her pass vnconquerd?

Bow. Why what could I do more? I looked upon her with judgment, the strings
of my tongue were well in tune, my embraces were in good measure, my palm of a
good constitution, only the phrase was not moving; as for example, Venus her
self with all her skill could not win Adonis, with the same words: O
heavens! was I so fond then to think that I could conquer Mall Berry? O the
natural fluence of my own wit had been far better!

Godden good fellow.

Enter Fiddle. Fid. God give you the time of the day, pardon me Gallants, I
was so near the middle that I knew not which hand to take.


Bow. A very good conceit.


Fid. And yet because I will be sure to give you a true salutation, Cripple,
quomodo vales? Good morrow Cripple, goodden good master Barnard, master
Bowdler, Bonos noches, as they say, good night; and thus you have heard my
manner of salutation.


Crip. You are very eloquent, sir; but Fiddle, what is the best news abroad?


Fid. The best news I know not sir, but the newest news is most excellent
in faith.


Barn. Prithee lets hear it.


Fid. Why this it is, the Serieants are watching to arrest you at master
Berries suit.


Barn. Wounds, where?


Fid. Nay, I know not where; alas sir, there is no such matter, I did but say
so much, to make you warm the handle of your rapier: But M. Bawdler, I have
good news for you.


Bow. Let me hear it, my sweet russetting.


Fid. How, russeting?


Bow. I my little apple John.


Fid. You are a


Bow. A what?


Fid. You are a, O that I could speak for indignation!


Bow. Nay, what am I?


Fid. Yon are a pippinmonger to call me Russetting or apple John.


Bow. Sir Russetting, i will pare your head off.


Fid. You pippinmonger, I Will cut off your legs, and make you travel so near the
mother earth, that every boy shall be high enough to steal apples out of thy
basket, call me Russetting?


Crip. Nay, be friends, be friends.


Fid. As I am a gentleman cripple, I meant him no harm, but the name of
Russetting to master Fiddle, that many times trauells under the arm in
velvet, but for the most part in leather trussd with calue-skinne points, it is
most tolerable, and not to be endured, flesh and blood cannot bear it.


Crip. Come, come, all shall be well.


Bow. Fiddle, give me thy hand, a plague on thee, thou know I love thee.


Fid. Say you so? why then anger avoid the room, melancholy march away, choler
to the next chamber, and here is my hand I am yours to command from this time
forth, your very mortal friend, and loving enemy, master Fiddle.


Bow. Now tell us, what is the news you had for me?


Fid. O, the sweet news, faith sir, this it is, that I was sent to the Cripple
from my young Mistress. Master Cripple you know I have spent some time in idle
words, therefore be you compendions, and tell me if my mistress handkercher be
done or no.


Cri. Fiddle it is done, and peace it is, commend me to thy mistress.


Fidd. After the most humble manner I will; and so gentlemen I commit you all:
you Cripple to your shop; you sir, to a turn-vp and dish of capers; and lastly,
you M. Barnard, to the tuition of the Counter-keeper: there is an Item for you,
and so farewell. Exit.


Crip. M. Bowdler, how do you like his humor?


Bowd. By this light, I had not thought the clod had had so nimble a spirit:
but Cripple farewell, I Will to Mall Berry, come Barnard along with me.


Crip. Farewell sweet Signiors both, farewell, farewell. Exeunt.


Enter M. Flower at one door reading a letter from Ferdinand, at the other
Mistress Flower, with a Letter from Anthony. Master Flo. The conceit is good,
Ferdinand entreats a marriage with my daughter; good, very good: for he is a
Gentleman of good carriage, a wise man, a rich man, a careful man, and
therefore worthy of my daughters love: it shall be so.


Mistress Flo. Mary and shall, kind Gentleman, my furtherance say thou? Yes
Anthony, assure thy self, for by the motherly care that I bear to my
daughter, it has been a desire that long has lodgde within my careful
breast, to match her with thy well-deseruing self; and to this end have I sent
for my daughter, and chargde my servants, that presently upon her repair
hither from her Mistrisses, that she enter this private walk, where, and with
whom, I will so work, that doubt it not, dear son, but she shall be thine.


Master Flo. And I will make her ioyncture of a hundred pounds by year: it is
a very good conceit, and why? because the worthy portion betters my conceit,
which being good in conceiving well of the Gentleman's good parts, the
proffered ioyncture adds to my conceit, and betters it, very good.


Mistress Flo. A thousand crowns for you to make the match, pretty heart, how
love can work! by Gods blessed mother, I vow she shall be thine, if I have any
interest in my daughter; Flower smiles reading the Letter, they snatch the
Letter from each other. but stay, whom have I espied? my husband likewise
reading of a Letter, and in so good an humor, i will lay my life, good Gentleman
he has also wrought with him for his good will; and for I long to know the
truth thereof, my sudden purpose shall experience it. What Is here husband? She
reads privately, and frowns. a Letter from master Ferdinand, to entreat a
marriage with your daughter.


Master Flo. And here the like to you from Anthony to that effect, this is no
good conceit, if she be mine, she shall be Ferdinand.


Mistress Flo. If she respect her mothers favor,
It Is Anthony shall be her love.

Master Flo. How wife?

Mistress Flo. Even so husband.

Master Flo. You will not cross my purpose, will you?

Mistress Flo. In this you shall not bridle me I swear.

Master Flo. Is she not my daughter?

Mistress Flo. You teach me husband, what your wife should say,
I think her life is dearest unto me,
Though you forget the long extreamitie
And pain which I indurd, when forth this womb
With much ado she did enjoy the life she now does breathe,
And shall I now suffer her destruction?

Master Flo. Yea but conceit me wife.

Mistress Flo. A fig for your conceits, in this I know there can be none that:
Say he be his fathers eldest son, and a merchaunt of good wealth, yet my
dear Anthonies as rich as he:
What though his portion was but small at first,
His industry has now increasd his talent;
And he that knows the getting of a penny,
Will fear to spend, she shall have him, if any.

Master Flo. By the Mary God wife, you vex me.

Mistress Flo. It Is your own impatience, you may choose.

Master Flo. I will not wed my daughter to that Anthony.

Mistress Flo. By this.

Master Flo. Hold wife, hold, I advise thee swear not,
For by him that made me, first I vow,
She shall not touch the bed of Anthony.

Mistress Flo. And may I never live (so God me help)
If ever she be wed to Ferdinand.

Master Flo. The diuel's in this woman, how she thwartes me still!

Mistress Flo. Fret on, good husband, I will have my will.

Master Flo. But conceit me wife, suppose we should consent our daughter
should wedde either of them both, and she dislike the match, were that a good
conceit?

Mistress Flo. All Is one for that, I know my daughters mind if I but say the
word.

Master Flo. I would be loath to wed her against her will,
Content thee wife, we will hear her resolution,
And as I find her, to her own content
To either of them she shall have my consent.

Mistress Flo. Why now old Flower speaks like himself.

Master Flo. Agreed, and faith wife it is a good conceit,
Enter Phillis. And see where my daughter comes: welcome gerle,
How does your Mistress Phillis? God bless thee Phillis, rise.

Phi. God have the glory, in perfect health she is.

Master Flo. It Is good, I am glad she does so well;
But list my daughter, I have golden news
To impart unto thee:
A golden, Golding, wench, must be thy husband,
Is It not a good conceit?

Phi. Father, I understand you not.

Master Flo. Then, my gerle, thy conceit is very shallow,
Master Ferdinand Golding is in love with thee.

Mistress Flo. No daughter, it is thine Anthony.

Master Flo. Ferdinand is rich, for he has store of gold.

Mistress Flo. Anthony is rich, yet is not so old.

Master Flo. Ferdinand is virtuous, full of modesty.

Mistress Flo. Anthony's more gracious, if more may be.

Master Flo. Ferdinand is wise (being wise) who would not love him.

Mistress Flo. Anthony more wise, then Gerle desire to prove him.

Master Flo. In Ferdinand is all the beauty that may be.

Mistress Flo. He is deceived, it is in thine Anthony.

Phi. Dear Parents, you confound me with your words,
I pray what mean these hot persuasions?

Master Flo. Thy good my daughter.

Mistress Flo. If but ruled by me.

Master Flo. But for thy ill-fare.

Mistress Flo. If she tend to thee.

Master Flo. The truth is this, that each of us has taken
A solemn vow, that thou my loving daughter
Shall wed with one of those two gentlemen:
But yet refer the choice unto thy self,
One thou shall love, love Ferdinand, if me.

Mistress Flo. If love thy mother, love thine Anthony.

Phil. In these extremes what shall become of me?
I pray you give me respite to consider
How to digest these impositions,
You have imposde a business of such weight,
Pray God your daughter may discharge her self.

Master Flo. Think on it, my gerle, we will withdraw awhile.

Phi. A little respite fits my resolution, They walk.
Those Gentles sue too late, there is another,
Of better worth, though not of half their wealth,
What though deformed, his virtue mends that miss;
What though not rich, his wit does better gold,
And my estate shall add unto his wants,
I am resolved (good father, and dear mother,)
Phillis does choose a Cripple, and none other;
But yet I must dissemble.

Master Flo. How now my souls best hope! tell me, my gerle,
Shall Ferdinand be he?

Phi. I pray a word in private.

Master Flo. Mary with all my heart.

Phi. In all the duty that a child can show,
The love that to a father it does owe;
I yield my self to be at your command,
And vow to wed no man but Ferdinand.
But if you please, at your departure hence,
You may enforce dislike to cloud your brow,
To avoyde my mothers anger and suspicion.

M Flo. Before God a very good conceit,
Hence baggage, out of my sight,
Come not within my doors, thou had been better,
Run millions of miles bare footed, then
Thus by your coy disdain to have deluded me.
Oh mine own flesh and blood, the mirror of wit!
Now will I hence, and with all the speed I may
Send for my son, i will have it done this day. Exit old Flow.

Mistress Flow. What, is he gone? and in so hot a chafe?
Well let him go, I need not question why,
For well I wot his suit is cold, t'must die.
Daughter, I gather by thy pleasant smiles,
Thy mother has more interest in thy love,
Than discontented Flower thy aged father.

Phi. Mother, you have, for when I well consider
A mothers care unto her dear bought child,
How tenderly you nurcde and brought me up,
I could not be so much unnatural
As to refuse the love you proffer me,
Especially being for my chiefest good;
Therefore when married I intend to be,
My loyal husband shall be Anthony.

Mistress Fl. Live ever then my dear dear daughter Phillis,
Let me embrace thee in a mothers arms;
Thus, thus and thus i will ever hug my daughter,
Him hence thou sendst with frowns, me hence with laughter,
Come Phillis, let us in.

Exit Mistress Flower. Phi. Forsooth i will follow you.
Am not I a good child think you,
To play with both hands thus against my parents?
Well, it is but a trick of youth: say what they will,
I Will love the Cripple, and will hate them still. Exit.

Enter Cripple in his shop, and to him enters Frank. Frank Mirror of
kindness, extremities best friend,
While I breathe, sweet blood, I am thine,
Entreat me, nay command thy Frances heart,
That wilt not suffer my ensuing smart.

Cripp. Sweet signior, my advise in the reservation of those Letters,
Which I will have you hide from eye of day,
Never to feel the warmth of Phoebus beams,
Till my selfs care, most careful of your weal,
Summon those lines unto the bar of Joy.

Francke I will not err, dear friend, in this command.

Cripple So much for that, now listen further Francke,
Not yet two hours expiration,
Have taken final end, since Beauties pride,
And Natures better part of workmanship,
Beauteous Phillis was with me consorted;
Where she among other pleasing conference,
Burst into terms of sweet affection,
And said, ere long she would converse with me
In private at my shop, whose wounded soul
Struck with loves golden arrow lives in dread,
Till she do hear the sentence of my love,
Or be condemned by judgment of fell hate.
Now since that gracious opportunity
Thus smiles on me, I will resign the same
To you my friend, knowing my unworthy self
Too foul for such a beauty, and too base
To match in brightness with that sacred comet.
That shines like Phoebus in Londons Element;
From whence inferior stars derive their light:
Wherefore I will immediately you take
My crooked habit, and in that disguise
Court her, yea win her, for she will be won,
This will I do, to pleasure you my friend.

Frank. For which my love to thee shall never end.

Crip. About it then, assume this shape of mine,
Take what I have. for all I have is thine?
Supply my place, to gain thy hearts desire,
So may you quench too hearts that burn like fire:
She Is kind to me, be she as kind to you,
What admiration will there then ensue?
Frank, I will leave thee, now be thou fortunate,
That we with joy your loves may consummate,
Farewell, farewell, when I return again,
I hope to find three in a pleasing vain. Exit.

Fran. Farewell dear friend; was ever known a finer policy?
Now brothers, have amongst you for a third part,
Nay, for the whole, or by my soul, i will loose all,
What though my father did bequeath his lands
To you my elder brethren, the moueables I sue for
Were none of his: and you shall run through fire,
Before you touch one part of my desire:
Am I not like my self in this disguise,
Crooked in shape, and crooked in my thoughts
Then am I a Cripple right, come wench, away,
Thy absence breeds a terror to my stay.
Enter Phillis. Yonder she comes, now frame thy hands to draw,
A worser workman never any saw.

Phil. Yea yonder sits the wonder of mine eye;
I have not been the first whom destenie
Has thwarted thus; imperious Love,
Either withdraw the shaft that wounds my heart,
Or grant me patience to endure my smart:
Remorcelesse love, had any but thy self
Been privy to my direful passion,
How I consume and waste my self in love,
They would have been, yea much more pitiful:
But all auailes not; demanding for my work
Shall be a means to have some conference.
She speaks to Frank. Good morrow to you, is my handkercher done?

Frank. Yea Mistress Flower, it is finished.

Phil. How sweetly tunes the accent of his voice!
Oh, do not blame me, dearest love alive,
Though thus I dote in my affection;
I toil, I labor, and I feign would thrive,
And thrive I may if thou would give direction:
Thou art the star whereby my course is led,
Be gracious then, bright sun, or I am dead.

Frank. Fair Mistress Phillis, such wanton toys as these,
Are for young Nouices that will soon be pleased,
The careful thoughts that hammer in my brain,
Bid me abandon wanton love; it is vain.

Phil. For me it is.

Frank. Is my vngarnishd, dark, and obscure Cell,
A mansion fit for all-commanding love?
No, if thou will sport with love,
And dally with that wanton amorous boy;
Hie thee unto the odoriferous groves.

Phil. There is no groves more pleasant unto me,
Then to be still in thy society.

Frank. There of the choicest fragrant flowers that grow
Thou may devise sweet roseat Corronets,
And with the Nimphs that haunt the silver streams,
Learn to entice the affable young wagge;
There shall thou find him wand ring up and down,
Till some fair saint impale him with a crown:
Be gone I say, and do not trouble me,
For to be short, I cannot fancy thee.

Phil. For to be short, you cannot fancy me:
Oh cruel word, more hateful then pale death,
Oh, would to God it would conclude my breath.

Frank. Forbear, forbear, admit that I should yield:
Think you, your father would applaud your choice.

Phil. Doubt not thereof, or if he do not, alls one,
So you but grant to my affection.

Crip. I am too base.

Phil. My wealth shall raise thee up.

Crip. I am deformed.

Phil. Tut, I will bear with that.

Crip. Your friends dislike brings all this out of frame.

Phil. By humble suit I will redress the same.

Frank. Now to employ the virtue of my shape:
Fair mistress,
If heretofore I have remorselesse been,
And not esteemd your undeserved love,
Whereby in the glass of your affection
I see my great unkindness; forgine what is past,
And here I proffer all the humble service
Your hie prizde love does merit at my hands,
Which I confess is more then I unable
Can gratefie: therefore command my toil,
My travel, yea, my life to pleasure you.

Phil. I take thee at thy word, proud of thy service,
But yet no servant shall thou be of mine,
I will serve thee, command, and i will obey:
This does my soul more good, yea, ten times more
Then did thy harsh denial harm before,
Let us embrace like two united friends,
Here love begins, and former hatred ends.

Enter Ferdinand and Anthony walking together. Ferd. Brother Anthony, what
news from Venice?
Are your ships returned? I had rather aside.
Hear news from Phillis: Oh, brother Frank,
Thy absence makes me burn in passion.

Anth. Sir, I had letters from my factors there
Some three days since; but the return of one, aside.
Of one poor letter, yet not answered,
Makes me stark mad: a plague upon that Porter,
Damned may he be for thus deluding me.
Ferdinand spies Phillis and turns back. How now brother, why retire you so?

Ferd. Yonder Is a friend of mine acquaintance,
With whom I would gladly have some conference,
I pray thee stay I will return immediately.

Go to Phillis and court her to themselves. Anth. Of your acquaintance; is she
so good brother?
Only with you acquainted, and no other?
Faith i will try that, take heed sir what you do.
If you begin to court, I needs must woe, Go to her too.
Brother have you done?

Ferd. But two words more at most:
You have not then received any such letter?
A vengeance take the lazy messenger;
Brother if I live, i will quittance thee for this,

Fran. Good words, dear brother, threatened men live long.

Anth. You have done.

Ferd. Yes.

Anth. Then by your leave brother,
You had one word, I must have another. Talk in private.

Ferd. I know our business tends to one effect:
O that villain Frank, it mads my soul
I am so wronged, by such a foolish Boy.

Frank. That foolish boy may chance prove to be witty:
What, and the elder brothers fools? Oh it is pity!

Anth. That villaiue Porter has deluded me,
Confusion guerdon his base villain.

Frank. What are you cursing too? then we catch no fish:
Comes there any more, heeres two Snights to a dish.

Ferd. Well, since I have such opportunity,
I Will trust no longer to uncertainty.

He courts her again in private. Anth. At it so hard brother; well, woe apace,
A while I am content to give you place.

Frank. Well, to her both, both do the best you can;
I fear young Frank will prove the happier man.

Phil. You have your answer, trouble me no more.

Fer. Yet this is worse then my suspense before,
For then I lived in hope, now hope is fled.

Anth. What, male content? is Ferdinand struck dead,
Fortune be blithe, and aid the second brother.

Talk in private. Frank. Think you to have more favor then an other?
To her a Gods name, live not in suspense,
While you two strive, I needs must get the wench.

Phil. I am resolved, and, sir you know my mind.

Frank. What, you repulst too? Phillis is too unkind.

Phil. Here sits my Love, within whose lovely breast
Lives my content, and all my pleasures rest,
And for a further confirmation,
Which to approve, even in sight of both you here present,
I give my hand, and with my hand, my heart,
My self, and all to him; and with this ring
I Will wed my self.

Frank. I take thy offering,
And for the gift you gave to me, take this,
And let us seal affection with a kiss.

Ferd. Oh sight intolerable.

Anth. A spectacle worse then death.

Frank. Now gentlemen, please you draw near and listen to the Cripple.
Give them the letters and they stamp and storm. Know you that letter? sir,
what say you to this?

Both. How came they to your hands?

Frank Sirs, a porter even of late left them with me,
To be delivered to this Gentlewoman.

Anth. A plague upon that Porter; if ere I meet him,
My rapiers point with a deaths wound shall greet him. Exit.

Ferd. Frank thou art a villain, thou shall know it ere long.
For proffering me such undeserved wrong. Exit.

Frank. So, vomit forth the rhume of all your spite,
These threats of yours procure me more delight.

Phil. Now gentle love, all that I have to say,
Is to entreat you seek without delay,
My fathers kind consent, for thou have mine,
And though he storm yet will I still be thine;
Make trial then, it is but thy labor lost,
Though he deny thee, it requires no cost.

Frank. I will assail with expedition.

Phil. God, and good fortune go with thee, farewell. Exit.

Frank. Well, I will go, but not in this disguise;
Arm thee with policy Frank, Frank must be wise:
Now would the substance of this borrowed shape
Were here in presence, and see where he comes,
Enter the Cripple. Poor in the well framd limbs of nature, but
Rich in kindness beyond comparison.
Welcome dear friend, the kindest soul alive,
Here I resign thy habit back again,
Whereby I prove the happiest man that breaths.

Crip. Have thou then, sweet blood, been fortunate?

Frank. Hark, I will tell thee all: Whisper in private.

Enter Bowdler, Mall Berry, and Ralfe, Bowdler capers and sings. Ralf. Faith
sir, me thinks of late you are very light.

Bowd. As a feather, sweet Rogue, as a feather:
Have I not good cause, sweet Mall, sweet Mall,
Has she not causde the same: well, if I live, sweet wench,
Either by night or day I will requite your kindness.

Frank. Now I will take my leave, to put the same in practice. Exit Frank.

Crip. Good fortune wait on thee.

Bowd. Mall, thou art mine, by thine own consent;
How say thou Mall?

Mall. Yes forsooth.

Ralfe. I am witness sir.

Bowd. But that is not sufficient Mall, if thou art content Mall, here is a
Rogue hard by, a friend of mine, whom I will acquaint with our loves, and he
shall be partaker of the match.

Ralf. Nay sir, if you mean to have partners in the match, I hope Ralfe can
help to serve your wives turn as well as another, what ere he be. How say you
mistress?

Mall. Alls one to me, whom he please.

Bowd. Come then sweet Mall, we will to the Drawer,
There to dispatch what I further intend.

Mall. And well remembered husband.

Ralfe. A forward maiden by this light; husband before the Clarke has said
Amen.

Mall. He has work of mine, I pray forget it not.

Bowd. I will not Mall. Now you lame Rogue, where is this maidens work? my
wives work you rascal, quick, give it her?

Crip. Sweet Seignior, the sweet Nymphs work is almost finished, but sweet
blood, you drive me into admiration with your latter words, your sweet wives
work, I admire it!

Bowd. I ye halting Rascal, my wives work; she is my wife before God and
Ralfe, how say thou Mall, art thou not?

Mal. Yes for sooth, and to confirm the same,
Here in this presence, I plight my faith again;
And speak again, what erst before was said,
That none but you shall have my maidenhead.

Bowd. A good wench Mall, in faith, now will I to thy father for his good will,
Cripple, see you remember what is past, for I will call thee in question for a
witness if need require, farewell curre, farewell dog. Exit. Bowdler and
Ralfe.

Crip. A due fond humorist, Parenthesis of jests,
Whose humor like a needless Cipher sils a room:
But now Mall Berry, a word or two with you:
Have thou forgotten Barnet? thy thoughts were bent on him.

Mall. On him Cripple! for what? was it for marriage?

Crip. It was for love, why not for marriage? O monstrous!
Were I a maid and should be so bewitched,
I Would pull my eyes out that did lend me light,
Exclaim against my fortune, banne my stars,
And tear my heart, so yielding her consent
To Bowdlers love, that froth of complement.

Mall. Cripple, you lose your time, with your fair tears
To circumuent my heart: Bowdler I love thee,
Barnard I hate, and thou shall never move me.

Crip. I will; thou do love Barnard, and I can prove it.

Mall. That I love Barnard! by heavens I abhor him.

Crip. Thou love him, once again I say, thou love him,
For all thou have borne Bowdler still in hand.

Mall. What will thou make me mad? I say, I hate him.

Crip. I say thou love him: have not I been at home,
And heard thee in thy chamber praise his person,
And say he is a proper little man,
And pray that he would be a suter to thee?
Have I not seen thee in the Bay-window
To sit crosse-aride, take counsel of thy glass,
And prune thy self to please young Barnards eye?
Some times curling thy hair, then practicing smiles,
Sometimes rubbing thy filthy butter-teeth,
Then pull the hairs from off thy beetle-browes.
Painting the veins upon thy breasts with blew,
An hundred other tricks I saw thee use,
And all for Barnard.

Mall. For Barnard! it was for Bowdler.

Crip. I say, for Barnard.
Nay more, thou know I lay one night at home,
And in thy sleep I heard thee call on Barnard
Twenty times over.

Mall. Will you be sworn I did.

Crip. I, I will swear it:
And art thou not ashamde thus to be changde,
To leave the love of a kind Gentleman
To dote on Bowdler? Fie, fie, reclaim thy self:
Embrace thy Barnard, take him for thy husband,
And save his credit, who is else undone,
By thy hard fathers hateful cruelty.

Mall. Cripple, If thou can prove that ever I
Did fancy Barnard, I will love him still.

Crip. Why i will be sworn thou did.

Mal. And that I doated on him in my sleep.

Crip. I Will be sworn I could not sleep all night
In the next room, thou did so rave on him.

Mal. I cannot tell, I may well be deceived,
I think I might affect him in my sleep,
And yet not know it; let me look on him,
In Faith he is a pretty hansome fellow,
It Is pity he should waste himself in prison;
Hey ho.

Crip. What Is the matter wench?

Mal. Cripple, I will love him.

Crip. Will thou in faith?

Mal. In Faith I will. Enter two Serieants

Crip. Give me thy hand, a bargain, it is enough.

Mal. But how shall he know I love him?

Crip. Why thus: I will entreat the Serieants
To go with him along unto thy father,
And by the way i will send young Bowdler from us,
And then acquaint my Barnard with thy love,
He shall accept it and avouch the same
Unto thy father, wench do thou the like,
And then I hope his bonds are cancelled.

Barn. Cripple, shall we have your company?

Crip. My friends, hold here, there is money for your pains
Walk with your prisoner but to master Berry,
And ye shall either find sufficient bail,
Or else discharge the debt, or I assure you
We Will be your aid to guarde him safe to prison.

1. Serieant Well, we are willing sir, we are content
To show the Gentleman any kind of favor.

Crip. Along then; hark master Bowdler. Exeunt.

Enter Master Flower, Mistress Flower, Master Berry, and Fiddle. May Flo.
Welcome good master Berry, is your stomach up sir? It is a good conceit in faith.

Fiddle It is indeed sir.

Master Flo. What, Fiddle!

Fid. If his stomach be up to go to dinner.

Master Flo. Fiddle, bid master Berry welcome.

Fid. What else master? with the best belly in my heart, the sweetest strain
in my music, and the worst entertainment that may be, Fiddle bids your
worship adesdum.

Berry Thanks Fiddle, and master Flower, I am much beholding to your courtesy.

Mistress Flo. Fiddle, I wonder that he stays so long,
Thou toldst me Anthony would follow thee.

Fid. I, and heel be here I warrant you.

Master Flo. I Will tell you sir, it is a rare conceit,
My wife would have her marry Anthony,
The younger brother, but against her mind,
I will contract her unto Ferdinand,
And I have sent for you and other friends,
To witness it; and it is a good conceit.

Mistress Flo. Fiddle, are all things ordered well within?

Fid. Alls well, alls well, but there wants some saffron,
To color the custards withal.

Mistress Flo. Here, take my keys, bid Susan take enough.

Master Flo. Fiddle, are all our guests come yet?

Fid. I sir, and here comes one more than you looked for.

Exit. Enter Frank. Frank God save you Master Flower, as much to you Master
Berry.

Master Flo. Welcome M. Golding, yare very welcome sir.

Frank My brother Ferdinand commends him to you,
And heeres a letter to you from himself.

Master Flo. A letter sir, it is a good conceit,
I Will read it strait,
Gives the other Letter to mistress Flower. Master Flower, I am beholding to
you for your kindness, and your furtherance in my loue-suite, but my mind is
changed, and I will not marry your daughter, and so farewell.
This is no good conceit: what Ferdinand,
Delude old Flower, make me deceive my friends,
Make my wife laugh, and triumph in her will,
What think you Fiddle?

Fid. Why sir I think it is no good conceit.

Master Flo. Thou say true Fiddle, it is a bad conceit,
But hear you sir.
Mistress Flower reads her Letter. I understand by Fiddle your forwardness in
my suit to your daughter: but nevertheless I am determined to draw back, and
commit your daughter to her best fortunes, and your self to God; Farewell.




Why this is like my husbands bad conceit,
Have you ore-reachd me Flower, you crafty fox?
This is your doing, but for all your slight
I Will cross you if my purpose hit aright.

Fra. Tut, tell not me sir, for my credit and reputation is as it is, and
there is an end: if I shall have her, why so.

May. Flo. Sir, the conceit is doubtful, give me leave but to consider of it
by my self.

Frank With all my heart.

Mistress Flo. Master Golding, a word I pray sir,
You know my daughter Phillis, do you not?

Frank Mistress, I do.

Mistress Flo. She is a star I tell you.

Frank She is no less indeed.

Mistress Flo. I tell you sir upon the sudden now,
There came an odd conceit into my head,
Are you a batcheller?

Frank I am indeed.

Mistress Flo. And are you not promisde?

Frank Not yet believe me.

Master Flo. Master Golding.

Mistress Flo. Well, do you hear sir? if you will be pleased
To wed my daughter Phillis, you shall have her.

Frank To wed your daughter, why she loves me not.

Mistress Flo. Alls one for that, she will be ruled by me:
Disdain her not because I proffer her,
I tell you sir, Merchants of great account
Have sought her love, and Gentlemen of worth,
Have humbly sude to me in that behalf:
To say the truth, I promisde her to one,
But I am crossd and thwarted by my husband,
Who means to marry her unto another:
Now sir, to cry but quittance for his guile,
I offer her to you; if you accept her,
I Will make her dowry richer by a pair
Of hundred pounds than else it should have been.

Frank Why this is excellent, past all compare,
Sude to to have her, gentle mistress Flower,
Let me consider of it.

Mistress Flo. Nay, nay, defer no time if you will have her,
I Will search my coffers for another hundred.

Fran. Say I should yield, your husband will withstand it.

Mistress Fl. I Will have it closely done without his knowledge;
Is it a match?

Frank Well, well, I am content.

Mast. Fl. Why then old Flower, i will cross your close intent.

Master Flo. It shall be so; and it is a good conceit,
It shall be so if but to cross my wife,
Hark master Golding, the conceit does like me.
You love my daughter, so me thought you said;
You said moreover, that she loves you well,
This love on both sides is a good conceit.
But are you sure sir, that my daughter loves you?

Frank For proof thereof show her this ring.

Master Flo. A ring of hers! it is well.

Frank I but conceit me,
If I had wood her in my proper shape,
I do believe she never would have likde me,
Therefore since I shall have her, give me leave
To come and court her in my borrowed shape.

Master Flo. With all my heart, and it is a good conceit,
And heeres my hand, son Golding, thou shall have her.

Frank Then father Flower, I rest upon your promise,
I Will leave you for a while, till I put on
My counterfeited shape, and then return. Exit.

Master Flo. Welcome good son, it is well, by this conceit
My wife will be prevented of her will:
I would not for the half of all my wealth,
My crosse-word wife had compassd her intent:
Now wife.

Mistress Flo. Now Husband.

Master Flo. You still maintain the suit for Anthony,
You Will have your will, and I must break my word.

Mist. Flo. Jest on old Flower, be cross, and do thy worst,
Work the best means thou can, yet whiles I live
I swear she never shall wed Ferdinand.

Mast. Flo. What shall she not?

Mist. Flo. No that she shall not.

Master Flo. I say, she shall.

Mistress Flo. In Faith she shall not.

Master Flo. No!

Mistress Flo. No.

Master Flo. Well wife, I am vexed, and by Gods precious.

Master Berry O sir, be patient gentle mistress Flower,
Cross not your husband, let him have his will.

Mistress Flo. His will!

Master Flo. Hearst thou wife, be quiet, thou know my humor.
Thus to be crossde, it is no good conceit.

Mistress Flo. A fig for your conceit; yet for because,
I know I shall prevent him of the match,
That he intends, henceforth I will dissemble.
Well master Flower, because it shall be said,
And for kind master Berry may report
The humble loyalty I bear to you,
Such as a wife should do unto her husband.
I am content to yield to your desires,
Protesting, whiles I live, I never more
Will speak that Anthony may marry her.

Master Flo. Wife, speakst thou with thy heart?

Mistress Flo. Husband, I do.

Master Flo. Do thou indeed?

Mistress Flo. Indeed forsooth I do.

Master Flo. Then it is a good conceit: ha, ha;
I see it is sometimes good to look aloft,
Come hither wife, because thou art so humble,
I Will tell thee all, I have received a letter
From Ferdinand, wherein he sends me word,
He will not marry with my daughter Phillis,
And therefore I was full determined
To cross thy purpose, that his brother Frank
Should marry her, and so I still intend:
What say thou wife, do thou assent thereto?

Mist. Flo. That Frank should marry her, I have sworn he shall,
And since this falls so right, i will not disclose,
That I did mean so much; but now I Will yield,
That it may seem my true humility:
Husband, because hereafter you may say,
And think me loving, loyal, and submisse,
I am content, Frank shall have my consent.

Master Flo. Why now thou shewst thy self obedient,
And thou do please me with thy good conceit.

Enter Barnard, Mall, and two Serieants. Barn. By your leave master Flower,
Berry I am arrested at your suit.

Berry And I am glad of it with all my heart;
Hold friends, there is somewhat more for you to drink,
Away with him to prison.

Barn. Stay master Berry, I have brought you bail.

Berry What bail? where is your bail? here is none I know
Will be thy bail, away with him to prison.

Mall Yes, I forsooth father, i will be his bail,
Body for body; think you i will stay at home,
And see my husband carried to the Iaile?

Berry How, thy husband!

Mall My husband I assure you:
Father, these Serieants both can witness it.

1. Ser. We saw them both contracted man and wife,
And therefore thought it fit to give you knowledge,
Before we carried him unto the prison.

Berry But i will undo this contract on my blessing,
Daughter, come from him, he is a reprobate.

Mall He is my husband.

Berry But thou shall not have him.

Mall Faith but I will, Barnard, speak for thy self.

Barn. Why M. Berry, it is well known to you,
I am a gentleman, though by misfortune,
My ventures in the world have somewhat faild me:
Say that my wealth disables my desert,
The diffrence of our bload supplies that want?
What though my lands be morgagde, if you please,
The dowry you intend to give your daughter,
May well redeem them. You perhaps imagine
I will be wild, but I intend it not.
What shall I say, if you will give consent?
As you redeem my lands, so I my time ill spent
Mean to redeem; with frugall industry,
I Will be your counsels pupil, and submit
My follies to your will, mine to your wit.

Berry What think you master Flower?

Master Flo. Faith master Berry,
Barnara speaks well, and with a good conceit.

Mal Do thou love him Mall?

Mall Yes sir, and here protest,
Of all in London I love Barnard best.

Master Flo. Then master Berry, follow my conceit,
Cancel his bond, and let him have your daughter.

Berry Well Barnard, since I see my daughter loves thee,
And for I hope thou will be kind and loving,
Regard thy state, and turn an honest man,
Here, take my daughter, i will give thee in thy bond,
Redeem thy lands, and if thou please me well,
Thou shall not want all that I have is thine.

Barn. I am loue-bound to her, to you in duty,
You conquer me with kindness, she with beauty.

1. Ser. Then Master Berry I think we may depart.

Berry I, when you please, you see the matter ended,
The debt dischargde, and I can ask no more.

1. Ser. Why then we take our leaves. Exeunt Serieants.

Ma. Flo. Now wife, if young Frank Golding were come back,
To sum our wish, it were a good conceit: Enter Phi.
Why how now Phillis, sad, come tell me wench,
Art thou resolved yet for to have thy husband?

Phi. A golden Golding, it is a good conceit.
That golden Golding is but loath some dross,
Nor is it gold that I so much esteem;
Dust is the richest treasure that we have,
Nor is the beauty of the fairest one,
Of higher price or value unto me,
Than is a lump of poor deformity.
Father, you know my mind, and what I said,
Which if you grant not, I will rest a maid. Enter Fid.

Master Flo. To die a maid, that is no good conceit.

Fid. Master, where is my master? heeres one would couple a brace of words with
you.

Master Flo. With me sir.

Fid. No sir, with my young mistress.

Master Flo. What is he knave?

Fid. A crooked knave sir, it is the Cripple.

May. Flo. What would he have? he has no good conceit,
It Is he that has bewitched my daughters heart,
He is a knave, go send him packing hence.

Phi. As you respect the welfare of your child,
Dear father, let me speak with him.

Master Flo. Speak with him! no, it is no good conceit,
I know he comes to run away with thee.

Fid. Run away with her? well may she carry him, but if he run away with
her, i will never trust crutch more.

Master Flo. Thou say true Fiddle, it is a good conceit:
Go call him in, Frank Golding, it is he. Exit Fid.
In the lame knaves disguise, a good conceit; Enter Frank
Now sir, what is the news with you, you come to speak with my daughter?

Frank Yea sir, about a little work I have of hers.

Master Flo. What work, you knave? no, thou have some conceit, to rob me of
my daughter; but away:
I like not that conceit out of my doors.

Phi. Unhappy Phillis, and unfortunate.

Fra. Sir, I am content, i will not move your patience.

Phi. Life of my living body, if thou go,
Though not alive take me hence dead with woe. she sounds

Berry. In troth sir, you are too blame.

Master Flow. What? is she dead? it is no good conceit.
Speak to me Phillis, O unhappy time,
Sweet Girl, dear daughter, O my only joy,
Speak to thy father wench, in some conceit,
What, not a word?

Berry. Now may you see, what fell impatience
Begets upon such tender plants as these.

Mistress Flow. Now may we see the folly of old age,
Governed by spleen, and ouerweening rage.

Master Flow. Speak to me, daughter.
And thou shall have, what not? couetst thou gold?
Thou shall not want for crowns, thou shall have all.
O was my fury author of thy trance?
Did I deny thy loves access to thee?
Speak but one word and thou shall be his wife,
By heaven thou shall.

Phil. I take you at your word; it is no pain
To die for love, and then revive again.

Berry. Now M. Flower how like you this conceit,
Has she not over reached you?

M. Flow. My word is past, and yet for all my rage,
I rather choose to fail in my conceit,
And wed thee Phillis to thy own content.
Here, take my daughter, Cripple, love her well,
Be kind to her, and i will be kind to thee,
Thou art but poor, well I will make thee rich,
And so God bless you, with a good conceit.

Frank. I thank you, when I leave to love my wife,
Heaven hasten death and take away my life.

M. Flow. It Is well done Frank, I applaude thy wit,
And now I know I fail not in conceit.

Enter Cripple, Fredinand, Anthony, Bowdler. Crip. Gentlemen sweet bloods, or
brethren of familiarity,
I would speak with Phillis, shall I have audience?

Phil. Help me derre father, O help me Gentlemen,
This is some spirit, drive him from my sight.

Frank. Were he the devil, thou shall not budge a foot.

Bowd. Zounds two Cripples, two dogs two curres, it is wonderful!

Frank. Fear not dear heart.

Phil. Hence foul deformity.
Nor thou nor he, shall my companion be,
If Cripples dead, the living seem to haunt,
I Will neither of either, therefore I say auaunt;
Help, me father.

Frank. Dear heart, revoke these words,
Here are no spirits nor deformities,
I am a counterfeit Cripple now no more,
But young Frank Golaing. as I was before:
Amaze not love, nor seem not discontent,
Nor thee nor him shall ever this repent.

Ferd. M. Flower, I come to claim your promise.

Anth. I come for yours, your daughter I do mean.

M. Flow. My promise; why sir, you refusde my promise,
And sent me word so in your letter.

Mistress Flow. And so did you to me, and now it is past,
Your brother Frank has both our free consents.

Ferd. Sir, sir, I wrote no letter.

Anth. By heaven, nor I.

Frank. But I did for you both; I was your Scribe,
The whilst you went to see your house a fire:
And you (as I remember) I did send,
To see your sister drowned at London Bridge.

Ferd. Y faith good brother have you ore reach,d us so?

Anth, So cunningly, that none of us could know.

Ferd. For all this cunning, I will break the match.

Anth. And so will I.

Frank. Why brothers, she is mine by her fathers gift.

Ferd. Brother you lie, you got her with a shift.

Frank. I was the first that loved her.

Ferd. That Is not so, it was I.

Anth. Catch that catch can, then brothers both you lie.

M. Flow. Yea, but conceit me Gentlemen, what do you mean to spoil my
daughter? you claim her, and I have given her your younger brother; this is no
good conceit: why how now Phillis, still drooping, cheer thee my girl, see a
company of Gentlemen are at strife for thy love; look up, and in this fair
assembly make thine own choice; choose where thou will, and use thine own
conceit.


Phil. But will my father then applaud my choice?

M. Flow. I will.

Phil. And will these worthy Gentlemen be pleased,
How ever my dislike or liking prove?

All. We will.

Phil. I must confess you all have taken pains,
And I can give but all for that pains taken,
And all my all, is but a little love,
And of a little who can make division,
I would I knew what would content you all.

Ferd. Thy love.

Anoth. Thy life and love.

Frank. Thy life, thy love, thy self, and all for me,
For if I want but one, I then want thee.

Phil. If then I give what either if you crave,
Though not what you desire will it suffice.

Ferd. I wish but love.

Phil. And as a friend you have it.

Anth. I life and love.

Phil. And as your friend, I vow, to love you whilst I live, as do now.

Frank. I ask but all for I deserve no more.

Phil. And thou shall have thy wish, take all my store,
My love my self.

Frank. By heaven, I ask no more:
Brothers, have done, and Dad to end all strife,
Come take her hand and give her for my wife.

M Flow. Withal my heart, and it is a good conceit.

Bowd. Gentlemen, patience is your fairest play.

Ferd. Impatience pulls me hence, for this disdain,
I am resolved never to love again. Exit.

Anth. Stay brother Ferdinand, i will follow thee,
Farewell all love, it is full of treachery. Exit.

Bow. By heavens Frank I do commend thy wit,
Come Mall, shall thou and I ask blessing too for company?

Mall. You and I sir, alas, we are not play-fellowes, though we be turtles: I
am provided.

Bowd. Provided! why am not I thy Menelaus?

Mall. I sir, but this is my Paris, I am resolved,
And what I do is by authority.

Bowd. Is it even so, is Hellen stolen by Paris?
Then thus in arms will Menelaus mourn,
Till Troy be sacked, and Hellena return. Exit

Enter M. Wood, and Officers. Wood. This is the man, officers attach him upon
fellonie.

Office. M. Flower, I arrest you upon fellonie, and charge you to obey.

M. Flow. Arrest me upon fellonie! at whose suit?

Wood. Sir, at mine; where had you that Dyamond on your finger? it was stole
from me, and many other Jewels to the value of a hundred pownd.

M Flo. This is no good conceit; has Captain Racket,
Banded old Flower to such an exegent?
I hope my credit somewhat will asist me;
Well, whither must I go?

Wood. Straight to the bench, where now the Judges are
To give you speedy trial.

M. Flow. Words here are little worth, wife and friends all
Go with me to my trial, you shall see
A good conceit now brought to infamy. Exeunt.

FINIS.

