An hundred Epigrammes. Invented and made by John Heywood.

Anno Christi. M. D. L.

To the reader.
RYme without reason, and reason without ryme
In this conuercion deep diffrence does fall.
In first part whereof where I am fallen this time,
The folly I grant, which granted (readers all)
Your grant, to grannt this request require I shall,
Ere ye full reiecte these trifl^s following here
Perceive (I pray you) of the words thententes clear.
In which (may ye like to look) ye shall es^ie
Some words, show one sense, another to disclose,
Some words them selves sondrie senses signify:
Some words, somewhat from common sense, I dispose,
To seem one sense in text, another in gloss.
These words in this work, thus wrought your workyng tool,
May work me to seem (at least) the les a fool.
Than in rough rude terms of homely honestee,
(For dishonest term (I trust) there non^ here soundes)
Wherein fine tender ears shall offended be,
Those folies, being sercht in reasons bounds,
Reason may be surgin in saluyng those wounds,
^^^^yng those sores to salues: for reason does guess,
Homly matters, homly terms do best express.
But where all defense standth in exempcion
To defend me her in out of folies bands,
So that to redeem me there is no redemption.
^rauntyng and submittyng folly, that so stands,
This last refuge I crave to have, at your hands,
Those folies ^^an^yng clear from intent of ill.
In lieu or lack of good wit, accept good will,
The table of this book.
The preface to the reder. An epigramme on this book of epigrammes. i. Of
three sages. ii. Questions an^wered. iii. Of water wine and ale. iiii. To much
or to littell. v. Of the senses. vi. Of talkyng. vii. Of hears and wits.
viii. A dronkerd ix, The fox and the maid. x. Of an ill governor called Jude
xi. Upon geuyng an alms. xii. Of a surfeit. xiii. Repugnancie in appearance.
xiiii. The ape and the ass. xv. A fool and a wise man. xvi. Of sight xvii.
F^igned news. xviii. Two arm in arm xix. Of heryng and speaking. xx. Of
wit, will, and wisdom xxi. The wrenne and her birds. xxii. The master and
his man xxiii. Upon penance. xxiiii. Jack and his father. xxv. Of a dawe.
xxvi. Of askyng and showing the way. xxvii. A quiet neighbor. xxviii. Of
dogs and thieves. xxix. A keeper of the commandments. xxx. Of a nose. xxxi.
Lettyng of a ferme. xxxii. Age and youth. xxxiii. A rose and a nettill.
xxxiiii. Of the wifes and her husbands wast. xxxv. An old wives boon. xxxvi.
A talk of two conies. xxxvii. A prisoner. xxxviii. Two blind men. xxxix
Debilitee of senses. xl. A foolish husband. xli. A witty wife. xlii. Hansom
handlyng. xliii. A saying of Patche, my lord Cardinals fool. xliiii. Certain
folies. xlv. Of two students. xlvi. A merry woman. xlvii. A lowse and a flea.
xlviii. Of him that forgot his Pater noster in Latin. xlix. Of him that could
not learn his Pater noster in english. l. Of the fist and the heart. li. Of
this word, enough, lii. Of table play. liii. The cock and the hen. liiii.
Chepenyng a face of furre. lv. Biyng of shoes. lvi. A suspicion clered. lvii.
Of spite. lviii. Of the letter H. lix. Ill fleeyng of Idilnesse. lx. A tongue
and a clock. lxi. A herer of a sermon. lxii. A man without wit, strengh, and
cunnyng. lxiii. How to wisshe. lxiiii. A doubtful demand of choice. lxv. An
old wydower, and a young maid. lxvi. Gapyng oysters. lxvii. The judge and the
iuggler. lxviii. Of lookyng. lxix. Of constancy. lxx. Of a face and a wit.
lxxi. Of blowing. lxxii. To the flatterer. lxxiii. Of contentacion. lxxiiii. Of
waityng. lxxv. Of foreknowlage. lxxvi. The same impugned without change of
words, except. iiii. or five. Mistakyng an errand. lxxvii. Of keeping an Inn.
lxxviii. A wives defense of her betill brow. lxxix. The shrewde wives toonge.
lxxx. A fools tongue. lxxxi. Of glass and lattise. lxxxii. Tow wisshes for two
manner of mouths. lxxxiii. Of disprayse. lxxxiiii. A discharge from hypocrisy.
lxxxv. Of the fool and the gentilmans nose. lxxxvi. A fool taken for wise.
lxxxvii. Things to forbear. lxxxviii. Of medlers. lxxxix. Of dwelling. xc. Of
the milner and the sexten. xci. Of books and cheese. xcii. Of heads. xciii.
The woodcock and the dawe. xciiii. Of few words. xcv. Wotyng and wening.
xcvi. The same otherwise. A much like mattier. xcvii. Wysedom and folly.
xcviii. Of lack. xcix. The whethercock, the reed, and the wind. C.
The end of the table.
An Epigramme on this book
of Epigrammes. I.
THis book may seem, as it sorteth in suit,
A thin trym trencher to serve folk at fruit:
But caruer or reader can no way wyn,
To cut fruit thereon, or count fruit therein.
Of three sages. II.
Three manner sages nature does deuyse,
The sage her^e, the sage fool, and the sage wise,
And who for most wyle him self does accept,
May match any sage, the sage wise except.
Questions answered. III.
Trust thet any,
That trust not many?
ye. Please they any,
That serve many?
Nay. Help they any,
That help not many?
ye. Freende they any,
That flater many?
Nay. Fear they any,
That do fraie many?
ye. Keep they any,
That keep to many*
Nay.

Of water, wine, and ase. IIII.
Water under a boat, wine in a botell,
The tone I can bear, the other bearth me well:
And where as another botes nor botels be,
Another can I bear wine, nor water bear me.
But above all licour welfare ale (I say)
For I with ale, and ale with me wag away.
To much or to littell. V.
If that I drink to much, than am I dry,
If I drink to littell, more dry am I:
If I drink no whit, than am I driest,
To much, to littell, no whit, naught is the best.
Thus drink we no whit, or drink till we burst,
Yet poor dry souls we be ever a thurst,
Of the senses. VI.
Speak not to much, lest speech make the spechlesse,
Go not to much, for fear thou go behind,
Here not to much, lest heryng bring defnesse.
Look not to much, lest lookyng make the blind.
Smell not to much, lest smellyng lose his kind.
Taste not to much, lest taste mistast thy chaps.
Touch not to much, for fear of after claps.
Of talkyng VII
Thy tail can talk, and knowth no letter.
Thy tongue can talk, and talkth much sweiter
But except wisdom were the gretter,
Of tongue and tail thy tail talkth better.
Of hears and wits. VIII.
Thynne hears and thick wits be deyntee.
Thick hears, and thynne wits be plentee.
Thick hears and thick wits be scant,
Thin hears and thin wits none want.
A dronkerd. IX.
A goose is harnest in her white feathers,
A drunkerd in drink aganst all weathers,
A fool in his fools hood, put all togeathers.
The fox and the maid. X.
Althouh that foxes have been seen there seelde,
Yet was there lately in Fynsbery feelde
A fox sat in sight of certain people
Noddyng, and blissyng, staryng on poulis steeple.
A maid toward market with hens in a band
Came by, and with the fox she fell in hand.
What thing is it Rainard in your brayn ploddyng,
That bringth this buisie blissyng and noddyng?
I another nodde for sleep sweet heart the fox said,
Nor bliss for spirit, except the devil be a maid.
My noddyng and blissyng breedth of wonder
Of the wit of Poules wethercock yonder.
There is more wit in that cocks only head,
Than has been in all men's heads that be dead.
As thus; by common report this we find,
All that be dead, did die for lack of wind.
But that wethercocks wit is not so weak
To lack wind: the wind is ever in his beak.
So that while any wind blowth in the sky,
For lack of wind that wethercock will not dye.
She cast down her hens, and now did she blis.
Jesus (quoth she) In nomine patris,
Who has ever heard at any season
Of a foxes forgeyng so ^eat a reason?
And while she preised the foxes wit so,
He gat bir hens in his neck, and to go.
Whither away with my hens fox (quoth she?)
To Poulis pig as fast as I can (quoth he.)
Between these hens, and yonder wethercock
I will assaie to have chekins a flock.
Which if I may get, this tale is made good,
In all Christendom not so wise a brood.
Maiden (quoth he) these hens be forboden
Your sight, till that wethercock has trodden.
Woe worth (quoth she) all crafty inuencions,
And all inuenters, that by false intencions,
Invent with intent to blind or bleare blunt eyes,
In case as this fox to me does devise.
Of an ill governor called Jude. XI.
A ruler there was in countreie a fer,
And of the people a great extorcioner:
Who by name (as I understand) was called Jude,
One gave him an as, which geft when he had veude,
He (...) geuer, for what intent
He brought to him that as. For a present
I bring master Jude (quoth he) this as hither,
To ioygne master Jude and this as together.
Which two ioygned in one this is brought to pas,
I may bid you good even master Judas.
Macabe or Iscariot thou knave (quoth he?)
Whom it please your master ship, him let it be.
Upon geuyng an alms. XII
Into a beggars hand, that alms did crave,
Instead of one penny, two pense one give.
Which done he said beggar happy thou art,
For to thee, my hand is better than my heart.
That is (quoth the beggar) as it chances now,
The better for me, and the worse for you.
Of a surfette. XIII.
A man from a fever recovered new,
His greedy appetite would not eschew.
From meat contagious, whereto he had a lust,
But one morsel one euenyng, needs eat he must.
Which forthwith after brought good approbacion,
Of his return into residiuacion.
What cause causes this (quoth the physician?)
I know (quoth he) no cause of suspicion.
How be it my wonder is great as can be,
By what mean this fever attacheth me
More, for caryng a littell this night last,
Than for caryng much more the night before past.
I did eat a capon me every whit
The last night: after which I felt no fit.
And this night I eete but one bit of fresh beef,
And yet am I shaken with the hourson thief.
Now (quoth the physician) aperth the cause why
Capon is wholesome, and the beef contrary.
And a litell ill meat gives sickness more food,
Than a littell to much of meat that is good.
Sir, I thank you much (quoth the pacient)
This lesson shall hensfoorth make me to consent,
When I shall needs surfeit, by unruly will,
Rather to surfeit on that is good, than ill.
Repugnancie in appearance. XIIII
Much contrarietee may seem to stand
Where none is. as by example, my son.
In London is the best ale of all England:
And yet as good ale in England as in London.
The ape and the ass. XV.
The ape and the ass stood, where they beheelde.
A course with a greyhound at the hare in a feelde.
They well perceiving, the greihound great gron^d wan
As long as the hare and he foorthright ran.
And like advantage they saw in the hare,
When she list lightly to turn here and their.
The ape to know whether the assis talkyng,
Were any quicker than his asshis stalkyng,
Asked the ass: If thou should choose one of both,
To ren as swiftly as the greyhound yonder gothe,
Or turn as light as the hare: which one of twain
Would thou in thy choosyng by choice obtain?
I (quoth the ass) being at libertee,
Will choose none of both feats, I may say to thee.
What wins the dog by his swift footemanship?
When the bare at pinche turnth from him at a whip.
And what wynth the hare in her turns so lightly?
The dog outrennyng her again by and by?
Rennyng or turnyng so, ren or turn who will.
I will go softly, or else stand even still.
Howbete to assoyle thy question (quoth he)
If I should choose one, like the hare would I be.
For where the dog renneth the hare for to kill,
She turnth for defense, offryng the dog none ill.
And better is this part in this case brother,
My self to defend, than offend an other.
A fool and a wise man. XVI.
A fool and a wise man ridyng one espyde.
He asked the horse, that the wise man did ride,
Whither ghost thou horse? whither go I (quoth he?)
Ask him that guides the bridell, ask not me.
Whither ridest thou fool (quod he) with look so fell?
Ask my horse knave (said he) what can I tell.
When fools ride (quod he) that can not rule the rain:
Their horses be their herbengers, I see plain.
And when wise men ride, I right well epsy,
Them self, not their horse, apoynt where they shall lie.
Of sight. XVII.
Who needs will look, and would not see,
The sight once seen thou lokeste fore,
Close up thine eyes For trust thou me,
Much lookyng so, breedth much ^ie sore.
Feigned news. XVIII.
From a feelde fought, one of the beaten side,
Ran ^ome, and victory on his part he cryde.
Whose prince by him thus enfo^rmed of this,
Made bonfiers and banertes as the use is.
In short time after all which joy and cost,
The king was acert^ynde, the feeld was lost.
Wherewith he (in as great have as great grief)
Charged the first messenger to make preefe,
Where he had this lie, that the feelde wss wonue.
My self sir (quoth he) this lie first b^gonne.
Which for comm^dite^ unto your grace
And all your subjects. I brought it in place.
Where ye truth should have brought waa^^hing and weping
My lie brought two days of laughing and sleping.
And if ye all this year took my lie for true,
To keep you merry, what harm could ensu^?
(...) is (quoth he) be it new or stale,
A harmless lie. than a harmefull true tale.
How his lie wa^ ^laude I know none that knowth?
But it was at least wink at, I heard of trowth.
Two arm in ^rme. XIX
One said to a another taking his arm,
By license friend, and take this for no harm.
No sir (said the other) I give you leave
To hang on mine arm, but not on my sleue.
Of hearing and speaking. XX.
Who hereth all
And speaks naught,
Chance may so fall
He is well tought.
Who speaks all
And hereth naught,
Fall what shall fall,
He is ill tought.
Who hereth all,
And all bableth,
What ever fall
He often fableth.
Who hereth naught,
Nor naught can speak,
May soon be thought
A hody peake.
Say naught, here all,
Say all, here naught,
Both, none, these fall
Extremely wrought.
Who hereth often
And speaks seeld,
Be wit alofte
He wynth the feeld.
Of wit, will, and wisdom. XXI.
Where will is good, and wit is ill,
There wisdom can no manner skyll.
Where wit is good, and will is ill,
There wisdom sitth all silent still
Where wit and will are both two ill,
There wisdom no way meddill will.
Where wit and will well ordered be,
There wisdom makth a Trinitee.
The wrenne and her birds. XXII.
Of a nest of wrens late bred in a hedge,
Which the dam forsakyng, when they were fledge,
One said: Alas mother, what is the why?
That ye draw from us unnaturally.
Child (quoth the dam) I do now unto the,
As my dam in my youth did unto me,
Whereby I am blameless in that I do,
Sens I do but as I have been done to,
Mother (quoth he) to deal as ye be dealt with,
Is not alwaie meet: but this is the pith:
As ye would your dam should have dealt with you,
So should ye our dam deal with your birds now.
Why son (quoth she) think thou me such a fool?
That my child shall set his mother to school?
Nay, adieu (quoth she) and away she is flowne:
This child for this check refusyng for her own.
Which done, the wren calth his brothers and sisters,
And unto them this lesson he whisters.
I see and ye may see (quoth he) by this case,
The trial of tauntes out of time and place.
Where fair words happily my mother might ^ won,
This taunt ma^^ her refuse me for her son.
Which may teach us all, where ever we cum
Rather by silence alwaie to be mum,
Than in ought at libertee, or forbidden,
To taunt our betters, openly or hidden.
The master and the man. XXIII.
A man, and his man, chanced late to be
Nie where a crow stood criyng in a tree.
James (quod the master) the crow has spide thee.
Nay by God, he looks on you master (quoth he)
Tauntes (quoth the master) rebound sometime I see
Where I thought to taunt the, thou do taunt me
Upon penance. XXIIII.
Two men of one man were confessed but late,
And both two had penance after one rate.
Which was: each of them a penny should give
To a peniles man, him to relieve.
The One of these twayue had one penny and no more.
The Other, no penny nor farthyng had in store.
They disclosyng each to other this case.
This penny father drew his purse apase,
Saying: sens thou art penilesse, I will
Give the this penye, my penance to fulfill.
God thank the (quoth the the other) and sens thou
Art now peniles, as I was even now,
For penance I give this penny to the,
As freely as ever thou gave it to me.
Well done (quoth the other) bear may we bost,
Penny dole dealt, without one penny cost.
Jacke and his father. XXV.
Jack (quoth his father) how shall I ease take?
If I stand, my legs ache, and if I kneel,
My knees ache, If I go, then my feet ache,
If I lie, my back akthe, If I sit, I feel
My hyps ache: and lean I never so we will,
Mine elbowes ache. Sir (quoth Jack) pein to exile,
Sens all these ease not, best ye hang a while.
Of a daw. XXVI.
With a crossebow late in hand ready bent
To shoot at a daw in a tree, I went.
Saying to one by: I will assaie to hit
Yonder I see a daw, if she will sit.
She is, if she sit, a daw in deed (quoth he)
But if she sit not, what is she than say ye?
A daw also (said I.) Than said he, I see,
Whether a daw sit, or whether a dawe flee,
Whether a daw stand, or whether a daw lie,
Whether a daw croke, or whether a daw cry,
In what case so ever a daw persevere,
A daw is a daw, and a daw shall be ever.
Of she wyng the way. XXVII.
Twain met in a high way, what, time they did go,
Each one toward the place the the other came fro.
What is my way (said the tone) I pray the?
Foul (quoth thot^er.) That is il ^^oynges (quoth he.)
I can t^ll thee better ^^dynges then this:
Thy wa^^, both fair and smooth as a die is.
My tidings (quoth he) is be^ter than thine,
But I think thy ^idynges truer then mine.
This is (quoth the the other) so well brought about,
That it brought and shall bring me in dout*
Which one of these twain is most ill at view,
Good tales that be false, or ill tales that be true.
A quiet neighbor. XXVIII.
Accounted our commoditees,
Few more commodious reason sees,
Than is this one commoditee,
Quietly neighboured to be.
Which neighborhood in thee aperes.
For we two having ten whole years
Dwelt wall to wall, so ioignynglie,
That whisperyng sounds through well nie,
I never heard thy servants brall
More than thou had had none at all:
Nor I can no way make auaunt,
That ever I heard the give them taunt.
Thou art to them, and they to thee
More mylde than muet. mum ye be.
I hear no noise mine ease to break:
Thy buterie door I hear not creake.
Thy (...) cum^^^th not by heat,
Thy cooks choppe neither herbs nor meat.
I never heard thy fire once spark,
I never heard thy dog once bark,
I never heard once in thy house.
So much as one peep of one mouse.
I never herd thy catte once mew.
These preises are not small nor few.
I bear all water of thy soil,
Whereof I feel no fylthie foil,
Save water, which does wash thy hands:
Wherein there none annoyaunce stands.
Of all thy guestes set at thy boorde
I never heard one speak one word,
I never here them cough nor hem,
I think hense to Jerusalem,
For this neighborly quietness
Thou art the neighbor neighbourlesse.
For er thou would neighbors annoy,
These kinds of quiet to distroy,
Thou rather would to help that matter,
At home alone fast bread and water.
Of dogs and thieves. XXIX.
To keep thieves by night out of my house,
I keep dogs to aid me in my yard,
Whose barkyng at stur of every mouse.
By lack of sleep kilth me in regard,
Thieves or dogs than, which may best be sparde?
Murder is the most mischief here to guess,
Thieves can do no more, and dogs will do no less.
A keeper of the commandementes. XXX.
If it be (as it is) much commendable
To keep Gods precepts, given Moses in table:
In keeping the same (as thou have pretended)
Thou may well be marueilously commended.
First for thy having any mo gods but one,
Thou kepest within that bound, For god you have noue.
Having or woorshippyng of god false or true,
Thou have nor worshippest God old nor new.
And as for the committyng of Idolatry
By grauyng to thy self any Imagerie,
This Twenty years day, in weather hot or cool,
Thou handledst no caruyng nor workyng tool.
The name of god in vain thou consentst not till,
Thou never swerst but for some purpose good or ill,
And as for the holy day, thou do break none.
For thou will rather make twenty, than break one.
Father and mother not dishonourd by thee:
For thou never comst where any of them be.
And where thou shall not kill, to clear the of that,
Thou never durst abide to fight with a gnat.
Than all adultrie or fornicacion
Chastitee discharges, by this approbacion.
All women hardly can bear thee their favor,
To abide thy sight: and in no wise thy savor.
For stealyng or their, what ever thou have been
Thy hands at this day are known to be clean.
How caust thou stele ought in house, feeld, or street?
Thou sit in Newgate fast bound hands and feet?
By false witness thou never hurtest man for why,
Eury word thou speakst, eury man thinkth a lie.
Now to covet in mind thy neighbors ass,
Or his house, when bondage will not let the pass
To ride to the tone, or go to the the other,
Or in consented thought one way or other.
For to covet thy neighbors maid or his wife,
Thou knowing* they can not love the for their life,
Or of thy neighbors things to covet any thing,
When covetousness can no way bring winnyng,
But that lack of credit, libertee, or love,
Kepth thee from that couetyng can move,
Thou have to shrewd a wit in desire to dwell,
To have things, from which dispeite does the expel.
Thus in Gods precepts, except thou clear appear,
I know not who the devil can say he is clear.
Of a nose. XXXI.
But for blemishe of a face to look upon,
I doubt which were best, to have a nose or none.
Most of our savors are more sower than sweet.
A nose or no nose, which is now most meet?
Lettyng of a ferme. XXXII.
By word without writing, one let out a farm,
The couenauntes wherein the lessee brake a main:
Whereby the lessor, lackyng writing, had harm.
He said and swear, he would make promise plain,
Without writing, never to let thing again.
Husband, cried his wife, that oath again reuarte,
Else, without writing, ye can not let a farte.
Age and youth. XXXIII.
Though age and youth to gether can seeld agree,
Yet once two young and two old folk did I see,
Agr^de like lams together diverse years.
The story whereof forthwith aperes
A woman old, and a man young were led,
She him for love, and he her for good, to wed.
A young woman, and an old man, in like case,
Were wed for like cause at the same time and place.
Into one house these two couples wedded were,
And during their lives, together must live there.
And they once aquainted, and one month married,
All their lives after they never varied.
Company and condition these four folk hold,
As nature naturally wylth young and old:
Couplyng them selves to gether thus eury day
Tholde fools aldaie prate, ye yo^g fools aldaie play.
A rose and a nettill XXXIIII.
What time herbs and wedes, and such things could talk,
A man in his gardeyn one day did walk
Spiyng a nettill green (as Themeraude) spread
In a bed of roses like the Rubie red.
Between which two colors, be thought by his eye,
The green nettill did the red rose beautify.
How be it he asked the nettill, what thing
Made him so pert? so nie the rose to spryng.
I plant me with these roses, said the nettill:
Their mylde propretees in me to settill.
And you, in laiyng unto me your nose,
Shall smell, how a nettill may change to a rose.
He did so: which done, his nostrils so pritcht
That rashly he rubd, where it no whit itcht,
To which smart mock, and wily begylyng,
He the same smellyng, said smothely smylyng,
Roses convert nettils? Nay, they be to fell,
Nettils will pervert roses rather, I smell.
Of the wifes and her housbandes waste. XXXV.
Where am I least husband? quoth he, in the waste:
Which comth of this, thou art vengeable streit last.
Where am I biggest wife? in the waste (quoth she)
For all is wast in you, as far as I see.
An old wives boon. XXXVI.
In old world, when old wives bitterly prayde,
One deuoutely, as by way of a boon,
Axt vengeance on her husband, and to him said,
Thou woldst wed a young wife er this weke were done
Were I dead, but thou shall wed the devil as soon.
I can not wed the devil (quoth he) why (quoth-she?)
For I have wedded his dam before (quoth he.)
A talk of two conies. XXXVII
In time, when dom beasts, as well as birds, spoke?
Two conies their minds in this matter brake.
Were all conies in such case (said the tone)
That of two wynters weathers we must choose one,
Which were best choice, frost never, and snow ever?
Or else to choose froste ever, and snow never.
Frost (quoth the the other) makes us lusty and fat,
And snow lameth us for leave. What (quod he) for that?
Forty fat conies be often killed in one night,
When lean conies with life escape away quight.
Ye (quoth the the other) but where snow to long lies,
Conies by famine well nie every one dies.
Better all be fat, though some die, as lotts fall,
Than linger in leannes, and thereby die all.
A prisoner. XXXVIII.
In prison, a prisoner condemned to die,
And for execucion waityng daily,
In his hands for worms lookyng on a day,
Smilyng unto him self these words did say:
Sens my four quarters in four quarters shall stand,
Why harm I these seely worms eating my hand?
Naught else in this deed do I, but my self show,
Enemy to the woorme and friend to the crow.
Two blind men. XXXIX.
One blind man to supper an other bad,
Which twain sittyng at such meat as they had,
Me thinkth (quod this blind host) this candel burnth dim.
So thinks me sir, said the blind guest to him.
Wife (said the good man) with sorrow mend this light.
She put out the candell, which burned very bright,
And chopped down empty candelsticks two or three.
So lo: now eat and welcome neighbor (quoth he)
Debilitee of senses. XL.
Wife, my hands for feelyng are often very ill.
And as the one hand mendth, the other appeyrth still.
Ye say so the (said she) the one hand feelth evermore
Worse the day present, than the day before.
The Other hand feels by oynctmentes excellent
Better the day before, than the day present.
But how does your eye sight? worse and worse (said he)
For worse this day than yesterdaie, I see the.
Though you were blind (quod she) y^ should no love break,
I would your eyes were out, so you could not speak.
Take hearing to (quod he) thou makst my ears such,
That thou have made the^ here enough, and to much.
And going may go to. For where ever I am,
I go not an inche from the devil or his dam.
In feith if thou did (quoth she) yet could I well
Find mean, to find out a fool even by the smell.
And here may we here and see, how this tale fitts
With my good man's goodly lyms, and good wits,
A foolish husband. XLI.
Husband, two wits are better than one, clarks say,
To debate mattiers: which seems true this way.
When we two contend, what is my wit without thine,
To convince thy self, thy wit conducth mine.
A witty wife. XLII.
Jane (quoth Iame) to one s^ort demand of mine
Answer not with a lie, from that mouth of thine,
And take this nobill Which when she had taken,
Is thy husband (quoth he) a cockold Jane?
She stood still, and to this would no word speak.
From which dum dump when he could her not break,
He axt his nobill again. Why (quoth she?)
Made I any lie to thee? Nay (quoth he.)
Than walk fool (quod she) this wager I wyn clear,
And thou of my counsel never the nere.
Gogs soul (swear he) and flang away amayne,
I will never talk with that womon again.
For as she in speech can revile a man,
So can she in silence beguile a man.
Hansom handlyng. XLIII.
Some wonder to see thy handlyng of things neat,
But it is no wunder as the case stands.
The toes of thy feet in handlyng of things feate,
Are as hansom as the fingers of thy hands.
A saying of Patche my lord cardinals fool. XLIIII.
Master Sexten a parson of known wit,
As he at my lord Cardinals board did sit,
Gredily caught at a goblet of wine:
Drink none (said my lord) for that sore leg of thine.
I warrant your grace (quoth Sexten) I provide
For my leg: For I drink on the the other side.
Certain folies. XLV.
To cast fair white salt into wise men's meat,
To make them count salt sugar, when they eat,
a folly. To bear a man in hand he itchth in each part,
When the man feels an universal smarte,
a folly. To speak always well, and do alwaie ill,
And tell men those deeds be done of good will,
a folly. Thy lusty limd horse to lead in thy hand,
When on thy lame lyms thou can scantly stand,
a folly. Of kyks for cage work to build thy house hye,
And cover it with lead, to keep thy house dry.
a folly.

Of two students. XLVI.
Two scholars young in the vniuersitee late
Kept in thin diet, after scholars rate,
The One being an eater greedy and great,
The Other a weak feeder, said at his meat:
Oh this smart small pittans, and hungry diet,
Makes us to study aptly in quiet.
Sure (said the the other) small meals are induction
To thencrease of study, for deper instruction,
This diner shall drive me to study anon,
Where I may get more meat, when this is gone.
A merry woman. XLVII.
There came by chance to a good company
A lady, a wanton and a merry.
And though every word of her own showde her light,
Yet no man's words else to her might that recite:
She had all the words, she babled so fast,
That they being weery, one said at the last:
Ma dame, ye make my heart light as a kix,
To see you thus full of your meretrix.
This trick thus well tricked in the latin phrase,
Brought unto this tricker another muse nor mase,
She naught perceiuyng, was no whit offended:
Nor her light demeanor no whit amended,
But still her tongue was clappyng like a paten.
Well, said the said man, in language of laten
I never told woman any fault before,
Nor never in laten will tell them fault more.
A louse and a flea. XLIII.
A lowse and a flea, set in a man's neck,
Began each other to taunt and to check.
Disputyng at length all extremitees
Of their pleasures, o^ discommoditees.
Namely this I heard, and bare away well.
If one (quoth the louse) scrat within an ell
Of thy tail: than forthwith art thou skippyng,
Like Jack of bedlem in and out whippyng.
Half an hour after thou dare no where sit,
To abide the bityng of one good bit.
And when any man herein shall prove me,
His nails do (as a writ does) remove me.
Which nails once removed from the man's head,
I am straight at feedyng within a hear bread,
Where I fed before in my deintie diot.
Ye be hardy (quoth the flea) I deny not,
But how many lise have abiden by it?
When they would have done as fleas do, fly it.
With this the man to his neck his hand caught,
The flea skipt away, but the louse he caught.
How now (quoth the fl^a) Alas (quoth the louse)
My head is well served to serve for sowse:
That thus like a sowse head, for saw not this grief,
Till feelyng has put peinfull practice in preefe.
Of him that forgot his Pater noster in Latin. XLIX.
An old homely man at shrift commaundid
By his Curate, his Pater noster to bid
After long study, he said: Master vicker,
By Iys cham a shamd, my wit is no quicker.
Ich said it within littell more then fortnight.
And now, like a beast, cha forgote it quight.
Fie on age. In youth Ich had ever such wit,
That what so ever Ich had had to do, yet
At shrif^ chad my Pater noster ever more,
When Ich said it not twice in the year before.
Of him that could not learn his Pater noster in english. L.
A man of the countreie shriuen in Lent late,
(According to thiniunction) his curate
Bad him, the Pater noster in engli^^e say,
Ich can it not master (quoth he) by my ^aie.
Say a piece of it (quoth he) though ye the rest mys,
Ich can not one word of it (quoth he) by Iys.
(...) yet master vicar, by gods sacrament,
Cha (...) about it ever seus last lent.
And some of it Ich had in the clensyng week.
But now when Ich should saee it, all is to seek.
(...) (quoth the priest) if your wit be so far decade,
Say the Paternoster, ye have alwaie said.
Nay by the mas (swear he) if you will have al told,
Cha ^^^^rated on the new, cha forgot thold.
Of the fist and the heart. LI.
One cursed an others heart for a blow in a fume.
Curse not his heart (quoth one by) curse his fyst.
(...) heart (quoth he) to mine ear did not presume,
But his heart to mine ear did his fist assyst.
(...) each lym must frame in feate, as the heart list,
(...) the heart wilth any lym in any fault to fall.
^o man blame any man, to blame the heart for all.
Of this word, enough. LII.
^ (...) merry man by his master at mete set.
Me thinkth (quod the master) thou can no drink get.
Here is enough, though there be none said he.
Than art thou not dry. Yes so more I thee,
And fain would drink. How be thy words true than?
Thus ^his word enough two ways we may scan.
The One much enough, the other littell enough.
And here is littel enough. His master lough,
Calling in his wife to discant upon this.
How say thou wife? our man in this case is
Dry, and would drink, and drink nothing (...).
And yet proves he drink enough by him.
Sens he (quoth she) proves drink enough in store,
More than enough were wast. He getth no more.
Of table play. LIII.
Wife, I will no more play at tables with the:
When we come to bearyng, thou begylest me,
In bearyng of thy men, while thou have any,
Each other cast thou bearst one man to many.
The cock and the hen. LIIII,
A cock and his hen perchyng in the night,
The cock at his hour crode loud as he might.
The hen heavy of sleep, prayde the cock that he
Would leave of his crowyng, but it would not be.
The hen saw* the cock would stick to his tacklyng,
In her treble voice, she fell so to cacklyng,
That the cock praide her, her cacklyng to sease,
And he of his crowyng would hold his pease.
Nay chorle (quoth she) be sure, that will I not.
And for thy learning henceforth mark this knot.
When ever thou would seem, to over crow me,
Than will I surely over cakyll the.
Chepenyng a face of furre. LV.
Into a skinners shop, while his wife there wrought,
In have ran a gentilman to epsy
A fair face of fur, which he would have bought.
What fur (quoth she) would your mastership bie?
Harlots wombs (quoth he) know ye any nie?
Harlots wombs (forsooth) I have none (quoth she)
But ye shall have knaves shankes mete as can be.
Biyng of shoes. LVI.
When I at the shoemakers shall shoes assaie,
If they be to littell, they will stretche (says he)
If they be to much, they will shrink straight way.
To long, to short, how narrow or wide they be,
All is one matter as he shapth them to me.
For may he once get his shoes on my feet,
Without last or lingel his words make them meet,
A suspicion clered. LVII.
One to his friend keendly,
Gave monicion freendly,
That ill was reported
By one, that resorted
To him: whom (as they thought)
Entysed him to naught.
He thanked him, and said:
My friend, be not afraid.
The heryng of that fool
Setth me no whit to school.
I here him, when he list,
And follow him when me list.
Of spite. LVIII.
If there be any, as I hope there be none,
That would l^se both his eyes* to lose his foe one,
Than fear I. there be many, as the world gothe,
That would lose one eye, to lose their foes both.
Of the letter H. LIX.
H, is worst among letters in the cross row,
For if thou find him other in thine elbow,
In thine arm, or leg, in any degree,
In thy head, or teeth, in thy toe or knee,
Into what place so ever H, may pyke him*
Where ever thou find ache, thou shall not like him.
Jll fleyng of Jdelnesse. LX.
If flight from idilnesse may be deemed
Mayn mean to virtue being fled warely:
How may thou than thereby be esteemed?
Thou fleest that vice not meanly nor barely,
But mainely: scrupulously, and so charely,
That in then er idelnesse shall be spied,
Thou will yet rather be ill occupied.
A tongue and a clock. LXI.
Thy tongue should be a clock wife, had I gods power,
For than would it strike but once in one hour.
Yet it might ren (quoth she) and strike er the time,
And should that clock have (as my tongue has) a chyme?
I being sexten, might set the clock forth soon,
To strike and chime. xii. two hours before noone.
A herer of a sermon. LXII.
What bringst thou from the sermon Jack? declare that.
Forsooth master (quoth he) your cloak and your hat.
I can the good thank Jack: for thou art yet sped,
Of somewhat in thy hand, though naught in thy head.
A man without wit, strength, and counnyng. LXIII.
Thou art a wight to wonder at.
Thy head, for wit, shewth the a wat.
Thy body for strength shewth the a gnat.
Thy voice for tune shows the a cat.
Do, say, or sing, in any what,
Thou art a minion marm^ar.
How to wisshe. LXIIII.
How may I have the Gill, when I wisshe for the?
Wish not for me Jack, but when thou may have me.
This is a lesson Gill propre and pleasant.
For by these words this winnyng Jack may auaunt,
Though Jack be no nere Gill then Jack was before,
Yet Jack is nere his wit, by gis, by ten score.
A doubtful demand of choice. LXV.
If thou must chose Hodge, touching cockoldry,
Which woldst thou chose, to know thy self commonly
To be taken for one, and take thy self none,
Or, to be taken for none, and take thy self one?
The best or worst of these twain (Hew) tell me which
Claw where it does smart, or tikell, where it does iche?
I know small difference herein, Hodge brother,
And I (Hugh) know as littel in the the other.
An old widower and a young maid. LXVI.
A widower rich, with riueld face old,
Wooyng a fair youg woman, his mind he told.
Bostyng what he had, as wowers do, that can,
Wherein he bosted of a goodly young man,
A soon of his own, whom god had him sent.
Of conditions and qualitees excellent,
In this what wooyng this old man's behauour
So far forth had won this young woman's favor,
That in short tale, when his long tale was done,
She prayed hi^ to go home, and send her his soon.
Gapyng oysters. LXVII.
On whom gape thine oysters so wide, oysterwife?
(...) oysters gape on you sir, god save your life.
(...) gape the? Sir they gape for promotion.
(...) premote them) you have devotion.
Nay (...) pernicious,
To promote Oysters, that be ambicious.
The judge and the iuggler. LXVIII.
To a iusticer a iuggler did complain
Of one, that dispraised his liger de main.
What Is thy name (said the justice) Dauson said he.
Is thy father alive? Nay, dead sir perdee.
Than thou shall no more be Daus soon, a clear case,
Thou art Daw thy self now, in thy fathers place.
Of lokyng. LXIX.
To save mine head, when I upward cast mine eye,
And look not to my feet: to the ground fall I.
When I look downward to my feet, to take heed,
A tyle fallen from a house makth my head bleed.
And look I right forth, between my feet and head,
Broken head, break neekee falls, of both I am sped.
I think it as good, by ought I can devise,
To be stark staryng blind, as thus to have eyes*
Of constancy. LXX.
Some say, thou art inconstant, but I say naie.
What though thy wit be wauryng every way?
Whose wit like the wind has been wauring ever,
And in vnstedy wauryng doothe persevere,
A constant man I affirm him constantly,
For he is constant in inconstancy.
Of a face and wit. LXXI.
In thy youth and age these propretees are sprung.
In youth thy face was old, in age thy wit is young.
Of blowyng. LXXII.
What wind ca^ thire blow, yt does not some man please?
A fart in the blowyng does the blower ease.
To the flatterer. LXXIII.
Thy flattryng of me, this follows thereupon:
Other thou art a fool, orels I am one.
Where flattrie aperth, at least: by wise men's school
The flattrer, or the flattred, is a fool.
Of contentacion. LXXIIII.
Is not the poor man rich, that is contented?
Yes, rich by his contentacion consented.
Is not the rich man poor, that is not content?
Yes, poor by lack of contentacion here meant.
Than riches and pouertee in men's minds lie.
Ye, but we may far sooner learn (think I)
To think our selfs rich, having much riches by,
Than make our selfs rich, having no riches ny.
Of waityng. LXXV.
I would see a man wait to his masters mind,
As the weathercock wauth on the wind.
Blow it here or there, blow it low or hie,
The wethercocks beke is still in the wyndes eye.
Of fore knowlage. LXXVI.
Foreknowlage of things that must fall
To man, I think it were not best.
The fore known ill to man, would call
Fore felt grefe, of fore known unrest.
By foreknowen good to man were cest
Sweet sudden joy, which ever more
Comth, when joys come unknown before.
The same im^ugned without change of words, except four or five.
Foreknowlage of things that must fall
To man* I think it were the b^st,
The fore known ill to man would call
Digestion, of fore known unrest
By fore known good to man, were cest
Distemperate joy, which eu^rmore
Comth, when joys come unknown before.
Mistakyng an errande. LXXVII.
Feastyng a friend, the feaster (whose man did weyte)
Bad him er the last course, fetch the clouted co^ceyte.
What bringst you here knave (quod he) what have you done?
I have (quod his man) brought here your clouted shoone.
Clouted shoone car^e^ly knave, what do you dream?
Eat you the clouted shone, fetch us ye clouted cream.
Of holdyng an Jn. LXXVIII.
Being holden in Newgate, thou can not be
An Inholder, for thine June holds thee.
A wives defense of her bettill brow. LXXIX.
Were I to wed again wife, I make a vow.
I would not wed a wife with a beetill brow.
And I (quod she) rather would a husband wed
With a beetill brow, than with a beetill head.
The shrewde wives toonge. LXXX.
A dog dame rules in degree
Above a devil with thee:
At lest sower wynd a dog letth flee,
Thy nose will stopped be:
But no devils word may make decree
To stop thy tongue I see.
Seus thou aperst to be (quoth she)
A dogged devil to me,
To tame thy diuillishe propertee
My tongue shall still be free.
A foolis toonge. LXXXI.
Upon a fools prouocacion
A wise man will not talk:
But every light instigacion
May make a foolis tongue walk.
Of glass and lattise. LXXXII.
Where glasiers and lattise makers work in sight,
This one difference in their two feats we find:
Glass keeps out the wynd and letth in the light,
Lattise keeps out the light, and letth in the wind.
Of both sorts I wish, when I shall wish any,
Lattise makers few, and glasiers many.
Two wisshes for two manner of mouths. LXXXIII.
I wissh thou had a littell narrow mouth wife,
Littell and littell to drop out mords in strife.
And I wisshe you sir, a wide mouth for the nonse,
To speak all that ever you shall speak at onse,
Of dispreyse. LXXXIIII.
All men must be blind and defe er thou preise win.
For no man sees or herth ought to preise the in.
A discharge from hipocrisy. LXXXV.
Thou art no bird of hipocricise brood.
For thou fleest all things, that might show the good.
Of the fool and the gentilmans nose. LXXXVI.
One gentilman having an other at meat,
That guest having a nose deformd foul and great.
The fool of that house, at this time standing by,
Fell thus in hand with that nose suddenly.
Nose autem, a great nose as ever I saw.
His master was wroth, and cride, hense with that daw.
One said: talk no more of great noses ye fool,
Lest ye be talked with all in the whippyng school.
The fool warnd of great noses no more to speak,
To mend that faut, this way these words did break.
Said I, this is a foul great spittell nose?
Byr lady I lied, it is a fair littell nose.
Will not that fool be had hence (quod the master?)
Thou will fool (quod one) be walked with a waster,
If thou spe^ke of any nose great or small.
The fool at third warning, mindyng to mend all,
Stepped to the board again criyng as he gose,
Before God and man, that man has no nose.
The fool was feakt for this: but what of that?
The great raut here to no^e, he amended not:
Which is this: Not the wise, but the fool ye see,
In clukyng of one fault, makth fautes two or three.
A fool taken for wise. LXXXVII.
Wisdom and folly in the (as men sean)
Is as it were a thing by it self soole:
Among fools thou art taken a myse man,
And among wise men, thou art known a fool.
Things to forheare. LXXXVIII.
Displeasures that fume and fret
Good to forgive and forget
All oaths, what, when, and where,
Better forbear than forswear.
Other men's liuinges all,
As good forsteale as forstall,
Not at botom, but at brynke,
Better foresee, than forthynke.
Of medlers. LXXXIX.
To feed of any fruit at any feast,
Of all kinds of medlers, meddell with the least.
Meddel not with great medlers. For no question,
Medlyng with great medlers, makth ill dig^stion.
Of dwelling. XC.
Between Ludgate and newgate you caust dwell never,
For in Ludgate or Newgate thou must dwell ever.
Of the milner and the sexten. XCI.
The milner tolth corn, the sexten tolth the bell,
In which tollyng, tollers thrive not a like well.
The One tolth with the claper, the other in the hoper.
The One sauerth of silver, the other soundth of coper.
Of lokes and chese. XCII.
No two things in all things can seem only one:
Because two things so, must be one thing alone.
How be it redyng of books and eating of chese.
No^ things for some things, more like one the^ these.
The talent of one chese in mouths of ten men,
Has x. different tastes in judgment most times when.
He says it is to salt, he says it is to fresh,
He says it is to hard, he says it is to neshe.
It is to strong of the reuer, says he.
It is says he, not strong enough for me.
It is says an other, well as can be.
No two of any ten in one can agree.
And as they judge of chese, so judge they of books.
On lokers on which, who that narowly lokes,
May look for this: Seith he, that book is to long,
It Is to short says he. Nay, says he, ye say wrong,
It Is of mete length: and for fine phrase or fair style:
The like of that book was not made this good while:
And in touching the truth inuincibly wrought.
It Is all lies, says an other, the book is naught.
No book, no chese, be it good, be it bad,
But preyse and dispreyse it has, and has had.
Of heads. XCIII.
Some heads have taken two heads better tha^ one:
But ten heads without wit, I wene as good none.
The woodcock and the daw. XCIIII.
A woodcock and a dawe set upon a plain,
Both shewde comparison each other to disdain.
Back, quod the wodcock: Straw for thee, quod the dawe.
Shall wodcocks keep dawes now in dreadful awe?
None awe (quoth the wodcock) but in behavior
Ye ought to reverence woodcocks, by your favor.
For what cause (quoth the daw?) For your long bills?
Nay (quod the wodcock) but lords will by their wills
Rather have one wodcock, than a thousand dawse.
Wodcocks ar meat, daws ar carren, wey this clause.
In deed sir (said the daw) I must needs agree,
Lords love to eat you, and not to eat me.
Cause of daws curtesis, so, if wodcocks thus gather.
Ye shall have curtsy: For thus I would rather
Be a daw, and to wodcocks curtesy make:
Than be a wodcock, and of dawes curtesy take.
I were a double daw, had I not lever,
Birders should (in their birdyng endeuer)
Take up gins, and let me go, when they get me,
Than set gins to get me, for lords to eat me.
Of few words. XCV.
Few words show men wise, wise men do devise,
Which is often time true, and often other wise.
In some case silence may as stiffly stand
With folly, as with wisdom, wisely scand.
Wottyng and wenyng. XCVI.
Wottyng and wenyng, were those two things one,
Who could wot him self wise like the, I wene none.
Other wise.
I would give the best fardell in my pack,
To be as wise as thou wenest thou art Jack.
And to be as wise as I wot thou art.
What would I give trowest thou? wat? not a fart.
A much like mattier. XCVII.
Tom, thou think thy self wise ye what of yt Hew?
Thou think thy self wiser than I. Ye tom, true.
It seemth (said a third man) by this devise,
No maistrie for fools, to ween them selfs wise.
Wisdom and folly. XCVIII.
Thy wisdom and folly both, nay no one
Can be contained in volumes great nor small.
Thy wisdom being none, occupies place none,
Thy folly being all, occupies place all.
Of lack. XCIX.
One lack of late in the saw we,
Which lackth not now, for this we see,
Thou have lackt lack of honestee:
But now that lack lackth not in thee.
The wethercocke, the read, and the wind. C.
The wethercock and the reed comparyng late
Their service done to the wind, fell at debate.
The wind (quod the wethercock) wyndth no whetr*
But straight bolt upright I stand waityng there*
Forsooth (said the reed) and where the wynd is found,
At every blast I bow down to the ground.
Surely said the wynd, the waityng of the tone,
And courtesy of the the other I take both one.
And none of both good, but rather ill to me:
For when I often in corners secret would be,
Other the crooked courtsy of the reed,
Or wethercocks waityng, bewraith me with speed,
As life is to me, in such seruyng pre^ence
Single negligence, as double diligence.
The weathercock and the reed, being both blanke,
Each told hiself, much service may have small thank.
FINIS.
JMPRINTED AT LONDON IN FLETSTRETE IN THE HOVS OF THOmas Berthelet.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

Anno dni. 1550.


