A NEW Discourse of Moral Philosophy, Entitled, The Kayes of Counsel.

Not so pleasant as profitable, for young Courtiours.

Optima est Patientia Victor. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Ralph Newberie.

Anno. 1579.

Jndex.
Of humility. Cap. 1 Of company and fellowship. Ca. 2. Of talk and
communication. Ca. 3. Of modest behavior. Cap. 4. Of self love. Cap. 5. Of
wine and women. Cap. 6. Of dyce play. Cap. 7. Of travail. Cap. 8. Of
stabilitie. Cap. 9.
To John Kay the younger Gent. Haly Heron his Governor, wishes continual
health, with increase of learning and virtues.
WHen I had well considered with my self how great affinities are said to be
betwixt learning and good manners, insomuch as either of them without the other
seems to be imperfect, and both equally joined. (O God) how straight a course
they take to win both worldly favor and eternal felicity: I have thought
good, as well presently nourishing thy tender wits by daily instruction, as
hereafter (when some private occasion may perhaps remove me from thy company)
to leave these few precepts of moral Philosophy together, with my especial
good will toward thee bent, in riper years of discretion to be well wayed and
seriously followed. The gifts of nature which appear in the blossoms of youth,
so bountifully bestowed upon thee, have (as it were by co^templatio^) allured
me to give these instructions of Courtly behauior, not because I would thereby
persuade thee to seek such doubtful preferme^t, but (if hereafter by the
good advice of thy parents thou be commanded, or by deceiptful emulation
drawn to such kind of service) that thou might in the entrance of so
perilous a passage, be well armed against those dangerous delights which unto
others for want of better government, has been the chief cause of ruinous
decays and skornful overthrow. And first I would have thee to understand,
that the Court is a boisterous Sea, where by the raging storms above head, the
strongest ships are thrown upon the doubtful rocks of displeasure, and yet
sometimes by the favorable aspecte of fortune, safely arrived in the quiet
haven of good hap. It is like a steep hill or huge mountain hard for any
man to clymbe, and yet apt for all me^ easily from thence to fall down
headlong, and especially to such as are swiftest of foot, or rather lightest
of head, nothing subject to good counsel and foresight of mischiefs. The ways
are pleasant, the enterteinme^t sweet, but the fellowship is the more doubtful,
because that under so sweet a taste often times lie many bitter pills of hard
digestion, and as some say, the common sickness of the Court, is to surfeyt in
the ba^kets of dissembling: but no man can burn his fingers without fire, nor
be deceived where he has not overmuch trusted. Moreover, the way to vice is
readily found, but the true path and footesteppes of Virtue not so easy to be
followed: For nature is subject to sin, and soon allured by the enticements
of folly, but noble Virtue requires longer times of increase, whose humble
root as it were by degrees spredding her self abroad, is the more
stedfastlye planted in the firm ground of perfect knowledge, where not by
kind, but customablye increasing, brings forth the flowers of worthy fame,
and sovereign fruits of felicity. This is the mark whereat all men should
level, and the bounds of human life which by no means can be enlarged: and
as by the instinct of nature we are all moved with a provident care to live (as
by the maintenance of pleasures and needful commodities of life it is
manifest) so much more ought we by reason seriously to seek the safe conduct
of virtue, that guides us directly to the Palace of eternal life and
everlasting pleasures: by this we have fellowship with Angels in heaven, after
the consummation of this tragical act, but the other is common to us with all
other earthly creatures. Take therefore these instructions of virtue for a new
years gift at my hands, which (alluding to thy name) I have entitled the
Keys of Counsel: hoping, the eue^ as by the providence of God and the
furtherance of good parents hereafter, thine estate may be worthily advanced:
so that the dangerous course and adventures of youth by these my trauayles
shall be the better directed and more safely governed. I have followed the praise
of virtue more than the reprehensio^ of vice, in this short discourse of
manners, for that with Cicero the Prince of eloquence, I hold it greater glory
that is gotten by defense of honesty, tha^ that is doubtfully received by
disclosing of misdeedes. If want of skill has vnpleasauntlye closed up the
wide fields of rethorical exornations in so good a matter, accept the moral
sense of simplicity, which tends rather to plain profit, than vain
pleasure: But if perhaps the discourse seem to be shorter than the greedy
minds and attentive ears of the studious herein should require, content thy
self, that the rest of my winter exercise has been applied to thine own
private instruction. Farewell, and thus much remember: That life without
learning is unpleasant, and learning without virtues unprofitable. Call. December.
1578.

Thy Governor for the time, and thy friend for ever. HALY HERON.

Of Humility.
CHAP. 1.
THE strong foundations of virtue grounded on Humility, must of force his
raised from the steadfast rock of Faith: For as it is by true record of holy
scriptures witnessed, The fear of God is the beginning of wisdom. And
surely when a man begins to consider the frailty of flesh, and immortality
of the soul, the miserable calamities of this world, and the inestimable,
joys of heaven, of mankind the vain folly, and the true perfection of divine
nature and omnipotency of God: Even then is he tried with the touchstone of
truth, or rather moved by the suggestion of holy spirit, to fear ye just
judgment of the almighty, mistrusting his own righteousness which can not
be but imperfecte. Then is he forced in the doubtful storms of Despair, to
cast anchor in the quiet haven of Hope, then is he taught by the rigor of the
law, to claim the privilege of faith, appealing from his own merits, to the
mercies of Almighty God, trusting not in earthly fancies, but in the true
favor of his heavenly redemption. And this is the faith ye brings humble
fear, and gives increase of heavenly wisdom, from whence as it were from a
goodly fountain of grace, all other virtues have their beginning, but not from
reason alone, according to ye Philosophers opinion, which appoint Virtue to be
such a perfect quality of the mind, that guides us directly in ye execution of
right, toward ye atteining to felicity, a thing impossible unto us to
deserve, which by the corruption nature, and frailty of flesh, are commonly
withdrawn from that which is good, and contrariwise allured to that which is
evil and uncomely. And like as the natural plants without grafting, yield
bitter fruits, and the ground, that is not by the continual labors of
Husbandmen tilled and manured, brings forth dry Moss, and unfruitful
weeds: none otherwise the desires and affections of man, not grounded on
Humility by the fear of God, follow the lusts of the flesh, and proud
temptations of Satan, whose false delights at length will press them down
into the deep pit of perdition: these be the dangers least misdoubted in
the adventures of youth, which in these days account it an advantage to be
famous in vice, and a base mind or cowardly affection, to live by the stricte
course and direct rule of virtues, whereof hereafter we shall discourse more
at large. But now must we talk of Humility, which is even the Lantern of
light, that guydeth our feet into the way of peace, the star that leads
us to the house of true nobility, and the first step of duties, that rayseth
our minds to the worthy deeds of virtue. We see the lofty flying Eagle,
(whose large wings are unable to exalte the weight of her body from ground)
first humbles hirselfe with lowly stoupes, whereby she recouereth greater
strength to mount aloft into the Peripheries of the Air: so must the mind of
him, that seeks to have the full reward of Virtue, be content humbly to
fulfill the charge of duties, and by degrees, to climb the stately steps of
advancement. There be some that blindly judge the gifts of Fortune (as vain
pomp, and fond pleasures of this world) to be the sovereign goodness, and
chief support of felicity, in so much as this man carefully spendes the
whole course of his life for increase of wealth: another languishing in fond
desires, oftentimes by sundry diseases empayreth his own health: And some are
daily pampred with delicate meats, and drowned in the wanton Seas of worldly
pleasure. And is he therefore happy that is rich? no, for wealth is subject
unto fortune. But is he well pleased that has pleasure seldom? for commonly
sweet meat has sower sause, and pleasant mirth is accompanied with the
train of loathsome sorrows. And does he bath in bliss that lusts in
unlawful desires? or rather offers himself for a sacrifice, to be consumed
in Hell fires? then Fortune makes rich and poor, and Nature gives health and
sickness, beauty and deformity: but herein consists no felicity: for
neither is he to be accounted rich that is never satisfied, nor happy, whose
steadfast mind in quiet possession of Virtues is not established. Summum bonum.
A most quiet and peaceable estate is felicity, flowing with abundance of
pleasures, free from bondage, void of fear, and subject to no manner of
misfortune, and sooner shall glad poverty with a contented mind enjoy the
benefit of such heavenly treasure, than all wordly pomp, and riotous delight,
which by no means can insinuate themselves to soiourne in the house of happy
state and tranquillity: for this cause, the valleys are commonly more fruteful
than the Mountains, by reason, that lying low, and shrouded from the
scorching heat of the Sun, they receive more plentifully the drops of
deaw, and natural fatness, that falls down from the tops of the
Mountains. But there be found sundry branches of humility, which spread
themselves abroad as it were in defense of the tree that generally contains
the^ all. And first receiving chief sap from the root of humility, springs
out ye true knowledge of duties, Obedie^tia
than the which nothing is more commendable in youth, nothing more profitable
in a common wealth, and nothing more acceptable unto God, which thing M. Cicero,
the flower of eloque^t Philosophers, full wisely considered, when he wrote
those large instructions of Duties, wherein there is no sorts of me^, whose
expectation on ye behalf, he has not satisfied, for there is the duty toward
our parents, and the love toward their children lively expressed: the charge
of Princes, and obedience of subjects: the fear of Magistrates, and the
execution of laws; and that comprehends all in one, the most loyal love, and
dutiful regard of our Country, the common pare^t of us all, is there likewise
most manifestly mentioned. But we must rather hold with the doctrine of true
Philosophy, that the fear of God, and true service of the divine majesty,
contains all other duties, which spring from thence, as from the Fountain
of Life, as is aforesaid. For if all power comes from God, and authority
from above, no doubt, the Majesty of a Prince is with all duties of humility
to be honored, and the authority of a Magistrate by no means to be resisted.
We ought not in mind to conceive an evil thought, or sinister opinion of our
Prince and governor, much less then Giantlike to rebel, and consequently to
make wars with the Gods: but we should be like children affected toward
their Parents, accompting their imperfections our plague, their sin, our
shame, and their fall our utter confusion: for as that member is nothing
profitable, but rather hurtful to the body, which by corruption, is lame and
imperfect, so that subject, whose mind is drawn into sundry practices of
discord, working the disquiet of a common peace and tranquillity, may justly be
cut off, as an unprofitable part, or cancker of a common wealth: but whence
comes such unnatural affection, as the child to wish the destruction of his
pare^t? whereof rises such furious rage in the subject, to rebel against his
Prince? and what moves such desperate madness in ye Citize^, to betray his own
native Country? comes it not of Pride, covetousness, or envy? and what are
these cruel tygres, or despitefull mo^sters, yt so vex the minds of unhappy
men? or whence have such cursed vices their beginning? surely from nature
partly, which enclineth to the worst, nourished by false emulation, and
confirmed with evil custom, for as Vergill says, Alitur vitium crescitque
tegendo, Vice is nourished, and increases by cloaking. We must therefore
withstand ye beginnings of such mischiefs, least peradventure lingering delays
bring untimely repe^ta^ce. For sooner is ye green wou^d healed, and perfectly
closed up by the Surgeo^, tha^ an old grief (which by co^tinua^ce is festered
in ye body) can be soundly cured: so shall the tender capacities of youth, by
good gouernemente and wholesome instructions, be sooner trained to the
perfection of virtue, than the malapert affections, and obstinate desires of
riper years, from the lewd practice of vice, he restreyned according to the
Proverb, That is bredde by the bone, will never out the flesh. And surely, the
most necessary practice of good education, is with many other most profitable
commodities of the common wealth, at this time too lightly regarded. And is it
not a scornful thing ye a man should teach his Horse ye manedge and carere,
or his hanke to fetch ye lofty turns abouehead, or hound to follow the suite
of a stricken Dear, and leave his child in the flower of youth, either subject
to mischiefs for want of good government, or that is worse, wasted in the
fellowship of such vnthrifies, as happily shall encourage him for want of better
grace and maintenance, to seek his own fathers destruction. But ye
consideration of this, and the worthy benefits of learning, I leave to their
private judgment, which know the manifest difference of good and evil. And
returning to ye purpose, I say, that obedience as in all ages and estates it is
necessary, so in youth it ought chiefly to be planted, and principally grafted.
Next unto this arises ye bra^ch of patience, Pacientia.
wherein consists ye chief trial of wisdom. And a stout virtue is this,
that vanquisheth the swelling rage of wrath, and resists the invincible force
of nature. Bias.
Bias the wise man, being demanded what man was to be thought most unfortunate,
answered, even he that is most impatient, adding there unto this reason, that
not the loss of goods, or change of fortune, could so much prostrate a man's
life, as the unquiet acceptance of such unhappy chance does molest, and
grievously disturb the tranquillity of the mind: the present remedy for such
unco^fortable mischiefs is only patience, ye ouerwhelmeth heaps of sorrows,
with hope of succeding pleasure, ye indifferently susteineth the profits of
peace and bitter storms of war: patience is the shield of intolerable wrongs,
that lighteneth the burden of adversity, and seasoneth the joys of
prosperity, the comfortable medicine of sickness, and the most wholesome
preservative of health. What caused the Philosopher Socrates, Socrates.
a man of mean birth, to be pronounced the only wise man of the whole world,
by the divine Oracles of Apollo, but patience? what raised the worthy renoume
of Q. Griseld, whose fame is registered in ye court of everlasting memory, but
patience? finally, what storms of strife, what chance of fortune, or what
force of mischief does not the same patience overcome? for this cause were the
sage Philosophers wont to be received, and highly esteemed in ye Courts of
Princes, that by ye example of their modesty, ye noble Peers, and rulers of
the land, might be the better instructed of indifference in the execution of
justice, for according to the opinion of Aristotle, Aristotl.
unworthily to him is the charge of authority committed, that is unable to
restreyne and govern his own private affections. Then if patience in a Prince
be comely, and in a Magistrate also necessary, how much more ought it of all
good subjects dutifully to be embraced: for as ye virtue of a Prince is the
chiefest authority of the magistrate, so are the good conditions of rulers the
best stay, and strongest defense of inferioures. And thus much I would wish
to be generally persuaded unto youth, that as patience is the porter of
prefermente, so that all wrathful and rash revenge, is the ringleader of
mischief, and authoure of destruction. But here some will say perhaps, what
doctrine is this, that so confounds high courage? what a cowardly mind has
he that so debaceth manhood? can it stand with the courage of Achilles to
forbear? or with the majesty of Caesar to take wrong? yea Sir, and (by your
leave be it spoken) how much the more noble is the mind, so much less is
the revenge of private wrongs by himself esteemed, and for this cause, that if
the wrong consist in words, be misdoubteth not his good fame and credit
sufficient to disprove and confound the weak strength of false reports: but
if provoked with unjust deeds, to seek revenge of injuries. It appeaseth the
wrath of a noble conqueroure, more to be able to punish, than it contenteth
him utterly to destroy. Was it against the courage of Hercules, Hercules
that he restored Priamus unto the Scepter and possessions of his father
Laomedon? was it against the honor of King Hidaspis, Hidaspis.
that he pardoned ye false traitor Oroondates? and was it against the majesty
and manhood of Alexander, that he refused the unequal challenge of Queen
Thomyris? no, but rather a special sign of heroical magnamitie, to despise
light wrongs. and nothing to regard such mean adventures, whereunto this
Proverb may be applied, Aquila non capit muscas, the lofty fierce Eagle prays
not on silly Flies. But I mean not here to praise Thersites in stead of Ajax,
nor Ajax is to be preferred before Ulysses, for it is not enough for a man to
be bold without wit, nor strong without wisdom, but unto whom those
virtues are indifferently granted, he has in my judgment an absolute force
and perfection of manhood. Again, there be diverse kinds of sufferance, Fortitudo
for as the execution of justice, and wrongful persecution, are not equal, so
constreyned sufferance, and humble patience, are not alike. The patience of
good Calisthenes the Philosopher, enduring the cruel torments devised by the
tyranny of Alexander, was wonderful: but ye desperate boldness, or rather
obstinate stubbernesse of Queen Olimpias at her death, was not alike, nor by
any means commendable. Thus we see that patience is the armor of
righteousness, against which not the bitter storms of adversity, not the
furious rage of tirannie, no not the cruel passions of death it self can take
place, or any thing prevail. Comitas.
The last branche of Humility, outwardly showing the fruits of virtues,
humbles it self in the face of all men, and bears the flowers of courtesy.
And truth it is, that such as is the tree, like is the fruit, for neither ca^
we gather Figs of thorns, nor Grapes of thistles. This Virtue, as in all
places, amongst all sorts it is commendable, so in the Palace of a Prince,
(which is the Nursse of Fame, and Theater of Virtues) it ought chiefly to be
fostered, and daily practiced. So agreeable to the nature of mankind is this
gentle affection, that by the consent of sage men, it has bin called
Humanity, and since by the friendlye corruption of the common sort (as I
guess) from the Court, it now takes the name of courtesy: but we will not
stand so much upon the name, as the perfect use hereof, although in deed
of late, amongst our English Poets, has risen a doubtefull controversy, as
touching the true christening of this Virtue, in so much, as some call it a
bastard courtesy, or in plain terms, dissemblyng flattery, that covertly
takes possession of men's minds, in the Courts of Princes now adays: but as
these have their privilege to speak what they list, so I doubt not, but
many of the other have a protection of self will, to do what they like best.

These men may be resembled to the Philosopher Antisthenes, Antisthenes.
who walked on a time in the common place at Athens amongst the Nobility,
very much dysguised in apparel, wearing Rags in stedde of Robes, meaning
thereby couertlye, to steal the name of Humility, for that he was otherwise
of good ability, and reputation, wellknowen.

But Socrates, so soon as he peceyued him in that place thus attyred, cried
aloude, Behold, a man may see the secret ambition of Antisthenes, even
through the holes of his cloak, whom presentlye the people all beheld with
scornful derision. And thus was the deep dissimulation of Antisthenes
discovered, by the ready wit, and sharp rebuke of Socrates.

I find in an old writer a most virtuous example of Humility, practiced by
the King of Hungary, which on a time ryding in his Chariot, accompanied with
a troop of his Nobility, preparing themselves to sundry disportes, and
martial feats of exercise, glanced his eyes aside by chance, and beheld a
couple of ancient poor men that were traveling on the way, whereupon he
commanded his Chariot presently to be stayed, and coming down from thence,
marched alone to meet these two Pilgrims, whom he cheerfully saluted, and
humbly on his knees embraced, and after much familiar talk between them had,
the King sent them forward on their journey, very richly rewarded, himself
returning to his chariot as joyful as if he had done some great adventure.
But this thing done by ye King openly in the face of all the nobility, and
chief royalty of the Court, was amongst such a multitude, one cause of diverse
effects, and the only occasion of sundry offenses, in so much, as some
maruelling at this strange courtesy, with admiration, were very much
astonished. Other murmuring, grudged at the gifts so vaynely bestowed, but
chiefly, the prouder sort of the nobility, were grievously vexed with
scornful disdeyne, at the fact, amongst whom, the Kings brother was one,
which presently upon their coming home to ye Court, withdrewe him self
closely into the Kings chamber, where finding him with opportunity of time,
said these words: Sir, I let you understand, that the Lords and chief
royalty of the Court, wonderfully mislyked the strange enterteinment you gave
to the base beggars by the way, imputing it rather to the plain disgrace and
profaning of your royal Majesty, than to the vain pretense of any better
end, and thus much is spoken in secret of me, by nature your brother, and by
duties your humble subject. The King hearing these words, gave him hearty
thanks for his labor, dissembling his purpose until the evening when all the
Lords were departed to their lodgings. Then commanded he the deadly trompe to
be sounded at his brothers gate, which by custom of that country was wont to
give warning presently before the death of a Peer upon judgment not to be
reuersed. The sound whereof struck such a terror unto him and his whole
family, that calling his friends together, they lamentably mourning, passed
all the night, looking for nothing but death: And the morning was now come,
when with a sorrowful train of mourners himself the kings brother clothed in
sackcloth, bare head with his comely locks negligently dispersed abroad,
ghastly to behold, with his eyes fixed unto death, came thus into the Court,
abiding in ye hall humbly on his knees at the kings mercy: whereof ye king
being advertised, came down at length unto his brother, bearing him self
ignorant of this tragical show, whereof notwithstanding, he him self had bin ye
chief author, and cheerfully demanded before them all, what was the cause of
so strange an alteration in his brother, which heavily told him the sound of
the trumpe had thus fearfully warned him to put him self at the feet of his
majesty's favor: whereat ye king smyling said. And is this the cause of so
great a terror unto thee, ye hither unto us thou art come so disguised? can
the fear of ^eath by ye judgment of man which is vn^ertaine, so soon
co^fou^d thy lofty courage? But why did thou then so skornefullye wonder at
me, which humbled my self yesterday when I beheld the lively and express image
of death (whose force no man can escape) in those ancient men whom for age I
courteously salute? was it not more fearful to behold the figure of death than
to hear the sound of a trumpe? is it not less cause of wonder in me to obey
the laws of God and nature, than in thee to fear the judgment of man, which
is frail? Therefore I pardon, and advertise thee my brother, that as thou
haste been over dreadful of man heretofore, so that thou reverently fear God
above all men hereafter. With these and such like words, the good King
modestlye reproved and friendlye chastised the proud surquedrye of his own
brother, to the better example of all the Nobility of his Court. A worthy
mirror of Humility in ye Majesty of a Prince, and an especial pattern of the
rare clemency and courtesy of a King. And thus we see the state of Princes
much better by dignity of virtues mainteyned, than by the force of worldly
pomp and riches strengthened and vphelde, the fame of true nobility by
gentleness and courtesy fostered, the wealth of subjects by duetifull
obedience increased, and to conclude, the toward wits and singular good
capacities of young Courteours by sufferaunce well furthered, and through
modest behavior and humility, worthily to be advanced.

Of Company and fellowship.
CHAP. 2.
PYthagoras was wont to say, that commonly in a multitude the number of the
wicked is most, and the flock of good men least. How true the opinion of this
Philosopher is, by daily experience it is too plainlye proved: For where there
is one man in these days encouraged by the reward of virtue, to search out
the secrets of wisdom, there be many times as many which no doubt allured by
the smiling looks of vanity, do spend their whole time in the contemplation
and practice of folly. Hereof comes sloth the only nurse of need, pride,
the chief author of penury, and filthy lust, the mother of all mischiefs.
And to be short, what shame, what sorrow, grief, sickness, plague, death,
and that is worse than death, what seuile bondage does not this deceiptfull
emulation and pestilent force of ill company procure. But there is a more
curious kind of people sprung up of late days amongst us, which are so far
from imitating of any man, that they principally study to make them selves like
unto no man. And because in ye Court there be multitudes, and many men must
needs be diversely disposed, it behooves a young Courtiour at his entrance,
principally to be advised in the choice of his fellowship and company, for
surely it is the chief point and first means to win or loose creadite and
estimation: Let him remember the good Counsel of the kyngly Prophet David,
that saeith, with the just thou shall be made righteous, Psalm.
but with the froward thou shall learn frowardness. There be some, and I
fear too many, that know not what goodness means, neither will they come
where honesty dwells, unthriftiness is their hauntyng house, uncleanness
their delight, quarrellyng is their exercise, disdain their companion, and
swearyng their common talk: So that a young Gentleman accompanied with such
companyons, shall soon with the spoil of his goods be discharged of the
weight of his creadite, for if he have ought, they will wayt of purpose to
make him spend, they will spare their own to be liberal of his, until all
be gone, then flyng about for a new supply by such another companyon, which
is a foul shift and a shameful refuge: By this means many a toward youth
is undone, his preferment far of, and here by his folly has a very good
furtheraunce. For such as they are, such shall he be, both for conversation
of life and estimation. To avoid such mischief therefore, I would counsel
him at the first to frequent the company of such as are modest and wise, to
seek the fellowship of those that are learned, and so by little and little to
insinuate him self into the countenance of the best, whose estate is
stedfastlye grounded on the rock of Princely favor, neither must he bluntlye
at the first be roundyng with old Courteours, which will not rashelye admytte
young babes into their bosoms, but content him self with the company of the
inferiors, whose fellowshyp is commendable. Some are of greater experience by
reason of continual affairs, other have traueyled to learn the languages and
manners of strange countries, some at home do study pleasant hystoryes, and
have a goodlye gift of eloquence, and other by birth are not only Noble, but
in conversation of life, and countenance very comely, with such men ought he
first to acquainte him self: for these and such like excelling the common
sort, are best worthy to be esteemed, not that the rest of meaner wits should
be rejected, but that the best ought chiefly to be followed. And as one Swallow
brings not in summer as it is in the proverb, so the strength of one only
virtue, is not sufficient to knytte the steadfast knot of true friendshyp, nor
one good condition enough to seal the perfect bands of amity, but the
lykenes of minds, and similitudes of manners, for the most part makes true
friends: but to what end is this? shall we make a friend of every slight
companion? No sir, but herein is the difference expressed between society and
friendship, namely that this requires present shows of familiarity but the
other by longer tract of time is grounded, and by change of fortune best tried
and made manifest. And in choice of fellowship, he that feeds his eyes with
outward shows of bravery, more tha^ his mind is fixed in the co^templation of
inward beauty, may chance (while others clime ye steps of worthy Fame) so
shrewd himself in the dark shadows of reproach: for All is not gold that
glysters, but sometimes under the looks of love, lurketh the cruel plague of
despite, and under ye flowers of sweet favor, lies hid the Serpent of
deadly displeasure: In trust is treason, and to conclude, in fellowship oftimes
is found most wicked and deceitefull falseshood.

Of Talk and communication.
CHAP. 3.
Speech is a comfortable gift, amongst all other creatures granted by the
providence of God only unto mankind, whereby we are taught to understand the
meaning of good and evil. For the tongue is an interpreter of the mind, and
according to the opinion of some Philosophers, it is the greatest difference
between us and unreasonable creatures, that we excel them in talk and
communication. Socrates had a child of noble birth brought unto him, by gentle
instruction to be imboldned, for he was of nature bashful unto whom said
Socrates even at his first coming, speak child, that I may know thee, meaning
that speech discovers the good or ill conditions of the mind: But if
Socrates himself were alive in these days, he might perhaps by that plains
principle be very cunningly deceived: for why? the times alas are changed, and
with the times the manners of men are altered, their hearts are hardened with
untruth, their affections grounded on falseshood, and their smoth tongs are
filed with sweet phrases of dissembling flattery. Where is that man to be
found whose words and deeds are indifferent? where does he live, whose
friendship is faithful? nay rather who lives that does not learn to be
disloyal? and what is the cause of such and so great mischiefs? sure the
abuse and vile disordering of sundry good gifts of God. Let us consider for
example, that especial gift and sweet abounding knowledge of eloquence, which
has been heretofore, by the learned touching the reconciliatio^ of princes,
and true establishing of peace, worthyly employed: and now it is in the
brewing of discord, and moving of hateful wars, most wickedly practiced. It
has been heretofore in devising wholesome Laws, for the maintenance of a
common wealth seriously applied, and now it is in defesaunce of right too
commonly set abroche. It has been heretofore in the praise of virtues
exercise plentifully bestowed, and now it is in the maintenance of vice and
cunning enticementes of folly (I loath to speak) to shamefullye, scornefullye,
and too licentiously abused.

What, fear to speak truly? what liberty to lie falsely? what shame to
talk wyselye? what praise to speak fondely? what pain to be plain? what
pleasure to dissemble? finallye what sloth to commend? and what haste and
diligence to slander, is now commonly practiced amongst men? yt even to live
is nothing else but to dissemble. And herein ye secret providence of God is
wonderful, which unto every good gift has added some inconvenience,
because we should not be surprised with pomp of pride of any time. We see the
brighte sun beams which gives gladsome light over all the world, and yet
scortcheth the green grass, and is hurtful still to behold: likewise the
sweet flower yeeldes honny to the prettye Be, and gives poison to the
loathsome spyder: none otherwise is it with us, touching necessary use of ye
tongue, which unto some (being well used) and discretely governed, is the cause of
high prefermente, and to others lewdely practiced, and licentiouslye abused,
it is verily the sharp instrument of mischief. And it were better for a man
openly to be hurt with swords, than secretly to be wounded with evil words.
There be many virtues expressed in discrete talk and wise communication, but
amongst them al, there is none that commends a Courtier, so much as the
careful heed he takes in the praise or dispraise of any man: for neither is
a friend in the Court hastily to be commended, nor an open enimye secretly to
be slaundered. And as I would wish all men busilye to praise none, so I
would have no man bitterly to backbyte any. It is the duty of a Magistrate
to enter into judgment of manners, and not the part of a private subject, to
note any man with opprobrious words for his evil behavior, not that vice is
not in all places and at all times to be detested, but that faults and
offenses, by each man are not to be reproved: for of little meddling comes
great roste, and of licentious talk often times ensues much unquietness. And
since the best man in some thing may deserve blame, it is most requisite, that
one man should bear with another imperfections, and rather charitablye to
admonish, than maliciouslye to reprove another man's offense. The next Virtue
(that brings infinite commodities unto the well disposed mind) is in
concealing of secrets, I mean such counsayles in any respect as are committed
of trust unto any man. It is good to forbear to talk of things needelesse to
be spoken, but it is much better to conceal things dangerous to be told.
And touching ye Prince especially with the Peers and principal rulers, it
stands much upon to be silent: And of all other things impertinent unto us,
it behooves not to be curious and inquisitiue. For it is an old proverb Quae
supra nos nihil ad nos. Moreover if a man be called to the table of his
betters, where occasion may be given to speak, in any wise he must be well
advised what and whereof is the question, before he entend to make answer,
neither must he be to long in discourse, least perhaps they should say that
he loves well to hear himself talk, nor to curious in reasoning of the
truth, nor to bold in defense of an argument, least he be noted of impudence
and want of discreation: but in those points chiefly, must he labor to
delight by good order, observing Decorum in these and al other his saying: And
herein he must take heed not to much to accustom his tongue unto one
phrase, nor dwell in any one knide of discourse, least for want of better
Music, he prove an instrument of mirth to the scornful. And yet in this
point many cunning Courteours beguyle themselves now and then, except they
take the figure Tautologia, for a comely grace, which the Rethoricia^s were
wont to condemn for a vice: And now commes Thraso vaunting himself of his
own deeds of arms, and high points of service, next unto him Thersites the
minion powers out his doubtful problemes, and with amorous discourses weeneth
to be able to insinuate himself into the favor of the Goddesses themselves:
And other there be, whom no serious cause or weighty matter can remove from
luring of their hawks, rayning their horse, or following their hounds: But
these and such like, peradventure are well furnished with the gifts of fortune,
for good cause, to supplye the want of discretion. Lastly, touching the
occasion and order of talk, it behooves him much, that is conversant amongst
the highest, to give them leave to choose their own matter, and (except it be
in a case prejudicial to none) to let them be content with their own opinion,
only for duty sake, afording some few words of course for common answer:
neither must be show himself over manifestly to mislike the master, least
that should prove a greater offense, than somewhat to disse^ble. And if in
discourse of talk it has happened any choleric words to pass (as there is
none so modest, that can always restrain his affections) it is good to lap
up the matter in ye end, with a courteous farewell at the parting, and to give a
gentle conge at the next meeting, least peradventure some malice might thereof
arise, which thou must at all times seek to avoid and eschew like unto
poison. And he that can thus stay his tongue, and moderate his affections, has a
very good furtheraunce, no doubt, to advance his estate, or at the least to
pass his time without troubles.

Of Modest behauior.
CHAP. 4.
IT has been a doubtful question of long time amongst the learned, touching
the first cause and original occasion of Gentry. In so much as the Poets
have painfully traveled heretofore, Poetae.
by fond authority of feigned fables, and vain proof of false arguments, to
persuade the true coniunctio^ of heavenly bodies with ye corporal substance of
mankind, and thereby concluding Gentry to be the very offspring of the Gods.
Nor far dissenting from these men was the opinion of those Ethnike
Philosophers, Philosophi.
which would have their nobility to derive their pedigrees from the Sun,
from the Moon, and many other celestial creatures, the rather to increase
their high courage and magnanimity. But these vain sansies of Paganism are
already by the light of the Gospel and true Doctrine of Christian religion
sufficiently drowned. There rests yet, the gross error of the common sort
of people to be refuted, whose churlishe opinion has supposed only riches to
have bin the beginning of noble birth and Gentry, for (say they) when Adam
dolue, and Eve did spin, then was there no such Gentle kin: and true it is,
but yet nothing to the purpose. For as the goodly frame and beautiful stage of
the whole world was not in a moment raised all at once, but by ye inestimable
wisdom of God, brought by degrees to such a wonderful perfection, and
most steedfast continuance. So the seed of man from age to age, did increase
into multitudes, dividing themselves into sundry societies, and by divine
providence, at last taught to find out and practice the necessary help of
civil government. Hereof comes the crown of Princely dignities: hereof rises
the banner of true nobility: and from hence are blazed the ancient arms of
Gentry. But (say they) riches was the cause of their promotions: Wealth was
the occasion of such worthy calling, and by the waighte of their substance, it
is likely their estate was peazed in the balance of Estimation. And is it
likely indeed, that the cause should be corrupt of such an absolute
perfection? but that is contrary to natural reason, for such as is the cause,
like is the effect: or is it possible, that such favorable help of divine
wisdom, which was their guide in establishing that kind of government,
should then fail them in the appointing of dignities? but it is more probable,
that the natural affections of the mind by freee choice, would rather admit
the worthy disposed and virtuous men to take the supremacy and first charge of
government. And thus much reason provoke me to believe. But to return to
the purpose: If the worthy fame of Virtues alone, has raised inferiors up
to the top and type of Honor: if by valiant deeds of arms antiquity has
been advanced: if upon such foundation of manners Gentry was first
grounded, how much more necessary is it now and evermore, that so comely
virtues of all men, and especially of Gentlemen should be embraced? for will thou be beloved of all men? then thou must be courteous and despise none: will
thou be praised? use good conditions: will thou be honored of the people? then
be loyal to thy Prince and Country: and finally, will thou be dutifully
obeyed of others? then thou must humbly fear God thy self. There be many
kinds of Virtues which the wisemen have called Moral and Intellectual,
whereof some be common, both to the affections of the mind, and the outward
exercise of the body, such is truth, manhood, right, modesty in behavior,
courtesy in speech, sobriety, bounty, chaste life, true friendship, and
such others, but the rest, as cunning, knowledge, prudence, patience, and
wisdom, are subject only to inward contemplation, and therefore more heroical
and divine. And these are the true seeds, settes and sciences, which in youth
ought speedily to be sown, soundlye planted, and most artificially grafted.

The Romans (whose estate for politic government, far surmounted al other
dominions of the world) had such care for the trayning up of youth in
virtue and good manners, that they made laws, and ordained a special
Magistrate, to foresee that none should live idle. And amongst all other
Virtues, equity and truth was there of such estimation, that they might by
no means bear rule which were suspected of covetousness, nor hardly be
suffered to inherit, which in their youth had bin known to have been common
liars. In so much as the Emperor Traianus after that he had slain King
Cebalus the father in battle, and taken his young son to be kept prisoner,
during his nonage in the City of Rome, with much add granted his life, and
due succession of the Kingdom unto him, only upon this condition, that he
should be diligently taught, and well instructed in Virtues, and for this
cause appointed his governor and him to continue still within the precincts of
his Court. But the young Prince having liberty to solace himself with some of
his companions, on a time brake into the Emperors Orchard, where they busily
applied themselves in ye choice of sweet fruits to satisfy their childish
delight, whom the Emperor himself by chance out of window perceived in that
place, nor much discontent therewyth, he came down alone, and met the Prince
with his companions, meaning to have apposed him in sundry points of his
schollershippe, and asked first from whence he came, unto whom the young
Prince answered, from school, and stoutely maintained the same to his face:
which proud fault and impudent boldness in the child, so wonderfully
moved the wrath, and kindled the displeasure of the Emperor toward him, that
he would (notwithstanding his former pardon) have dispatched him both from life
and living when he came to riper years, had it not bin for the second suite
and great intercession of the Nobility, which earnestly persuaded him to the
contrary. Such was the severity of this Emperor Traianus, in chastising of
falsehood, and the worthy fame of all the Romans in the maintaynance of Truth.
And surely, if such laws were executed in these days, we should neither have
the cities grievously vexed with corrupt Magistrates, nor the quiet streets
troubled with so many frantic frayes of brawling unthrifts. But where should
a man seek Justice, but of Magistrates? where should he find peace, if not in
cities? and of whom should we learn good manners, but of Courteors? For in
such a multitude and daily meeting of the most noble, wise, and valiant
persons, the sundry gifts of nature and goodly virtues are so bou^tifully
bestowed, no otherwise tha^ in a beautiful garden, the sundry sweet flowers,
which in the Spring time make a pleasant show in sight, and yield a most
delicate savor of delight. In this place (as in a strong bulwark of defense)
ye worthy Knights returning from ye dreadful wars, refresh their weary
limbs with comfortable, words and great entertainment: here the wise consulte
as in a most quiet Senate house, touching the welfare and commodities of a
common wealth.

And likewise here the flower of Nobility daily practice deeds of arms, and
exercise all feats of Chivalry most needful in the defense of their Prince
and Country: and how much those men are to be blamed, which (in stead of
such good exercise) use only the practice of most lascivious pastimes, it
appears by the example of Ulysses, which in regard of his sweet wife at
home, famed himself to be distraught with soddaine furies, to the intent he
might withdraw himself from the siege of Troy. For when he had been
thereof aduertized by Nauplus, and other worthy Captains of the Greeks, he
was pensive all the night, consulting with himself for some fine device, or
subtle sleighte, to wind himself from the wars: and on the next morrow he
furiously brake out into the fields, where he found a plowe, wherein (in
stead of Oxen) he had yoked other wild beasts, which he took by craft, and
thus eared the ground, which afterward he caused to be sowed with Baye
salt. But Nauplus understanding hereof, soon smelt his device, and caused his
young son Telemachus to be brought forth, and laid in the furrowe, whom,
when Ulysses perceived, overcome by the strong force of natural affection, he
turned his ploughe aside, and saved the life of the child, to his own shameful
discredit. To whom Nauplus cried out aloude: Now maiste thou with shame
leave off thy dissembled fury, since thy councelles are betrayed, and the
deapth of thy device is throughlye sounded: and could thou (cowarde) for
filthy lust forsake ye worthy enterprise of wars: could thou persuade thy
self for wanton love to leave the honorable deeds of Knighthoode? It is a
great shame to a King, to win the love of a woman, and leese the honor of
the field, and therefore I council thee Ulysses to leave such lewd practices
henceforth, and follow the martial deeds of arms, most fit for thy calling.
And thus was Ulysses entrapped in his own snare, and circumuented with his own
shameful device. But here might a great question arise in controversy,
whether are more profitable of the valiant or wise in the administration of the
common wealth, which I had rather close up with the opinion of Cicero that
said: Parui sunt foris arma nisi est consilium domi.

Next unto these Virtues appears bountiful Magnificence, whose beams are so
bright shining in the deeds of Nobility, that I suppose to dark clouds of
Covetousness are not able to Eclipse the light of such a goodly virtue: And we
must esteem it a dream, where men say, that English hospitality is fled, or
rather Metamorphosed into the likeness of Italian thrift, Spanish pride, and
other outlandish Parsimony: which if it be in dreaming fancy, but too truly
found by common experience, it is a thing most lamentable, and especially to
be blamed in those which stand so much upon the terms of honorable antiquity,
and yet in Tauernes, and scornful places keep their chief hospitality. If
a man should reason with these men, and ask what is the thing they chiefly
desire, perhaps they would say Fame, Power, or Liberty, three spiritual
gifts of Grace in deed, but which of them likes you best? Do thou
thirst after the sweet Nectar and Heavenly perpetual flowing streams of
Fame: but there is no such dulcet liquor to be found in Tauerns: Virtue is
the only fountain from whence these riuelets have their beginning: for this
cause the divine Poet Homer did record the worthy deeds of Hector and
Achilles: this moved Virgil to discourse the painful travels of Aeneas: and
likewise the whole company of Historiographers, have left the deeds and works
of antiquity unto all posterities, only for example of Virtue. But do you
ambitiously desire to bear rule? then you must first learn to obey, for
what duties can ye look for at the hands of inferiors, whom you disdain, when
you proudly mislike the authority of superiors from whence comes your
honor? Is it Liberty that you seek? then can you not be free till you be
able to restrain your affections: For how can he enjoy the commodities of
Peace, which delights in the practice of discord? If he be free that is
subject to fear, or happy that pines in sorrows, or quiet that burns in
wrath, the^ is he at liberty, which overruled by his affections: but it is
far otherwise, and therefore in my judgment, he is free from liberty, and
inferior to bondage. Therefore, if we would be crowned with everlasting fame,
if we seek pleasantly to live, and honorably to dye, to rule with power, and
to be feared with favor, and lastely, to be like unto the Gods themselves,
we must be liberal in reward of duties, and bountiful in due consideration
of deserts. The Emperor (...) was so bountiful in rewards toward his subjects,
that he would suffer no day to pass, wherein he had not diversely performed
sundry deeds of charity. What a Princely reward was given to Virgil by the
noble Octauia, the mother of Marcellus, for a few lines writte^d in worthy
praise of her son? how mindful was that high renowned King Alexander, of
his friendly governors, which in the conquest of Persia commanded a rich
cheste, which contained chief part of the spoil, to be reserved for Homer.
These were the virtues of the Greeks and Romans, which committed their names
of the Book of eternal memory.

Furthermore, there be comely graces, Modestia
as well in gesture as other behavior, to be noted in a Courteour: and it
behooves him much that daily stands in the face of his Prince, and chief
royalty of the Realm, to be modest in his looks, and very circumspecte of
behauioure. Heliodorus, Heliod.
or at least, the friendlye translatour of his works, resembling Theagines
unto the valiant Achilles, both in stature and al other outward comely
proportions of ye body makes them equal, but for his countenance, (which
discloseth the modesty of the mind) he preferred Theagines before the other,
in that he was more humbly disposed, and far more courteous of speech, for
which he gives him a singular commendation. And to say truth, what is the
comeliness of personage without good manners? surely it may be likened to the
Painters image, wherein is much art, and no sense, most curious workmanship,
and little understanding. But in gesture and behavior there are as many
shameful vices to be eschued, as there be comely graces to be followed: for I
would not wish a young man to counterfeit such gravity, yt he become a
Drawlatche, nor a double courtesy maker, which is scornful, nor a ceremonious
cap giver to al men, for that is ridiculous, so yt he must be neither sheepish,
nor yet past shame, that will seek to advance himself to credit by good
manners and modest behauior. There be some which love rather to set their
looks in a Glass, than learn to sit comely in the saddle: another stalks in
the streets (as we say) like one that would steal Cranes: another bears the
countenance of a Lion, perhaps whose courage is not worth a Leeke: this wily
fellow shows every man his sword, which has bin the death of so many frogs
in Ireland: and other tells the wonders of strange countries, and therein uses
the liberties of a Trauailer: and lastely, some are ever exclayming on their
stepmothers fortune, and whine at the sorrows of Adversity. But these (in my
judgment) had rather choose Folly for their playfellowe and companion, than
the have Virtue their guide and safeconduct unto wisdom. There is a mean and
mediocritie in all things, which he that can indifferentlye observe, has
attained even to the full perfection of Virtue.

It commends a Courteour likewise to be generallye seen and experienced in
many things, for the knowledge of all things is profitable, but the abuse of
any thing is uncomely. I have known very wise men, which traueling by chance
in the company of mean Artificers, would not think scorn to talk, but take
delight to discourse with such, even of the vilest trades that are to be
necessarily used in a common wealth. Sweet honny is not gathered out of one
only, flower, nor learning is had out of one book, nor Wisdom likewise is
attained by the practice of one Virtue alone. And we must learn also to
frame our speech and behavior according to the place and company, not to
talk with Priests of love, nor with Ladies of religion, not to discourse with
children of wars, nor with Princes of trifles: neither in a tragical
misfortune to be too much daunted with fear, nor in a sudden felicity too
far surprised with delight. And in any discourse we must remember to infer
duties by desert, mirth with measure, and pleasure by commodities, for
according to ye Poet, Omne tulit punctum qui miscuit vtile dulci. To conclude,
in all our actions and expeditions, we must prefer the steadfast counsel of
advised policy, before the rash enterprise of malaperte boldness. It is
better to deserve everlasting fame with noble Fabius which saved his country by
delays, than to perish with shameful Callicratides which lost a goodly fleet
of the Lacedaemonians with overmuch have. We see the lingering snaile by tract of
time does softly climing reach to ye toy of stately Towers, and there quietly
sits without danger, where ye fierce capitain with hot assaults and bloody
skirmishe at last perhaps winnes the strongest fort, which he ca^ not keep
without double charge and deadlye peril. And surely, the cunning to keep is
no less commendable, than the courage to obtain: And thus he that will rule,
must learn to be obedient, he that will live quietly, must of force restrain
his affections, and he that would be known to be a gentleman, must always
use good conditions.

Of Self love and surquidrie.
CHAP. 5.
I Can not easily condiscende to the opinion of those which affirm that a man
cannot in any wise do himself wrong: but I am rather induced by reason to
believe yt a man can hurt no man so much, as he plagueth himself. For if we
consider the miserable estate of mankind, subject to such and so many
fearful dangers and sudden alterations, in the whole course of his life: we
shall find that in stead of one injury done is another man, he brings
mountains of care, and heaps of sorrows upon his own head. And to omit
all childish sorrows, when he comes from his crade first into riper years of
discreation, good God, how violently is he drawn by sweet alluring lust,
into the loathsome practice of follye? what care vexes him within? what fear
does compass him about? what pleasures in hope? what sorrows in despair?
what flames of desire? and what cold floudes of disdain? and finallye, what
rocks of repulse do break the billow waves of his wavering mind; in so
much as ten thousand times in a day (to end this careful strife) he
calls for death to cut the line asunder, of this his lucklesse life. And
yet perhaps by tract of time he is taught to leave such toys: reason
peradventure may rule such rage, and counsel overcome such youthful
fancies. But from thence escaping the danger of Scilla, he is now thrown
headlong upon the dreadful rocks of Charibdis: he is grown from youth to
manhood: nay rather he is come from joy to grief, from pleasure to pain,
and from mirth to mischief: before the wanton desires of youth molested him,
but now the wilful deeds of manhood, do daily assault him: before the
pleasure of lust enticed him to follye, but now the rage of wrath can
provoke him to mischief.

Lastly, he was then ravished with the joys of heaven, but now he is haunted
with furies of Hell. For in in this age he is chiefly subject to pride, vexed
with wrath, and puffed, or rather poisoned with ambition. Again when the
natural heat of lusty youthful blonde, by diminiyshing, seems to moderate
such outrageous furies, to quality such affections, and to assuage all such
wylfull desires: Even then commes the Image of death (I mean old age) so
crooked, so lame, so deformed, so loathsome, fraught with such care, and
ouerlade^ with such infirmities, that a man would wish rather now to dye
living, than to live longer in such a plight pyning: for besides all these
plagues and tedious annoyes, it is most commonly accompanied with such a
diuelishe companion, that faints his weak body for want of sustenaunce,
disquieteth his testie mind for lack of rest, and in the end (like and evil
guide that leads a blind man into the ditche) it closes up his eyes in
endless sorrows and most miserable calamities. And this is the same
covetousness, which has bin ever accounted the root of all mischiefs. So
that we see by the whole course of humain life, that a man is the chiefest
enemy unto himself. And oftentimes it comes to pass, that where a man
sows pleasure, he reapeth pain, where he pretends love, he finds hate:
and wherein he seems to offend others least, he priuilye hurts himself
most. Philautia.
And this is manifestly proved by the example of Self love and surquedry A
sweet vice and deceiteful affection is that fancy which the Philosophers have
called Philautia, and so natural a disease in deed, that neither Prince nor
Peer, high nor low, rich nor poor, wise nor foolish, weak nor strong, fair
nor deformed, no not the learned Philosophers themselves, were all able to
withstand. And me thinks I hear Nature thus reasoning with my self: Is it
possible for a man to live that loves not himself best? but that is contrary
to my laws, which have given to every one an especial charge and provident
care to nourish himself: and that thou may easilye perceive this to be true,
behold I gave thee ears to hear, eyes to see, tongue to speak, reason to
understand, feet to go, hands to feed and defend thy self, and generally
care to maintain the good estate of life. These things are granted by kind,
and can thou vndkindlye seek to abuse them, more to the profit of others
than to thine own benefit? no not if thou would: for I can compel thee to
the contrary: but thou take more delight in the beauty of another: I
grant, so thy neighbors field is more fruitful, and his cattle bear more
bountiful vdders, and what fares she the worse for that, which feeds often
upon the same, and thinks her own birds fairest? So can I see them weep
when I laughe, mourn when I rejoice, sick when I am whole, poor when I am
rich, naked when I am clothed, imprisoned when I am free, and harbourlesse
when I am housed: and wherein can this be hurteful unto me which feel not an
other man's grief, know not his want, nor bear not his passion? but what if
I did? should I supporte his need, and waste mine own wealth? that were
folly: should I set him free to lose mine own liberty? that were more
vain: and generally, should I succoure him, relieve and cure his disease? to
hinder me, to grieve me, and increase mine own maladies? that were even little
better than madness. No, I am nearest unto my self, and therefore no man can
justly blame me, to prefer mine own safety before the commodities of an
other: and I may perhaps commend him well, and like her bette, but I will ever
love my self best.

To these objections of nature, or rather false persuasions of Diuellishe
disposition, reason does modestlye replye, by the aucthoritye of truth, in
this manner.

How long will thou abuse the patience of divine power, Oh thou froward and
perverse human Nature? how long shall thy proud looks provoke the
dreadefull wrath of the heavens? can thou safely challenge the name and title
of a goddess, and yet still practice to rebel against the Laws and
ordinances of the Gods? or will thou look to be called the mother of
mankind, and wilt not submit thy self to the rules of reason? does not the
dreadful judgment of the one, fear thee from sin? nor the friendly
persuasions of the other, move to embrace virtue? But consider what thou art of
thy self, yet at the length I beseech thee: haste thou any strength,
substance, beauty, reason, or understanding, which is not given thee from
above? A naked life in deed we receive at thy hands: and what avails that
unto us without good conditions, nay, were it not better to be unfed, than
untaught and never borne, than brought up to destruction? Thou vauntest of
life: but can thou make us free from death? thou talkest of beauty, but
can thou teach us to avoid the smart of lust? thou braggest of strength,
but can thou warrant us to we stand sickness? no nor any means thou can
see to make us thy children happy. For as he is not called fortunat which is
poor and deformed, so they are not accounted happy, which are only rich and
beautiful. But thou will say perhaps, that Nature is desirous of knowledge
which is the ground work and foundation of Wisdom: And it is true that a
man is naturally inclined to the practice of skill, and experience of cunning:
For in his youth he voluntarilye learneth to speak, then he practices to
dispute, and persuade, he learneth to delighte with soundes, he is taught to
number any sums, he measures the ground by proportions, and rules the
stars with understanding: And what profits a man to compass all the world by
wit, and destroy himself for want of wisdom? for as life without learning
is unpleasant, so learning without Wisdom is unprofitable. To what end served
the deep knowledge of Aristotle, which virtuously instructed others, and yet
desperately shortened his own life? what aualyed the profounde skill of
Archimedes, which lost his City besiedged by Marcellus and was himself
(then drawing out of circles) by a messenger suddenly put to death? And what
gained Plato by his learning, which was shamfully reproved of ambition?
likewise of the rest Narcissus was fair and beautiful, but his unhappy
favor was the cause of his destruction: and lastly, Hercules and Sampson were
strong, but not able to withstand the force of shameful death. And thus you
see to vain and vicious nature the proud blossoms of your vntimelye fruit,
soon withered: the strength of your authority, soon decayed: and the
beauty of your countenance soonest of all to be fled, forlorn, and defaced.

And surely, if a man would but consider either the imperfections of nature,
the innumerable sorrows of this life, or the invincible force of death, no
doubt he should be as earnestlye persuaded to follow the rule of right, and
seek out the secrets of wisdom, as he was first allured to sweet sin,
and violentlye drawn into the school of follye. But alas, those which are in
hell know not the joys of heaven: and what hope of victory is left to them
that are already conquered? O strong self Love, and pestilent force of pride,
what homicyde, parricyde, or what murders haste thou not committed? What
flaming fyres, what wars, yea what mischief haste thou not attempted? Thou
have killed Princes, poisoned Kings, and murdered most famous Emperors: By
thee strong Castles are rased, towns spoiled, Cities wasted, and by thee
countries are left desolate. And whither can the force of thy ragyng fury be
now further extended? Thou haste vanquisshed men, and wylt thou now exercise
thy tyranny upon brute beasts? And would to GOD we might all be so well
excused. Thou haste won the whole world, but do thou mean to lay siege
to the heavens? or give battyle unto the Gods? But remember thy Champion
Lucifer, what reward had he for his proud attempt? Call to mind the
presumptuous buildings of Nembroth, and what success had he in his
enterprise: And forget not the proud Knight Companius, which being valiant
and fortunate in wars, had such confidence in his courage, and such
faithful trust in his own strength, that he scorned at those (which after
victory obtained) did use any ceremonies in worshipping of their Gods,
calling it a cowardlye affection that fearefullye craved help and supporte of
shadows: but he was suddenly consumed with fire from heaven, being in the
forefronte of the battle at the siege of Thebes. These things considered,
may soon cool the hot courage of pride, and most horrible conceiptes of
Surquedrye. But the close affection of self Love is more couertlye crepte into
the opinions of men, which think them selves by nature bound, and not
forbidden by divine laws to make much of them selves. And God forbid but that
each man should have a provident care to profit hime self: But yet are we
taught by the commandments of GOD to love another equallye as our selves: we
are instructed by the record of holy scriptures, that all our actions ought
to be done to the glory of GOD: And we may learn by profane writers, that
we are not borne unto our selves, but that partlye our parents, partlye
friends, partlye children, partlye kynsefolke, and chiefelye our natyue
countreye does challenge a pryncypall duty, wherein the charitable love and
affection of us all is jointly comprehended. And this is more plainly perceived
by the comfortable virtue of societe, without the which the life of man were
naked, tedious and unpleasant: For what avails it unto a man to be the
monarche of the whole world, if he have not subjects to govern, if he have
not a wife to increase his ofspryng, if he have not children to honor and
defend him, and lastly, if he have not friends to rejoice with him in
prosperity, and to comfort him in adversity. Yea if he be not happy,
straight ways that has all these things, how unhappy is he then that
wants so many goodly commodities? And by this means a proud man is to be
thought most unfortunate. For when he begins to take an opinion of him self,
even then is he first mislyked of others: Where he fawnes he is feared, where
he loves he is suspected, where he favors most he is lest regarded: Again,
when he frowns he is forsaken, when he laughes he is enuyed, and when he
mournes he is left desolate: But he is warye and wise, he will trust none,
neither shall he be trusted of any: he is proud because he is rich, but
he is poor in that he is proud: he is strong in power, but he is weak in
wisdom: he is comelye in proportion, but he is deformed in condition. Way
these things together in the true ballaunce of reason, and you shall perceive
the wayght of sin, and heavy burden of mischief, able to sink the
strongest, the comeliest, and the proudest man alive, into the deadlye pytte of
destruction. Dionisius was wise, and yet he beguyled him self, for he was
shamefullye murdered by the consent of his wife. Brennus was valiant, yet
could not withstand the wrath of the Gods. And Tarquinius was proud, but
pride was the cause of this foul destruction. And these be the fruits of
self Love and Surquedrie. But cease (O cruel King) cease now at length this
thy ragyng tyranny, forbear to vex the minds of innocents with pride, and
drown no more unhappy souls in the seas of self Love and Surquedrie. And
yet why do I thus gentlye entreat with a Tyrant? why do I plead for peace
with the chief author of discord? And why do I call him King, which is the
father of mischief, and mortal enemy to mankind ever since the beginning of
the world? Even him I mean, which brought the first care and calamityes unto
Adam by the taste of an Apple. For it is none but he which covertly seeks by
false prouocations to bring us unto mischief: It is he that settes the
spiteful plants of pride, and he that sowes the most hateful seed of
dissension: But he names him self the Prince of the World, how shall we
than seek to confound him? Nay but he is the Father of lies, and therefore
we will not believe him: he is but a shadow, and why should we then fear
him? he triumphs over worldlings like a Lion, but resist him stoutlye and he
vanishes into nothing. Wylt thou learn to withstand the temptations of
Satan? Then you must faithfully cleave to the promise of God, which will not
suffer the righteous to be confounded. But thou can not be righteous of thy
self, nor faithful without humility, nor humble without charity: For these
virtues are united and can not be separated. So that he which would have
the favor of the divine Majesty, must needs endeavor him self to resist the
strength and power of our universal enemy. Neither is it too late at any time
to resort unto goodness, nor too tymelye to prevent mischiefs. We must use
no procrastinations and delays to be virtuous. For he that is not ready to
think well to day, will be more unlikely to do good on the morrow. And it
is not enough to think ill of none, but we (must in that we may) do good
unto all, yea even unto our enemies, for thus are we taught to do good for
evil, which are the fruits of perfect charity. Much less then ought we to
disdain them that honor us, to spoil them that serve us, to persecute them
that love us, neither to musel the mouth of the labouryng Ox, nor unjustly to
withdraw the rewards of well deserved hier: for these are the works of
infidelity. Therefore if nature have somewhat heretofore nusled us in the
churlishe affections of self Love, which is the author of pride, and
consequently, the cause of great mischief: yet let us hencefoorthe follow the
persuasions of reason, which teaches us to shun the vain enticementes of
folly, and to search out the divine secrets of wisdom. and surely the
first point hereof, in mine opinion, is for a man to know him self. It is
strange that the nature of man should be desirous of novelties, and not
regard his own safety, or that his mind should be able to discover the
quality of the heavens, and yet graueled in the knowledge of himself: but you
will say, it is an easy matter for a man to be known from a beast, and that
is by reason and understanding. Then what meant the Philosopher Diogenes,
Diogenes
yt in the Market place stood gazing amongst a multitude, and being demanded
whom he sought, made answer, that he looked if he might see any man: they
told him, that there were many, but he said again, verily amongst so many,
I can not find any man: for he accounted them no men, which could not rule
their affections, which in the common sort of people is not easy to be
found, when of the learned themselves, it is a rare thing to be followed. And
as it is said, the greatest Clearkes are not always the wysest men, nor
commonly, the strongest most valiant. Simile.
And as the highest trees are more subject to the blustering force of ye winds,
than the low shrubbes, which are shrouded under the defense of the Mountains,
so the noble minds of Princes, and worthy Peers, are sooner shadowed and
ouercast with the clouds of Vanity, than the quiet fancies of the meanest,
whose affections are governed by the steadfast rule of Virtue. And for this
cause it was worthily provided by the Emperoures of old time, that the same
day they were crowned, even in their chief royalty, the artificers should
come personally, and demand how and after what sort it would please him to
have his Tomb fashioned: and this was done solemnly, to the intent he
should be mindful of death, and not surprised with too much delighte of
suddayne felicity. Therefore, if Princes and Emperoures have not bin ashamed
to acknowledge themselves mortal, and by this means, to suppress the
swelling waves of vain glory, it behooves all private men much more
vigilantly to watch and ward, that they be not at any time puffed up, and
infected with the strong poison of self love, and most hateful surquedrie.

Of Wine and Women.
CHAP. 6.
HEliodorus in the third Book of his Ethiopian History, proves, that the
cause of intemperancy and lust, are both one, for as well (says he) the mind
of a drunken man is flexible, as the affections of love are inconstant, because
they are both drowned in moist humors: and therefore we see, that a common
lover will soon be drunk, and a drunkerde soon moved with the desires of
love. It were a doubtful question to determine, whether has greater force,
of Wine or Women, for surely, the strength of the one is invincible, and the
lust of the other not to be satisfied.

This conquereth Kings, that wastes whole countries: this desguiseth me^ into
beasts, and that transformeth me^ into Monsters. This diuorceth us from the
joys of Heaven, and that other winds us to pains of Hell. But least we should
offend with Tiresias, we will rather confess with the Chamberlain of Darius,
that in these points women are sovereign. And as the use of them both, and
many things else is very necessary, pleasant, and profitable, so it is only ye
abuse, either of them, or any thing, that is filthy, tedious, and
incoueniente. May not the tree be good, although the blossoms are blasted? is
not the air wholesome, because it is hurtful to ye sickly? or is gold naught,
because our nature is corrupted? no, it is pure, but we are imperfect: these
things are wholesome, but we are immoderate: they are good, but our affections
are evil disposed.

Aristotle gave counsel to King Alexander, in his most troublesome affairs,
and warlike adventures, to behold the beautiful countenance of women, and by
pleasant speech with them had, to lighten the weight of cares, which
continually increasing, might discourage the mind of the most valiante from
his noble enterprise: wherein he had great reason, for what can be more
delectable unto a man, than to behold the image of himself, set forth in a
more perfect and heavenly figure? what more comfortable, than to see the cause
of his life, and consequently, the chief author of his felicity? what is
more joyful than pleasure? what more pleasant than beauty? and what can be
more beautiful than women? surely nothing. And I suppose with the Poets, that
Nature has curiously fashioned them in her own molde, with such excellency
of personage, to spite the proud Goddess, that vauntes her self in beauty
to be sovereign. Neither can I perceive them in any virtues to be much
inferior unto men, but if I should not speak partial, rather the authors,
than followers of wisdom. To begin with Chastity, it is not possible that
so pure a metal should be defiled with any spots of filthy lust, for why?
they were made after the perfection of man, of the soundest part of his body.
Moreover, their own complexion is cold, and therefore commonly they are more
temperate and chst, modest and patient, mild and merciful, most constant and
pitiful, and for the corruption that arises of gross meats, and unwholesome
sauoures, why they have by nature a continual euacuation of all superfluous
humors, such force has that which is pure, to expel the same that is
unclean. And what is he that doubts of the continency of women? but let him
remember only the daughter of Virginius, which chose rather to be slain of
her own father, than to hazard the Castle of her chastity, unto the hot
seege of Appius her fleshly enemy: if they be not constante, what was
Penelope? if not patie^t, what was Griseld? if not pitiful, what was Dido?
except you will make them Goddesses for Virtue, which were in deed by kind
women: but you will say, they want courage, because they are gentle by nature:
a wise reason, as though Saints themselves are not sometimes displeased, or
as if the water were not calmest in the deep, and the wind strongeir in the
streyghts: but did not Queen Thomiris challenge the combat of Alexander, to
fight with him hand to hand, which he refused? was not Pentheseleia before
her in the midst of the battle at the ruinous seege of Troy? what was
Bellona her self, if women were not courageous? yes no doubt, they are strong
and valiante, which appears even in that stout affection of them, which
burns in desire of soueraintie. And lastly, for wisdom, is it like that
Pallas would instruct me^, and spitefully withdraw from her own sex, the
worthy gift of understanding? no, but it is manifest, yt she has adopted them
for her only heirs, of such a right and bountiful patrimony, which benefit
men have rather received at their hands, than found out by their own
industries. For it is thought that the Latins first learned their leters of
Nicostrata. Pithagoras was supposed to be the desciple of his sister Theoclea.
Pericles the Duke of Athens was instructed in learning by Aspatia. Such and
absolute perfection of virtue, and so rare a figure of divine beauty, is both
fixed, and fashioned in ye noble mind, and comely proportion of women, that who
can mistrust any loathsome qualities to lurk under the couerte shadows of such
comeliness, but those which have by experience unhappily found the same to be
manifest? But oh blind goddess Fortune, or cursed fury Fate, with what
terms shall I enter into thy disprayse? with what voice shall I sound thy
dishonor? or by what force shall I confound thy government? thou that
unequally diuidest thy goods, thou that partially bestowest thy gifts, and
thou that disdeynefully rewardest thy subjects, why did thou not
indifferently impart riches unto men, that none should be disdeyned? or
universally bestow virtues on women, that none might be condemned: because
thou will say, the last was not in my power, and the first was not
conueniente. But is it nature then, that has thus scornefully abused her
creatures? to raise up one unto the seat of honorable fame, and to foil a
thousand with the reproach of shameful folly? Surely it were an unjust part
of a mother, that had many daughters, to make one of them her Mistress, and
all the rest her servants. And it were unnatural in a Nursse (in stead of
Milk) to give her children poison. But Nature is the mother of mankind, and
teaches to maynteyne the commodities of life: she is our Nursse, and
therefore wishes the health of her children. No, it is even our selves, that
are corrupt and imperfect, it is men that are abused by women, and it is
women that are the cause of all mischief. Examine histories (which are the
light of truth) even from the beginning of the world until this day, and you
shall find no grief, no sorrow, no death, no danger, no wars, no wast, no
fires, no destruction, no woes, no lamenting, no deceypt, falsehode, discord,
no not any other inconvenience, whereof a woman has not bin some part of the
occasion. Was not Eve the cause of Original Sin? than the which to
mankind, what could happen more pernicious? this one singular example of
most auntiente authority, might serve to daunte the pride, and cool the
vauntyng bragges of wicked and licentious women: for as they began with
persuasions of false delyghte, so they continue with dissembling practice, and
end commonly with horrible shameful mischief.

Their beginning I call the flowers of youth, which age is first subject to
the many assaults of love, wherein how maydenly they behave themselves in
the mayntenance of Virginity, nay, how Syrenelyke they show themselves, in
the Shipwreck of their modesty, it is wonderful. And first, she learnes to
set her eyes, fixed with the stars in sign of stabilitie: her ears are
vigila^t, to hear her self praised: her tongue is taught to be silente, in token
of modesty: her countenance is mild, her speech short and sweet, and lastly
her lively looks of sober cheer, but yet amiable. She is bashful, and
therefore sittes most comely beneath at the door, or else above somewhat more
modestly in a window, where she sings sometimes for sorrow, she sighs perhaps
for delighte, she sowes for a fashion, she plays to remove fancies, and she
mournes for want of company. And when she co^mes to be moved with plain
terms of marriage, good God what niceness she will use, how coy she will
become, and what a countenance of virginity she will borow, to set forth the
matter, for then they will all be Nuns, they will never marry, nor know
what a man means, so long as they live, whereas they mean nothing so much as
the contrary: but let them be courted after another sort, and as you would
say, proffer them the common courtesy, it is not so soon offered, as
willingly enterteyned: for when they know the depth of his devotion, they sound
his affection by their own desire, and they suppose he will be quickly lost,
if not lightely loved: and thus they feed some with looks, and other with
love: some with words, and other with works: some with sport, and other with
spite: some with pleasure, some with pain: some with favor, some with
disdeyne: some with loss, some with gain, that I think their insatiable
desire would have as many supplies, as they have sleightes of alluring. And
these are the slighte practices of young women, whom when riper years, and
alteration of estate has well grounded in the perfection of their science,
then they begin to proceed in high degrees of falsehoode. By this time use
has made them expert, and impudence has given the^ utterance of deep
dissembling flattery, but now they have a cloak for the rain, and why should
they be bashful? before they masked in the close visordes of virginity, but
now they dance with the figure, a Saint in their hand, and the image of
Devils in their heart: before they were only molested with the tyranny of
love, but now they are vexed with hate, pressed with pride, poisoned with
disdeyne, haunted with jealousy, and plagued with suspicion, and the least of
them all (if it lay in their power) is as much as a man's life is worth, for
the nature of them all is in extremes, in so much, that either they love
affectionately, which is seldom, or else they hate deadly (which is common:)
they are too proud or too sluttishe, too fond or too froward, too pleasant
or too peeuishe, too much fawning or too scornful, too much familiar or too
strange, too sheepishe or too shrewishe, too apish or too lumpishe: so that all
their affections are without mean, and their passions without measure, as
soon surprised in delight, and as soon confounded with sorrow, soon quickened
with hope, and as soon drowned in despair, soon weeping, soon laughing, and
according to the Proverb,

Soon ripe, soon rotten,

And seldom seen, is soon forgotten.

They are Lawless, for they choose whom they like, and refuse when they list:
but yet they are conscionable, for they would have all things in common. So
they are liberal, but it is of other men's goods: they are pitiful, because
they would have no man want that which they desire: and they are courteous,
because they would be courted. Mantuan likeneth the^ to a Northeast wind,
which bears off clouds at ye first puff, and draws them back again with a
false encou^tring blast. So women, when they perceive the devotion of me^ to be
cold, or their own beauty to be diminished by tract of time, the^ begins the
knowledge of their cunning to be expressed, and the full perfection of art to
be practiced: they will not have their smooth brows with untimely wrincles to
be defaced, nor their comely cheeks of ye roseal color so sone to be
defrauded, it were unjust to suffer their beauty to decay for want of
repratio^s, which is ye chief cause of their maintenance. How should they be
known for images, unless they be curiously painted? how should they be taken
for Saints, if they were not gorgeously attired? and how should they be
honored for Goddesses, if glistering in gold, the majesty of their person
should not be fully furnished? yea, they kembe, they curle, they pinke, they
purle, they streyne, they feign, they wrinch, they pinch, and all to insinuate
so fine a carcass with alluring looks, into the practice of folly. And dare
you call them weak, which in force have vanquished the strongest? and no
marvel, for what man has ever bin so strong, but has bin vanquished by
fond desires of lust? had Hercules bin burned? had Giges bin slain? had
Dionisius bin murdered? had Anchus, the sons of Arcinoe, Cyrus, and other
innumerable Kings and Princes, dyed of mischief, but by the only treason of
women? what should I speak of wars, since Troy, the chief City of all
Asia, was for a woman's sake sacked, wasted, and left, desolate? I loath to
recite Paricides, though Scilla murdered her father Nisus, and carried his
hear for a sign of love to his enemy King Minos, which scornefully refused
ye gift and abominable giver, such are the fruits of lust, and outrageous
desires of women. And are they to be thought simple, which in wiles have
begiled the wisest? and true it is, for who has ever bin deceived, where he
has never faithfully trusted? and whom should a man trust, if not his own
wife, with whom he lives, for whom he toils, in whom he joys, and from
whom he should receive most loyal love, and most comfortable delight? But
alas, in stead of comfort, they give care to their husbands, in stead of joy,
they bring sorrow, for meat mourning, for drink dolor, for rest unquietness,
for safety perils, for peace discord, and at last, for his good deserts, he is
requited with the vile reward of mischief. Was not Albinus the first King of
the Lombardes, shamefully murdered by his fair spouse Rosamund? was not
Agamemnon served after the same sort with his unchaste wife Clytemnestra? how
spedde the wisest of them all? Were not Salomo^, David, Caesar, Antonius,
Tully, Marcus Aurelius and others, abused by the sleightes of their wives and
women? And therefore who is now so fond but will learn to bridle the
affections of lust? who is so blind that sees not the false entycementes of
folly? and who so doltishe that will doat upon such kytes of Cresides
kind? It is better with Phirimus the beautiful young Roman, to deface the
Majesty of comely favor and beauty, than with Narcissus to be confounded
with his own folly: it is more commendable with Alexius to forsake the
concupisence of the flesh, and follow the sweet contemplation of wisdom,
than with unhappy Cephalus to seek the trial of faithless folk, and fall
into the snares of inevitable mischief. But in any wise I would not have the
virtuous women and modest virgins herewith offended: For the reprehension of
Vice increases the glory and praise of Virtue, none otherwise, tha^ the
beauty of the sweet Rose more brauelye shows it self being set amongst
Nettles, and the Sun appears more glorious in sight after the dark clouds
and droupyng shades of night is banished. And to the rest I tell this tale to
stop their own envious conceit, and self hurting imagination. There was a Lady
of base birth, and borne in a barbarous country, which by the favor of blind
fortune was raised unto the stage of honor, wherein bluntly behauing her self,
as well toward her equals as inferiors, she was generally mislyked of all
sorts, in somuche as her husband also at length began to estrange himself
unto her, whose sad lokes she over hastily suspecting, or whither it be that a
continual fear vexes the guilty mind (I cannot tell) but she runs hastily
to meet a secret friend of hirs which was the^ coming out of ye fields with
his gown in his neck, and a lame Crow whose wings he had maimed in his hand,
and suddenly bemoned her case unto him how unfortunate she was to be
suspected without cause, with an ample discourse of her misfortunes: The
Gentleman knowing her disease to have proceeded only from the jealousy of her
own conceit, had thought to have given her good counsel in plain terms, but
he was disappoynted by the coming of her husband, which sodeinelye came upon
them unawares, and therefore he gave her this riddle for an answer before her
husbands face: Madam says he, you demand what was the cause that I spoiled
this carren Crow which as you say was innocent, and true it is, but yet
sitting in the top of a tree safely shrouded from sight, she could not be
content, but discovered her self by her own natural voice, which is
unpleasant for any man to hear: And therefore has bin subject to this
mischance as you see, whereof in my judgment her self has been the chief
occasion. And herewith smiling, they went in all together, and the Gentleman
rounding in her ear, thus expounded his ridle. So Madam I doubt (says he)
that the too much declinyng unto your own natural disposition, has been the
only cause that the wings of your worthy Fame are now galled with the
spiteful shot of suspicion. And surely so it falls out many times with
those (which are not very cunning dissemblers) that while they intend to
color their craft by dissimulation, they unwarily discover them selves by the
force of their natural affection, for nature is above art in the ignorant:
And Virtue above all things is esteemed of the wise.

Of Dyce play.
CHAP. 7.
AS there be diverse and sundry exercises of the body which are wholesome,
because by the^ both strength is worthily increased, and health as warily
mainteyned: So there be many unprofitable sportes, unlawful games, and leude
practices, which infecte the body with diseases, pollute the mind with vices,
spoil ye necessary goods with unthriftiness, and therefore ought of all men
to be shunned and abolished. For if we make our sport and game to delyght, why
should we toil so much therein most commonly to our own hynderaunce and
disease: but in loss is no delyght, in pain is no pleasure, neither is there
any joy in annoye, and as the Poet says, Voluptatis commendat rarior vsus.
The rare practice and seldom use commends pleasure most. Let us take for
example amongst so many other unprofitable disportes, the only immoderate use
of Dyce play, wherein if the pleasure be little, the profit is less: if the
chance be doubtful, the choice is hard: and though the commodities are
uncertain, yet the dysprofites are infinite. And first touching the Fame and
creadyte of a man which amongst the virtuous is esteemed equal with life: It
is a very hard matter inordinatly to follow the deceyptfull practice of this
coosenyng skyll or skillful coosenage, without the shameful mark of reproach
or badge of open infamye. For (besides that many times he is constrained to
disappoynt his especial good friends of sundry days of payment) he shall be
forced to make such shifts of descant and hard supplies to underprop and
bolster his base estate, that at the years end he shall be driven to fly, not
for fear of his enemies, but least he be pursued of his best friends, and to
shroud him self in corners far from the sight of the scornful. And is it
not a scornful thing in deed that the absence of friends should be desired,
and not their most comfortable presence embraced? O most miserable estate,
where friends are feared, and enemies nothing mystrusted: And how far from
punyshement, can he be whose countenance bewraieth him self guilty? how
far from judgment whose conscience accuses him? and how free from
imprisonment can he be which is in every ma^s debt and danger? And thus is ye
fame and good name of every man no sooner in question, than when he is known
to be a common gamester. Then then folowes the riotous effusion of his goods
and lands, which is even as lamentable. Simile.
None otherwise than as in the shipwreck of a common wealth, or cruel spoil
of a whole country, where all things come to a most miserable and ruinous
decay, even so with these men, down with woods, down with ancient
buildyngs, down with stately Towers, down with Princely halles: And if it
were in their power or possession, whole streets, Temples, towns, Cities, and
all should go down even flat to the ground. Why should Pate be vnpauned
and the owner like to be imprisoned? Why should lands lie unsold and the Lord
lack his liberty? A course exchange of Plate for penury, and a shreude
loss of lands and liberty. But will ye know why Castles and Towers, Cities
and towns, halles and houses, lands, goods, trees, and all go to wrack?
Surely because the Lord is an unthrift: And why be there now such
intrusions? why such wrongful possessors? why be rentes rackt without
offense? why be tenaunts punished without cause? why such pounding? why such
pylling? why such strayning? such deteyning, such driuyng, such unlawful
thryuing, such catching, such snatching, such coosoning with quick speed,
and such falsehood now adays in word and deed? mary sir because the Lord
himself has need. Oh lucklesse Lord with such calamities molested, and
alas poor Tenaunts with such a thriftlesse landlord oppressed: were it not
far better to be the Tenant of liberty, than Landlorde of thrall? the
servant of thrift, than to be called Matter Makeshift: and the scholar of
Wisdom, than ye slave of Folly? Is it not vain to follow such a thriftlesse
vain, that brings many a welthy man to the Wallet? or is it not absurd for
childishe pastimes to forsake so many goodly commodities? or to be led by
fond affections of youth, and leese the liberties of life? For besides these
great losses of land and living, perhaps in the end he loses and
destroys himself, what with rear banquets, and more tothesome tha^ wholesome
iunkets, what with untimely feeding and insatiable quaffing, long standing,
unwholesome sitting, night walkyng, and inordinate watching, he so much
distempereth himself, that of a most clear complexion and healthful body,
he will in short space be changed into a pale ghost haunted with great
sickness, and poisoned with loathsome foul diseases: This causes the cold
reumes (ascending up into his careless head) to impair the noble gift of
memory, this dryueth down the painful gout into his feet, which grief
(almost incurable) depriues him of liberty, and this likewise breeds the
loathsome dropsy than ye which nothing is more pernicious: and to be short,
what other foul diseases or any grievous maladies does not this disorder
breed, nourish, and maintain? but yet they will say: what sir, are we not young
and lusty? and why should we then fear such annoyaunce, as is more
commonly subject unto age? does the niceness of women become us? or should we
be curious in diet like unto Ladies? no, it hardneth us to watch and fast
against we bear armor in the field: nay, (but by your leave) using such
intemperance and disorder, you may chance sooner to become a criple at Saint
Barthelmewes in the spittle, than a soldier with Saint George in the field:
neither is it womanly softness to avoid sickness, nor wanton diet to seek
the means to preserve health: But it is plain follye to shorten the life by
disorder which by temperance and modesty might better be cherished and
maintained.

From hence commes likewise such swearing, such blaspheming, such fretting,
such fuming, such brawling, such blading, that oftentimes their solace is
turned into sin, their gain into grief, and their pastimes into mischief.
But oh ye witless folk, or wilful youth, how long shall these selfe-wrongs
oppress you? how long will you forsake true liberty, and seek to be coupled
in the straight yoke of bondage? for it is not freedom to be licentious, nor
liberty to live Idle: if you love sport, is it not thereby to delight? but
how can that be pleasant that is hurtefull? if thou seek pleasure is it not
profitable unto life? and why do you then run headlong unto mischief, but
rather learn of Nature that life is most sweet, and remember the Poet
Palengenius that says, death ca^ by no means come too late. But to late
co^mes had I wist, walking in solitary places, shunning the company of his
familiars, and reasoning with himself like a man distraught out of his se^ses,
with, what a wretch am I, that have thus rigorously wasted my goods, impaired
my good health, and hardly escaped the foul danger and loss of life? why did
I not erste restrain such fancies? and why do I not yet follow the
persuasions of good counsayl? but alas, late wit and unfruitful Wisdom, are
the next neighbors unto folly. And perhaps while he is thus laid on his
careful bed, complaining to himself of his loss, the rest of his
play-fellowes have friendly divided the spoil, and by this time huffing,
scoffing and quarelling in streates amongst ye rest of their ruffianly
companions. Is this a life or rather death? nay not so good, for death is the
only end of such mischief: then is it a most wretched life that is never
free from troubles.

Therefore as the exercise of Chiualrye is profitable to the common wealth, the
practices of strength and actiuitie, wholesome for the body: and the use of
Dice, Cards, and other disportes, good to recreate the mind: So the immoderate
abuse of them all, is not commendable, but hurtefull and pernicious, and
therefore of all degrees and sorts of people necessary to be refrayned and
warelye eschewed.

Of Travel.
CHAP. 8.
AMongst all the trades of life practiced in sundry sort, since the beginning
of ye world, there is none more ancient and agreeable unto the Nature of man
than Travel. For as the foul is bred to fly, fish to swim, the worm to
creep, as naturally enclyned to that kind of motion: So is man likewise
addicted unto labor, and pains taking, even from the first day of his birth,
unto the last hour of his life. And as birds fly not all one way, but some
to the hills, other into the fields, and these unto the water: Eue^ so of
diverse men diverse dispositions, and not all inclyned to one conversation, and
trade of living. For what common wealth (I pray ye) can consist of one only Art
and Society? or what realm so rich, what nation so fertile, that needs no
foreign help and suggestion? Surely none so absolute and perfect of it self,
but shall daily be forced to seek out and willingly embrace the commodities
of others, which how can you attain without Travel? Then if the good estate
of every common wealth depends much upon travel, no doubt the frequent use
thereof is no less worthy to be allowed and maintained, than the great and
continual commodities thereby gotten, are gladly to be received and embraced.
The which trade we see specially to be maintained and practiced by three sorts
of men, that is, merchaunts, Legates, and adventurers. To declare the effects
of them al, I think it not needful, for though the gains of the Merchaunts is
great, yet I esteem the commodities and glory of the other to be greater
because how much it excels been viuere quam viuere, it is not unknown to ye
learned. Then sparing ye Mercha^ts in their traffic, now we will return to ye
Legates and adventurers, and accompany the^ only in this short discourse of
Travel. whose studious minds in paineful travel, has from time to time as well
procured the quiet estate of this realm, as with foreign treasure
wonderfullye enriched the same. These therefore be they which daily hazard
themselves, their lives, and all that they have, in the faithful service of
their Prince and country, which following ye steps of famous Knights, and
valiant Counquerors, account the wide circuit of the whole world, their own
native soil, and finallye, which for their ventrous acts and worthy minds,
deserve to be written, in the Books of everlasting memory.

The noble charge of Embassage to be of great weight and importance, I note
especially in these two points. First by the dignity of the person (who for
the most part being out of ye number of ye most excellent, wise and learned
sort) is always no less honorably received, and worthylye entertained in
the discharge of his Embassage. Again, the most ancient use, and inuiolate
custom of liberty in all lands by the law of arms granted unto Legates
and Ambassadors, expressly shows the great power and dignity of their charge
and calling. And first I take witness of Herodotus, which writing of the
continual wars between the Gretians and Barbarians, notes for a wonder
that shameful fact of the Athenians, which upon a time did most villanously
murder the Legates of Darius. But Xerxes shortly after pardoned their scouts
(being taken and condemned by the Marshall of ye field) which before had
murdered his fathers Ambassadors. A notable example of Magnanimity in a
barbarous Prince, which disdained the malice of his enemies.

And to speak of Travel, we have heard, that the ancient Pilgrims were wont to
use many superstitious ceremonies, but amongst them al I note three special
points worthy and necessary to be used of all men. And first they had a guide
to direct them: secondly they had commonly a staff to stay them: and
lastly, they used to bathe their feet in the evening, that they might (...)
we may use for a staff to lean unto in the dangers of Travel. For if
Jupiter himself would vouchsafe to draw up into Heaven some mortal wight,
meaning to show him all the celestial joys and pleasures of the world, in
vain were the fruition and sight thereof unto him (says Cicero) unless he
had some friend or other, to whom he might imparte and disclose these
high profits and commodities aforesaid: whereunto alludeth also the Poet
Iuuenall in this verse, Sciretuum nihil est nisi te scire hoc sciat alter.

Then since we are so naturally inclined to Society, and that no friendeshippe
is to be compared to that which likeness of nature and disposition has
linked together, which causes equal minds to be affected either unto other,
whereby the true knotte of friendship is knitte, according unto Pithagoras,
of one mind in two bodies, it appears how necessary a thing is Society
and fellowshippe in Travail, which Marcus Cicero has so fittely expressed
in the persons of Caius Lelius, and Publius Scipio Affricanus, that you would
think them alive familiarlye talking with you, touching the friendship
between them used, which not only in house and harbor, peace and war,
prosperity and adversity, but even in long Peregrination and Travail was all
one. And how can the life of any man be so solitary, that he is not
constrained to delighte in mutual love and society? what is more pleasant
than to have so faithful a friend, to whom thou maiste commit secreates as
safely as to thy self, who in wrath does equally rejoice, and in poverty
lament with thee? But here I do not mean the common Familiarity and good
fellowshyppe which is pretended now amongst diverse, nor of the natural
affection of brothers and kinsfolks, which even now as in Ouides days,
Fratrum quoque gratia rara est. But I mean the true and virtuous knotte of
faithful friendship, as is aforesaid: The force whereof does chiefly
appear in this, that of so many kinds of Societies, which Nature has
procured, it is only so stricte and rare, that it cannot be well possessed of
many, but few in number, and that is two at the most, of which sort were
Alexander and Ephestion, Titus and Gisippus, Pilades and Orestes, Damon and
Pithias, Phocion and Nicocles, with Publius Scipio and Caius Lelius aforesaid,
whose lives were so dear of the one unto the other, that for the most part
they contended whose death should first celebrate their loving fame and
memory, supposing their glorious death to be better than unhappy life with
loss of friendship. Such is the force of Love, that it vanquisheth tirants,
conquereth the malice of the envious, and reconcileth mortal foes unto perfect
love and amity, insomuche, that they are worthily said to take the light of
the Sun out of the world, which exclude friendship from the life of men.
And surely this so good a virtue is rather to be persuaded by example of life,
than subtilty resoning.

Although I cannot omit the great prudence of Virgil, who considering, that as
friendship is always necessary, and never out of season, so in travail
most requisite, faineth unto Aeneas in his long travels and perilous
adventures a faithful friend and companion, whom he calls Achates, of the
word Achos, which is sorrow and care, signifying thereby, that nothing so
much behooves a Prince or Captain, as to have a care and especial regard of
his charge and companions in travail, which appeared in Aeneas, as well by
the great liberality he used, as occasion and faculty served, as also by the
noble courtesy and comfortable words he gave them in most dangerous
adversity.

And for the last point to be touched, we will (rather garnishing the mind than
hardening the body) bathe our hearts in Humility, arming our selves with
Patience and Courtesy, and learn of him which judges it the duty of a
stranger to apply his own business, not regarding other men's affairs, and to
be nothing curious, and inquisitiue in a strange common wealth, and as it
becomes not a Gentleman proudly to advance himself at home, so he must not
ouerbashfully behave himself abroad. And lastly, there is nothing more
commendable in any kind of attempt, then to proceed in the purpose unto ye
end and full determination. For according to the Poet, Est aliquid prodi tenus
si non datur vltra.

And thus much is hitherto spoken touching the necessary order of Travel,
which, whosoever does observe, (no doubt) he shall receive and enjoy the
unspeakable pleasures and commodities therein contained. And with the
accomplishment of his studious mind be sure at length to reap the reward
which is painefully earned, and therefore most worthily obtained by labor
and Travel.

It rests now to show and set forth the high treasure and commodities of
Travel, which, because they are infinite, belonging as well to the body as the
mind, it is good to restrain so large a scope and ample matter, into a less
roomth and more compendious style. Leaving then the rest which is superfluous,
we will (still favoring the mind) prosecute only such joyful treasure and
profitable pleasure, as by virtuous acts of noble minds already has been
and is still to be gotten and atteyned in Travel. Wherein who does not see
how sure and skillful a schoolemastres is experience, which not without
continuance and labor is retained? For if all things are achieved by these
three instruments, that is, Art, Use and Exercise, which are even the guides
of experience, we must of force seek and embrace the same as the chief
worker and maistresse of this trade and faculty. And as art is an aid, and
helper of nature, so is experience the trial and perfection of art. For of
experience comes prudence, by prudence knowledge, by knowledge wisdom, than
the which nothing is more precious and divine. Neither would I have any man
suppose this to be spoken (Pinguiminerua) as touching bare practice, which
without knowledge as it is lame and imperfect, so being directed by science it
works the perfection and dignity of the same.

Let us take for example the curious art of Cosmographie, not straying far
from the purpose, wherein if I should take occasion to talk of that part of
the world which is called Terra Habitabilis, the main land inhabited,
whereof according to the ancient writers there are three parts, Europa,
Africa, and Asia: the least of them in quantity is Europa, wherein we are
contained, the head City whereof is Rome, next unto that is Afric, wherein
Carthage is chief, an earnest follower and imitator of the Empire of Rome: but
the greatest part is Asia, whereof in times paste the principal City was
Troy. And so to describe the seas that divide them all either from other, and
yet environed round about with the same, might I not well be likened to a
blind man iudgyng colors, that talk of such things by hearesay, which I
cannot as Occulatus testis partly witness and report: Then let us rather say
with Tully, that it is better to practice and do advisedly, than to think and
imagine never so wisely. Wherein: as I would with my self able not to
exhort only, but to persuade any worthy and fit persons hereunto. So do
I not hereby greatly animate or encorage the rude sort being ignorant of
affairs, to such kind of Travel: For even as we see in the bodies of men
diverse forms, whereby some are swyfte to run, some light to leap, and other
strongly made to wrestle: So likewise the varieties of the mind are more in
number, and therefore all men are not of one disposition, which diversity of
natures full wisely did Pithagoras consider, when he lykened the life of man
unto a common fair or solemn assembly, whereunto did many resort for earnest
occasion of business and affairs, and others to behold the same, whom he
only judged to have the quiet life, and all the rest to be vexed with
continual cares and perturbations of the mind: which tranquillity and
contented lotte of life, he applied unto the wise Philosophers whom he supposed
for this cause to be borne and brought forth into the world, that they might
by co^templation search out the secrets of nature, and discern the sundry
dispositions of men. Then if the nature of a Philosopher or wise man be, to
behold as it were in a glass by speculation, the hydden secrets of nature, of
sundry one cause the diverse effects, and the variable estate of mankind, as
is aforesaid: Surely it behooves these kind of men very much, if there be
any such left, according to the example of their ancestors, to bestow
some time in Travail, whereby they might the better profit others, and be
better instructed them selves, which if they be the Citizens of the whole
world to whom all countries are in common, why should they doubt to enjoy
that heritage or patrimony which others in times past did extort by wisdom
from Tyrannes? or if they them selves be perfect, why should they childishly
fear the corrupt manners of others, but rather by the integrity of their
lives, seek to reform and instruct those that be rude and imperfect. For
this cause the divine Philosopher Plato, whose fame had ouerspread all Greece,
sailed often into Scicilia, partly tendryng the miserable estate of that
country, whose lot was often to be ruled and infested with Tyrants, whom he
by the admiration of his wisdom compelled unto goodness, and not foreslowing
his fame and honor thereby gotten, perseuered in the same, which seemed by the
ambitious answer he made unto him that asked, why (forsakyng his country and
yelding him self unto perils and dangers) he did neglect the building of his
Tomb according to the manner of ye Grecians, because says he Primum nomen
deinde vero monumenta: First we must win honor, fame and good name, and
thereby celebrate the worthy Tomb and monument of everlasting memory. He
resorted unto the Court of Dionisius the tyrant, which grudged at his fame and
the increase of his honor, which Plato perceiuyng, craved license to speak
with Dionisius, which being granted, he used this kind of reasonyng: If your
Majesty should know of any man (says Plato) that came into Scicilia wilfully
bent to do you some mischief, which nevertheless for want of opportunity
failed of his purpose, would you let him escape scotfree? whereunto the King
answered, no surely, for not only the deed but the evil intent is to be
punished. Then Plato used this objection: but if another well disposed person
should come hither to do you a great good turn, and cannot for want of
opportunity perform the same: were it reason he should be likewise neglect
and despised? The King demaundyng who that was, even Aeschines said Plato, a
man for virtuous life and civility of manners to be compared with any of the
rest of Socrates Scholars, who having passed many bitter storms on the Sea,
and other perilles to imparte his wisdom and knowledge unto thee, is hitherto
despised. This commodious speech of Plato so moved the Tyrant Dionisius, that
whereas before he disdeyned, now he embraced Plato, and was earnestly affected
toward Aeschines. Thus we see, that both the deeds and words of wise men
directed by virtue, are wonderful.

Anacharsis the Scithian, so much affected the desire of knowledge, that he
traueyled unto Athens, only to hear the wisdom of Solon, who at that time
flouryshed amongst the Athenians, in so much as coming thither, he boldly
badde him self to dynner with Solon, and sent him word that Anacharsis the
Scithian coueted both to be his guest and his Scholar: to whom Solon
aunsweared by his servant, that hospitality was wont to be amongst men in
their own country, meaning that between the Athenians and Scithians there
was no such right of custom: at ye which answer nevertheless he entered into
ye house of Solon, saying, yt he was even now in his own country, and
therefore ought to be received as a guest, wherewith Solon being greatly
delighted, received him courteously even unto faithful familiarity and
friendeshyp, perceyuyng by the first words he spoke, his philosophical
mind, which judged it his natyue soil, wheresoever he was well entertained:
which courtesy toward Anatharsis, I suppose that Solon used the rather,
doing that unto others which he wished unto him self: for not long time
after, scarce sufficientlye satisfied, either with the honor and dignity so
hardlye deserved, or with the slender reward and cold consideration of the
Athenians toward him, which as well by wisdom and sadness, as in fained fury
and madness, had profited his country, protesting the same in open place, did
sodeinely from thence sail forth into Egypt.

And lastly, amongst Philosophers, who does not highly commend the contented
mind of Anaxagoras, which after long peregrination and traueyle in the
searching out of knowledge, at his return found his patrimony and possessions
consumed, and his country almost desert, whereat at being little moved with
impatience or sorrow, said, if these had not perished, my self had not bin
saved. Oh Philosophical mind, armed with Socraticall patience, which esteemed
not the value of riches, in respect of the treasure of learning, nor bewailed
the loss of goods, whereby he found the divine knowledge of wisdom. And
thus it appears, that those things are prosperous, which unto us sometime
seem unfortunate, and contrariwise, that which is accounted for lucre, may be
turned into loss. And for ye experience of knowledge in travel, this may be
sufficient. Now have we to consider chiefly, the valiant acts, and
adue^tures of noble minds attempted by courage and magnanimity. And eue^ now
violently breaks out Hercules that heroycall wight, Hercules.
as worthily chalenging unto him self the principality of all the powers in
the world, whose acts and attempts, as for antiquity they be suddenly
worn out of noble men's Halles, so if they were co^piled together in one
volume, I doubt, that a great many would sooner spend their whole time in
contemplation thereof, than be by emulation moved, although not to the like
enterprises, nor yet to such like worthy exercise, in defense of their
Cu^ntrey. This was Hercules Thebanus, the son of Amphitrio, which having by
misfortune slain his brother, fled from Tyrintho, unto Thebes, where it
fortuned this Hercules to be borne, and after that he had there showed the
first proof of his strength and prowess, in defense of that City, beseeged
by them of Minia, forthwith delivered the Sea about Spain and Italy, from a
number of Pirates, in perpetual memory whereof, they caused two great Rocks
to be set up in the uttermost corners of Spain and Afrike, which at this day
are called Hercules Pillars: from whence he passing into Asia, conquered and
slew Laomedon King of Troy, but delivered the possession of the Kingdom to
Priamus his son. What should I speak of those twelve high adventures which
were called Hercules labors, which would carry more wonder tha^ credit to be
pronounced? And next ensues ye high courage of Alexander the great, whom
neither Country nor kingdom, Monarch or Empire, no not the wide circuit of
the whole world, was well able to co^teine, for being but.20. years of age, he
undertook to co^quer ye same with an army prepared by his father Philip,
which was in number.32000. foteme^, and.4500. horsemen, having no Captain
under ye age of.60. years, because yt not in their legs, but in ye force of
arms they should place ye hope of victory. In ye first year of his reign, he
was saluted Emperor of Greece, but being conte^ned of the Thebanes, yt they
should think him in courage not inferior unto Hercules, he vanquished ye
City by force of arms, destroyed it, and sold ye people for peasants. In
vain it were to rehearse ye Cities and towns, since ye countries and kingdoms
were almost infinite which he conquered. And coming first into Asia, he
subdued the Persians, and vanquished all the Regions extending unto P^rigia and
Scythia, where met with him Darius with a mighty army at Issus, but his
legs better deserved than his arms, for being put to flight, he left his
mother Sigambris, his wife, and her sisters behind, to encounter with
Alexander, whom notwithstanding he most honorably entreated, and courteously
enterteyned. After this, he was honorably received at Jerusalem, and
conquered all Egypt, where entering into the Temple of Hamon, he was worshipped
of the Priests for the son of Jupiter. From thence he traveled into India,
where he had a great conflict with Codrus their King, which came with.60.
other Princes, and four hundred Elephantes, with strong munition on their
backs, against Alexander, and yet was taken and restored again unto his
kingdom. This done, he sent forth his Navy into the East Occean Seas, to
search if there were yet any other part of ye world to be conquered. The long
travels, and hard adue^tures of Aeneas, which by the wrath of Juno were hardened,
and by the favorable aspect of his mother Venus lightened, I leave untouched,
as unknown to few or none, omitting likewise the sondrye conflictes of Hector
and Achilles, Hanniball, and Scipio, with others infinite, and lastly, the
noble acts of Julius Caesar, which did extend even unto our own native
Country of Britayne, where I can not let pass the noble entrance of Brute the
Troiane Captain, and first Conqueror of this land, then inhabited with
Giants and savage people, as it appears sufficiently by the just record of
Chronographers.

This noble Brutus, son of Siluius, whose father was Ascanius, not content to
live as a subject in Greece, whose auncesters had bin the Princes of the
world, gathered together an army of the Trojans, and furnished themselves with
Grecian Ships, in despite of their King Pandrasus, which at the first
refused gently to supporte them in their voyage, but afterward was content to
yield to the request of the Troyans, and the more willingly, for that he
doubted their force and worthy prowess; for that Pandrasus the King, was
content to give his daughter in marriage with Brutus, with a bountiful dower,
torwardes the furnishing of his adventures, and forthwith Brutus, with his
army, called from Greece, into the Island of Leogitin, where Brute consulted
with an Oracle, from whence, after solemn sacrifice done, he received this
answer according to Cambrius.

Brute, sub occasum solis, trans gallica regna
Insula in oceano est, vndique clausa mari:
Insula in oceano est, habitata Gigantibus olim,
Nunc deserta quidem, gentibus aptatuis.
Hanc pete, namque tibi seeds erit illa perennis,
Hic fiet natis altera Troia tuis.
Hic de prole tua reges nascentur, and ipsis,
Totius terrae subditus orbis erit.
Which Verses are thus Englished by Holinshead.

Brute far by Weast, beyond the gallicke land, is found
An I Will, which with the Occean seas enclosed is about,
Where Gia^ts dwelt sometimes, but now is desert ground
Most mete where ye may pla^ thy self with all thy route.
Make thither wards with speed, for there you shall find out
An ever during seat, and Troy shall rise anewe
Unto thy race, of whom shall Kings be borne no doubt
That with their mighty force ye world shall hole subdue.
And heerewith Brutus, glad to have received so certain an answer from the
Oracle, departed to his Ships, and came along the coasts of Afrike, where
he met with the rest of the Trojans that came away with Anthenor, whose
Captain was Corineus, and so joining both armies together, they came into the
coasts of Britayne, where after sundry conflictes had with the Giantes there
inhabiting, they destroyed the savage people, and long time possessed the land
in quiet peace and tranquillity, as appears more at large in the Chronicle:
so that we may see what the state of Countries are and have been, which by
the paynefull travels of worthy Conqueroures, have bin from time to time of
barbarous people brought to a most civil gouernemente, which kind of
travel besides an infinite number of pleasant commodities, has in it self
so closely contained a certain kind of natural inclination, that it causes
diverse men of sundry minds to affecte the use and experience thereof. For as
the Sun has sundry good gifts of grace, workyng diverse effects, so the
minds of the studious are not all governed with one kind of virtue, which
causes them to be diversely affected, some with desire of knowledge, some with
strange sightes of ancient monumentes, some with adventures in finding out of
unknown Countries and the commodities thereof, and other with many other
things are delighted, as in learning the languages, searching out the secrets
of nature, and discovering the manners of men, and customs of Countries,
which as they are all to be allowed, so me thynkes that kind of endeavor,
which proceeds of the desire of knowledge, to be the best worthy of
commendation.

And to conclude with Tullie, whom first and last for honors sake I name, I
suppose, that the knowledge of secreates and wonders, are most profitable to
furnishe the steadfaste felicity and happiness of man's life: which, as it is
the mark and scope whereat al men do shoot, as no doubt all things are
referred to an end, so it commes to pass, that after long travel and
peregrinations abroad, we shall return toward our own native soil, with a
full contentation to behold our kinsfolks, friends, and companions, and
finally, by this means armed with experience, be more able to persevere in the
sundry service of our most noble Prince and famous Country.

Of Stabilitie.
CHAP. 9.
Unto every living thing Nature has given a provident care, to seek and
maintain the commodities of life, which in the least creatures of all is
commonly most manifest to be perceived. And first we see the careful
providence of the little Emites, which, (as it is cunningly described of
Virgil) in the cold winter season, are assembled together in manner of an
army, when they most busily apply themselves to spoil the heaps of corn,
scattered here and there in the wide fields under the mole hills, and such
like huge mountains, most paineful and troublesome for their heavy carriage.
And wide themselves they disperse all the day long, gathering up their
loades until toward the evening, when they al meet together, marching
homewardes valiantly like victors, some under burden groaning with their
booties, some shouing with the might of their shoulders the greater kernelles
of heavy grain, some (changing burden) cheer their fellows ouerloaden, and
some lighted of their labors, come behind to survey the train, correcting
some of sloth, and setting al things in good order. And now the ways are
worn with weight of such heavy cariadge, and every path is moistened with the
sweat of their daily labors, until they come home to their own dwelling
place, where they safely bestow their provision afield, to supply the need
present, as also to supporte the necessity which by dearth or famine might
hap in time to come hereafter.

And thus we see the providence of Nature in this small creature to be
wonderful. And not only Providence is granted unto these, but even in many
other unreasonable creatures, we find sundry special gifts and prudent
qualities (if I may so call them) which in effect seem to imitate the
knowledge and perfection of reason. To wit, the Fox which in craft excelles
all other beasts, even in this point is chiefly noted of Subtlety, that he
never prays near home, so that commonly he does most harm where he is
least suspected. The Hedgehog seems to have judgment in Astronomy, which
stops his cave against any tempest that is coming. The little Be gives a
singular example of Industry, which out of every dower gathers some
sweetness. The Nightingale wc a sweet note gives warning to be watchful.
What a gift has ye hound in smelling? what courage has a horse in
traveling? how far does the Lynx excel all other beasts in sight? and
lastely, what a kind of high courage is in the Lion, which favors those
that fawn, and destroys any thing that does withstand? These and such
like a number of brute beasts, show and set forth the excellency of
natures gifts, and chiefly in that every one follows his natural
inclination according to his own kind. Then how much ought men (being
spiritually endued with reason and understanding) busily to apply themselves in
the maintainaunce of life, and seriously to bestow their time according to the
quantity and value of their talent, it is easy to be gathered. But according
to the opinion of Cicero, there is nothing so doubtful and uncertain in the
judgment of a young man, as steadfastly to chose what trade of life to
undertake. And true it is, for (besides that the trades and faculties of life
are diverse) there are also such an infinite number of conceits, and
fantastical opinions, which vex the minds of unskillful youth, that herewith
the judgment of Reason is blinded, the election of Wit troubled, and the
senses of Understanding quite overthrown.

For, if at some times, being better advised, we fall into deliberation of this
matter, we are as soon in one sentence, as soon in an other, and how many
veins, so many vanities: no otherwise than as an empty Ship unburdened,
and without equal baliste is taste too far upon the boisterous billows of
the swelling Seas, and lightly carried hither and thither with the least wind
that blows, until at length by some sudden storm and hideous tempest it is
thrown headlong upon the shelfe of hard Semphlegades, so is the unskillful
mind of youth not equally peazed in the ballaunce of Experience, lightly
drawn into sundry opinions by the fond allurementes of deceitful Folly,
until at last for want of Stabilitie and good Government, it is commonly
subject to the gripes of misfortune, and sodainelye fallen into the snares of
shameful mischief.

And this we see by daily experience, that if one man be moved with common
profit, a number be delighted with self love and private pleasure: if Virtue
draw some unto goodness, Vice drives many more unto mischief: if Reason
persuade this, Fancy forces unto that: if Wit weye one way, Will wresteth
another way, and some (as Horace witnesses) are so wavering and inconstante,
that not life at all can like them, no degrees of estate can content them, and
with no kind of fortune they will be satisfied. Kings are troubled with cares
(as they say) Honor haunted with Envy, no majesty in mean estate, in
poverty nothing but need and penury, single life is solitary, and marriage
is subject to an infinite number of troubles, so that it is unlike for these
men to be resolved upon any trade or faculty, which can fancy no kind of
estate: and it is no marvel, though crafts and base cunning be contemned,
when the noble sciences, and heavenly wisdom it self are utterly despised
and forlorn. A hard world you will say, when Divinity is suspected, a
shrewde case when the laws are neglected, and a froward time when physic is
rejected: to learn true speech is but trifling, Eloquence is little better
than Loquacitie, Logic is nothing else but litigiousnes, sweet melody is ye
servant of sloth, in nu^bring men now a days stand for ciphers: measuring of
land is better for the^ that build and purchase (which are few) than for such
as waste and sell (which are many:) and for the judgment of the Stars it is
thought to be vain and uncertain. Again the trade of Merchandise stands
upon haphazarde: Citizens are for the most part unconscionable: the country
life is clownishe: warrefare is hard and dangerous: and travel is costly and
perilous: So that any kind of life to these fellows is loathsome: but they
are no Peasaunts, they will not be Subject to servile bondage, whereas indeed
by this means they are free from Liberty, for, what is Liberty? but to have
free choice and election of things pleasant, profitable, and honest, the use
whereof, if it make to the felicity and happiness of life, then such as
want the commodities of the same, must needs be accounted unfortunate.

Moreover, if it were granted unto them, that in all things there is abuse,
should we therefore use nothing? the way to vice is pleasant and plain,
should we therefore run headlong into mischief? the hill of virtue is hard
to clymbe, and therefore shall we be slothful? to be short, the times are
changed, the manners altered, and the whole world is uncertain: and should we
therefore not live, or neglect the necessary commodities of life? then might
we justly give place unto brute beasts, whose nature in that point exceeds
our reason, and whose small providence ouerreacheth our deep understanding.

But to leave these wandering wits (which are constante in nothing but
uncertainty) of such as mean to incorporate themselves, and to become
profitable members of the common wealth: I suppose these three points in the
choice of life to be chiefly considered, and especially followed: And first
that we enter into the just contemplation of our own natural disposition, and
the rather apply our selves to that life, whereunto nature is chiefly
enclyned, for according to the proverb, a good beginning, makes a good ending,
and surely nothing is well begun, nor like happily to proceed, whereunto
nature is not consenting. Secondly, that we seriouslye follow that kind of
practice or study, which in youth has been grafted by instruction, and by
longest continuance in us accustomed: And thirdly, not over hastily nor
ouertimely to addict our selves to any one kind of calling, but that we may
be removed unto an other, if better occasion with opportunity should serve: for
no man is so steadfastly grounded in any degrees of estate, but that (by the
wrath of fortune) he is made subject to change and alteration of life. And
touching the first point, surely it seems to be necessary, that nature should
give her verdict in the free choice of faculties and trade of life: For as in a
common assembly and Parliament (where consultation, and deliberation is had of
matters yt are doubtful and necessary) al men's opinions are heard, and no
man's voice is suppressed, in so much as the sentence or election (pronounced
by one only man) is drawn for the most part out of the common consent of all
the rest: So in the choice of this (which successiuelye joins us in the
corporation of the other) we can not but injury our selves, in restrayning the
liberty of Nature, too much leaning to the authority of reason, and
counsel of others: And it should seem rather in this point more profitable
to forsake wit than will, more commendable to leave friends than fancy, and
more necessary to obey nature than reason: for if nature have not granted
strength, it is not wit that may withstand the hard labor and waightye
force of wrestling: if courage serve not to assault, it helps not by policy
to succor. And it is vain for a cripple to contend in running, scornful for
the crow to think hirselfe beautiful: who is so mad that will set an Ass to
learn Music, or so blind that calls a Bussard to ye lure? what avails it
to sow in the sands, and make furrows in the sea? and what pleasure is it to
put on a mastye at a Dear, and a Greyhounde at a Bear? Surely no more fit
and conueniente is it for a man to live contrary to his own natural
disposition: It is hard to strive against the stream, hop against an hill,
and spurn against the prick. So the force of nature is invincible, which
though she be resisted many times for good cause, yet she will never suffer
her self to be vanquyshed, and quite overcome. And is it not reason, that she
which is the Author of life, should give counsel in the order and good
maintenance of ye same? should not the mother instruct her children? or does
not the opinion of the Judge bear chief credit in the cause? yes no doubt,
and so much the sooner to be accepted, by how much the more it seems to
give light, and chief evidence to the truth of ye matter: but you will say, ye
nature is corrupt and therefore not meet to sit in place of judgment: in deed
this reason is not light, in other matters which seems harder to be confuted,
than maintained, and if the consequente be true: I could wish it were
nowadayes generally practiced and approved: but in this case I deny that
nature of it self is corrupt, nor vicious, but custom, nor hurtefull by any
means unto it self, and therefore not to be refused: and it is manifest, that
discord is in all things the author of mischief: we see that a kingdom
divided within it self cannot stand, much less the man (that is continuallye
vexed with contrary thoughts and affections) in his acts and operations can
prosper. There be diverse parts and members of the body, but the mind guides
them all into one kind of motion. Let us take for an example that honorable
state of marriage (which by reason seems to be the first step of
Stabilitie) for compassed by leisure and aduisemente, it resembles the joys
of heaven, and rashly enterprised, it is equal with the torments of Hell: it
is only the treasure or discommodities, prosperity or adversity, the only
felicity or unhappiness of life: wherein truly there is nothing so
dangerous, as the inequality of estates in such a steadfast knot and firm
coniunctio^ of two bodies: for what likelihood of condition can there be
between two of diverse dispositions? or what consent or agreement ca^ be found
in ij. contrary natures? when one shall be lowly and the other lofty, one
ambitious ye other courteous, one chaste the other incontinent, one covetous and
the other by nature churlishe. And as the Wolf cannot leave to be ravenous,
nor unthankful swine learn to be courteous: so the haughty Lion is merciful
by kind, and the silly Lamb by nature innocent. But we see there is hard
familiarity between any of these creatures, because their natures be
contrary, and therefore commonly they seek one another destruction. And as
unequal oxen can not well draw together in one yoke: so the match is marde
where the mates are not like disposed, and consequently, nothing else prosperous
(inuita Minerua) to say, nature not consenting. And now to the second point of
this deliberation, there belongs a dutiful regard in following ye chief
schoolemastresse experience, unto whose discipline and instruction, we have
bin longest accustomed: For it is an old saying, Rome was not builded in one
day, neither is any serious matter to be attempted with ouermuche haste, and
nothing is so hardly won, which is more easily lost, the strong hold or
fortress, whose bulwarks seem to be invincible, at length with hard and
perilous adue^tures is entered, and yet perhaps again by slight policies, in a
moment lost and recovered. And next unto Nature her self, Custom chale^geth a
large prerogative, which (in process of time) makes hirselfe almost equal
with Nature in force and conditions. For, if we consider ye whole regiment of ye
world (which is by antiquity of times principally directed in good things) we
shall find almost nothing in so large an Empire that is no subject to the rule
of custom: first the general fruit and propagation of kind, is by custom
naturallye increased and maintained, by custom Emperors and kings are
crowned, by custom Knights and Lords created, and by custom Justice
administered, truth exalted, duties regarded, Deserts rewarded, might
encouraged, and to be short, all kind of good virtues easilye attained and
worthyly embraced: the servants of custom, are these three, Art, Use, and
exercise, and as these are by custom specially maintained, so by them al
things also are usually achieved, and from these comes also experience,
which in any faculty or trade of life is most necessary: and herein appears
the imperfection of unskillful youth, which being ignoraunte of affairs,
sometimes enterprise to reach (by a superficial kind of knowledge) unto the
practice of high mysteries, too far above ye slight consideration of their
green capacities, and in the end (in reward of counterfayte skill and
presumption, and fained holiness) they receive the just punishment of shameful
reproach and confusion. It is a common proverb amongst us, he that mary's in
have, shall repent at leisure: and indeed a man can not be too chary in that
choice, nor too circumspect in election of that trade wherein he means
steadfastlye to run the whole course of his life: if we do entende to win
friendship with any man, see how circumspect we are in finding out his vain,
how curious in considering his conditions, and how nyce in favoring his
nature: but does it not stand us more upon (in ye maintenance of life) to
behold our own properties and conditions, for no man is borne wise, nor any
man can suddenly become happy: but even as in the spring time, the natural
sap and moisture of the tree breaks out first into the blooming buds, from
buds into blossoms, and then from blossoms, by little and little into a more
harder substance (whereby it is better able to withstand the hurtful blastes,
and bitter cold) until at last it softneth again, by the virtue of the
Sun, when it commes to the perfection and ripeness of the fruit: so the
natural disposition of mankind, is first moved with affection, to seek
knowledge, then cunning is desirous to imitate the practice of virtues, by the
example of others that were famous: and thus experience by custom, brings a
man at last to the full perfection of wisdom, and therefore, the regard of
continual experience, in the choice of man's life, is most necessary. Thirdly,
it behooves man to be armed at all assayes, against the change of times, and
mutabilitie of fortune, for nothing in this life is stadfast and permanent: no
country so rich, that wars has not wasted: no quiet peace and tranquillity
so durable, that discord has not dissolved: no beauty so divine, which by
clouds of care is not eclipsed: no courage so stout, which by crooked age is
not qualified: and lastly, no mirth, no joy, no pleasure, no pastime, no love,
no lust, no kind of commodity so perfect and permanent, which is not by
sorrow, care, troubles, envy, wrath, mischief, or misfortune, made subject
to some change and alteration: so that the mind is only constant, which is
content, and that man seems most happy, that is patient: and as riches,
health, honor alone, without singular virtues, makes not fortunate, so truth,
courage, equity, bounty, and such like, without perfect rest, and
contentation of the mind, cannot lay the plot and foundation of Stabilitie: for
can we call him rich that is covetous? or courteous yt is proud? or noble
that is scorneful? no more can he be constant yt is furious and fantastical:
neither ought any man to esteem the choice of faculties and trades of living
to be the only suertie and steadfastness of life. Since that the gifts of
nature and fortune both richlye possessed are not sufficient to the maintenance
of felicity: for he is not to be accounted happy, that is not absolute and
perfect of him self, and coueteth more to increase, or fears any thing to be
diminished: And therefore Solon (being demanded of the rich King Craesus what
let him to be called happy) answered, because he was yet alive: meaning
that no estate of life is free from the bondage and yoke of sorrow, for
neither Kings nor Princes can assure them selves steadfastly to stand in the
good grace and favor of fortune: which by the example of Policrates was
manifestly proved, whose estate was long time prosperous, and so beautifully
furnished with health, wealth, and pleasure, that he began to be at defiaunce
with fortune her self, and despised the fawning favor of Neptune that sent
him his King again in the bowels of a Fish, which he had before wilfully
cast into the sea (being of great price) to try the friendshyppe of fortune.
But as the Sun being at the highest, must needs decline by his natural
course again. So the blind Goddess (whose looks are like unto brittle
glass that is not so bright but it is as soon broken) now began to shake the
chair of proud Policrates, and as soon overwhelmed him in the pains of helf,
whom she had before hoysed up into the joys and pleasures of heaven: For of a
King he became a captive, and of a happy man a most miserable wretch, and so
died at mischief. And thus we see by this only example which may be matched
with innumerable of like sort, that no life is certain, none estate steadfast,
and no condition nor any kind of calling without continual cares, troubles,
and aflictions. And therefore I conclude, that Patience is the strongest armor
of proof to withstand the spiteful force of inconstant and variable Fortune.

FINIS.

