Upon the Frontispice.
Convivas Vitulos, Hircos, Asinosque suesque,
preusae vides bruto stringere vina pede,
Quid mirare? ivos hic aspicis Helluo fratres,
qui, quoties coptus, talis es ipse pecus:
Quandoquidem pressis rationem sensibus aufert,
AEmula Cyrcaeis Artibus Ebrietas
Quam si bellipotens Brittannia tollerit Hostem,
Clarior hac nusquam natio, gente foret.
Thus Interpreted.
Calves, Goats, Swine, Asses, at a Banquet set,
To graspe Health's in their Hooff's, thou see here met;
Why wonder'st thou oh Drunkard, to behold
Thy brothers? In whose rank thou art inrowled,
When thou (so often, as tox't at any Feast)
Can be no better held, then such a beast,
Since, like Cyrcaean Cups, Wine does surprise
Thy senses, and thy reason stupifies,
Which Foe, would Warre-like Britain quite expel,
No Nation like it, could be said to excel.
T.H.
Philocothonista, OR, THE DRVNKARD, Opened, Dissected, and Anatomized.



LONDON, Printed by Robert Raworth; and are to be sold at his house near the
White-Hart Tavern in Smithfield. 1635.

The Author to the Book.
There Is no faith in the forehead, Drunkard, go,
Tell all of that condition, that are so
(Styled worthily) they are Helluoes and not men;
If they be vexed? say ore and ore again,
They are Statues, only gasping a short breath
Like dying men, each hour expecting death;
Tubbs-bottomlesse, in which what ere you fill,
All runs to waste, the more you power, you spill;
Casks, open to receive what so you please
To glut their Concaves with, health, or disease;
To them all is one: Foul Kennells that make stink
The pure rain they from spouts and gutters drink,
And turn them into puddle: Froggs, not content
To live in water, (their sole nutriment)
But ever croaking (to find something new)
After the evening and the mornings dew:
Dry Spunges, always thirsty (in their kind)
And (drunk) being squeezed, leave all the dregs behind;
They are no day-birds, rather Owls and Batts,
These look not on the Sun, but see like Catts,
Best in the night: To rest, they lay their heads,
When the early Cock calls other from their beds:
Though men of fashion, and possessed of land,
Yet on their own free ground they cannot stand;
They live in thick Foggs (which like Etna choke)
By Candle-snuffes, and in Tobacco-smoake;
Sometimes, they like those heathen Idols be,
Have Ears, and Eyes, but neither hear nor see,
Mere Ethnicks i will not call them; Christians neither,
But the seven grand sins, bundled up together:
Thou art none such; Then Book, away, begone,
And tell the World, Ebrietas quid non.
Tho: Faeni-lignum.
GEORGE DONE, To his industrious Friend.
THere rests the height of knowledge, when we see
The Praticke part linck'd with the Theorie;
To both these, Observation. To contend,
Whether this Art thou have best observed, or penned,
Is questionable: most, thou say do draw
A lawless drinking into rules of law.
The Soldier, Clearke, and Seaman, from this part
Speak all in their own terms, and drink by Art;
Yet here is the master piece thy Art could feign,
To show to drink, and drinking to abstain.
OF PHILOCOTHONISTA, The Reader: To the Author, NEPHALIOPHILVS.
THou have (my learned friend) with happy fate,
Shown to the world A Monster, (at cheap rate:)
Much more A Prodegy, then all the Toys
Set out to cozen Women, Fools, and Boys
At Fayres and Markets. In the Gulf of drink,
Where giddy vessels reele, and lastly sink;
The Quicksands, Whirle-pooles, the Rocks, the Shelues,
Are so described; that they must read Themselves
Guilty of wilful Shipwreck, who ore-looke
Thy pains, yet then be saved by thy Book.
Hang Books! Let it go round! Follow your Leader!
Pardon; I Am but Interpreter to the Reader.
JOHN FOORD.
The BOOK to the sober and discreet Reader.
GEnerous Reader, thou hear'st my charge, and I come to present my self to thy
view, like a Chancery Bill, pitifully complaining. The reason is, because I am
turned out, like a masterles man, without Patron, or Mecaenas to countanance
me, much misery I undergo, merely for my names-sake: For is he that has a
bad name is said to be half hanged, what may I hope for then, when mine is so
abominable; Notwithstanding, if my condition had accorded with my Title. I
might have had Incouragers enough, and too many; but when they understood my
nature and my name were directly opposites (For many who were loath to have me
follow them publikly in the streets, would have been glad to have hugged me
in their private Chambers) I then was left destitute, both of pity and
patronage: For instance; I presented my service to a great Favorite in the
Court, who when he apprehended that my coming was, rather to pluck up, then
plant the Vine, and to condemn, not countenance the vice, he bit the lip,
contracted the brow, and made me this answer: And would thou bar me from
drinking healths to the Prince whom I serve? the Lords whom I honor? and my
Mistress whom I love? So with a look able to sour the next draught before he
swallowed it, left me.

From the Court I took my progress into the Country, where hearing of a
Noble housekeeper, who kept liberal hospitality (not common in these days)
I tendered my service to him, who generously excused himself thus. Friend,
would thou have me now close-handed, and to set a pad-locke upon my Buttery
hatch; If my servants be freely entertained in other great men's Sellers? Shall
I forbid their followers to drink drunk in mine?

From him I went to an old Country Lawyer, his next Neighbor, who presently
clapped his spectacles on his nose, and reading my inside, with my Title (in a
great chollar, which swelled up his ruff as hie, as his velvet cap) said,
Hence from my doors thou imposture, which art not what thou seem, were it
not for such of thy name, who quarrel in their cups, how should I do for
clients to maintain my estate?

Near unto the Lawyer, dwelt a Farmer: I descended so low, as to offer my
self to him, telling him my condition and quality, he replied in a fury, How
then shall I pay my Landlord? were it not for Drunkards, I should sow no more
Barley, so might the Malt-men starve, and I perish.

Having such cold comfort in the Country, I then provided to come up to London
with the Carryer. The first Inn we came unto, I opened my self to mine Host
(a Iollie Corpulent fellow, and a boon Companion) who at the very motion,
first stamped, then staring, he began at length to be stark mad, saying aloud;
Who then shall keep my guests up all night? call in for drink? and put them
to unnecessary charges? how shall my Tapster live? or I maintain fire in thy
Kitchen? As good persuade me to cut down my signe-post: For think thou,
that I can eat and drink hay and water, with the Horses? Much ado I had to
get lodging there that night, but with condition, to be gone thence by the day
break in the morning. At length I came to the City, and hoping to have been
entertained by one of the Sheriffs, I found the Seargeants and Yeomen, ready
to beat their silver Flagons about mine ears. Their Sellers were open for all
comers, and I only excluded, and extruded, for by no entreaty, they would
show me to their Masters. The French and Spanish Merchants, that trade in
Wines, rejected me, as one who had laid some project to undermine, and blow up
their traffic. I then thought good to find some relief at Vintners Hall, but
there I was more churlishly repulsed, then at any time before. They called me
Innovator, and told me, I had laid a plot to beggar them, who had (...) so
many. I went thence to the Fraternity of the Brewers, and finding them
assembled, I had no sooner petitioned to them; but they presently opened so
many stale bottles mouths against me, that I was afraid either to be drowned
in their frothy (...) (which powered upon me like a deluge) or to be shot to
death with their corkes, which peal'd against me like so many Pot-guns: For
which injury, I complained to a Justice, desiring his warrant; and withal,
besought him of entertainment. But he gave me this short answer. I prithee
friend, how then do thou think my Clerk should live? I then was in
despair, but thus comforted my self, surely one Scholar will (...) the work
of another, and so put my self upon a Poet, who looking first steadfastly upon
me, after a small pause, gave me this short answer, and so left me.

Ennius ipse pater number nisi potus ad Arma prosiluit.

Old father Ennius never durst aspire
To write strong line, till Bacchus lent him fire.
I have now no refuge; but to thee (oh temperate and discreet Reader) under
whose wings I hope at length to be shadowed, if not supported; For which
favor, I shall protest me thine in all sober s^dnesse,

Philocothonista Anatomized.

The Contents of the first Tractate.
CHAP. I. THe excellency of Sobriety illustrated, and the h^rrid effects of
(...) discovered: The first for Imitation; The second for detestation, etc.
CHAP. II. A Catalogue of sundry Helluoes, and great quafsers amongst the
Grecians; Infamous for their (...). CHAP. III. Of famous Wine-bibbers amongst
the Romans and other Nations, etc. CHAP. IIII. A particular discourse of those
nations most addicted to Vinosity and Drunkenness: with the monstrous effects
thereof, etc. CHAP. V. Of s^verall sorts of quaffing Cups and drinking Bowls
most frequent in Greece, and other Countries. CHAP. VI. A discovery of sundry
other Cups of several fashion and size. CHAP. VII. Of Nestors quaffing Bowl,
the same which he used at the siege of Troy. CHAP. VIII. A discourse of
several sorts of Wines; and first of them most frequent in Italy. CHAP. IX.
The like of the Wines of Greece and elsewhere, with their appellations and
operations, etc.
The Contents of the second Tractate.
CHAP. X. OOf our English Drunkards. The titles they give one to another; with
the variety of their drinking Cups, and Vessels. CHAP. XI. What foreign
Wines and sundry sorts of drinks are now frequent in this Kingdom. CHAP. XII.
Of a new order of drinking lately come up amongst us, called a drinking School
or Library. The degrees taken in the School: The Tongues and Books which they
studdy, with the several titles proper to the Professors of that Art. CHAP.
XIII. Their phrases borrowed from several Courts, with places of dignity (...)
by them, both Civil and Martial. CHAP. XIIII. Of their Sea-seruice: Their new
terms for new (...): Their Writing-Schoole, etc. CHAP. XV. Of certain penal
statutes enacted by drunkards, upon several forfeitures committed in their
healthing; With Writs that issue upon the forfeitures, etc. CHAP. XVI. Of
sundry Terms and Titles proper to their young Studients, with Customs to be
observed, and forfeits upon the breach, with diverse Proverbs used amongst them,
etc. CHAP. XVII. Diverse Cases to be put in their healthing, which have been
weightily considered, and learnedly determined amongst themselves. CHAP. XVIII.
Diverse stories of such whom immoderate drinking has made most ridiculous.
CHAP. XIX. Of some who have lived abstemious, and altogether refrained from
Wine. CHAP. XX. A moderation to be observed in drinking, borrowed from
Antiquity. CHAP. XXI. Of the most horrid effects of Drunkenness, and a
Christian like admonition, to Sobriety and Temperance.
Philocothonista, OR THE DRVNKARD.
CHAP. I. The excellency of Sobriety Illustrated, and the horrid effects of
Drunkenness discovered: The first for Imitation; The second for detestation,
etc.
THe first age of the World, which is reckoned from Adam to Noah, (or the
Creation unto the Deluge) might be called the Temperate, or Sober age, for then
Mankind neither tasted the flesh of Beast, nor Bird, nor drank of the Ivice,
or liquor of of the Grape; their Meat was the fruits of Trees, and the Roots
and Herbage of the Field: Their Drink, the fresh and unmixed Water of the
Rivers, and Fountains. But after the great Cataclisme, or Flood, when the
waters were ceased from off the face of the earth, Noah The first Planter of
the Vine.
was the first that planted the Vine, and was made drunk with the strength
thereof. Some are of opinion, that because in the dressing of it, he moystened
the roots with the blood of sundry beasts. It still retains that predominant
quality to put Drunkards into such several humors. For we find by common
experience, some in their healthing, to be made Several operation of Wine.
wild as Lions, (apt for any mischief, or outrage.) Some in their Cups, dull
and sortish as Asses, (almost void of motion or spirit;) some Luxurious as
Goats (forgetting both Civilitie and manners:) Others crafty as Foxes, (then
most subtle, either in Cheates, or Bargains,) and so of the rest, but it is an
Argument on which I will not insist, but pass it over, as rather a fancy then
a maxim; only I will make my first Corrolary to show a reason why several
Drunkards may be properly paralleld with sundry Beasts; and first of

Ebrietas Asinina.
THe horrid vice of Drunkenness and Intempeance, which like the Cup of Cyrces,
turns Men into beasts, is to be avoided, as an open enemy to all goodness and
virtue, Macrob. lib. sat. 2. tells us, that of the five Senses, the unlawful
pleasures of two (If immoderately used) Man communicates with the unreasonable
Creature: Namely these of the Touch and Taste: and therefore all such are to be
numbered amongst Beasts, who brutishly forget the Nobleness of their own
Nature, and give themselves over to inordinate and carnal appetites: Amongst
which, such may be called (and not amiss Drunken Asses, who bear themselves
in their lavish and riotous cups, no otherwise then the Beasts, whose names
they deserve) as being rude, Ignorant, Infacious, Ill-nurtered, shameless,
Ill-tutered, and unmanerly; who neither observe their betters, nor reverence
their elders, regarding not Matrons, nor respecting Virgins: who not only are
of that impudence, to utter squirrelous and absceane speeches in their hearing,
but in their absence to asperse their Chastities; boasting what either they
have, or might have done, when their more sober consciences can Justify
against their toxed Insolence, their words to be as far from Truth, as their
senses were at that time from reason; complying with that of Ovid.

Corpora cum nequeunt, quod possunt nomina tangunt, Et nulli; non se
Concubuisse ferunt.

Whose bodies are debarred, their names they taint,
And boast to have lain with all, both shrew and saint.
Ebrietas Canina.
OThers are said to be Dogge-drunke, or as drunk as Dogs, and of such ought
all men to beware; these like spannells faune upon any man in their better
temperature, but when their brains are heated in the blood of the Grape, they
will fasten on thee like Mastiffes, who in their native and genuine malice,
against the lovers of Arts, and favorers of virtue; never express their
virulency but in their pots, when they can no longer conceal it, on whom that
of the Psalmist seems to re flect, Sep^lchrum (...) es^ guter ^orum, venenum
Aspidum sub labiis ^orum: Their mouth is an open sepulcher? and the poison of
Aspes is under their lips.

Ebrietas Ovina.
THose are said to be sheepishly s^ttish in their healthing, when wine takes
away all manly courage from their hearts, melting them into such E^eminacy, as
if Bacchus and Venus were met together: These never think of Hell or Heaven,
or have any religious thought, but at such intempestive seasons: Insomuch that
they will often times weep in a kind of superstitious piety, and seem to be
terrified with the fear of Sprites and Hobgoblins, forgetting that of the Poet.

(...) genus Humanum, falsa formidi^e mortis,
Quid stiga, quid Tenebras, quid nomina vana timetis,
Materiam vatum falsique pericula mundi.
Why stupid generation, do thou fear
The bug-beare death? Or lend a timorous ear,
To styx and darkness? Idle names and errors.
(...) From the Poets fictions, and worlds terrors.
Ebrietas Vitulina, etc.
SVch are said to be drunk like Calves and Apes, who when they begin to be
Cup-shot, and that the Wine or Al^ works in their heads, can stand upon no
ground, but leap and dance, and caper, toy, laugh, sing, and prattle,
troubling the whole company with their Antic gesticulations, and tedious
verbositie, on whom that of the Psalmist may be conferred: Circumcederunt me
vituli multi, et Tauri pingues obsederunt me: many Calves have compassed me
about, and fat Bulls have besieged me round.

Mill boves pascunt vitulorum millia centum,
Musca super vitulum quemlibet vna sedit.
An Hundred thousand Calves, (and here,
A Thousand Oxen graze)
And upon every drunken Calue,
There sitts a fly, and plays.
Ebrietas Vulpina.
OThers are said to be drunk as Foxes, and those are they who Insidiate men
in their Cups, and urge others, qua^ing and healthing for no other purpose then
to entrap them in their speeches, and bring them into trouble, or to catch some
advantage at their words, thereby to supplant them in their estates, and such
may be called Pollitick Drunkards; of whom Cicero speaks. The craftier and
subtiller a man is (says he) the more he ought to be hated, as one who has
forfited reputation, and opinion of goodness, the serpent hid in the the
grass, stingeth the foot, and these Engineers under the pretense of honesty,
deceive the simple.

Sic avidis fallax Indulget piscibus hamus,
Calida sic stultus, decepit esca feras.
So cannot from the crafty hook,
The greedy fish beware,
And so does the deceitful bait,
The foolish beast Ensnare.
Ebrietas Porcina.
But above all; These are most ridiculous and nasty, who by giving themselves
over to all beastiall vinositie, by spending whole days, and consuming night
after night in Tavernes, and Tipling-houses, return from thence, either led or
carried, who often times stumbling, lie wallowing in the kennells, and so appear
no other then Hoggs and swine, newly come durty and dawbed out of the puddles,
and such may be called (and not unproperly) Scrophae, and Scrophi pasci. i.
Sowes, or sowefeeders. I might run through all the several sorts of Drunkards.
As (...) Leonina, Caprina, Anserina, etc. Of some that are like Lions, some
like Goats, others like Geese, in their height of vinosity, but by the former
deciphered, the rest only named, may be apprehended: leaving therefore their
expression I commit them to your Imagination, and (mixing Democritus with
Heraclitus. I thus proceed.

But before I come to speak of the Modern Drunkards of these times, and a new
Grammar of a late, and the last addition In frequent use, ^ly studied, and
hourly practiced, it shall not be unnecessary (the better to Illustrate ^his
present Tractate) to reckon up, some of the former ages, who have bin notorious
in that kind, and for their great vinosity, and excess in carrowsing,
howsoever not commended, yet remembered to all posterity, as also of their
manner of Healthings: The fashions and sizes of their Cups and Goblets; The
height, and depth of their draughts, with the customs, and Ceremonies, used
and obs^rued in diverse Countries, which, though they were strange, and almost
prodigious, yet if we compare them with the Riotising and intemperance of these
times, It will manifestly appear, that though we come short of them, both in
stature and strength, yet we in many degrees exceed them, both in
distemperature and (...).

The bad man (says (...)) lives to eat and to drink, but the good man
eats and drinks to live; Homer, to make men believe the Immortality of the
Gods, taught the people that it was not possible they could die, because they
did not eat, thereby intimating; that as eating and drinking maintain life,
so they are likewise the occasions of death: Surfett (says one) has killed
more then the Sword, and Wine has drowned more then the Sea. And another, the
Vine brings forth three * Grapes; The first of Pleasure, the second of
drunkenness, (...) several (...) the Vine.
the third of Repentance; Vino forma perit, vino corrumpitur aetas (says Ovid)
Wine blasteth Beauty, and hasteneth Age: It makes of a man, a (...), of a
strong man an impotent, of a wise man a fool (says Origin) whereof, the
contrary according to the words of (...), Sobriety is the very sinews, and
strength of the soul: Plato lib. 8. de legibus, writing to the Lacedaemonians,
uses words to this purpose; To drink too much, does not become you, oh you
men of Lacedemon, unless it be at the high Feast of that God, who first
delivered the use of the Grape unto you, therefore I persuade you to forbear
al intemmperate carrow sing. To which the Lydians, the Persians, the Thratians,
the Carthagineans, the Celtae, the Teutones (by whom is meant the Galls, and the
Germans) are too much addicted, Ebrietatem vitet verecundus quisque Lib de
Garrat:
and modestus, ^aith Plutarch, Let every bashful and modest man avoid
drunkenness, for it is a monster Drunkenness a Monster.
with many heads, one of obsceane talk, others of Blasphemy, Profanation,
Lying, Cursing, wrath, Murder, etc. For Wisdom is hindered by Wine, and
Understanding dark'ned. One (...) being demanded how it came to pass that he
had lived to the number of an hundred and eight years, returned this answer,
because I never in my lifetime ^ate beyond satietie, nor drunk to (...): Wine
(says (...)) will make the wise man sing foolishly, the temperate man laugh
outragiously; The stayed man dance rediculously, the silent man utter secrets
openly, and to speak things immodest, and uncomely: (...) est in cord (...),
est in lingua (...). Whatsoever things lies hid in the heart of the sober man,
is (...) made public by the tongue of the drunkard: When a prating fellow
upbraided Bias of folly, because he (...) silent at a banquet, he made him
this answer, Friend did thou ever know a fool that was tongue-tide in his
Cups? And when certain Foreign Ambassadors were feasted in Athens, by one
the most eminent amongst the Areopagitae, whither diverse learned Philosophers
were invited to discourse, and keep them company; After many Arguments,
gravely and weightily debated, one of the strangers observing Zeno in all that
time not once to have opened his lips: Took up a bowl and drank unto him,
saying, But of you grave Sir, what shall we report to the King our Master? To
whom he replied, say to him nothing else but this: We have (...) an old man,
who had that power over himself to be silent at a Banquet.

It is reported of Phillip King of Macedon, the Father of Al^xander, that
having leavied a Potent Army to invade the Persians, and understanding by his
skowtes and spies, that the land abounded with dainty fare, and delicate
Wines, and that the People were wholely addicted to feed hie, and to drink
deep, he presently retired his Forces, and returned into his own Country,
and being demanded the reason, he made answer: To what purpose should I make
war upon them, who are every hour ready to overcome themselves.

CHAP. II. A Catalogue of sundry Helluoes, and great quaffers amongst the
Grecians: Infamous for their vinosity.
I Come now to speak of the ancient Carowsers: I will first begin with the
merry Greeks. From whom the Good-fellowes of this age would borrow that name,
and see what Frollike healthers I can find amongst them. He that had a great
inclination to drink Wine, was called Philoenus: He that loved to make himself
merry with that liquor, which was (...) of Water, and Grain (which I imagine
to be like our Ale, or (...)) was styled Phi^: He that drank immoderately, and
above his strength, had the denomination of Philocothonista: Among whom * Old
Nestor, even (...) a great drinker.
in his third age, was numbered; He was observed to take his rowse freely, and
more at the siege of Troy, then the General Agamemnon, whom Achilles upbraided
for his immoderate drinking* Neither in the hottest of the battle, was he
ever known to venture further then within sight of his Bottle: To whom Sir John
Falstaff may not unfitly be compared, who never (...) ride without a Pistol,
charged with Sack, by his side. You may read in Homer:

Nestora non latuit clamor, tamen ille bibebat.
Old Nestor, notwithstanding, all the Noise and clamor made by the Tumult,
would not break his * draught. His Cup was compared Atheneus Dypa: lib. 10.
to Achilles his Shield; as the one never entered the field, nor engaged his
person without his Targe to guard his life -- So the other never heated his
body in any skirmish, without his bowl to quench his thirst: Proteus the
Macedonian Proteus, lib. de Sepulc. Alexand. et Hephestion.
had the character of an invincible quaffer; For as Ephippus testates,
Alexander the Great; drinking to him a full bowl of Wine, containing twelve
Sextaries (which according to our measures, held two Gallons and a quart, he
pledged the King, and carowsed it off at one draught, with a great applause
from the standers by, and after some small interim, he caused it to be filled
again, and began a new health to Alexander: In the pledge whereof, the King
failing in his strength, and not being able to overcome it, the bowl slipped out
of his fingers, and he (with it) fell likewise grovelling to the earth. It is
further reported of * Alexander, that he (...) the great.
would sit up and drink so long, that being overcome with sleep, he has not
left his bed for two entire nights and days together, insomuch that it grew to
a common Proverb in Greece, That if any man could power more liquor down his
throat then his companions, they would say he were able to drink with
Alexander; diverse Authors report of him, That carowsing one day Menander in
Adulatot: (...).
with twenty Persons in his company, he drank healths to every man round, and
pledged them severally again; And as he was to rise, Calistenes the Sophist,
coming into the Simposition, or Banqueting House, the King offered him a
deep quaffing-bowle, which he modestly refused, for which, being taxed by one
there present: He said aloud. I desire not, oh Alexander, to receive a pledge
from thee; by taking which, I shall be presently enforced to inquire for a
Physician. Theophrastus writes, that by continual riotising, his body was made
so unable to perform any venerall Act, that when his mother (...) sent unto
him a most beautiful Lady, called (...), notwithstanding, his opportunity,
and her importunity, she departed unvitiated from him. King Darius had these
words inscribed Darius.
upon his Tomb.

Vinum multum bibere potui Idque perferre. I could drink much Wine, and bear
it well.

Etesias reports, that the Kings of India, were not suffered to drink, but
with great moderation. But the Kings of Persia had liberty for one day in the
year to carowse even unto surfeit, and that was in their sacrifice offered to
the Sun: For so says says Duris. Philip of Macedon was surnamed Philip King
(...) (...).
Bibax (for so says Thepompus) who having (...). 7. (...) lib. (...). 26.
one night bounteously feasted the Athenian Ambassadors, they were no sooner
departed to their lodgings, but he caused she minstrells and fingers to be
called into the room, with Aristonicus the harper, and Dorionus the Piper,
with sundry other Iesters and Bafoones, with whom he often used to revell and
carowse. In whose company having spent the whole night; the day no sooner
appeared, but he commanded them all to leave the place, and sending for the
Ambassadors early in the morning, even when he was scare able to utter one
ready word, dismissed them with a ridiculous answer. Caristius in his historical
commentaries writes, That when he purposed to take his rowse, he was wont to
say, Now may I drink freely and safely, for it is sufficient to me that
Antipater is sober and awake. Upon a time, being at ^hesse, and one bringing
him word that Antipater was coming to see him; he suddenly flung away the bag,
the men, Chesse-board and all, and hid them behind the bed on which he then
sat; as if he either feared or was ashamed to be found (by him) at so
unprofitable an exercise.

Amongst these great wine-bibbers, Dionysius (...).
Junior is numbered by Thepompus, who almost drunk out his eyes; for his
continual surfetts made him purblinded and dull sighted: For as Aristotle
reports of him, he has been known (...).
to drink, and then sleep, and waking, to drink again without (...), for
the space of nineteen days and nights together: diverse of his Followers and
Flatterers, because the King had bad (...), (...) themselves blind, faigning
that they could not see their way, but as (...) them; nor distinguish the meat
upon the Table, but as he sed the; nor would they discern the cups that stood
brim'd before them, but as he reached them* and put them into their hands; for
(...) palpable (...), they were called Co^. (...) Tirant of (...), with his
brother (...) of Si^:
Appollocrates, both sons unto the forenamed Dionysius, were immoderate
(...). Nyseus understanding by his (...), that he could with no possibility
outlive some few months, resolved with himself to (...) them voluptuously, in
all the varieties that could best taste his palate, drinking the most sweet
and delicious wines, even till the very moment of his death; He was no sooner
instated in the kingdom, but he caused Chariots to be made; and wore a vesture
of diverse colors; his chiefest delight was in riotous feasts and inordinate
draughts, being frequently attended by Catamites and strumpets. In all which
his brother Appollocrates equaled, if not exceeded him. The A (...).
same Author speaks of (...) the Theb^, (...).
and Charidimus (...) the Athenian, both branded (...).
for their intemperance in wine, and incontinence with women. Arcadion drunk
himself (...).
to death, of whom Polemon the exigramatist writ Polemon Epig.
this Epitaph.

Arcadionis habet tumulus his ossa bibacis Eroctusque --

This Tomb contains, drunkard Arcadions bones;
If you desire to know who laid these stones,
'Twas Charmilus and Dorcas, to his fame,
Who as he lived in drink, died in the same.
The same Author in one of his Epigrams, remembers Erexemus guilty of the like
intemperance. (...).
(...) Salaminus, and Diotomus Atheniensis two approoved writers, commemorate
one (...), who was likewise called ^dibulum, (...).
which signifies a Tunnell: For when a Tunnell was put into his mouth, what
wine soever was powered down his throat, he received it into his belly without
(...), gulping, or fetching his breath: of him (...) witnesses. Herodotus
tells us that Cleomenes the (...) (...).
was an extraordinary quaffer, and slew himself with his own knife, when he
was extremely Cup-(...). The Poet Alcaeus, and Baton Synopeus were taxed of
the like life, though not remembered (...).
in the like death. (...) Rhodius was (...).
(...) his bibacity called Metator, as the Poet Ephorion (...) in Chi^.
testat's. Chares Miletenus writing of Alexander reports, that when he came to
the Tomb of Colanus the Indian Philosopher, he there celebrated to his honor
and memory, a contention in Music, and another in wrestling; a third likewise
he instituted in drinking: In which the first, who exceeded the rest, had for
his reward proposed a talent, the second prize was thirty A prize of (...).
pound weight of silver, the third t^nne; to, try which mastery, 30* Indians
fell instantly dead in the place, and six more expired within a few hours
afte: He that drunk most, and attained to the first, which was a talent,
powered down sour Choas (which holds just the same quantity with that which
the Romans call Congius) which contains a gallon and a pint, and he was
called Promachus. Tymaus writes, that Dionysius the Dionysius (...).
tyrant was the first who in the feast called Choas proposed a golden crown as
a reward to him who could drink off a Choa at one draught which Zenocrates the
Philosopher first compassed, (...).
and was therewith crowned; but immediately taking it from his head, he exposed
it to that statue of Mercury which was erected in the great hall, to which he
had before accustomed to offer wreathes and garlands of flowers. Phanodemus
reports that the feast called (...), celebrated in Athens, was first instituted
by King Demophoon at his entertainment of Orestes; at the end of which sacred,
every guest there present, had a Chao of wine delivered into their hands, which
done, the King spoke aloud and said, that he who first could turn up his
bottom, to him should be given a (...) or Marchpane.

Antigonus in his Book of (...), surnamed (...): (...).
Heracleotes relates, how that at one of these Drinking-feasts; the King having
his chief and best affected Mistress there present, he retired her apart to
have had some dalliance with her, but finding himself unable, by reason of his
age, he brought her back into the Drinkingschoole, amongst his fellow
carowsers, and said to them openly; For my own part I am now past it, but he
whose youth is about him, and finds himself best able, let him do this Woman
a courtesy. Anacharsis Scitha, upon a time, (...), (...).
when a contention, or wager of drinking (celebrated by Periander) being the
first that was toxt in the Company, he demanded the prize as his due, as if
celeritie in drinking, and speedy in the race had been all one, and that he
might challenge a right, and with as much Justice, for being quickly drunk, as
he that attained soonest to the Goal. Herodatus tells us of one Micernius Lib.
^.
an Egyptian, who being told by the Priests (...).
that he had not long to live, resolved with himself to do nothing but
drink, till the snuff of his life was quite burnt out: The same Author ranks
(...) King of (...) amongst these immoderate (...)
(...) Methimnerus reports one Nicolites Corinthius to be of the same
condition (...). 3. (...).
and (...): And (...) writes that (...) the son of (...), and Nephew to
Scotta (...). ^ (...) on. (...).
the Ancient, was so devoated, and quite given over to (...), that he was
often seen to come (...) from the common (...); sometimes he would cause a
Chair of state to be brought him, and being placed thereon, would be carried
publicly through the streets to his Palace, on men's shoulders.

Philarchus relates, that King Antigonus was so Lib. Histor. 6.
R. Antigonus.
be sotted with the love of wine, that scarce one day past him without
extraordinary distemper; for seldom was he sober when he sat upon the
Judgment seat: Insomuch that not being able to govern himself, he appointed
two to manage the affairs of his Kingdom; Aristeus and Themiston brothers,
and Ciprians by nation. King Antiochus surnamed the Illustrious, he who was
Antioch. Illustr.
once sent on hostage to Rome, was (as Ptolemeus Coment. lib. 1. and 5.
Evergetus reports of him) called Bibax; he, much addicted to the Indian
commessations and surfetts, devising new and unheard of ways of riott, and
excess: In which he exhausted an infinite Magazine, who in his wine would take
handfulls of gold, and cast it into the streets and highwayes, saying, This
belongs to them to whom Fortune has disposed it, they that find it let them
take it: He was often seen to wear garlands of Roses about his brows, and
garments upon him of golden texture: He washed openly, and daubed himself
with sweet unguents, Insomuch that a private man coming by and observing him,
said aloud, how magnificently do thou smell (Oh King) which he hearing,
commanded a vessel (of the measure of two Choa^s of sweet ointment, to be
powered upon his head, to which the people thronging to dip their handkerchiffes
and garments, the place was made so slippery, that many of them fell grovelling,
which moved in the king extraordinary laughter, Polibius Polib. lib. Hist. 26.
would not allow him the name of Illustrious, but calls him a madman. For he
was not only seen to quaffe and carowse amongst strangers, but with common
men, and the most abject of the people: Posidippus Apamaeus speaks of another
Posid. lib. Hist. 16.
Antiochus, he who fought a great battle in Antiochus.
Media, against Arsaces: And gives him also the character of Bibax, who being
slain in the conflict, and the body brought before Arsaces, he taunted him in
these words: Thy Wine and thy boldness has much deceived thee, Oh Antiochus,
who in thy deep and lavish Cups, did promise to thy self to have drunk up
the Empire of Arsaces. Antiochus sir-named Magnus, whom the Romans Antioch.
Magnus. Prolib. li^. 20.
after subdued (by the relation of Polibius) when he came to Chaleis in
Eubora, though he were in the midst of his Wars, and environed with nothing
but combustion: yet being above Fifty years of Age, he gr^w inamor'd of a
Chal^idian Virgin: and in his drunkenness married her; she was the daughter of
Cleoptolemus, one of the most eminent men of that Nation, and she the fairest
of the Damosells of Enboea, (...).
whom after, the King styled by that name: There he spent a whole Winter in
gormandising, and drinking without any regard of the safety of his Army. But in
the spring following, being overcome come in Battle by the Romans, he was
forced shamefully to fly with his new Mistrisse, and hid his head in Ephesus.

Polibius tells us likewise of Agrones king of the Polib. lib. 20. Agrones.
Illirians (who was wont greatly, to glory in his conquest of the Etolians.)
that he made himself more like a vessel of Wine, then a man, and died of an
extreme pain in the belly: He remembers only of one Teuthiones, King of the
(...).
same Country, and a successor unto Agrones, who performed many excessive
outrages in his Cups: for night and day he continued his Ryots: Amongst other
execrable acts, he caused his brother Pleuratus, who had married the daughter
of Menanius to be slain, that most incestiously he might enjoy her bed,
neither spared he any of his subjects; but murder still followed whithersoever
Wine and lust led him: Demetrius who was a pledge unto the Romans, Dem^trius,
lib. 33.
and escaping thence, after reigned in Syria, was also one of these brothers of
the Grape, and such was Olophernes, remembered by the same Author, (...), li^.
32.
who reigned but a small season in Capadocia. For neglecting his Fathers
precepts, and wandering in a wilful deviation from his former strict and
austeere government, entertained from other foreign Countries, all brutish and
infamous vices, denison'd them in his own, naturalising all alien disorders,
ryots, luxvries, intemperances, vari^ties, and vinosities, which were
Incouragers, and Abetters to all the rest: so that as his government was
wicked, and his manners dissolute, his life was short, and his end miserable.

Most commendable and wholesome therefore Plut. lib. (...).
was the Counsel of Divine Plato, advising that Children should by no means
be suffered to taste any Wine at all, till they were eighteen years of age, as
holding it inconvenient to add fire to fire, and so prove Incendiaries to the
body. But it is lawful from the eighteenth to the thirtieth year, for young
men to use Wine moderately and modestly: but to proceed so far as surplus,
or drunkenness, they ought altogether to abstain. He that has past forty
years, and shall be sometimes invited to feasts, and banquets, may amongst
the rest of the Gods, offer some Ceremonious rights to Bachus, as to him that
is (...) and medicinable to Austeritie and old age: because he infuseth into
them that alacrity not only to forget evils, and cares, but to think
themselves for the present restored again to part of their former youth.

Amongst so many men drunkards, give me leave to insert one woman amongst the
Greeks (for it is no rara avis in terris) named Cleo, remembered by Phalaecus
in one of his Epigrams, in these words,

Auratam vestem, and croceam, succincta Lyaeo
Ista dedit patri, munera magn^ Cleo, Cleo.

Simposijs quoniam prestabat, quam bibere aeque
Nullus tentavit vincere vel potuit.
Thus paraphrased:
Her yellow gold-robe, Cleo (full of wine)
Cast off, and said; Father, this great gift's thine.
Famous for her deep healths; on even hand, whom
None could, none durst contend to overcome.
But it is now high time that I leave the Grecians, and proceed to the Romans,
of whom I will be the more brief, because their histories are frequent amongst
us.

CHAP. III. Of famous Wine-bibbers amongst the Romans and other Nations, etc.
IT is read of Alexander the great, That he was of rare temperance and
continence, till he had subdued the Persians, but as he conquered them, so
their vices captived him; for they were much addicted to effeminacy and
pleasure: So the Romans who were a nation of austere behavior and absteimious
diet, thirsty in their fare and sparing in their cups; having recovered the
Monarchy from the Grecians, and subjugated their Empire; As they could teach
the other to sight, so they could learn of them to drink; for in short time
he was accounted no brave fellow, that could not Graecari, or Greco more
bibere, that is, could not measure his cup with theirs, and drink after the
Greekish fashion: Neither shall you scarce read of any famous General employed
in the conquest of foreign dominions, but that although the spoils he took
from them were never so rich, yet he brought withal from thence, part of
their vices, were they never so dangerous. So the Frenchmen are said to have
brought the Neopolitane disease from Italy, and since ingrost both the malady
it self and the name thereof to themselves. And many of our nation have used
the LoweCountrey wars so long, that though they have left their money and
clothes behind, yet they have brought home their habit of drinking.

Of the Roman Emperors, these were they who were most Voratives and Infamous
for their intemperance, as too much indulgent over their throats and bellies,
namely, Claudius, Tiberius, Caius, Caligula, Nero the Tyrant, Galba, Vitellius,
Aelius verus, Plautianus, Severus, Antonius, Heliogabulus, Bonosus, Maximinus,
(...), Galienus: neither can Augustus Caesar himself escape aspersion. Amongst
the rest Claud: Tiber: Nero was so observed for his extraordinary quaffs and
carowses, that the very soldiers in his Camp did not fear to nickname him,
even in his hearing, and for Claudius called him Cald^s, for Tiberius,
Biberius, and for Nero, Mero. Marcus An^onius one of the Triumvirate, with
(...) and L^pidus, has bin likewise not unjustly taxed for his night reuells,
and elbowe-deepe healthes. Infinite more I could capitulate unto you, whom for
brevities sake I omit. Now if the Emperors, and great men, were so given over
to intemperate bibacity, there is no question, but the People and Communalty
being more apt to apprehend their vices, then imitate their virtues, would
fashion themselves to their example.

Regis ad exemplum totus componitur orbis.

CHAP. IIII. A particular discourse of those Nations most addicted to Vinosity
and Drunkenness: with the monstrous effects thereof, etc.
BOcton in his discourse of Alexander^ journeys, and Amyntas in diversor,
reports that the Tipirians were so besotted of the grape, they did not only
please their palate, and swell their bellies therewith, but they dipped their
garments in wine, not enduring the savor of any other odoriferous (...).
Ctesias in his book de tribut. Asiatic. assirmes as much, giving them the
character (notwithstanding) of honest and upright men; which comes something
near the Proverb we have amongst us, In vino veritas, In Wine there is
truth: Harmodius Lampreates speaking of the Phigalenses, who are near
neighbors The Phigalenses.
to the Nessenians, brands them with the Title of common Drunkards; and
Philarchus, lib. Byzantians.
6. terms the Byzantians Helluoes: For their custom is to bring their beds
into Tavernes and Tipling-houses, and there drink with all comers, till they
fall into such a dead sleep, that a Trumpet sounded in their ears cannot
awake them. They are people given over to all voluptuousness, and impatient of
labor: Therefore when the great Captain Leonidas had drawn them to battle
on his party, he shut up all the Drinking-houses within the City, and caused
great store of Wine to be carried without the walls into the Tents, where they
were billited, but when the summons was given, and his forces ready to
Encounter the enemy; even then says Damon, lib. de Byzant, could they be but
with great difficulty, thrust out of their drinkingtents, and be drawn to the
battle, Menander on Mineruali says, that Bysantium makes all the Merchants
that trade with them drunkards, neither they to have sufficient, till every one
seem to one another, to have four heads upon his shoulders. Ephippus in
Busyrid. taxes the Argiues Argiues.
Tyrinthians.
and the Tyrinthians; For being perpetually overcome with Wine, insomuch (says
he) as often as they enter battle, so often they turn their back upon the
enemy, and fly the field. Eubulas in conglut mat. reports the like of the
Milesians, Eubidus.
and Polemon in his Book of Epigrams, accuses Elis.
the City Elis, both of Drunkenness and Elis.
Lying, in these words:

Ebria fitque Elis, mentinurque; ac domus vna qualis erit, mox vrbs, tota
reperta tibi.

Elis will drink and lie,
and as one house to thee
Proves; thou will by and by,
find the whole City be.
Theopompus lib: 22. speaking of the Calcedenses Calcedenses.
in Thracia, says thus, they are a nation who contemning all Arts, and
disciplines, with such things as induce to virtue, and good manners, give
themselves over to Wine, and sloth: The Thratians in general he call's
homines Bibaces, Thracians.
of whom the Poet Callimachus thus writes.

O derat hic Thraces potantes, ore patenti
Fusim: grataque erant pocula parua sibi.
The Thrasians drinking open mouthed,
And scattered on the flower,
He hated: thirsty cups he craved,
And did desire no more.
Theopomp. lib. 5. affirms the Methimnians to neglect all things, that even
belong to their necessary uses, to spend their hours in carowsing, and
qua^ing, whom Cleomenes the Tyrant remoov'd from his People, and diverse of
their Bawdes (who professed to keep drinkingscholes, and under that
government, enticed freewomen to prostitution,) he caused to be sowed up, and
thrown into the river: The like act Hermippus, lib. septem sapient. ascribes
to Periander, and the same Author, lib. 2. rerum Philippic. reports that the
Illirrians, are seldom (...).
or never out of the Simposij, drinking so long, till their wives setch them
thence, and support them staggering to their houses: they are all (says he)
voluptuous, who at their first coming into the Tavern (having broad belts,
or girdles to contract their bellies within compass) still as they drink, let
them out by degrees, till he that came in a Rundlet, goes out like an
Hogs-head. The same Author tells us, that the Ariaei, and (...).
Helotes, when their Army in the field has filled (...).
up the number of Three hundred Thousand fighting men, they have been so
effascinated with the delicious taste of the (...), as that they were
perpetually intoxicated with the fume and strength thereof, being (...) or
never sober, Insomuch that the Celtae leading A potent host against them, and
searing the adversaries puissance and number, the night before they were to
join battle (knowing their greediness of Wine) they caused their Tents to be
furnished with tables; on which were (...) costly banquets, with all the
rarieties the camp could afford, with great choice of Wines and
quaffingbowles, which were tempered with the Ivice of certain pestilent and
venenifferous herbs, whose operation was to trouble, and wring the guts, and
purge the belly: which done, leaving their Tents desolate, they pretended a
sudden and secret fight; The enemy advancing, and supposing them fled for
fear, their licorishnesse so far overcame their reason, that they had not
the apprehension to suspect the deceit, but presently swallowed the bait, and
laying aside their Arms, betook themselves to gormondizing and quaffing: of
which the Celtae, taking advantage, came suddenly upon them, slew many, and
those that escaped the slaughter, were fore't through the extreme pain of
their bellies, to cast themselves into Rivers, perishing by Water, who were so
much besotted of Wine.

The Danes have made a profession thereof The vinosity of other nations.
from antiquity, and are the first upon record, that brought their
Wassell-bowles and elbowe-deep Danes.
healthes into this land. It would ask too long discourse, to tell when and
how the Swethians, Sweathland.
Norwayians, with other inferior nations under Norway.
their dominions, as the ^inlander Lopplander, Greeneland^r, etc. all bred in
cold Climates, love to warm themselves within, and where wine is wanting they
have Confections made of honey and other ingredients, with which they will
drink themselves so far out of their senses, that though they be uncovered
upon the Ice, or frozen earth, hid with snow in the very depth of their winter,
yet for the present they are not sensible of the bitter weather or airs
distemperature. It is further observed, that the cooler the Climats are, the
more the inhabitants are addicted to strong and toxing drinks of which they
provide themselves great plenty and much variety.

The Italians are something moderate, yet at Italians.
certain times, either at the celebration of public feasts or private
banquets, they will take their rowse freely, though not commonly. The French
are our neighbors, I will spare to speak French.
much of them, but it seems they love the best of their own grapes so well,
that they keep the choice and chief wines to themselves, and send the
smallest and refuse into England and other Countries. The Spaniards
notwithstanding Spaniards.
they have such choy^ and plenty, yet are to be commended for their
temperance; drunkenness being ^ Vice so much hated generally among them, that
whosoever has been noted to be delinquent in that kind, he is neither
admitted to be of any Jury, neither, in his best sobriety, will his evidence
be taken in any matter of controversy. The Transiluanians, Wallachians,
Hungarians, Transiluan.
Walachians.
Bohemians, Polanders, etc. for the most part drink after the Dutch; neither
can any of these free Principalities and Provinces belonging to the Empire,
acquit themselves of the great a^persions (in that kind) which is laid upon
whole Germany in general. The Russian has his (...)
quasse* the Scot his Ale, the Welsh his Metheglin, Scot.
the Irish his (...)* and none of these but Welsh.
has sometimes the operation to make midday Irish.
look with them, like midnight: but from arch drunkards, I come now to speak
of the several sizes and fashions of Cups, Bowls and Goblets, which they used
in old time to quaffe in.

CHAP. V. Of several sorts of quaffing Cups and drinking Bomles most frequent
in Greece, and other Countries.
We read in History, of some whose sole delight was to be possessed of many
kind of quaffing cups of various shapes and qualities; insomuch that they used
not to give a valuation of their riches, by how many Talents they were worth,
or what they might yearly dispend, but how many Pots, Cups, and Goblets of
Silver, Gold, and Crystal, they could show, when they made any solemn
invitation of their friends. Amongst whom was Arcadius Pitheas, (...).
(...).
who at his death entreated to have that Epitaph inscribed upon his tomb, of
which Harmodius Pepreates. lib. legittim, makes mention.

Pytheas hoc tumulo, tegitur prudensquae bonusquae Pocula cui vini multa fuere
viro, etc.

Within this Tomb, here Pytheas lies,
A man in life both grave and wise;
With many Cups served in his Chamber.
Of Silver, Crystal, Gold and Amber*
Who for variety and store,
Exceeded all that went before.
Zenophon lib. 8. saiththat the Persians were most ambitious that way, so that
he was most magnified amongst them, who at any inuitation could show the
richest Plate, and the greatest choice of quassing Cups; neither made they any
scruple how unjustly they compast them, so that they had of them abundantly to
furnish their Cup-boards.

Cerilius the Rhetoritian reports of Agathocles, (...).
that he was much delighted in drinking vessels of Gold and Silver, amongst
which were intermingled earthen Pots and Steanes, in remembrance that he was
the son of a Potter; and would usually show his Plate to his familiars, and
say, Behold, all these have I bought and purchased since I was made King.
Sophocles in Lariss: speaks of Acrisias thus; Acrisias.


Exponit aeneas lebetes vt ferunt etc.

His brazen kettles he would show (they say)
And hollow Mineral Cups, with some of Clay,
Others of Silver (whose store) could afford
Sixty two cups at once upon the board.
Possidonius in his 26. book of histories, writes, that when Lysimachus the
Babilonian invited Hymerus (...).
with three hundred gentlemen to supper, (which Hymerus governed the
Babylonians and Selucians at one time) when the Table was taken away, he put
into the hands of every one of the 300, a silver bowl of four pounds weight,
which when they drunk off brim'd with wine, he bestowed the cups freely upon
them, to dispose of at their pleasure.

There were a sort of Cups called literatae, or (...) liberat^e.
with letters, when Anticlides the Athenian, with other Princes, sent a
Collonie into Lesbos; In which expedition, a beautiful virgin was cast
Over-boord into the Sea; one Enallo a chief Captain amongst them being much
(...) on the damsel, leapt in after her, with purpose to save her, but both of
them were suddenly overwhelmed with the waves, and no more seen, but after
some few years, when Methimne came to be Inhabited, Enallo appeared to some
chief men of the City, and to them delivered the cause of his so long
absenting himself, relating unto them that the Virgin was still living, and
made a companion with the daughters of the old Sea-god Nereus, and that he
himself was entertained by Nepture, and made his chief heards-man, to feed
his Sea morses, or oxen, and then presented them with a Cup of Gold, (of no
great quantity) made round with ears, and very ancient, about whose compass
were engraven eleven Greek Letters to Jupiter, the deliverer, or preserver;
Achaeus tragicus in (...) speaks of this Proculum Libertum, thus: They called
me of late a Judge, or drinking-cup, consecrated to the Gods, whilst D. stands
in the first place, I. in the second, then O. and N. with Y. follows, and
after O. which fills up the word Dyoniso, or to Bacchus.

CHAP. VI. A discovery of sundry other Cups of several Fashion and syze.
PHiletus Megarenses, lib. de ordinat Prothenius, and (...) the Priest of
A^ollo, writ of a Cup called Giala; that whensoere the King entered Giala.
into any City, he was presented with a Giall of Wine at the gate, of which he
tasted before he was permitted to proceed any further: There is another sort
called Dynus, of a (...).
great capatious receipt, of which diverse Authors make mention, as Archidie^s,
Appollophanes in Daulid, Telesilla poetria, and others, amongst which is
Dinosius, Synopaeus; who of a drunken old Woman thus writes.

Dic quo tuplex est poculorum genus,
Faeminae? Dicothili Tricotili and ingens Dinus, etc.
Tell me, oh woman, if thou now be'st able,
How many several Potts be on the Table?
Cups of 2. draughts, or 3. or the great Dyne,
Of a capatious measure, brim'd with Wine,
Boat-cups, or bowls called Rhytae may there be? Boate-Cups.

For nothing else but cups the Crone can see. Rhytae.

Silemus, and Clitarchus in linguis said, that amongst the Clytorians, there
were Gobletts in frequent use, called Depastra, as Antimachus, Colophonius
Depastra.
lib. 5. Thebaid. affirms.

Regibus and Graijs mox atulit ipsa Depastra.

To the Kings and Greeks, she straight brought in the Depastra, which were
Golden vessels, and made with ears, after the fashion of those which were
called Dactilotae, so termed, because (...).
they were straight and tall, after the manner of the Sydonian bowls, or else
because they were altogether plain, and came not near the fire, Homers
Caldron, or Kettle, was never set to warm any liquor, or to cool that which
was before heated.

Damoxemus speaks of another kind of Goblets, called Elephas, est poculum
(says he) magnum Elephas.
quod trium sit Choarum and Capax, It is a great spacious Bowl, and holds
three Choas: Of the same Epinicus in Re^pondent makes mention, there was
another called Ephebus, vulgarly styled Ephebus.
Embacicaeta; of which Pholemon Atheniensis lib. (...).
Attic. nomin: and lingua: speaks, as also Stephanus Comitas in phicilotacone
in these words, mecum tuli grandes Ephebas and graves simul, I brought with me
those great and heavy pots, which were cal^'d Ephebae.

Lynceus Samius writes of another kind called The names of several quaffing
bowls*
Hedipotades, some were styled Herculea, Hethania, Semisecta, Thericlea, Cadus,
Cadiscus, Cantharus, Carchesius, Calpius, Celeba, Cornu, Cossibuium, Cotila,
Cyborium, Condy, Canonius, Caelicus, Hemin^, Cotabides, Cratanium, Crumum,
Cyathides, Calyx, Cilichnides, Cymbium, C^pella, Cymba, Colcon, Latronia,
Lacaeum, Lepasta, Laebasnis, Spondium, Lesbium, Peluis, Lyciargus, Mela,
Holmus, Oxybaphet, Aenesteria, Vnguis, Proaros, Pelica, Rheontes, Rhycydes,
Rhotyades, Rhytus, Sannacra, Selencides, S^yphus, Callina, Scythus, Tabaeta,
Tragelaphus, Triremis, Hystiachus, Phyale, Chrysides, Argirides, Odus, Ovum,
Otyscyphium, etc. every one of these taking denomination, either of the Matter,
Metal or Sign; the measure they contain, the place where they were forged
or cast, or the Artist who first devised them, it asks too much time to give
you of them a several Character.

CHAP. VII. Of Nestors quaffing Bowl, the same which he used at the siege of
Troy.
OF Nestors quaffing Bowl the Poet thus writes;

Poculum erat Pulchrum, etc.
'Twas a fair Cup with golden studds transfixt:
Four ears it had, with equal space betwixt,
(In which he drank at home) you might behold
There double Liviaes feeding upon gold.
Two bottoms t'had, and when it was brim'd, not one
Could lift it from the board, save he alone:
The grave old Nestor) with no labor too, etc.
Some would have these Claues to be golden nails artificially driven in; but
Asclepiades Mirlyanus takes them rather to be swellings, beaten out in the
manner of studds, such as Homer describes to be in Achilles his S^epter, and
the hilt and chape of Agamemnons Sword; the fashion of this Bowl was not
usual, but only in these Cups called Seleucides; such as had two bottomes
were styled Oniscipia parui cantheri, and Carchaesia; such a quaffing Cup there
is in Capna a City of Campania, dedicate to Pallas, yet to be seen; which they
say was Nestors drinking Cup before spoken of. The metal is of silver, and
has certain verses charactered in gold; Livi^.
Nor are these Liviaes to be understood (as some have interpreted them) these
birds which we call Doves and Turtles, but rather the Pleiades, the daughters
of old Atlas (who is said by the Poets to support the whole frame of heaven
upon his shoulders.) For the grave and wise Nes^or, in making the substance of
silver, seemed to have a reference to the color of the firmament; and in the
golden studds to comply with the stars, and by the Liviaes the Pleiades, we
are taught when to sow, to mow, or to reap; and by their appearance to know
the time of the growth or gathering in the fruits of the earth, according to
that of the Poet Hesiad:

Tempus adest Messis cum sunt Atlantides ortae,
Ast ubi Merguntur jubeo proscindere campos.
When Atlas daughters rise, harvest com's on,
When they are drensht, the plough then think upon.
Many other Criticismes that may arise hence, might be disputed, but I purpose
not to be prolix in any thing.

CHAP. VIII. A discourse of sev^all sorts of Wines, and first of those most
frequent in Italy.
IT would not stand with propriety, nor suite with Custom, to expose so many
empty cups before you, and no liquor at all in them, and therefore it follows
by course to speak something of Vines, and first of those in Italy.

Galen speaking of the Falernum or Muscadell, Vinum Falernum.
says, It is commonly drunk from ten years old to fifteen, and so to
twenty: before ten, it is neither wholesome nor tastefull; and after twenty,
offensive to the head and stomach, there be two sorts thereof, white and
yellow. Then they (...).
have vinum Albanum, of which there are likewise two kinds, the one sweet, the
other bitter, both of them commonly drunk from the fifteenth year to the
twentieth. Their Surrentinum is not to S^ntinum.
be drunk till after five and twenty years, it is fat, but weak, and hard of
digestion. Rhegium is Rhegium.
more fat then the former, and is not drunk till after fifteen years.
Privernum comes of a grape which is smaller and less offensive to the brain.
Phormianum is somewhat like it, but not so (...).
strong and sooner ripe; a degree below which, for strength, is the Trypholium,
near unto which (...).
(...).
is the Sentinum: The Tybertine is more heady (...).
then the former, and the older it is, the better it Libicanum.
relisheth the palate; the Libicanum is a Wine full, and sweete-tasting,
betwixt the Album, and Falernum. The Gauranum is sweet and fat, thick and
strong; but very rare, and esteemed the best, (...).
as preferred before the Tybertine, or Prenestine: Marsicum is very tart and
sharp, and healthful to the stomach; It grows in the Provinces called
Campania, near unto the Cumae: Asconitanum (...)
is fat and good; The Picentinum is like the (...), (...).
Albanum, and profitable to digestion, Calanum is a light Wine, and better
tasted then the Muskadell, the Caecubum is called Vinum generosum, a generous
Wine, very strong, but not in its prime till after many years; Fundanum is
strong and nourishing, but sooner fumeth into the head, and inflameth the
stomach, therefore seldom drunk in the Simposium: The Scyathium is (...).
lighter then all these, and is drunk from seven years to fifteen: The
Signinum is good at six (...)
years, and the older the better: The Nomentanum (...).
quickly comes to ripeness, and has in it little or no sweetness at all* The
Spoletinum is sweet in taste; and of the color of Gold; That called Acuannm
parallels the Surrentine in (...)*
all things; Valuinum is sharp and unpleasant; (...).
Cansinum is held to be a generous Wine, and very (...).
like Muskadell* Venefranu^ comforts the stomach, (...).
match, and is light: Trebellicum is most in use in Trebellicum.
and about Naples; It cherishes the stomach, makes a cheerful countenance,
and is of a moderate strength: Eubulum is first black, but after Eubulum.
some few years changes color, it is small, but delicate in taste:
Massiliense is wholesome, Massiliense.
thick and strong, but there is very small stoore of it, therefore it is the
dearer, and the more desired: The Tarentinum, and all in that climate are soft
and pleasant, and very comfortable to the stomach: Mamertinum grows not in
Italy, (...)* Io^linum.
The Sicillians call it Iotalinum; It is sweet and strong, Chares Mytilenaeus
speaks of A Demon, or spirit adored amongst the Indians, whose name is
Soradius, which as the Greeks interpret it? was the first that brought the use
of Wine into their Country.

CHAP. IX. The like of the Wines of Greece, and elsewhere, with their
appellations, and opperations, etc.
THe Kings of Persia drink only of one kind of Grape, which was called Vinum
Calybonium, which Possidonius (...) n.
affirms, grew in Damascus, a City of Syria: But Agarsides (...).
writes that the best Wines grow in Issa, an ^land (...).
near unto Adria, Epilichus remembers us of the Wines in Chyus and Thasius;
Fubulas comemorates others called Thasium, and Psythium, Thasium.
and Peparethinum: and Arestrates Dypnologus (...).
of Lencadinum, and Milesium, and Blebina, which grow^ in Syria: Phenicum and
Lisbinum, Xenophon of Mendaeum, and the Poet Hermippus Mendaeum.
speaking of Wines, sorteth them thus;

Mendaeum Mingunt Caelestia regna tenentes,
Molibus in stratis, sunt dulcia Thessala vina.
The Gods Celaestiall, in their beds Divine,
Having drunk deep, piss out Mendaena wine.
Thessalium Wines are pleasant, relishing well, Thessalium.

The Thasunim too, that do of Apples smell;
And that I thought all others had surpast,
Till mellow Chyum better pleased my taste.
There is a wine called Saprium, which if pow'rd Saprium.

Into a bowl, and covered but an hour,
The lid removed, thence will arise a smell
So rare, that shall the Violet excel,
Or H^cinthe; as of that fragrant race,
The casements shut; it sweetens all the place,
Such noble Nectar may my friends devour,
My foes, the Peparathium, tart and sower.
The Mendoians, as Phantas Eressius writes, Phantas.
use often to water their Vines with certain Medcinable Ivices, called
Elateria, to make the Wine taste the more pleasant and gentle: Se^us in Icaro
reports that ther^ is another sort called Pramnium, which takes the denomination
Pramnium.
of a Mountain so called: Amphis speaks of Acantium: Acantyum.
(...).
Alexis of Corinthium, and Euboicum: Enboicum.
Archilochus of Napium, and (...): Chresmus Napuim.
of Pollium, so called of Pollio the Argine, who (...).
Pollium.
reigned in Siracusa: We read further of Vinum (...).
Oaenantium, Benthium, Paristium, Onoglium, Benthium.
Pavistium.
Stathmium; from the places where they grew: Onoglium.
Polyrelus speaks of a Wine in Rhodes* called Antitum; (...).
Antitum.
(...) Comicus of Capria, the best of which (...).
he says is in Bonaventum in Italy: Amphium is Amphium.
remembered by (...), and called Malum, etc.

THE SECOND TRACTATE.
CHAP. VIII. Of our English Drunkards. The titles they give one to another,
with the variety of their drinking Cups, and Vessels.
TO leave all other natives, and now at last to turn our eyes inward, and
look back upon our selves, w^e by comparing their ryotts, excesses,
intemperances, surfets, variety of drinks, and choice of quafsing Cups with
ours frequent in our land, rather for figure, or syze, Metal, or matter,
shall easily find, that we are so farte from coming short of them in any one
thing, that we apparently exceed them in all things, first, whereas other
languages afford but some few words, as amongst the Grecians, Philocothonista;
the Latins, Ebrius, or Bibax; the Spaniards, Borachio: The French, Yurogne:
The Italian, Boraco, and so of the rest. To title a drunkard by, we (as loath
to give such a name, so gross and harsh) strive to character him in a more
mincing and modest phrase; as thus:

He is a good fellow,
Or,
A boon Companion,
A mad Greek,
A true Tojan,
A stiff Blade,
One that is steel to the back,
A sound Card,
A merry Comrage,
A Low Country Soldier,
One that will take his rowse,
One that will drink deep, though it be a mile to the bottom,
One that knows how the Cards are dealt,
One that will be flush of all four,
One that will be subtle as a Fox,
One that will drink till the ground looks blew,
One that will wind up his bottom,
One that bears up stiff,
One whose nose is durty,
One whom the Brewers horse has bit,
One that ca^ relish all waters,
One that knows of which side his bread is buttered,
One that drinks vpse-freeze,
One that drinks supernaculum,
One that lays down his ears and drinks,
One that can sup off his Sider, etc..
Next for variety of drinking Cups, we need DrinkingCuppes.
not be said to come near, but to go far beyond the Grecians, of whose
carow sing bowls I have before given you a sufficient catalogue; diverse and
sundry sorts we have, some of Elm, WoodenCuppes.
some of Box, some of Maple, some of Holly, etc. Mazers, broad-mouth'd dishes,
Noggins, whiskins, Piggins, Crinzes, Al^-bowles, Wassell-bowles, Court-dishes,
Tankards, Kannes, from a Pottle to a Pint, from a Pint to a Gill: other Bottles
we Of Leather.
have of Leather, but they most used amongst the Shepherds, and harvest people
of the Country; small Iacks we have in many Alehouses of the City, and
Suburbs, tipped with silver, besides the great black Iacks, and bombards at the
Court, which when the Frenchmen first saw, they reported at their return into
their Country, that the Englishmen used to drink out of their Boots; we
have besides, cups made of horns of beasts, of Cocker-nutts, of Goords, of the
eggs of Estriches, others made of the shells of diverse fishes brought from the
Indies, and other places, and shining like mother of (...): Infinite there are
of all measures, and fashions modeled of earth, Cotili, and Dycotili, single
pots, and double pots, some plain, others of many colors: Insomuch that the
Dutchmen have removed their Furnaces hither, and driven a great trade as if
our own Nation and soil, could not either asford us earth, and clay enough,
or worke-men sufficient to maintain our (...): some I have seen made in the
form or figure of beasts, as of Dogs, Catts, Apes, and Horses, others of
Fishes, as Dolphins, etc. But the most curious and costly, either for
Workmanship, or Metal, are brought from China: Of glasses to Glasses.
quaffe in, the fashions and sizes be almost without number, some transported
hither from Venice, and other places, some made in the City by strangers;
besides the ordinary sort, I have seen some like Ships under-sayle,
accommodated with Mastes, Sails, Ordnance, Cable, Anchor, and saylors to man
her: others like boats, Lions, Ratts, Trumpets, and indeed what not? Come to
plate, Every Tavern can Plate.
afford you flat bowls, French bowls, Prounct Cups, Beare-bowles, Beakers,
and private houshoulders in the City, when they make a Feast to entertain
their friends, can furnish their cupbords, with Flagons, Tankards, Beer cups.
Wine-bowles, some whire, some percell guilt, some guilt all over, some with
covers, others without, of sundry shapes and qualities. Many can make shows of
50. pounds, or an hundred Marke-worth of plate upon his Table, when he has
scare an hundred shillings to dance in his pocket, and that makes the proverb
to grow so common amongst them. A good pa^ne never shames his master. But come
to a great man's Invitation in the Citi^, the variety and value of their plate,
were it not so common, might to some appear wonderful: what then may we
imagine the estate of the Nobility, and the Court to be in that kind: No
question without valuation; Insomuch that diverse of good experience and
Judgment have been of opinion; that the Plate does much out-value the Coin
in the Kingdom: you see how we may compare with others in variety of cups,
let us now examine what competitor-ship we can claim with them in diversity
of drinks.

CHAP. XI. What foreign Wines and sundry sorts of drinks are now frequent in
this Kingdom.
IT is unquestionable, but that where other nations and Provinces are contented
with such wines or other liquors as their own Climats afford; Yet we, as if
doting upon insatiety, borrow from them all: From the French; Red, White,
Claret, Graves, High-countrey, Gallicke, from Gascoyne, Rochel, Orleance, etc.
From the Spaniard, all kinds of Sacks, as Malligo, Charnio, Sherry, Canary,
Lcatiea, Palerno, Fr^ntiniack, Peeter-see-mee, Vino deriba (...), Vino dita
Frontina, Vino blanco, Moscatell perarsarvina Calis, Callon gallo paracomer,
etc. And from other Islands, sweet wines, B^stard white and brown, Raspis,
Tent, Halligant, Melnisee, Muskadell. From Germany; Rhennish, Backrag, etc. And
besides these, sundry Greek wines; to every of which, as they but vary in
taste, so they give them new adulterate names never before heard of. We have
moreover Wine of the Vintners own making conjvred from the rest: Ip^cras white
and red, Boxt Alligant with Sugar and Eggs; Stitchbroth brewed with rose water
and Sugar, Burn'dSacke; Burn'd-Wine; Muld-Wine; TomlonsBalderdash, etc. And
notwithstanding we have it in our own dominions, Metheglin from Wales, and
nearer hand, Whey, Perry, Syder, Bear, Braggat, and Ale: To add to these
chief and multiplicity of wines, before named, yet there be Stills and
Limbecks going, swetting out Aquavitae and strong waters, deriving their names
from Cynamon, Lemmons, Balm, Angelica, Anniseed, Stomach-water, Humm, etc. And
to fill up the number, we have plenty both of Vsque-ba'he and Scotch-Ale;
neither can I think that any nation under the Sun thirst more after variery
of variety.

But I could wish all our deep Carowsers and health-quaffers to listen to the
words and counsel of Zenophon, who thus says, I would have all my friends to
drink Wine, but with a limit and moderation; for when it has watered and
quickened the spirits, It qualifieth cares, and expells The effects of moderate
drinkers.
the dolourous passions of the mind; it ^th the power of Mandragora to provoke
men to quie^ and sound sleep, and as oil puts life into the flame, so it
wakens and stirs up the dull and slothful spirits to agility and quickness;
for men's bodies may be compared to the flowers and plants of the e^th; for when
they are overwatered, and almost drowned with sudden showers; and tedious and
intempestive Rain: they droope, and hang their heads, as not able to hold them
up, through the extremity of moisture: but when they receive a gentle dew,
and drink no more from the soft melting clouds then is sufficient, they
appear much refreshed, and are made more capable thereby of sudden grouth,
and fertile production, so we, when we pour into our bodies deep and lavish
cups, they dull the understanding, darken the eyes, captive the senses,
suffocate the breath, dull the tongue, making us neither fit for speech, nor
motion; but to drink moderately sharpeneth the appothite, helps digestion,
and prepares the spirits to active mirth and alacrity. Our Feasts, banquets,
and meetings should be rather ordered and prepared like that of which
Zenophanes Colophonius speaks, expressing himself in these words:

Iamque solum purum, est manus huic and pocula cunctis, Puraque quae-cingit
nexa corona caput, etc.

Clean swept the flower, white hands, Pots without stain
And pure and fresh the Crown that girts thy brain.
An unguent one Cup holds, with odours sweet,
A second fraught is brought, these a third meet,
Full of sweet smelling flowers, in midst of which
Another bowl is placed, that's filled with rich
And purest Frankincense, the feast to grace,
Whose devine smell does sweeten all the place:
Fresh pleasant water is not wanting there,
Upon the the reverend Table; All the cheer
Is Yellow cakes, pure Honey, and fat cheese:
The Altan that stands by, has the degrees
With fair flowers strowed, so likewise is the ground,
With festive songs, the Courts about resound.
They offer first unto the Powers divine,
(As good men ought) before they taste their Wine:
With hearts sinceere, unto the Gods they pray,
That nothing ill may there be done that day.
They do not drink to surfit, but for thirst,
Riot with them is starved, and temperance nursed;
Extremes they shun, the mean they do not break,
Not he that most can drink, but best can speak,
Has their repute. All quarrels they extrude,
Mong'st them the Giants wars are not renewed;
Nor Centaines Feasts: but in their cups they bear,
Hearts like the Gods, so upright and sinceere.
The like we read in the Excellent Poet Anacreon.

Nullus amicus erit, qui tecum pocula siccat,
Dum rixas bella etc.
No friend of thine let such a man be held,
Who when he empties cups with thee: is swelled
With rage to braule and fight, but only he
With whom the Muses, and sweet mirth agree.
CHAP. XII. Of a new order of drinking lately come up amongst us, called a
drinking School or Library. The degrees taken in the School: The Tongues and
Books which they studdy, with the several titles proper to the Professors of
that Art.
HOw far from these and the like, our Bachinalls are, may appear by the
sequel; For there is now professed an eight liberal Art or Si^nce called Ars
bibendi, ^. the Art of Drinking. The Students or Professors thereof, call a
gre^ne Garland, or painted hoope hanged out, A College: A sign where there is
lodging, mans-meate, and horse-meate: An Inn of Court an Hall, or an Hostle,
where nothing is sold but Ale and Tobacco, A Grammar School: A red or blew
Lattice, that they term A free School, for all comers.

Now we know that in all Schools there are several degrees to be attained
unto, therefore they in their deep understandings, and prosound Judgments
have thought it exped^ent to call:

A fatt corpulent Fellow, A master of Art. A lean Drunkard, A Bachelor. He
that has a Purple face inchac't with Rubies, and such other ornaments. A
Bachelor of Law: He that has a red nose; A Doctor, and he that goes to
school by six a clock in the morning, and has his lesson perfect by eleven;
him they do hold to be a pregnant Scholar, and grace him with that Title.

Now before they go to study, at what time of the day, or night soever it is
necessary to know what language:

If the English Tongue, He drinks Al^. The study of Several tongues.
If the Dutch, Bear. If the Spanish, Sack^, or Canari^. If Italian, B^stard.
If the Grecian, Rennish, or (...). If Irish, Vsqueba'he. If Wel^, (...). If
Latin, Hallig^. If Greek, Muskadell. If Hebrew, Hypocr^.

The books which they studdy, and whose leaves they so often turn over, are
for the most part three of the old translation, and three of the new, those of
the old translation:

First, the Tankard. The books which the drunka^ds study.
Secondly, the Black-Iac^. Thi^dly the Quart-Pot rib'd, or Thorondell.
Those of the New be these.

First, the Judge. Secondly, the Beaker. Thirdly the double or single Can, Or
Black-Pot.
You hear what the Books most in use amongst them are: It follows now as a
thing necessary to make known unto you, what the professors be, or at least
what Titles they have amongst them. The professors of this Art.


He that weeps in his cups and is Maudlen drunk -- studies Hydromancy. He that
laughes and talks much -- Natural Philosophy. He that gives good counsel --
Morality. He that builds Castles in the Air -- Metaphisicks. He that sings in
his drink- Music. He that disgorgeth his stomach. -- Physic. He that
brags of his Travells -- Cosmography. He that rimes extemporie, or speaks play
speeches- Po^try.

He that cries trill-lill boys, is a -- Rhetoritian. He that calls his fellow
Drunkard, a -- Logitian. He that prooves his argument by a Pamphlet or Ballad,
a -- Gramarian. He that rubs off the score with his Elbow Ha^ or Cloak, an --
Arithmetitian He that knocks his head against a post, then looks up to the
sky, an -- Astronomer. He that reeles from one side of the Kennell to another,
a -- ^eomitrician. He that going home-ward falls into a ditch, or Kennell, a --
Navigator. He that leeseth himself in his discourse or talk, a -- Mooter. He
that brawles and wrangles in his Cups, a -- Barrister. He that loves to
drink in hugger-mugger, a -- Bencher. He that drinks to all comers, a -- Young
Student. He that has no money in his purse, but drinks on trust, a -- Merchant
Venterer. He that in his Wine is nothing else but complement, a -- Civilian.
He that drinks and forgets to whom: is said to study the -- Art of Memory.
CHAP. XIII. Their phrases borrowed from several Courts, with places of
dignity usurped by them, both Civil and Martial.
TO leave the Colleges it is needful now that we inquire what is done in the
Courts, and to learn what phrases and words of Art belonging to their
profession they borrow from them:

He that plucks his friend or acquaintance, Phrases borrowed from several
courts
into a Tavern or Tippling house perforce, is called a -- Sergeant. He that
quarrels with his hostess and call's her whore -- Puts in his Declarations. He
that is silent or tongue-tide in his Cups, is said to -- Demur upon the
Plaintiff. He that ingrosseth all the talk to himself, is called -- Foreman
of the Jury. He that with his loud talk deaffens all the company, -- Crier of
the Court. He that takes upon him to make the reckoning, -- Pronounces
judgment. He that wants money, and another man pays for, is -- Quit by
Proclamation He that gives his host or hostess a bill of his hand, is said to
be -- - Saved by his Clergy. He that is so free that he will pledge all
comers -- Attorney Gen^rall. He that wears a Nightcap, having been sick of
a surfeit -- S^geant of the Coyffe. He that is observed to be drunk but once a
week -- An ordinary Purs^ant. He that takes his row^ freely but once in a
mon^th, a -- Sub-Sheriffe. He that healths it but once in a Quarter, a --
Justice of Peace. And he that takes his rowse but twice a (...) -- Judge of a
Circuit.
There be likewise belonging to this Art, or Places of dignity belongto this
Ar^.
Science, diverse places of respect and dignity, both Civil and Martial; Of
the Civil ^rst;

He that is unruly in his Cups, swaggers, and flings Pots and Drawers down
stairs, (...) Glasses, and beats the Fiddlers about the room; they call by
the name of -- Major Do^. He that cuts down signs, bushes or (...) -- Master
Controler. H^ that can win the favor of the ho^esses daughter to lie with her,
-- Principal Secretary. He that stands upon his strength and begins new
healths, -- Mr. of the Ceremonies. He that is the first to begin new
frollickes, -- Mr. of the Novelties. He that ^ings Cushio^s Napkins and
Trenchers about the room, -- Mr. of Mis^ule. He that wanting money is forced to
pawn his Cloak, -- Master of the Wardrobe. He that calls for Rashers,
pickleOysters, or Anchovyes, -- Clerk of the Kitchen. He that talks much, and
speaks nonsense, is called a -- Procter. He that tells tedious and long
tales, -- Register. He that takes the tale out of another man's mouth, --
Public Notary.
The Martial degrees follow in the next place; And their order, thus;

He that drinks in his boots and Gingling-spurs, is called a -- Colonel of a
Regiment. He that drinks in Silke-stockings and Silke-garters -- Ca^tain of a
foot-company. He that slings Pottle and Quart pots down the stayres, --
Marshall of the field. He that begins three healths together to go round the
table, -- Mr. of the Ordnance. He that calls first in all the company for a
Looking-glass, -- Camp Master. He that waters the Faggotts by pissing in the
Chimney, -- Corporal of the field. He that thunders in the room and beats
the Drawers, -- Drum-Major. He that looks red, and colors in his drink, --
Ensigne-bearer. He that thrusts himself into company and hangs upon others, --
Gentleman of a Company. He that keeps company and has but twopence to s^end,
-- Lansprizado. He that pockets up Gloves, Knives, or Handkerchers, -- (...).
He that drinks three days together without resp^t, -- An Old-souldier. He
that swears and lies in his drink -- An Intelligencer.
CHAP. XIIII. Of their Sea-seruice: Their new terms for new Paradoxes: Their
Writing-Schoole, etc.
HAving past the degrees, both Civil and Martial, It follows in the next
place that we come to take view of the Sea, or rather, Seller-seruice; of which
we have already made this Que^e:

He that having over drunk himself, Of their Seaseruice.
and utters his stomach in his next fellows Boots or Shoes, they call --
Admiral of the NarrowSeas. He that piss^th under the Table to offend their
Shoes or Stockings -- Viz-Admirall. He that is first Flau'd in the company
before the rest, -- Master of a ship. He that is the second that is drunk at
the Table, -- Masters Mate. He that slovenly spilleth his drink upon the
Table, -- Swabber. He that privately and closely steals his liquor, --
Pyrate of the Narrow-Seas He that is suddenly taken with the Hitch-up, --
Master-Gunner. He that is still smoking with the Pipe at his nose, -- Flute.
He that belcheth either backward or forward, -- Trumpet^r
I might run through the rest of the Offices in the ship but for tediousness,
therefore these before-named suffice for the present. I am next to acquaint you
with new terms for new Paradoxes; As first, Your Drinking-Schoole must not be
termed a Study, a Buttery, a Tavern, a Tap-house, or a Seller; but a Library,
wherein is specially to be observed, That whosoever shall Necessary obs^uations.
drink himself from off his legs, in the Library, must be Raised, Recovered,
and Conjured up with a book of the Old-translation: But he that is drowsy, and
sleeps only to prevent the biting of Flees, must read in one of the New; and
in so doing, it is judged by the most learned of that Society, that the
exercise is well performed for that present.

You have heard how they practice to study; It is requisite that you likewise
know how they teach one another to write:

He that is industrious to learn Their (...).
the Secretary-hand, calls for a Bowl or Glass of -- Six-shillings Bear. He
that desires to write a fair Rom^n-hand, -- for Ch^ico. He that for that time
would practice the Court-hand, -- C^ary. He that will write the Chancery hand,
calls for three horns of -- Bragg^tt. He that would be perfect in the
Checker-hand, begins with a draught of the Wooll-sac^ -- Bear, or Al^. He
that cannot see the way out of the Library, must call for a legeble hand to
read, and that is -- A cup of Sack.
CHAP. XV. Of certain penal Statutes enacted by Drunkards, upon several
forfeitures committed in their healthing; with Rits that issue upon the
forfeitures, etc.
I Come now to the penal Statutes enacted for diverse forfeitures, upon most
grave and mature deliberation, Of penal Statutes enacted upon diverse
forfeitures.
as follows; No man must call a Good Fellow Drunkard, for that is a name of
reproach and indignity, as quite extermin'd out of their learned Society: But
if at any time they spy that defect one in another, they may without any
forfeit or just exceptions taken, say; He is Foxt, He is Flaw'd, He is
Flusterd, He is Subtle, Cupshot, Cut in the Leg or Back, He has seen the
French King, He has swallowed an Hair or a Taverne-Token, He has ^hipt the
Cat, He has been at the Scriveners and learned to make Indentures, He has
bit his Grannam, or is bit by a Barne-Weesell, with an hundred such like adages
and sentences, extracte out of the most Authentic Authors in their Liberary.

Now upon the breach of these Statutes diverse Writts Issue, to be s^rued upon
the delinquents; of which:

The first cup, or Writ, with Of Writts that Issue upon the for^itures.
which he is to be served, is -- A Subpaena. The second granted out by the
Court, is called -- Alterum summoneas. The third that comes upon him for his
forfeiture, -- An Exigent. The fourth, if he be peremtory, and stand it out,
-- A capias. The (...), which by no means can be avoided, a -- Fieri-facies.
And if the Liquor be sour, flatt, muddy, or any way distastefull, so that it
gives no content unto the company:

There presently goes a Writ out, -- Admelius inquirendum.
There are diverse other Writts for ^vers other causes.

If any shall rudely press into Other W^itts for other causes.
the room without leave, -- A forcible Entery. If he be admitted, he then
pleads -- Liberate probanda. If one depart the Room without paying that
which he called for, -- No exeat (...). If he begins to stagger, then two
cupps more, is an -- Atachment. But if he chance to fall under the Table: -- A
binding process. If he be drowsy, and offer to sleep in the room, an --
Habeas corpus. If he be dead drunk, and without motion, -- Capias ad Vigatum.
If any to cease drinking, fall to whisper, -- A Writ of conspiracy. If any
shall offer to buy the stooping, -- Champertaine. If an unruly drunkard chance
to be kick't down the stayers, -- Excomunicato capiendo. But if he be suffered
to stay with good leave, -- Dedimus Potestatem. If any one of them shall hide
his head for the reckoning, -- A Latitat. If a drunkard sitting long in the
Tavern, sha^be fetched home by his Wife, a -- Quo Iure. If he drink from the
morning till the Sun go down, -- Diem clausit extremum.
CHAP. XVI. Of sundry Terms and Titles propper to their young Studients, with
Customs to be observed, and ^rfits upon the breach, with diverse Proverbs used
amongst them, etc.
HE that makes himself Terms and Titles.
a laughing-stocke to the whole company, is called a -- Tenant in Fee-simple.
He that will be still smowching and kissing his Hostess behind the door, --
Tenant in-taile special. He that will be still kissing all comers in, --
Tenant in-taile general. He that is three parts foxt, and will be kissing,
-- Tenant in-taile after possibillitie of Issue extinct. He that is permitted
to take a napp, and to sleep, -- Tenant by the courtesy de Angliter. If two or
three Women meet twice or thrice a week, to take Gossips Cup, they are --
Tenants in dower. He that has the disposing of a donative amongst his
comrades, -- Tenant in Frank Almaine. He whose head seems to be heavier then
his heels, holds in -- Capite. He whose heels are heavier then his head,
holds in -- Soccadge. All Gentlemen - Drunkards; Scholars, and Soldiers, hold
in -- Knights s^ice. He that drinks nothing but Sack and Aquavitae, holds by
-- Gr^d (...). He that drinks only Ale, or Beer, holds by -- Petit
serientry. He that drinks uncovered, with his head bare, -- Tenders his homage.
He that humbles himself to drink on his knee, -- Does his fealty. He that
hunteth the Tavernes, or Taphouses, when he comes first to age, -- Paies his
relief. He that has sold and morgag'd all the land he has, -- Sueth for his
livery. He whose Wife goes with him to the Tavern, or Alehouse, is -- A
freeholder. He whose Wife uses to fetch him home from the Library, is a --
Tennant at will. He that articles with his Ho^esse about the reckoning, is a
-- Coppie-holder. He that staggering, supports himself by a wall or a post,
holds by the -- Verge.
Customs to be observed: and forfeits upon the breach.

First, not to drink unto any man in the company Customs and forfeits.
if a Woman be in presence. 2. Not to drink to the Drawer, Tapster, or
Buttler; Upon pain of drinking twice. 3. To keep your first man, and withal
to remember whom you drink unto. 4. To have a care to see your self pledged.
5. That you see the health to go round.
Other customs there be in some places held by Tradition, as to have
Thirteen to the dozen, and call for the reckoning pot, or come again.

Certain learned Proverbs, and proper Phrases belonging to the Library.

AS to drink Vpse-phreese, Supernaculum, Proverbs.
to swallow a Slap-dragon, or a raw Egg: Then to see that no less then three
at once be bare to a health: And of Proverbs These and the like.

He that drinks red, gains by the color* A pound of care, will not pay an
ounce of debt: A raw stomach makes a rumaticke head, etc.

CHAP. XVII. Diverse Cases to be put in their healthing, which have (...)
considered and lea^edly (...) amongst themsel^s.
AS first; If a Clerk happen to be dead-drunk in his own Library, in that
case, his Wi^e may make him Cuckold without Impeachment of waste: If she can
do it before he revive, and therein she may plead custom.

Now follows a case in the Common Law.

IF there be two brothers, and the elder being A Case in the Common Law.
seized of sixteen pence in credit* and shall be made dead-drunke in the
Liberary, the younger may enter as the next Heir, upon the sixteen pence in
demean, and presently convey it over in Fee to his Hostess: but except she
please, the (...) in credit shall not descend, because the elder brother died
not seized.

If three Gentlemen Jointly purchase three Gallons of Sack to themselves and
the remainder over to their servants in fee: If the men fall drunk before
their masters, without Issue: The remainder reverse, or escheate to the (...),
and the suruiving purchaser (his fellows being blown up) goes away with the
whole, which he may Alien to the next commer in non obs^, the Statute of
Alien^ions.

If a Female Covert, offer her Petticoate or Smock to Morgage, to the Clerk of
the Li-^ary, and he takes one or both up for the (...) or reckoning, If her
Husband come just in the Nick, the Plantiffe shall abate, and the Clerk shall
be forced in despite o^ his Breeches to withdraw his Action, or to let it
fall, and all because it was not before entered.

In case of Linen, it has been adjudged, that if four brothers have but one
shirt amongst them, If by consent of all ^oure, that single shirt be condemned
to the Lombard, and the purchase spent in the Library, the naked ^ueth of the
common law in that case is; that they are compellable to wear no Linen, but
to go wooll-ward for Pennqnce, till the next bountiful hedge commiserates
their necessity.

If two empty Corporalls, or Low Country Soldiers lately come over, hap
into a strange Library, and after the turning over the Books of the old
Translations, they be called to account for their learning; If they upon some
feigned case, fall to quarrel, and the ^lerke be well and thoroughly beaten
for his labor, they may by the force of the Common Law, depart whilst the
disputation is hot, sco^-free, and shot-free.

If a Bottle of Aquavitae, or Strong Water, descend to three Gossips, they may
as partners divide the liquor by a cup, or glass of partition, but i^ the
Bottle as a thing not dividable, they shall occupi^ in common, till two of them
decease, and be buried in the Library; then the suruiving Gossip may carry
away the Bottle whole (if she break it not by the way) and that by the way of
suruivership.

If a Clerk bring to any approoved Scholar, A Book of a false Translation,
that is, when it should be in Quarto, to bring him one in Octavo, or in stead
of one in Duo decimo, to bring him one that is in Decimo sexto, although the
student turn it over for inst^ction sake, yet if he mislike the Volumne, he
may lawfully break the cover of the Book about the Clerks head, and justify
it by a decree, made at the ^rst setting up of the Library. But of these no
further; I now proceed to matter of more weight and consequence.

CHAP. XVIII. Diverse stories of such whom i^moderate drinking has made most
ridiculous.
TO leave all foreign, discourses, which might exemplify unto you how Wine
has debilitated the senses, and made some men derisions and laughing stocks to
the world; I will now only present you with a few domesticke examples, either
of mine own notion, or related from others.

A Seruing-man much over taken with wine, A drunken Seruingman.
when he perceived that he could bear no more, stole out of the T^verne by a
back door, and passing through a duke and narrow Lane, late in the night when
the Moon shined very bright and clear, and at length coming to cross
Cheape-side, to go into Friday-street, he presently began to apprehend, that
the shadow wherein he stood was the Shore, and the Moone-shine a River (for he
directly conceited it to be water) therefore he first called aloud, A Boat, a
Boat, but hearing none to make him answer (for who would but imagine him to
be some drunkard or madman) he next bethought himself, It might be possible
for him to wade over, in which conceit he laid by his Cloak, plucked off his
Boots and Stockings, and then his Breeches: when drawing up his shirt to the
highest, he laid the rest of the luggage upon his shoulders, and staying
himself upon his Sword, put one foot first softly into the Moone-shine,
andfinding the Channel firm under him, he aduentred the other; and wading
further, in great fear and supposed difficulty, at last got over to the Shore,
and then fell devoutly to his prayers, thanking those powers who had granted
unto him such an happy and safe passage. The Watch sitting close, seeing and
perceiving all that was done and said, let him alone till he had wiped himself
dry and put on his clothes, and then showed themselves, and told him they were
Watermen and came to row him back again to the Counter, which they would
have done, had not the Constable (of milder temper (and being well pleased with
the jest) stayed them, and commanded one or two of them to see him safe at his
lodging.

Another Drunkard coming homward late A traveling Drunkard.
over the fields, thinking to pass a bridge, slipped into the ditch where he
stood knee deep in water, and not able to get out, in that posture fell fast
asleep. Toward morning one passing that way heard him first muttering and
grumbling to himself, at length, turning to one side, he said a-loud, Thou
Whore, why do thou no more clothes upon my feet.

Before the old Exchange was built, the Merchants An old man Cup-shot.
kept their meeting in Lumber-Street where dwelt a plain honest old man,
called Father Garret, who having played the Good Fellow a whole night together
among his Countrymen (which was not usual) and drinking a cup or two too
much, it was morning before his wife and maid could get him into his warm bed,
where he slept soundly; and waking about noone (his eyes being gum'd together,
so that he could not well open them) he groped by the bed side for the
Chamber Pot, and perceiving it to be full, he rose up, opened the Casement
(which was toward the street) and powered it out upon some of the Merchants
heads, who after they had well shook their Hats and their Cloakes, called to
him by his name, and said; Why how Father Garret? what do you mean by this?
who putting his head again out at the window, made them this answer Marry it
is to teach you for walking abroad so late at midnight.

A Loader, or Miller in the Country, was such A swaggering Miller.
a notorious swaggerer, and so dangerous in his drink, that none of the
Townsmen durst keep him company, unless he would first put off his great
basket-hilt Dagger (which was a Swords fellow, and still wore about him) and
lay it by; which at their request he upon a time had done; The fashion was to
wear great broad Belts of Leather, buckled about their wastes: They having
drunk their dozens round, and he amongst the rest (...) Flusterd, the motion
was made to break up Company; when the rest rose, he sitting upon the bench
side, and groping for his Dagger behind, he happened upon a (...) that was
(...), and putting the end of his Belt through the handle of it, buckled it
about him in the stead of his weapon, and so walking without a Cloak through
the street in the day time* all thd^ Boys and Girls ran laughing and hollowing
after him to look behind him, For his Dagger dropped out of the Scabberd.

It was somewhat more wittily put off by him, A witty drunkard.
who living in a Chamber, over heard where the watch wa^ set beneath, emptied a
Chamber Pot upon their heads* who calling unto him, and asking him why he had
used them so slovenly (...) demanded of them, Who they were that questioned it*
They told him they were the Watch, why then says he, Harm Watch, harm Catch,
and so shut to his Casement.

Another coming from (...) at a very (...).
(...) hour over the Bridge, justled against one of the Chaine-posts ov^r
against Saint Magnus Church, who being naturally very quarrel some in his
Cups, supposed that some night-walker had given him that affront; and therefore
very desperately out with his dagger, and by great fortune struck into the very
hollow of the post; and perceiving it to give way, made no further question,
but he had slain the party: with the sudden apprehension whereof, he leaves
the weapon in the wood, presently begins to devise of some sudden shift to
save his own forfeit life, he dares not go home to his house: and knows no
man whom he may trust with such a secret: Therefore he presently takes boat,
down hec goes that night to Graves-end, and from thence gets shipping into the
Low Countries. The weapon the next morning was found in the post, and known,
and the owner thereof mist by his wife and friends: but not to be heard off.
After a twelue-moneth, notice being given to his wife, where he lived, and by
circumstances, being possessed of the mistake, he came over like an Ass as he
went, and was a jeere to the City his whole life after.

Certain Gentlemen using much to our Tavernes, A sleepie (...)
some of them affecting Tables: Their custom was still when they met to play
at Irish or Tictack: and whatsoever the stake was, to call in Wine, because
they would not charge the house, so that the standers by might drink freely of
the gamesters cost, and thus sometimes they would spend the whole night: Amongst
the rest, one observed to be a sharke, that would save his purse, but could
never be drawn into any game, or expenses, and yet would devour more Wine
then any two in the Company, and whilst the rest were either busy all
playing, or looking on, he would be still tampering with the cups, till he
had stolen himself drunk, and then he would fall alseepe in the room: This
being noted by the rest, whilst he was taking a sound nap in a chair, they
devised to put a trick upon him, and watching his waking, they suddenely put
out all the lights in the room, and still pretended to hold on their game: The
dice run, and the Table-men walk, the standers by, bet, some on this side,
some on that, every cast was named as it was thrown, all which he heard, but
saw nothing: This Jest was held up so long, and carried so well, that he
presently apprehended, that he was struck blind, and quite bereft the use of
his eyes, and so fell into a great passion and clamor: The Gentlemen came
about him, and feined to wonder what he meant, bid him look up, and be of
good cheer, he told them, he knew them by their tongues, but could not
discern any one of their faces: at which they seemed to be the more amazed,
and so concluded that he was miraculously deprived of his eyesight, still they
called for more lights, more lights; Another answered, there were six in the
Room already, and if not by them, he could ^ever see at all* one offers to
lead him, another began to shrive him, persuading him, that sure this
judgment was fallen upon him for some great sin he had committed: Some he
remembered and confessed; sure says another, he has been a great sparer of his
Purse, a stealer of his drink, and a dissembler with his friend, none of which
he deemes: At length, when they had got out of him what they coul'd, and
Ieer'd him (as they thought) sufficiently, they suddenly caused light to be
brought in, by which, finding how he was gulled, he grew so ashamed, that he
who was before a burden to them, could never be seen in their company after.

I knew a Citizen, and a substantial housekeeper, A Citizen
who having been drinking late, could not find his own door, and though he
knew the streets, and the posts that stood at other men's gates, and how far
distant his house was from them, yet still ^e rather came short of it, or past
beyond it; at length (loath to be noted, but mere loath to lie upon the stall)
he perceived a light in one of his Neighbors windows, he rapps at the
doors, the good man (being upon some occasion late up at that time) looked out
of the window, asked who was there? and what he would have? Nothing good friend
answered he) but only to entreat you to direct me where such a man dwells,
(meaning himself) and show me his house; his Neighbor knowing him, replied,
calling him by his name, I hope no man knows that, or at least should know it
better then your self: True it is ^aith he, but not at this time; so his
Neighbor perceiving in what case he was, came down, opethe door, and light
him over the way, which howsoever it was secretly carried, yet made his
intemperance palpable, even after midnight.

A Malt-man coming ^ling at noone day A (...) Malt-man.
from a Red-lattice, wearing about his waste a leatherne Belt, buckled before,
with a thong hanging down, went to turn to the wall, and standing some yard
from thence, (...) his head on the one side to see who went and past by; and
putting his hand down to grope for something to show the wall, he mist of his
aim and lighting upon the thong that hung down, held it out betwixt his
fingers, and pist in his breeches; The people that saw the water drop down by
his knees, grew into a general laughter; by which he finding the mistake, grew
sensible of the plight he was in, and so ashamed, stagge^r'd away as fast as he
could, like a drunken Coxcombe.

A drunken Sailor having been foxt in the A (...) Saylor.
Town, his ship being then in harbor, he called aloud for the Cock-boat to
fetch him aboard, and in the mean time laid him down upon the Banck, and there
fell fast asleep* The Tide was then coming in (for it was young flood) and by
degrees first came up and washed his feet, and then retired; the next time it
came up to his knees, and then fell back, ^o to his very neck, yet all this
while he waked not; the next wave came up to his mouth, of which being somewhat
sensible, he said, No more drink I pray thee, and the second time and the
third, and still as it covered his face, when it was fallen off, as soon as he
could recover himself, he said nothing else, but No more drink I prothee, and
had not the Boat come just at the instant, there he had been drowned, and
never told who hurt him.

A company of drunkards having tossed the A drunkard in a W^ll.
Cans all the night long, even till the day break, in the morning, one of them
rises from the table reeling, with a purpose to piss in the Chimney, and
having let something fall upon the harth, and stooping, thinking to take it up:
when he raised himself, his head was got within the Mantle-tree (which he
perceived not) but having made an end of that which he went to do, and being
something tall of stature, he made pro^er to come away, and first walked from
one end of the Chimney to the other, then back again and felt about with his
hands, but could find no way out, at which he began to bless himself and
wonder where he was, and in his devotion casting up his eyes he perceived a
light above (for it was then day) by which he presently apprehended, that he
was fallen into a well; but seeing by the distance betwixt him and it, it was
so deep that there was no possibility for him to get out without help, he
began to be in despair; And as he was musing what he should do, he heard
them laughing and talking in the room, which he supposed were some above that
passed by the wells mouth upon business; and not willing to loose that
opportunity, he called out aloud, Help, help, Ladders, Ropes, help, help,
I am fallen into the Well? The rest wondering by the hollownesse of his voice
whence the noise should come (for the clamor ascended upward) at length by his
struggling and striving perceived him to be in the Chimney, and so in the stead
of pulling to draw him up, they plucked him out by the legs below, and these
and such like are the ridiculous effects of drunkenness, which end with that
of the Poet;

Nam maximum Ebrietas Malorum est omnium. Mortalibus, quod laedat hos est
maximum.

The greatest evil that on earth can be,
And most hurts mankind, is Ebrietie.
CHAP. XIX. Of some who have lived absteinious, and altogether refrained from
Wine.
IAm loath to cloy the reader with too much impertinences, I will next set
before you the absteniousnesse of some Ethnicks of the sormer Ages; To whom, if
we oppose the Libertines of these our times, and this nation, it will easily
appear how far those Moral men excel us in sobriety and temperance, and on
the contrary, how much we Christians exceed them in vinocity and surfeit.
Philarchus (...).
relates that Theodorus Larissaeus was of such abstinence, that he always
withdrew himself from the presence of King Antigonus, when he went to any
quaffing feast. The same Author (...), that the Iberians, though they were the
(...).
richest and potent of all their neighboring nations, yet they drink nothing
but water, and eat but once a day; yet in their atyre they were gorgious and
sumptuous. Aristotle and Theophrastus remember a man called Philinus, who never
(...).
in his whole life time, eat, or drank any thing save Milk. Hegesauder
Delphus writes that Anchimolus and Mosschus, two Philosophers (...).
that read in Helis, never in their life time drank any thing but water, and
eat nothing but fruits, yet they were of strong and able bodies. Matris (...).
an Athenian, eat little or nothing, save the fruit of the Myrtle, he never
tasted of the Grape, but water only. Lamprus Musicus was most abstenious,
(...).
commended by Pbrinicus, both for the sweetness of his voice and wisdom, he
never drank but from the river or fountain. Macho the (...) Poet remembers
the like in one (...).
Moschiaedes. Aristotle in his book de Ebrieta, speaks of diverse, who
notwithstanding they fed upon salt meats, yet were never thirsty, amongst whom
were Archonides the Argine, and Mago the (...).
(...).
Carthaginian who past the Deserts three several times, eating only dry
meats, and never drank in all their travel. Antigonus Charistius reports
(...) Accad.
of Poleman the Academick, that beginning from thirty years of his age, he
drunk nothing but water to the hour of his death. (...) Sceptius witnesses
of Dioeles Peparethius, to have tasted Diocles.
no other in the whole term of his life. Herodatus, lib. 1. speaks of a King
of Persia, who A King of Persia.
drank only of the Ri^er which flows near unto Susas, and whithersoever he
remooved, many Wagons, drawn by Mules, and laden with silver vessels filled
with that Water followed him. The second King of Egypt, surnamed Philodelphus,
having contracted his daughter Berenice Philodelphus.
unto Antiochus King of Syria; at his infinite charges provided, that the water
of Nilus should be continually conveyed unto her, because he would have her
drink only from that River, for so reports Polibius. Heliodorus relates, that
Antiochus the Illustrious, used to mix his Wine with (...).
a water drawn from a Fountain in Antioch, which Theopompus, says Midas,
King of Phrigia, caused first to be made, when he thought to surprise Sylenus,
the drunken Priest of Bacchus: I^ is called Inna, and lies (as Byon says) in
the midway betwixt the Medi and the Paerniaus: Staphinus says, that Meampodes
was the first (...).
that used to drink Wine commixt with water. Demostenes the famous Orator,
protests of himself, (...).
that for a long space together, he drank Water only, of whom Pytheus thus
writes. Now behold, and cast your eyes upon Demosthenes and Demudes, both
pleading at the bar, the continence of the one, and the intemperance of the
other: The on^ tastes nothing but water, the other swilles altogether Wine,
Demosthenes always sober, Demudes ever drunk; the one addicted solely to his
study, the other to his belly. Euphorian Calcidensis reports of Lysirtus
Lasivinius, (...).
that he was never known to be thirsty at all, and though he seldom or
never tasted any liquor: yet his urine has been as free to him, as to any
other man: At which when many wondered, yet by trial they found it to be true.
Infinites I could exemplify in this kind, but I will surfeit you with nothing,
for I observe with the Physicians, that a sparing diet is better then surfeit:
but on the contrary, concerning those spunges that power down their throats
cup after cup, and glass after glass, as if their thirst would never be
satisfied, or as if their stomachs were of the nature of fire, which the more
it eats, the more it asks; let them listen to that of the Poet Antiphanes.

He that with Wine, Wine thinks to expel,
One ill, would with another quell:
A Trumpet, with a Trumpet drown.
Or with the Crier of the Town,
Still a loud man: Noise deaf with noise*
Or to convert a Bawd, make choice
Of a Pander, pride with pride, shame thus,
Or put a Cook down by Calistratus;
Discord, by discord, think to ease,
Or angry men, with scoffs appease:
So War by Battle to restrain;
And labor, mittigate, by pain:
Command a sudden peace between
Two shrill scoulds, in their height of spleen:
By drink to quench drink is all one,
As if by strife, strife to atone.
CHAP. XX. A moderation to be observed in drinking, borrowed from Antiquity.
EPichermus is of opinion, that all sacrifices which were first piously de^oted
to the Gods, have since, by the corruption of times, been adulterated, as
merely changed into ryotous Feasts, and banquets; And those which were at
first sacred, made profane by voluptuous and excessive quassing, from whence
arises wantonness, or fury, begetting blastings, misery, and fetters; The
Poet Pangascs dedicates the first moderate draught to the hours, and the
Graces; the second to Venus and Bacchus; the third to Injury and discommoditie,
according to that of Euripides: Sunt praemium Lascivienti verbera: To him that
wantons in his cupps, strokes are due. And Pamasis, before named, thus speaks
concerning the use or abuse of Wine.

A superis homini vinum gratissima dona Conueniunt, Illi, Cantus, Choreae simul
omnes, etc,

Wine was the grateful gift of Gods, to men,
To which agree songs and all dan^es, when
Their strains are chaste, and comely: and above,
Where gifts pass free in interchange of love.
Took modestly, all sorrows it expells;
Immoderate cups, breeds madness, and naught else.
The Poet Eubulus, Introduces Bacchus the God of Wine, speaking thus:

Prudentibus viris, Ego tres misceo
Crateras, unam, sanitatis gratia
Primum bibant hunc, gra^^ Amoris Alterum, etc.
I Temper three cups to the wiseman: one
To preserve health (if it be drunk alone)
The next of love, and pleasure, both to keep
Firm and entire: A third to provoke sleep;
These may the grave and discreet men carowse,
Yet each of them* art sober to his house:
No more I do allow, who these exceeds
In a fourth draught, brauls, and contention breeds;
Clamor a fifth: A sixth to Lust inuites,
And loose incontinence: A seventh accites
Spots in the cheek and forehead: The eight does make
Tumult, and confused noise, able to shake
The strong Simposium: and the ninth cup, has
Power to exclude all peace, and stir up wrath
What Is beyond these, is madness: if you fill
Great Vessels into small, you waste and spill.
Zeno Citieus says thus, To do justice unto all men, is Prudence; To follow
what is good, and avoid what is ill, Temperance; To endure all adversity with
patience, Fortitude. The counsel then that I would give to all such as are
given over to vinosity, I will borrrow from Plutarch lib. de Audiend. Poetis;
It is great wisdom (says he) for a man who is subject to anger and wrath,
not to be ignorant of his imperfection, but to take heed to himself, that he
entertain no motive that may accite him to choler: so should the intemperate
man arm himself against drunkenness. And as King Agesilaus would not suffer
his cheek to be kissed by a beautiful young man, lest he should grow inamor'd of
his feature; And Cyrus commanded the fair Paccthea not to come into his
presence, for fear of being captivated by her beauty; so he should avoid both
wine and bad company, lest he be tempted by the one, or taken by the other; be
advised by Solon, whose maxim was Nequid nimis, take not too much of any
thing, the branches (says Plato) which proceeds from the root Abstinence, are
Modesty, Shamefastness, Continence, Temperance* Moderation, Honesty, Parsemony
and Sobriety; when the fruits of Drunkenness, are the trembling of the Joints,
the stammering of the tongue, Error, Oblivion, Babbling, Dullness, Baldness,
age in Youth, imbecility of Body, defect in the brain, a diseased Life, an
immature death: Salust says, Nothing can be more abject and base, then a man
to live a slave to the pleasures of the mouth and belly. It is a true saying,
Much meat, much malady; Plenty of Wine, and store of ^antonnesse. It fares
with men, says Origin, as with vessels upon the water; put in the one too
much loading, they sink; power into the other too much wine, they surfeit. It
is a great fault, says Seneca, For a man to be ignorant of the measure of his
own stomach; Every man knows what weight his beast can bear, but not what
burden himself can carry; loath he is to overlaode him, but still ready to
overcharge himself; But how difficult a thing it is (says Cato) to preach
Abstinence to the Belly which has no ears; and is still importunate, that it
will brook no denial: I will conclude this Argument of Abstinence with that
of Virgil, de vino and venere,

Nec veneris, nec tu Vini capiaris amore.
Vno namque modo, vina, venusque nocent, etc.
Doat neither upon Women, nor on Wine,
For to thy hurt they both alike incline;
Venus thy strength, and Bacchus with his sweet
And pleasant Grape, debilates thy feet:
Blind-Love will blabb what he in secret did,
In giddy Wine there is nothing can be hid;
Seditious wars, often Cupid has begun,
Bacchus to Arms makes men in fury run;
Venus (unjust) by horrid war tossed Troy,
Bacchus by war the Lapyts did destroy:
When thou with both, or either, art possessed,
Shame, Honesty, and Fear, all sly thy breast:
In setters Venus keep, Gyves Bacchus tide,
Lest by their free gifts thou be damnisi'd
Use Wine for thirst, Venus for lawful seed,
To pass those Limits, may thy danger breed.
CHAP. XXI. Of the most horrid effects of Drunkenness, and a Christian like
admonition, to Sobriety and Temperance.
DOsitheus lib. 3. rer. sycular. writes, That Cyanippus Siracusanus sacrificing
to the gods, amongst all the rest had neglected Bacchus the god of wine; for
which, boing enraged, he sent the plague of Drunkenness upon them, (as the
greatest punishment he could inflict) who in the heat of his cups, meeting his
daughter Cyane in a place remote and (...), viciated her Chastity; In which act
(not knowing (...) the ravisher was) she wrung a Ring from his singer, and
after gave it to the keeping of her Nurse, as hoping by that token to find out
in the future who had done her that outrage: In process, a great plague
beginning in the City, and they sending to Apollo Pytheas, to know why the gods
were so incenst against them; answer was returned by the Oracle, That to
remove it thence and to appease the anger of the gods, an incestious man must
be sacrificed. Cyane having sound by the ring, the intent of the Oracle (which
none else apprehended) and that it pointed at the father, she took him by the
hair of his head and beard, and dragging him to the Altar slew him there, and
presently her self fell upon (...) same sword, and so died: Though this may to
some appear fabulous, yet has our own country afforded accidents in the
like nature, as prodigious and strong. One Master Coverlee, a gentleman of
quality and good desent, in the like distemper wounded his Wife and slew his
own Children; whom I am the bolder to nominate, because the facinerous act
has by authority bin licensed to be acted on the public Stage. And very
lately in Wilt-shire, A young gentleman well borne, but riotously conditioned,
ran his sword through his own mothers body, and slew her when she came with
her grave and Matron like advice, to counsel and diswade him from ryotising
and lewd company.

Nay, have not some Husbands slainc their Wives, when they have come home from
swilling? and Wives cut their husbands throats, after they have been tippling?
The Father has flung his knife at the Mother, and missing her, killed the
Child* one Brother has slain the other in the Tavern: and one man stabbed his
dear friend in the Alehouse: I need not wander far to inquire for these
fearful accidents, when this very City it self affords such frequent
examples* Wine (says one) is the blood of the ^arth, and the shame of those
who abuse it: St. Ambrose says, the first evil of drunkenness, is the hazard
of chastity. And Saint Augustine, It is a sweet sin, a pleasant poison, and
a bewitching devil.

Of this cursed (I may say) most contagious sin (for commonly, one drunkard
infecteth another) hear what the wise man, King Solomon says, Proverb. 23.
Keep not company with drunkards, nor with gluttons, for the glutton, and the
drunkard shall be poor, and the sleeper shall be clothed with rags: To whom
is woe? To whom is sorrow: To whom is strife: To whom is mourning? To whom is
wounds without cause? And to whom is the redness of the eyes? Even to thee
that tarryest long at the Wine, to them that seek mixed wine; look not then
upon the Wine when it is red, and when it shows his color in the cup, or
goes down pleasantly; In the end thereof, it will bite like a serpent, and
hurt like a Cockatrice: Thine eyes shall look upon strange Women, and thine
heart shall speak lewd things, and thou shall be as one that sleeps in the
midst of the sea, and as he that sleeps on the top of the Mast. They have
stricken me (shall thou say) but I was not sick; they have beaten me, but I
knew not when I awoke, therefore will I seek it yet still, Saint Luke 21. 3,
4. Take heed to your selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with
furfets and drunkenness, and cares of this life, least that day come on you at
unawares, for as a snare shall it come on all them that dwell on the face of
the whole earth.

Take therefore the Counsel of Boethius the Christian Philosopher and Poet,
who speaks thus: Then necessity impells to a sober and upright life, when
we apprehend and consider, that all our actions, how private soever, are
visible to him that shall judge them; Neither ought we to delay the amending
of our lives, or correcting of our manners, for as Saint Augustine says: Dat
penitenti veniam, fortasse non dabit peccanti penitentiam. i. He that gives
pardon to the penitent sinner, will not perhaps give repentance to him that
sins, for there is no man who drinks to day, that can presume to lift the
cup to his head to morrow.

If lavish cups be not permitted to Kings and Princes, how much less to common
men: Hear what the Wiseman says, Proverbs 31. 4. It is not for Kings ( Oh
Lemuel) It is not for Kings to drink Wine, nor for Princes strong drink,
least he drink, and so forget the decree, and change the judgment of all the
children of Affliction. To you therefore I speak (who are altogether given
over to this sin) hated of God, and abhorred of all good men,) which St. Paul
in his Epistle to the Ephesians 5. 17. And be not drunk with Wine, wherein is
excess, but be satisfied with the spirit.

Let us therefore speak unto God, as if men did hear us: And live amongst
men, as knowing that God sees us, whose eyes pierce into the secrets of the
prison, into the corners of the hearts, into the hiddennesse of time, and the
concealednesse of Eternity: For not to the offender, but to him that is
offended, does God grant pardon, says Saint Augustine.

Johannes Episcop. tells us, What does carnal man know more, then warily to
keep his own, and watchingly to scratch from another? Or if he cannot
compass it, yet at least to desire it* But the heavenly Physician has to all
vices, made obvious virtues, as remedies. For as in the Art of Physic, they
work by contraries, ministering hot things to heal cold infirmities, and cold
things to help hot diseases: So the Creator of the Heavens, the Earth, and us,
has provided cordial Medicine^ to cure contrary corrupt Maladies: To make
sound the slothful man, is to be applied Labor and Industry: The Avaritious
man, Bounty and Charity: The wrathful man, Gentleness and Patience: The
Proud, Humility and Lowliness: The drunken man, Sobriety and Temperance. Let
us then be swaid by Leo Pap. who tells us that we ought all to labor (by the
Almighties Grace and help, that he may in His own Temple, which is our
bodies, find nothing that may be offensive to the eyes of so Divine a Majesty,
but let the Tabernacle, and habitation of our hearts be clean swept from all
vices, and furnished with Virtues, keeping them still shut and locked, against
the Temptations of the devil, but always open to receive our Redeemer.

Thus I conclude, beseeching the Almighty, that as our Nation being the most
forward to commit this grievous and abominable sin of drunkenness, so it may
be the first to express a true Repentance, and contrition for the same, that
his heavy Judgments, long threatened, and now impending, may be turned from
us, which he grant for His mercy sake, and Merits of His Son our blessed
Savior.

In Cratere meo, Thetis est conjuncta Lyaeo
Est Dea Iuncta Deo, sed Dea major eo.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 7. read, for infacious, infacetious. p. 4. l. 5. r. patens. p.
12. l. 8. r. Symposium. p. 22. l. 20. r.thrifty. p. 26. l. 5. r. mentitur. p.
33. l. 6. r. Poculum. p. 43. l. 1: r. nations. p. 62. l. 13. r. Ligatum. p. 75.
l. 4. r. denies. p. 78. l. 17. and in the rest. r. abstemious. p. 8. l. 3. r.
Demades. p. 84. l. 20. r. Panthaea p. 18. l. 5. r. lost. Diverse mistakes are
in the proper names, which I entreat the understauding Reader favorably to
correct.


