If you know not me, You know no body: Or, The troubles of Queen ELIZABETH.



AT LONDON, Printed for Nathaniel Butter. 1605.

If you know not me, You know no body: Or, The troubles of Queen ELIZABETH.
Enter Sussex, and Lo: Chamberlain. Sussex. GOod morrow my good Lord
Chamberlain.


Cham: Many good morrowes to my good Lord of Sussex.


Suss: Whose with the Queen my Lord.


Cha: The Cardinal of Winchester: The Lord of Tame: the good Lord Shandoyse:
and besides, Lo: Howard, Sir Henry Beningfeild, and diverse others.


Suss: A word my Lord in private.


Enter Tame and Shandoyse. Shand: Tuching the Queen my Lord who now sitts hye,
What thinks the realm of Phillip The Emperors son,
A marriage by the Council treated of?

Tame: Pray god 't prove well.

Suss: Good morrow Lords.

Tame: Good morrow my good Lord of Sussex.

Shand: I cry your Honors mercy.

Chamb: Good morrow to the Lords of Tame and Shandoyse.

Tame: The like to you my Lord: As you were speaking

Enter Lord Howard and Sir Henry Beningfield. Bening: Concerning Wiatt and the
Kentish rebels,
Their ouer-throw is past: the rebel Dukes that sought
By all means to proclaim queen Jane chiefly Northumberland
For Gilfords sake, he for'st his brother Duke unto that war,
But each one had his merit.

Howard: Oh my Lord,
The Law proceeded against their great offense,
And it is not well, since they have suffered Judgment,
That we should raise their scandal being dead,
It Is impious, not by true Judgment bread.

Suss: Good morrow my Lord, good morrow good Sir Henry.

Bening: Pardon my Lord I saw you not till now.

Chamb: Good morrow good Lord Howard.

Howa: Your honors; The like to you my Lords.

Tame: With all my heart Lord Howard.

Cham: Forward I pray.

Suss: The suffolk men my Lord, was to the Queen
The very stayres, by which she did ascend:
She Is greatly bound unto them for their loves.

Enter Cardinal of Winchester. Winch: Good morrow Lords, attend the Queen
into the presence.

Suss: Your duties Lords.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Tame bearing the purse: Shandoyse the Mace: Howard the
Septer; Sussex the Crown: then the Queen, after her the Cardinal, Sentlow,
Gage, and attendant. Quee: By gods assistance and the power of heaven,
We are instated in our brothers throane,
And all those powers, that war'd against our right,
By help of heaven and your freindly aid,
Disper'stand fled, here may we sit secure,
Our hearts is joyful Lords, our peace is pure.

Enter Dodds. Dodds: I do beseech your majesty peruse this poor peticion.

Quee: O master Dodds we are indebted to you for your love,
You stood us in great stead even in our ebb
Of fortune, when our hopes were near declined,
And when our state did bear the lowest sail,
Which we have reason to requit we know;
Read his peticion my good Lord Cardinal.

Dodds. Oh gracious sovereign, let my Lord the Duke have the
Perusing of it, or any other that is near your grace,
He will be to our suit an opposite.

Winch: And reason fellow.
Madam, here is a large recital and vpbraydinge of your highness Sovereignty,
the Suffolk men that lifted you to the throne, and here possessed you, claim
your promise you made them about religion.

Dodds: True gracious Sovereign;
But that we do vpbraid your majesty,
Or make recital of our deeds forepast,
Other then conscience, honesty and zeal,
By love, by faith, and by our duty bound,
To you the next and true successiue heir,
If you contrary this; I needs must say,
Your skillesse tongue does make our well tuned words,
Iarr in the Princes ears, and of our text,
You make a wrong construction: Gracious Queen,
Your humble subjects prostrate in my mouth,
A general suit when we first flockt to you,
And made first head with you at Framagham,
It Was thus concluded that we your liegemen:
Should still enjoy our consciences, and use that faith
Which in king Edwards days was held Canonical.

Winch: May't please your highness note the Commons insolence
They tie you to conditions, and set lymits to your liking.

Queen: They shall know,
To whom their faithful duties they do owe,
Since they the lymbes, the head would seek to sway,
Before they govern, they shall learn t'obays
See it severely ordered Winchester.

Winch: Away with him, it shall be thoroughly scand,
And you upon the pillory, three days to stand. Exit Dodds.

Benif: Has not your sister (gracious Queen) a hand
In these peticions; well your highness knows
She is a favorite of these heritiques.

Winch: And well remembered, is it not probable,
That she in Wiats expedicion,
And other insurrection lately queald
Was a confederate; if your highness will your own estate preserve,
You must foresee fore-danger, and cut off all such
As would your safety prejudice.

Bening: Such is your sister,
A mere opposite to us in our opinion, and besides
She Is next Successiue, should your majesty
Dye yssules, which heaven defend.

Omnes. Which heaven defend.

Bening: The state of our religion would decline.

Queen: My Lord of Tame and Shandoyse,
You two shall have a firm Commission sealed,
To fetch our sister young Elizabeth
From Ashbridge where she lies, and with a band
Of armed soldiers to conduct her up to London,
Where we will hear her.

Sentlo: Gracious Queen, she only craves but to behold your face,
That she might clear her self of all supposed treasons,
Still protesting, she is as true a subject to your grace,
As lives this day.

Winch: Do not you hear, with what a sawcye impudence,
This Sentlo here presumes.

Quee: Away with him, i will teach him know his place,
To frown when we frown, smile on whom we grace.

Winch: Twilbe a means to keep the rest in awe,
Making their sovereigns brow, to them a law.

Quee: All those that seek our sisters cause to favor,
Let them be lodged.

Winch: Young Courtney Earl of Devonshire,
Seems chiefly to affect her faction.

Quee: Commit him to the Tower,
Till time affordes us and our Counsel breathing space.
Whence is that Post? A Horn within.

Constable: My Sovereign, It is from Southampton.

Quee: Our Secretary, unseal them and return
Us present answer of the contents, She speaks to the Lo: Constable.
What Is the main business.

Constable: That Phillip Prince of Spain,
Son to the Emperor, is safely ariu'd,
And landed at Southampton.

Quee: Prepare to meet him Lords with all our Pomp.

Howard: Prepare you Lords with our fair Queen to ride,
And his high princely state let no man hide.

Quee: Set forwad Lords, this sudden news is sweet,
Two royal lovers on the midde way mere. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Master Gage and a gentlewoman. Gage. Good morrow Mistress, came you
from the Princess?

Wom: Master Gage, I did.

Gage. How fares her Grace.

Woman: O wondrous crazey gentle master Gage,
Her sleeps are all unquiet, and her head
Bears and grows giddy with continual grief.

Gage: God grant her comfort, and release her pain,
So good a Lady few on earth remain.

Enter the Clown. Clown. O Arm, arm, arm.

Gage. How now what is the matter.

Clown. O Lord the house is beset, shouldiers are as hot as fire,
Are reddy to enter every hole about the house,
For as I was a'th top of the stacke, the sound of the Drum,
Hott me such a box a'th Ear, that I came tumbling down,
The stacke with a thousand byllets a'th top on me, look about,
And help for gods sake.

Gage. Heaven guard the Princess grant that all be well,
This Drum I fear, will prove her passing bell.

Enter Tame and Shandoyse with soldiers, Drum. etc. Tame. Where Is the Princess.

Gage. O my honored Lords,
(May I with reverence presume to ask)
What means these arms, why do you thus begirt,
A poor weak Lady, near at point of death.

Shand: Resolve the Princess we must speak with her.

Woman: My Lords, know there is no admittance to her presence,
Without the leave, first granted from her self.

Tame: Go tell her we must and will.

Wom: I Will certify so much. Exit Woman

Gage: My Lords, as you are honorably borne,
As you did love her father, or her brother,
As you do owe alegeance to the Queen,
In pity of her weakness, and low state,
With best of favor, her commisserate.

Enter Woman. Wom: Her grace intreates you but to stay till morn?
And then your message shall be heard at full.

Shand: It Is from the Queen and we will speak with her.

Wom: I Will certify so much.

Tame: It shall not need, press after her my Lord.

Enter Elizabeth in her bed, Doctor Owine, and Doctor Wendith. Eliz: We are not
pleased with your intrusions Lords.
Is your have such, of your affairs so urgent,
That sudenly, and at this time of night,
You press on one, and will not stay till morn?

Tame: Sorry we are sweet Lady, to behold you in this sad plight.

Eliz: And I my Lords not glad,
My heart, oh how it beats.

Shand: Madam, our message and our duty from our Queen,
We come to tender you, It is her pleasure,
That you the 7. day of this month appear at Westminster.

Eliza: At Westminster? my Lords no soul more glad then I,
To do my duty to her Majesty,
But I am sorry at the heart, my heart, oh good Doctor raise me:
Oh my heart, I hope my Lords, considering my excremity and
Weakness, you will dispense a little with your have.

Tame: Doctor Owine and Doctor Wendith,
You are the Queens Physicians truly sworn,
On your alegeance, as before her highness you will answer it,
Speak, may the Princess be remoou'd with life.

D: Owine. Not without danger Lords, yet without death,
Her fever is not mortal; yet you see into what danger,
It has brought the Princess.

Shand: Is your opinion so?

D: Wend: My Judgment is, not deadly, but yet dangerous,
No sooner shall she come to take the air,
But she will faint, and if not well prepared and attended,
Her life is in much danger.

Tame: Madam, we take no pleasure to deliver
so strict a message.

Eliza: Nor I my Lords to hear a message delivered
with such strictnes; well must I go.

Shand: So says the Queen.

Eliza: Why then it must be so.

Tame: To morrow early then you must prepare.

Eliza: It Is many a more (...) my feeble legs,
Felt this my bodies weight: O I shall faint,
And if I taste the rawnes of the air,
I am but dead, indeed I am but dead.
It Is late, conduct these Lords unto their chambers,
And cheer them well for they have iorneyd hard,
whilst we prepare us for our morrowes Journey.

Shand: Madam, the Queen has sent her letter for you.

Eliza: The Queen is (...), and we will strive with death
To tender her our life,
We are her subject, and obey her hest,
Good night, we wish you what we want,
Good rest. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Queen Mary, Phillipp and all the Nobles, but Tame and Shandoyse. Que:
Thus in the face of heaven, and broad eye of all the multitude,
We give a welcome to the Spanish Prince,
Those plausiue shouts which give you entertain,
Echoes as much to the almighties cares,
And there they sownd with pleasure, and excels
The claymorous trumpetts, and loud ringing bells.

Phil. Thrice excellent and ever gracious Princess,
Doubly famous for virtue and for beauty,
We embrace your large stretched Honors with the arms of love,
Our Royal marriage, treated first in Heaven
To be solemnized here, both by Gods voice,
And by our loves consent, we thus embrace:
Now Spain and England two populous Kingdoms,
That have a long time been opposed
In Hostile-emulation, shall be at one:
This shall be Spanish England, ours English Spain.

Quee. Hark the redoubling echoes of the people, Flourish.
How it proclaymes their loves; and welcome to this Union.

Phil. Then here before the (...) of the Land,
We do embrace and make a public contract.
Our souls are joyful, then bright Heavens smile,
Whilst we proclaim our new united Style.

Queen. Read Sussex.
Sussex reads. Phillip and Mary, by the grace of God, King and Queen of
England, Spain, France and Ireland, King and Queen of Naples, Scifcillia,
Leon and Aragon, Arch. Duke and Duchess of Assria, Burgondy, of Brabant Zeland,
of Holand: Prince and Princess of Sweaue, Count and Countess Hasburdge,
Maliorca, Sardinia, of the firm Land, and the maine Ocean Sea, Palatins of
Jerusalem, of Henolt; Lord and Lady of Freeseland, and of the Isles: And
Governor and Gouernesse of all Africa, and Asia.





Omnes. Long live the King and Queen. Flourish.

Kin. and Qu. We thank you all.

Con. When please your Highness to solemnize this your Nuptials?

Qu: The 25. day of this month July.

Phil. It likes us well, but royal Queen we want
One Lady at this hye solemnity:
We have a Sister called Elixaebeth,
Whose virtues and endowments of the mind
Has filled the ears of Spain.

Winch. Great are the causes, now too long to say,
Why she my Sovereign should be kept away.

Constable: The Lord of Tame and Shandoyse are returned.

Enter Tame and Shandoyse and Gage. Quee. How fares our Sister? Is she come
alonge?

Tame. We found the Princess, sick and in great danger;
Yet did we urge our strickt Commission,
She much entreated that she might be spared,
Until her health and strength might be restored.

Shand. Two of your Highness Doctors we then called,
And charged them as they would answer it,
To tell the truth, if that our iourneys toil
Might be no prejudice unto her life;
Or if we might with safety bring her thence:
They answered, that we might; we did so,
Here she is to do her duty to your Majesty.

Quee: Let her attend, we will find time to hear her.

Phil. But royal Queen, yet for her virtues sake,
Deem her offenses, if she have offended,
With all the lenity a Sister can.

Quee: My Lord of Winchester, my Lord of Sussex.
Lord Howard, Tame, and Shandoyse,
Take you Commission to examine her
Of all supposed Crimes; so to our Nuptials.

Phil. What Festival more Royal has been seen,
Than twixt Spaines Prince, and Englands Royal Queen.

Exeunt. Enter Elizabeth, her Gentlewoman, and three Household servants. Eli: Is
not my gentleman usher yet returned.

Woe: Madam, not yet.

Eliz. O God, my fear has been good physic,
But the Queens displeasure, that has cured my bodies Imperfection,
Has made me heart sick, brain sick, and sick even to death.
What are you?

1. Ser: Your howshold Officers and humble servants,
Who now your house fair Princess, is desolu'd
And quite broke up, come to attend your grace.

Eliz. We thank you, and am more indebted for your loves
Than we have power: or virtue to requite,
Alas I am all the Queens, yet nothing of my self,
But God and Inocence, be you my Patrons and defend my cause
Why weep you gentlemen?

Cooks: Not for our selves, men are not made to weep
At there own fortunes, our eyes are made of fire,
And to extract water from fire is hard,
Nothing but such a Princess grief as yours,
So good a Lady and so beautiful, so absolute a mistress,
And perfect as you have delivered been,
Have power to do it, your sorrow makes us sad.

Eliz: My Inocence yet makes my heart as light,
As my front's heavy: all that heaven sends is welcome
Gentlemen divide these few crowns amongst you,
I am now a prisoner; and shall want nothing,
I have some friends about her majesty,
That are providing for me all things; all things;
I, even my grave; and being possessed of that,
I shall need nothing: weep not I pray,
Rather you should rejoice:
If I miscarry in this enterprise, and ask you why,
A Virgin and a Martyr both I die.

Enter Gage. Gage: He that first gave you life, protect that life,
From those that wish your death.

Eliz: What Is my of offense? who be my accusers.

Gage: Madam, that the Queen and Winchester best knows.

Eliz: What says the Queen unto my late petition.

Gage. You are denied that grace:
Her Majesty will not admit you conference,
Sir William Sentlo urging that motion,
Was first committed, since sent to the Tower,
Madam, in breife your foes are the Queens freindes,
Your friends her foes,
Six of the Counsel are this day appointed,
To examine you of certain articles,

Eliz: They shall be welcome; my god in whom I trust,
Will help, deliver, save, defend the just.

Enter Winchester, Sussex, Howard, Tame, Shandoyse, and Constable. Suss: All
forbear this place unless the Princess.

Winch: Madam, we from the Queen are joined They sit, she kneeles.
in full commission.

Sussex: By your Favor good my Lord ere you proceed,
Madam, although this place does tie you to this reverence,
It becomes not you being a Princess to deiect your knee,
A chair there.

Eliz: My duty with my fortunes do agree,
And to the Queen in you I bend my knee.

Suss: You shall not kneel where Sussex sits in place,
The Chamber keeper, a chair there for her grace.

Winch: Madam, perhaps you censure hardly.
That was enforst in this commission.

Eliz: Know you your own guilt my good Lord Chancellor,
That you accuse your self, I think not so,
I am of this mind, no man is my foe.

Winch: Madam I would you would submit, unto her highness.

Eliz: Submit my Lord of Winchester, it is fit
That none but base offenders should submit,
No no my Lord, I easily spy your drifte,
Having nothing whereon you can accuse me,
Do seek to have my self, my self betray,
So by my self my own blood should be spilt,
Confess submission I confess a guilt.

Tame: What answer you to Wiats late rebellion,
Madam, it is thought that you did set them on.

Eliza: Who is it will say so? men may much suspect,
But yet my Lord, none can my life detect,
I a confederate with those kentish rebels?
If I ere saw or sent to them, let the Queen take my head,
Has not proud Wyat suffered for his offense,
And in the purging both of soul and body for heaven,
Did Wyat then accuse Elizabeth?

Suss: Madam he did not.

Eliz: My reverent Lord I know it.

Howard: Madam he would not.

Eliz: Oh my good Lord he could not.

Suss: The same day Frogmorton was arrain'd in the Guild Hall,
It was imposed on him, whether this Princess had a hand
With him or no; he did deny it,
Cler'd her sore his death, yet accused others.

Eliz: My god be praised, this is news but of a minute old.

Shand: What answer you to Sir Peter Carew in the west,
The western Rebels.

Eliz: Ask the unborn Infant, see what that will answer,
For that and I, are both alike in guilt,
Let not by rigor Innocent blood be spilt.

Winch: Come Madam, answer briefly to these treasons.

Eliz: Treason Lords, if it be treason to be the daughter
To The Eighth Henry; Sister to Edward, and the next of blood unto
My gracious sovereign now the Queen I am a traitor: if not, I
Spit at treason. In Henryes reign this Law could not have stood,
O god that we should suffer for our blood.

Constable: Madam, the Queen must here you sing another song,
Before you part with us.

Eliz: My god does know, I can no note but truth,
That with heavens King,
One day in quiers of Angels I shall singe.

Winch: Then Madam you will not submit.

Eliz: My life I will, but not as guilty,
My Lords, let pale offenders pardon crave,
If we offend, Laws rigor let us have.

Winch: You are stubborn, come letts certify the Queen.

Tame: Rowme for the Lords there. Exeunt Counsel.

Eliz: Thou power eternal, Inocents just guide,
That sways the Scepter of all Monarchies,
Protect the guiltless from these ravening Jaws,
That hidious death presents, by Tyrants Laws,
And as my heart is known to thee most pure,
Grant me release, or patience to endure.

Enter Gage and Servants. Gage: Madam, we your poor humble servants,
Made bold to press into your graces presence,
To know how your cause goes.

Eliz: Well, well, I thank my god, well,
How can a cause go ill with Innocents,
They that to whom wrongs in this world are done,
Shall Be rewarded in the world to come.

Enter the six Counselors. Winch: It is the pleasure of her majesty,
That you be straight committed to the Tower.

Eliz: The Tower, for what?

Winch: Moreover all your howshold servants we have discharged,
Except this gentleman your usher and this gentlewoman
Thus did the Queen command,
And for your guard, a hundred Northern whitecotes,
Are appointed to conduct you thither,
To night unto your chamber, to morrow early prepare
You for the Tower, your bardge stands ready,
To conduct you thither. she kneeles.

Eliz: Oh god my heart: A prisoner in the Tower,
Speak to the Queen my Lords, that some other place
May lodge her sister, that is too vild, too base.

Suss: Come my lords, lett's all join in one peticion
To the Queen, that she may not be lodged within the Tower.

Winch: My Lord, you know it is in vain,
For the Queens sentence is definitive,
And we must see it performed.

Eliz: Then to our chamber comfortless and sad,
To morrow to the tower that fatal place,
Where I shall never behold the suns bright face.

Suss: Now god forbid, a better hap heaven send:
Thus men may mourn, for what they cannot mend. Exeunt omnes.

Enter three white-cote soldiers with a Jack of beer. 1: Come my masters you
know your chardge, it is now about
Alcauin, here we must watch till morning,
And then carry the Princess to the tower.

2: How shall we spend the time till morning.

3: Mase we will drinck and talk of our friends.

2: I but my frnd, do not talk of state matters.

1: Not I, I Will not meddle with the state,
I hope this a man may say without offense,
Prithee drink to me.

3. Withal my harry faith, this a man might
Lawfully speak, but now, faith what wast about to say.

1: Mass I say this: That the Lady Elizabeth is both a lady,
And Elizabeth, and if I should say she were a virtuous Princess,
Were there any harm in that?

2: No by my troth, there is no harm in that,
But beware of talking of the Princess,
Let Us meddle with our kindred there, we may be bold.

1: Well sirs I have two sisters, and the one loves the other,
And would not send her to prison for a million, is there any harm
In this? i will keep my self within compass I warrant you,
For I do not talk of the Queen, I talk of my sisters,
I Will keep my self within my compass I warrant you.

3: I but Sir, that word sister goes hardly down.

1: Why Sir, I hope a man may be bold with his own,
I learned that of the Queen, I Will keep my self within compass
I Will warrant you.

2: I but Sir, why is the Princess committed?

1: It may be she does not know her self,
It may be the Queen knows not the cause,
It may be my Lord of Winchester does not know,
It may be so, nothing's impossible to god,
It may be there is knavery in Munckery,
There Is nothing impossible, is there any harm in that?

2: Shoemaker, you go a little beyond your last.

1: Why, in saying nothing's impossible to God,
I Will stand to it; for saying a truth's a truth, i will prove it;
For saying there may be knauerie in Monckery, I Will justify it,
I do not say there is, but may be, I know what I know,
You know what you know, he knows what he knows,
Marry we know not what every man knows.

3: My masters, we have talked so long that I think it is day.

1: I think so too, is there any harm in all this?

2: No harm ith world.

3: And I think by this time the Princess is ready
To take her barge.

1: Come then let us go, would all were well,
Is there any harm in all this? but alas wishes and tears
Have both one property, they show their love that Exeunt omnes.
want the remedy.

Enter Winchester and Beningfield. Winch: Did you not mark what a pitious eye
she cast
To the Queens window as she past a long,
Feign she would have stayed, but that I caused
The bargmen to make have and row away.

Bening: The bargmen were too desperate my Lord,
In staying till the water was so low,
For then you know, being underneath the bridge,
The barges stern did strike upon the ground,
And was in danger to have dround us all.

Winch: Well she has escaped that danger,
Would she but conform her self in her opinion,
She only might rely upon my love,
To win her to the favor of the Queen.

Bening: But that will never be, this is my censure,
If she be guilty in the least degree,
May all her wrongs survive and light on her:
If other ways that she be cleared,
Thus both ways I wish her down,
Or else her state to raise.

Enter Sussex, Tame, Howard, Shandoyse, and Gage. Suss: Why does the Princess
keep her barge so long,
Why lands she not? Some one go see the cause.

Gage: That shall be my charge my Lord. Exit Gage.

Suss: Oh me my Lord, her state is wondrous hard,
I have seen the day, my hand I Would not have lent
To bring my Sovereigns Sister to the Tower:
Good my Lords, stretch your Commission
To do this Princess but some little favor.

Shand: My Lord, my Lord, let not the love we bear the Princess, incur the
Queens displeasure, it is no dallying with matters of Estate, who dares
gainsay the Queen?

Suss: Marry a God not I, no, no, not I;
Yet who shall hinder these my eyes to sorrow
For her sorrow: By Gods marry dear,
That the Queen could not, though her self were here:
My Lords, my Lords, if it were held foul treason,
To grieve for her hard usage, by my Soul
My eyes would hardly prove me a true Subject:
But it is the Queens pleasure, and we must obey:
But I shall mourn, should the King and Queen say nay.

Enter Gage. Gage. My grieved Mistress humbly thus entreats,
For to remove back to the Common stayres,
And not to land where Traitors put to shore,
Some difference she entreats your Honors make
Twixt Crystal Fountains, and foul muddy Springs,
Twixt those that are condemned by the law,
And those whom Treasons stain did never blemish:
Thus she attends your answer, and sits still
Whilst her wet eyes, full many a tear did spill.

Suss: Marry a God, it is true and it is no reason: Lanch Bargeman.
Good Lady land, where Traitors use to land,
And fore her guilt be proou'd, Gods marry no,
And the Queen wills it, that it should be so.

Shand: My Lord, you must look into our Commission,
No favors granted, she of force must land,
It Is a decree which we can not with stand,
So tell her master Gage, Exit Gage.

Suss: As good a Lady as ere England bread,
Would he that caused this woe, had lost his head.

Enter Gage, Elizabeth and Clarentia her gentlewoman. Gage: Madam, you have
stepped too short into the water.

Eliz: No matter where I tread,
Would where I set my foot, there lay my head,
Land Traitor like; my foot's wet in the flood,
So shall my heart ere long be drencht in blood.

Enter Constable. Winch: Here comes the Constable of the tower,
This is your charge.

Constable: And I receive my prisoner, come will you go?

Eliz. Whither my Lord, unto a grate of Iron,
Where grief and care my poor heart shall enuirone,
I am not well.

Sussex: A chair for the Princess.

Constable: Here Is no chair for prisoners,
Come will you see your chamber.

Eliza: Then on this stone, this cold stone I will sit,
I needs must say you hardly me entreat,
When for a chair, this hard stone is my seat.

Suss: My Lord, you deal too cruelly with the Princess,
You knew her father, she is no stranger to you.

Tame: Madam it raynes.

Suss: Good Lady take my cloak.

Eliz: No let it a lone: See gentle men,
The pittious heavens weeps tears into my bosom,
On this cold stone I sit, rain in my face,
But better here, than in a worser place
Where this bad man will lead me.
Clarentia, reach my book, now lead me where you please
From sight of day; or in a dungeon; I shall see to pray.

Suss: Nay, nay, you need not bolt and lock so fast, Exit Eliz: Gage: Claren:
and Constab.
She is no starter; honorable Lords,
Speak to the Queen she may have some release.

Enter Constable. Constable. So so, let me alone, let me alone to coope her,
I Will use her so, the Queen shall muth commend
My diligent care.

Howard. Where have you left the Princess?

Constable. Where she is safe enough I warrant you,
I have not granted her the privilege
Of any walk, or garden, or to open
Her windows, casements to receive the air.

Suss. My lord, my lord, you deal without respect,
And worse than your Commission can mainetaine.

Constable. My Lord, I hope I know mine office well,
And better than your self within this place,
Then teach not me my duty, she shall be vsd so still,
The Queen commands, and I Will obey her will,

Suss: But if this time should alter, mark me well,
Could this be answered, could it fellow Peers?
I think not so.

Constable: Tush tush the Queen is young likely to bear,
Of her own body a more royal heir.

Enter Gage. Gage: My Lords the Princess humbly entreats,
That her own servants may bear up her diet,
A company of base vntutord slaves,
Whose hands did never serve a Princess board,
Do take that privilege.

Constable: It Was my appointment, and it shall be so.

Suss: Gods marry dear, but it shall not be,
Lord Howard join with me, we will to the King.

Enter soldiers with dishes. Gage: Stay good my Lords for instance, see they
come,
If this be seemly, let your honors Judge.

Suss: Come come my Lords, why do you stay so long,
The Queens high favor shall amend this wrong.

Constable: Now sir, what have you got by your Exeunt omnes, praeter Consta. and
Gage.
complaining, you common find-fault; what, is
your Mistress stomach so queasie? our honest
soldiers must not touch her meat, then let her fast,
I know her stomach will come down at last.

Enter soldiers with more dishes, Gage takes one from them. Gage: Vntutor'd
slave, I Will ease thee of this burden,
Her highness scorns to touch the dishe
Her servants brings not up.

Constable: Presume to touch a dish I Will lodge thee there,
Where thou shall see no sun for one hole year.

Gage: I would to god you would, in any place Exit Constable: and soldiers.
Where I might live from thought of her disgrace,
O thou all-seeing heavens, with pitious eyes,
Look on th'oppresions of their cruelty!
Let not thy truth, by falsehood be oppressed,
But let her virtues shine and give her rest,
Confound the sleights, and practice of those men,
Whose pride do kick against thy seat of heaven.
Oh draw the courtaines from their filthy sin,
And make them loath the hell which they live in.
Prosper the Princess, and her life defend,
A glorious comfort to her troubles send.
If ever thou had pity, hear my prayer,
And give releasement to a Princes care. Exit Gage.

A dumb show. Enter six with torches. Tame and Shandoyse, bare-headed, Phillip
and Mary after them: then Winchester, Beningfeild, and Attendants: at the other
door, Sussex and Howard, Sussex delivers a peticion to the King, the King
receives it, shows it to the Queen, she shows it to Winchester and to
Beningfeild: they storm, the King whispers to Sussex, and raises him and
Howard, gives them a piticion, they take their leaves and depart, the King
whispers a little to the Queen. Exeunt. Enter Constable and Gage. Gage: The
Princess thus entreats you honored Lord,
She may but walk in the Lieftenants garden,
Or else repose her self in the Queens lodgings:
My honored Lord, grant this as you did love
The famous Henry her deceased father.

Constable: Come talk not to me for I am resolved,
Nor lodging, garden, nor lieftenants walks
Shall here be granted, she is a prisoner.

Gage: My Lord, they shall.

Constable: How, shall they knave?

Gage: If the Queen please, they shall.
A noble and right reverent Counselor,
Promised to beg it of her Majesty:
And if she say the word, my Lord she shall.

Constable. I, if she say the word, it shall be so:
My lord of Winchester speaks the contrary,
So do the Clergy, they are honest men.

Gage. My honored Lord, why should you take delight
To torture a poor Lady innocent?
The Queen I know when she shall hear of this,
Will greatly discommend your cruelty.
You served her father, and he loved you well,
You served her brother, and he held you dear,
And can you hate the sister he best loved?
You serve her sister, she esteems you hye,
And you may live to serve her ere you dye:
And therefore good my Lord, let this prevail,
Only the casements of her window open,
Whereby she may receive fresh gladsome air.

Constable. O you preach well to deaf men, no, not I,
So letters may fly in, I Will none of that,
She is my prisoner, and if I durst,
But that my warrant is not yet so strickt,
I Would lay her in a dungeon where her eyes,
Should not have light to read her prayer book,
So would I danger both her soul and body,
Cause she an alyen is to us catholics,
Her bed should be all snakes, her rest despair,
Torture should make her curse, her faythles prayer.

Enter Sussex, Howard, and servants. Suss: My Lord, it is the pleasure of the
Queen,
The prisoner Princess should have all the use
Of the lieftenants garden, the Queens lodgings,
And all the liberty this place affords.

Constable: What means her grace by that?

Suss: You may go ask her and you will my Lord,
Moreover it is her highness further pleasure,
That her sworn servants shall attend on her,
Two gentlemen of her Ewry, two of her Pantry,
Two of her Kitchen, and two of her wardrobe,
Besides this gentleman here master Gage.

Constable: The next will be her freedom, oh this madds me.

Howard: Which way lies the Princess.

Constable: This way my Lord.

Howard: This will be glad tidings: come let us tell her grace.

Gage, Wilt please your honor, let my Lady Exeunt omnes preter Constable and
Gage.
Walk in the leiftenants garden,
Or may but see the lodgings of the Queen,
Or open the casements to receive fresh air,
Shall she my Lord: shall she this freedom use,
She shall: for you can neither will nor choose,
Or shall she have some servants of her own,
To attend on her: I pray let it be so,
And let your look no more poor prisoners daunt,
I pray deny not what you needs must grant. Exit Gage.

Constable: This base groom flowts me, oh this frets my heart,
These knaves will let upon their privilege,
But yet i will vex her, I have found the means,
I Will have my cooks to dress my meat with hers,
And every officer my men shall match,
Oh that I could but draine her hearts dear blood,
Oh it would feed me, do my soul much good.

Enter the Clown, beating a soldier. Exeunt. Enter Cook beating another
soldier. Constable: How now, what means the fellow.

Cook: Audacious slave presuming in my place.

Constable: Sir 'twas my pleasure and I did command it.

Cook: The prowdest he that keeps within the tower,
Shall have no eye into my private office.

Constable: No Sir, why say it is I.

Cook: Be it your self or any other here,
I Will make him sup the hottest broth I have.

Constable: You will not.

Cook: Zoundes I will,
I have been true to her, and will be still. Exit Cook.

Constable. Well, I Will have this amended er't be long,
And venge my self on her for all their wrong.

Exeunt omnes. Enter a boy with a Nose-gay. Boy. I have got another Nosegay for
my young Lady,
My Lord said I should be soundly whipped
If I were seen to bring her any more,
But yet I Will venture once again, she is so good,
Oh here is her chamber, I Will call and see if she be stirring,
Where are you Lady?

Eliz: Welcome sweet boy, what have thou brought me there.

Boy: Madam, I have brought you another nose gay,
But you must not let it be seen, for if it be,
I shall be soundly whipped, indeedla, indeed I shall.

Eliz: God a mercy boy, heeres to requite thy love.

Exit Eliz. Enter Constable, Sussex, Howard and Attendants. Constable: Stay him
stay him, oh have I caught you Sir,
Where have you been.

Boy: To carry my young Lady some more flowers,

How: Alas my Lord a child, pray let him go.

Constable: A crafty knave my Lords, search him for letters.

Suss: Letters my Lord, it is impossible.

Constable: Come tell me what letters thou carryedst her,
I Will give thee figgs and sugar plummes.

Boy: Will you indeed, well i will take your word,
For you look like an honest man.

Constable: Now tell me what letters thou deliuerest.

Boy: Faith gaffer I know no letters but great A,
B and C: I am not come to K yet,
Now gaffer will you give me my sugar plummes.

Constable: Yes marry will I, take him away,
Let him be soundly whipped I charge you sir.

Enter Elizabeth: Gage and Clarentia. Eliz: They keep even infants from us,
they do well,
My sight they have too long bard, and now my smell,
This tower has made me fall to huswiffry,
I spend my labors to relieve the poor,
Go Gage distribute these to those that need.

Enter Winchester, Beningfeild and Tame. Winch: Madam the Queen out of her
royal bounty,
Has freed you from the thraldom of the tower,
And now this gentleman must be your gardyan.
I thank her: she has ryd me of a Tyrant,
Is he appointed now to be my keeper?
What is he Lords?

Tame: A gentleman in favor with the Queen.

Eliz: Yt seems so by his charge, but tell me Gage,
Is yet the scaffold standing on tower hill,
Whereon young Gilford and the Lady Jane did suffer death.

Gage: Upon my life it stands not.

Eliz: Lord Howard what is he.

How: A gentleman, tho of a stern aspect,
Yet mild enough I hope your Grace will find.

Eliza: Has he not think you a stretch conscience,
And if my secret murder should be put into his hands,
Has he not heart think you to execute.

How: Defend it heaven, and Gods almighty hand,
Betwixt your Grace, and such intendments stand.

Bening: Come madam will you go.

Eliz: With all my heart, farewell, far-well,
I am freed from Lymbo to be sent to hell. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Cook and Pantler. Cook: What storm comes next: this has dispersed us
quite
And shattered us to nothing; though we be denied the presence
Of our mistres, yet we will walk a loofe, and none controwle us.

Pant: Here will she cross the river, stand in her eye,
That she may take some notice of our neglected duties,

Enter three poor men. 1. Come this way they say, the sweet Princess comes,
Let us present her with such tokens of good will,
As we have.

2. They say she is such a virtuous Princess, that she will
except of a cupp of cold water, and I have even
a nosegay for her Grace, here she comes.

Enter Elizabeth, Beningfeild, Gage and Tame. Omnes: The Lord preserve thy
sweet Grace.

Eliz: What are these?

Gage: The townes-men of the country gathered here,
To greet your Grace, hearing you past this way.

Eliz: Give them this Gold, and thank them for their loves.

Bening: what traitor knaves are gathered here to make a tumult?

Omnes: Now the Lord bless thy sweet Grace.

Bening: If they persist, I charge you soldiers stop their mouths.

Eliz. Yt shall not need the poor are loving, but the rich despise,
And though you curb their tongue, spare them their eyes,
Your love my smart always not but prolonges,
Pray for me in your hearts, not with your tongues,
See see my Lord, look I have stild them all,
Not one amongst them, but debates my fall.

Tame: Alas Sir Harry these are honest country men,
That much rejoice to see the Princess well.

Bening: My lord my Lord, my charge is great.

Tame: And mine as great as yours. Bells.

Bening. Hark hark my Lord, what Bells are these?

Gage: The townes-men of this village,
Hearing your highness pass this way,
Salutes your coming with this peale of Bells.

Bening: Traitors and knaves ring Bells,
When the Queens enemy passes through the town,
Go set he knaves by the heales, make their pates ring noone,
I charge thee Barwick. Exit Barwick.

Eliz: Alas poor men, help them thou God above,
Thus men are forced to suffer for my love,
What said my servants, those that stood aloof?

Gage: They deeply coniur'd me out of their loves,
To know how your case goes, which these poor people second.

Eliz: Say to them tanquam Ouis.

Bening: Come come away, this lingering will benight us.

Tame: Madam this night your lodging's at my house,
No prisoner are you Madame for this night.

Bening: How? no prisoner.

Tame: No, no prisoner, what I intend to do i will answer,
Madame, will it please you go. Exit Eliz: Bening: and Tame.

Cook: Now gentle master usher, what says my Lady.

Gage: Thus did she bid me say tanquam Ouis,
Farewell I must away. Exit Gage

1. Tanqus Ovrus pray what is tanqus Ovrus neighbor.

2. If the priest were here he would smell it out straight.

Cook: My self have been a scholar, and I understand
What tanquam Ouis means.
We sent to know how her Grace did fare,
She, tanquam Ouis said, even like a sheep,
That Is to the slaughter led.

1. Tanqus Ovrus, that I should live to see, tanqus Ovris.

2. I shall nere love tanquam Ovris again for this trick.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Beningfeild, and Barwick his man. Bening: Barwicke, is
this the chair of state.

Bar: I sir, this is it.

Bening: Take it down, and pull of my boots.

Bar: Come on Sir.

Enter Clown. Clown: O monstrous, what a sawey companion's this?
To pull of his boots in the chair of state,
I Will fit you a penyworth for it.

Bening: Well said Barwick, pull knave.

Bar: A ha Sir. The Clown pulls the Chair from under him.

Bening: Well said, now comes.

Clo: Gods pity I think you are down, cry you mercy.

Bening: What saucy arrant knave art thou, how?

Clo: Not so saucy an arrant knave as your worship takes me to be.

Bening: Villain thou have broken my crooper.

Clo: I am sorry it is no worse for your worship.

Bening: Knave, do flout me? Exeunt. He beats him out.

Enter the Englishman, and Spaniard. Spa: The wall, the wall.

Eng: Sblood Spaniard you get no wall here, unless you would
Have your head and the wall knocked together.

Spa: Seignior Caualero Danglatero,
I must have the wall.

Eng: I do protest, had not thou enforst it,
I had not regarded it, but since you will needs
Have the wall, I Will take the pains to thrust
You into the kennell.

Spa: O base Caualero, my sword and poniard well
Tried in Tolledo, shall give thee the Imbrocado.

Eng Marry, and welcome Sir, come on. They fight, he hurts the Spaniard.

Spa: Holo holo, thou have given me
The Canuissado.

Eng: Come Sir will you any more.

Spa: Seignior Caualero look behint thee,
A blade of Tolledo is drawn against thee.

He looks back, he kills him. Enter Phillip, Howard, Sussex, Constable, and
Gresham. Phill: Hand that Ignoble groom,
Had we not beheld thy cowardice,
We should have sworn,
Such baseness had not followed us.

Spa: Oh vostro mandado grand Emperato.

How: Pardon him my Lord.

Phill: Are you respectles of our honor Lords,
That you would have us bosom cowardice,
I do protest the great turks Empire,
Shall not redeem thee from a fellons death,
What place is this my Lords?

Suss: Charing cross my Liege.

Phill: Then by this cross, where thou have done this murder,
Thou shall be hanged, so Lords away with him. Exit Spaniard.

Suss: Your Grace may purchase glory from above,
And intyer love from all your peoples hearts,
To make atonement twixt the woeful Princess,
And our dread sovereign, your most virtuous Queen.

How: It were a deed worthy of memory.

Constable: My Lord she is factious, rather could I wish
She were married to some private gentleman,
And with her dower conuaid out of the land,
Then here to stay and be a mutiner,
So may your highness state be more secure.
For whilst she lives wars, and commotions,
Foul insurrections will be set abroch,
I think 'twere not amiss to take her head:
This land would be in quiet, were she dead.

Suss: O my Lord, you speak not charitably.

Phill: Nor will we Lords embrace his heedles counsel,
I do protest as I am King of Spain,
My utmost power i will stretch to make them friends,
Come Lords let us in, my love and wit i will try
To end this Jar; the Queen shall not deny. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Elizabeth, Beningfeild, Clarentia, Tame, Gage and Barwick. Eliz: What
fearful terror does assail my heart?
Good Gage come hither and resolve me true
In thy opinion; shall I out live this night,
I pre thee speak.

Gage: Out live this night, I pray Madam why.

Eliz: Then to be plain this night I look to die.

Gage: O Madam, you were borne to better fortunes,
That God that made you, will protect you still
From all your enemies that wish you ill.

Eliz: My heart is fearful.

Gage: O my honored Lord,
As ever you were noble in your thoughts,
Speak, shall my Lady out live this night, or no?

Tame: You much amaze me sir, else heaven forefend.

Gage: For if we should imagine any plott,
Pretending to the hurt of our dear mistres,
I and my fellows though far unable are
To stand against your power, will die together.

Tame: And I with you would spend my dearest blood,
To do that virtuous Lady any good.
Sir Harry, now my charge I must resign,
The Ladye's wholly in your custody,
Yet use her kindly as she well deserves,
And so I take my leave, Madame adue. Exit Tame

Eiz: My honored Lord farewell, unwilling I
With grief and woe must continue,
Help me to some ink and paper good Sir Harry.

Bening: What to do Madam.

Eliz: To write a letter to the Queen my sister.

Bening: I find not that in my Commission.

Eliz: Good Iaylor urge not thy Commission.

Bening: No Iaylor, but your guardian Madam.

Eliz: Then reach me pen and ink.

Bening: Madam I dare not, my Commission serves not.

Eliz: Thus you have driven me of from time to time,
Still urging me with your Commission.
Good Iaylor be not so severe.

Bening: Good madam I entreat you loose that name
Of Iaylor, twilbe a byword to me and my posterity.

Eliz: As often as you name your Commission,
So often will I call you Iaylor.

Bening: Say I should reach you pen, ink and paper,
Who is it dare bear a letter sent from you.

Eliz: I do not keep a servant so dishonest,
That would deny me that.

Bening: Who ever dares, none shall.

Gage: Madame, impose the letter to my trust,
Were I to bear it through a field of pikes,
And in my way ten thousand armed men ambusht,
I Would make my passage through the midst of them,
And perforce bear it to the Queen your sister.

Bening: Baddy of me, what a bold knaue's this?

Eliz: Gage leave me to my self,
Thou ever living power, that give all hearts,
Give to my pen, a true perswasiue style,
That it may move my impatient sisters ears,
And urge her to compassionate my woe. She writes.

Beningfeild takes a book and looks into it. Bening: What has she written
here? He reads.
Much suspected by me, nothing proved can be,
Finis quoth Elizabeth the prisoner,
Pray god it prove so, soft what book's this,
Marry a God, what is here an English bible?
Sanctum Maria pardon this profanation of my heart,
Water Barwick, water, I Will meddle with it no more.

Eliz: My heart is heavy and my heart does close,
I am weary of writing, sleepy on the sudden,
Clarentia, leave me, and command some music
In the withdrawing chamber. she sleeps.

Bening: Your letter shall be forth-comming Lady,
I will pervse it ere it escape me now. Exit Beningfeild.

A dumb show. Enter Winchester, Constable, Barwick, and Friars: at the other
door 2. Angels: the Friar steps to her, offering to kill her: the Angels drives
them back. Exeunt. The Angel opens the Bible, and puts it in her hand as she
sleeps, Exeunt Angels, she wakes. Eliz: O God, how pleasant was this sleep to
me?
Clarentia, saw thou nothing?

Cla: Madame, not I,
I near slept soundlyer for the time.

Eliz: Nor heard'st thou nothing?

Cla: Neither Madame.

Eliz Did not thou put this book into my hand?

Cla: Madame not I.

Eliz Then 'twas by inspiration, heaven I trust
With his eternal hand, will guide the just.
What chapter's this? Who so puts his trust in the Lord,
Shall not be confounded:
My savior thanks, on thee my hope I build,
Thou love poor Innocents, and art their shield.

Enter Beningfeild, and Gage. Bening: Here have you writ a long excuse it
seems,
But no submission to the Queen your sister.

Eliz: Should they submit that never wrought offense,
The Law will always quit wronged Innocence:
Gage, take my letter, to the Lords commend my humble duty.

Gage: Madame I fly,
To give this leter to her majesty:
Hoping when I return,
To give you comfort that now sadly mourn. Exeunt omnes preter Ben:

Bening: I do write and send, I Will cross you still;
She shall not speak to any man alive,
But i will ore-heare her, no letter nor no token
Shall ever have access unto her hands,
But first i will see it;
So like a subject to my soueraigns state,
I will pursue her with my deadly hate.

Enter Clown. Clown: O Sir Harry, you look well to your office,
Yonder Is one in the garden with the Princess.

Bening: how knave, with the Princess? she parted even now.

Clown: I sir that's all one, but she no sooner came into the
Garden, but he leapt ore the wall, and there
They are together busy in talk Sir.

Bening: Here Is for thy pains, thou art an honest fellow:
Go take a Guard and apprehend them straight. Exit Clown.
Bring them before me,
O this was well found out,
Now will the Queen commend my diligent care,
And praise me for my service to her grace.
Ha, traitors swarm so near about my house,
It Is time to look into it:
O well said Barwick,
Where Is the prisoner.

Enter Clown, Barwick, and soldiers: leading of a Got, his sword drawn.
Clown: Here he is in a string my Lord.

Bening: Lord bless us, knave what have thou there?

Clown: This is he I told you was busy in talk with the Princess;
What a did there, you must get out of him by examination.

Bening: Why knave, this is a beast.

Clown: So may your worship be for any thing that I know.

Bening: What art thou knave?

Clown: If you worship does not remember me,
I hope your worships crooper does:
But if you have any thing to say to this honest fellow,
Who for his gray head and reverent beard is so like,
He may be a kin to you.

Bening: A kin to me, knave i will have thee whipped.

Clown: Then your worship will cry quittance with my
Posteriors for misvsing of yours.

Bening: Nay, but do thou flout me still. He beats him.

Exeunt. Enter Winchester, Gresham with paper, Constable with a Pursuinant.
Gres: I pray your honor to regard my have,

Winch: I know your business, and your have shall stay,
As you were speaking my Lord Constable.

Constable: When as the King shall come to seal these writes.

Gres: My Lord you know his highness treasure stays,
And cannot be transported this three months,
Unless that now your honor seal my warrant.

Winch: Fellow what then: This warrant that concerns
The Princess death, shuffle amongst the rest,
He Will nere peru'st.

Gres: How, the Princess death? thanks heaven,
By whom I am made a willing instrument her life to save,
That may live crowned when thou art in thy grave.

Winch: Stand ready purseuant, Exit Gresham.
That when it is signed,
Thou may be gone, and gallope with the wind.

Enter Phillip, Sussex, and Gage. Phil: Our Chancellor Lords, this is our
sealing day,
This our states business; is our signet there?

Enter Howard, and Gresham as he is sealing. Howard: Stay your Imperial hand,
let not your seal imprint
Deaths impresse in your sisters heart.

Phyl: Our sisters heart, Lo: Howard what means this?

How: The Chancellor and that iniuryous Lord,
Can well expound the meaning.

Winch: Oh chance accursed, how came he by this notice?
Her life is guarded by the hand of heaven,
And we in vain pursue it.

Phill: Lord Chancellor, your dealing is not fair,
See Lords, what writs affords it self
To the impresse of our scale.

Suss: See my Lord, a warrant for the Princess death
Before she be convicted, what iugling call you this?
See, see for Gods sake.

Gage: And a pursuiuant ready to post away with it,
To see it done with speed,
What flynty breast could brook to see her bleed?

Phill: Lord Chancellor, out of our prerogative
We will make bold to enterlyne your warrant.

Suss: Whose plot was this?

How: The Chancelors and my Lord Constables.

Suss: How was it reueald?

How: By this gentleman Master Gresham the Kings Agent here.

Suss: He has showed his love to the King and Queens maiestyes,
His service to his Country, and care of the Princess.

Gres: My duty to them all.

Phill: In stead of charging of the Sheriffs with her,
We here discharge her keeper Beningfeild:
And where we should have brought her to the block,
We now will have her brought to Hampton court,
There to attend the pleasure of the Queen,
The Pursuiuant that should have posted down
With tidings of her death,
Bear her the message of her repriued life,
You master Gage assist his speed, a good days work we ha made,
To rescue Innocence so soon betrayed.

Enter Clown and Clarentia. Clo: Whether go you so fast mistress Clarentia.

Cla: A milking.

Clo: A milking, that is a poor office for a Madame.

Cla: Better be a Milk-maid free, then a Madame in bondage.
Oh had thou heard the Princess yesternight,
Sitting within an arbor all alone to hear a Milk-mayd sing,
It would have moved a flynty heart to melt,
Weeping and wishing, wishing and weeping,
A thousand times she with her self debates,
With the poor Milk-maid to exchange estates,
She was a Sempster in the tower being a Princess,
And shall I her poor gentlewoman, disdain
To be a Milk-maid in the country.

Clo: Troth you say true, every one to his fortune,
As men go to hanging, the time has been,
When I would ha scorned to carry coals, but now the case is altered,
Every man as far as his tallent will stretch.

Enter a gentlewoman. Wom: Where Is mistres Clarential to horse to horse,
The Princess is sent for to the Court
She Is gone already, come let us after.

Cla: The Princess gone, and I left here behind,
Come, come our horses shall outstrip the wind.

Clow: And I Will not be long after you, for I am sure
My curtall will carry me as fast as your double Gelding.

Exeunt. Enter Elizabeth and Gage. Eliz: I wonder Gage that we have stayed so
long,
So near the Court, and yet have heard no news
From our displeased sister, this more affrites me
Then my former troubles, I fear this Hampton court
Will Be my grave.

Gage: Good madam, blot such thoughts out of your mind,
The Lords I know, are still about your suit,
And make no doubt, but they will so prevail
Both with the King and Queen, that you shall see
Their haynos anger will be turned to love.

Enter Howard. Howard: Where is the Princess.

Eliz: Welcome my good Lo: Howard what says the Queen,
Will she admit my sight?

Howard: Madam she will, this night she has appointed,
That she her self in person means to hear you,
Protract no time, then come let us have away. Exeunt.

Enter four torches: Phillip, Winchester, Howard, Shandoyse, Beningfeild, and
Attendants. Quee: Where is the Princess.

How: She waights your pleasure at the common stayers.

Quee: Usher her in by torch light.

How: Gentlemen vshers, and gentlemen Pentioners, lights
For the Princess, attendance gentlemen.

Phill: For her supposed virtues, Royal Queen
Look on your sister with a smiling brow,
And if her fault merit not too much hate,
Let her be censured with all lenity,
Let your deep hatred end where it began,
She has binne too long banished from the sun.

Quee: Our favor shall be far boue her desert,
And she that has been banished from the light,
Shall once again behold our cheerful sight.
You my Lord shall step behind the arras,
And hear our conference, we will show her Grace,
For there shines too much mercy in your face.

Phill: We bear this mind, we errors would not feed,
Nor cherish wrongs, nor yet see Innocents bleed.

Quee. Call the Princess. Exeunt for the Princess, Phillip behind the arras.
Enter all with Elizabeth. All forbear this place, except our sister now?
Exeunt omnes.

Eliz: That God that raised you, stay you, and protect
You from your foes, and clear me from suspect.

Quee: Wherefore do you cry?
To see your self so low, or us so hye.

Eliz: Neither dread Queen, mine is a womanish tear,
In part compeld by joy, and part by fear:
Joy of your sight, these brinish tears have bread,
For fear of my Queens frown, to strike me dead.

Quee: Sister, I rather think they are tears of spleen.

Eliz: You were my sister, now you are my Queen.

Quee: I, that is your grief.

Eliz. Madame, he was my foe, and not your friend
That has possessed you so, I am as true a
Subject to your Grace, as any lives this day,
Did you but see,
My heart it bends, far lower than my knee.

Quee. We know you can speak well: will you submit?

Eliz: My life madam I will, but not as guilty,
Should I confess
Fault done by her, that never did transgress.
Iioy to have a sister Queen so royal,
I would it as much pleased your majesty,
That you enjoy a sister that is so true:
If I were guilty of the least offense,
Madame, 'twould taint the blood even in your face,
The treasons of the father being noble,
Vnnobles all your children, let your grace
Exact all torture and imprisonment,
What ere my greatest enemies can devise,
And they all have done their worst, yet I
Will your true subject and true sister dye.

Phill: Myrror of virtue and bright natures pride, behind the arras.
Pity it had been, such beauty should have died

Quee: You Will not submit but end as you begin.

Eliz: Madame to death I will, but not to sin.

Quee: You are not guilty then?

Eliz: I think I am not.

Quee: I am not of your mind.

Eliz: I would your highness were.

Quee: How mean you that.

Eliz: To think as I think that my soul is clear.

Quee: You have been wrong imprisoned then.

Eliz: I Will not say so.

Quee: What ere we think arise and kiss our hand,
Say God has raised you friends.

Eliz: Then God has kept his promise.

Quee: Promise, why?

Eliz: To raise them friends that on his word rely.

Enter Phillip. Phil: And may the heavens applaud this unity,
Accursed be they that first procured this wrong,
Now by my crown, you ha been kept down too long.

Quee: Sister this night your self shall feast with me,
To morrow for the country you are free,
Lights for the Princess conduct her to her chamber. Exit Eliz:

Phil: My soul is joyful that this peace is made,
A peace that pleases heaven and earth, and all,
Redeeming captive thoughts from captive thrall,
Fair Queen, the serious business of my father,
Is now at hand to be accomplished,
Of your fair sight needs must take my leave,
Return I shall, tho parting cause us grieve.

Quee: Why should two hearts be for'st to separate,
I know your business but believe me sweet,
My soul divines we never more shall meet.

Phil: Yet fair Queen hope the best I shall return,
Who met with joy, tho now sadly mourn.

Bening: What, droopes your honor? Exeunt omnes Phil: and Queen.

Winch: Oh, I am sick.

Con: Where lies your grief?

Winch: Where yours and all good subjects else should lie,
Near at the heart, this confirmation I do greatly dread,
For now our true religion will decay,
I do divine who ever lives seven year,
Shall see no Religion here but heresye.

Bening: Come come my Lord, this is but for a show,
Our Queen I warrant wishes in her heart,
Her sister Princess were without her head.

Winch: No, no my Lords, this peace is natural,
This combination is without deceyt,
But I will once more write to incence the Queen,
The plot is laid, thus it shall be performed:
Sir Harry, you shall go attach her seuant
Upon suspicion, of some treachery,
VVherin the Princess shall be accessory,
If this do fail, my policy is down,
But I grow faint, the fever steals on me,
Death like a vulture tyres upon my heart,
I Will leave you two to prosecute this drift,
My bones to earth I give, to heaven my soul lift.

Ex. omnes. Enter Gage and Clarentia. Gage: Madam Clarentia, is my Lady
stirring?

Cla: Yes master Gage, but heavy at the heart,
For she was frited with a dream this night.
She said, she drempt her sister was new married,
And sat upon a high Imperial throne,
That she her self was cast into a dungeon,
Where enemies enuiron'd her about,
Offering their weapons to her naked breast;
Nay they would scarcly give her leave to pray,
They made such have to hurry her away.

Gage: Heaven shield my Mistres, and make her friends increase,
Convert her foes, estate her in true peace.

Cla: Then did I dream of weddings, and of flowers,
Me thought I was within the finest garden,
That ever mortal eye did yet behold,
Then straight me thought some of the chief were picked
To dress the bride, O 'twas the rarest show,
To see the bride go smiling longst the streets,
As if she went to happynes eternal.

Gage: Oh most unhappy dream, my fear is now
As great as yours, before it was but small,
Come let us go comfort her, that joys us all.

Exeunt. Enter, A dumb show: six Torches. Sussex bearing the Crown, Howard
bearing the Scepter, the Constable the Mace, Tame the Purse, Shandoyse the
Sword, Phillip and Mary; after them the Cardinal Poole, Beningfeild and
Attendants: Phillip and Mary confers; he takes leave, and Exit. Nobles bring
him to the door, and return; she fales in a swound; they comfort her; a dead
march. Enter four with the hearse of Winchester, with the Scepter and Purse
lying on it, the Queen takes the Scepter and Mace, and gives it Cardinal
Poole; a sennet, and Exeunt Omnes, preter Sussex. Suss: Winchester's dead, O
God upon even at his death,
He showed his malice to the sweet young Princess,
God pardon him, his soul must answer all,
She Is still preserved, and still her foes do fall,
The Queen is much besotted on these Prelates,
For there is another raised more base then he,
Poole that Arch, for truth and honesty.

Enter Beningfeild. Ben: My Lord of Sussex I can tell ill news,
The Cardinal Poole that now was firmly well,
Is suddenly fallen sick and like to die.

Suss: Let him go, why, then there is a fall of Prelates.
This realm will never stand in perfect state,
Till all their faction be clear ruinate.

Enter Constable. Constable: Sir, Harry do you hear the whispring in the Court,
They say the Queen is craysy very ill.

Suss: How hard you that?

Constable: It Is common through the house.

Enter Howard. How: It Is a sad Court my Lord.

Suss. What Is the matter say: how fayres the Queen?

How: Whether in sorrow for the Kings departure,
Or else for grief at Winchesters decease,
Or else that Cardinal Poole is sodaynely dead,
I cannot tell, but she is exceeding sick.

Suss: The state begins to alter.

How: Nay more my Lord, I came now from the presence,
I heard the Doctors whisper it in seecret,
There is no way but one.

Suss: Gods will be done; whose with the Queen, my Lord?

How: The Duke of Norfolk, the Earl of Oxford,
The Earl of Arundell, and diverse others,
They are with-drawne into the inward chamber,
There to take counsel, and entreat your presence.

Suss: VVee'le weight upon their Honors. Exeunt omnes.

Enter Elizabeth, Gage and Clarentia above. Eliz: O God, my last nights dream
I greatly fear,
It does presage my death, good master Gage
Look to the pathway that does come from the court,
I look each minute for deaths messenger.
Would he were here now, so my soul were pure,
That I with patience might the stroke endure.

Gage: Madame I see from far a horseman coming,
This way he bends his speed he comes so fast,
That he is covered in a cloud of dust,
And now I have lost his sight, he appears again,
Making his way over Hill, Hedge, Ditch and Plain:
One after him, they two strive
As on the race they had wagerd both their lives,
Another after him.

Eliz: O God, what means this have?
Pray for my soul, my life cannot long last.

Gage: Strange and miraculous, the first being at the gate,
His horse has broke his neck, and cast his rider.

Eliz: This same is but as prologue to my death,
My heart is guiltless though they take my breath.

Enter sir Henry Karow. Karow: God save the Queen, God save Elizabeth.

Eliz: God save the Queen, so all good subjects say:
I am her subject, and for her still pray.

Karew: My horse did you allegiance at the gate,
For there he broke his neck, and there he lies,
For I my self had much a do to rise,
The fall has brus'd me, yet I live to cry,
God bless your Grace, God bless your majesty.

Gage: Long live the Queen, long live your majesty,

Eliz: This news is sweet, my heart was sore afraid:
Rise thou first Barron that we ever made.

Karew: Thanks to your majesty, happy be my tongue,
That first breathed right, to one that had such wrong.

Enter sir John Brocket. Broc: Am I prevented in my have, O chance accursed!
My hopes did sooth me, that I was the first;
Let not my duty be ore swayd by spleen,
Long live my Sovereign, and God save the Queen.

Eliz: Thanks good Sir John, we will deserve your love.

Enter Howard How: Though third in order, yet the first in love,
I tender my allegiance to your Grace,
Live long fair Queen, thrice happy be your raygne,
He that instates you, your high state maintain.

Eliz: Lord Howard thanks you ever were our friend,
I see your love continues to the end,
But chiefly, thanks to you my Lord of Hunsdon.

How: Meaning this Gentleman?

Eliz: The very same;
His tongue was first proclaymer of our name:
And trusly Gage in token of our Grace,
We give to you a captain Pentioners place.

How: Madame the Counsel are here hard at hand.

Eliz: We will descend and meet them.

Karew. Let Us guard our Sovereign praising that power:
That can throw down and raise within an hour. Ex: omnes.

Enter the Clown, and one more with faggots. Clow: Come neighbor, come away,
every man his faggot,
And his double pot, for joy of the old Queens death,
Let bells ring, and children sing.
For we may have cause to remember,
The seventeenth day of November.

Enter Lord of Tame. Tame: How now my masters what is here to do.

Clo: Faith making Bone-fires for joy of the new Queen,
Come sir your penny, and you be a true subject,
You Will battle with us your faggot, we'lbe merry yfayth.

Tame: And you do well: and yet me think 'twere fit,
To spend some funeral tears upon her hearce.
Who while she lived was dear unto you all.

Clow: I, but do not you know the old proverb,
We must live by the quick, and not by the dead.

Tame: Did you not love her father when he lived,
As deerly as you ere did love any,
And yet rejoiced at his funeral:
Likewise her brother (...)em'd him dear,
Yet once departed, joyfully you sung,
Run to make Bone-fiers, to proclaim your love
Unto the new, forgetting still the old:
Now she is gone, how you moan for her,
Were it not fit a while to moan her hearse,
And dutyfully there rejoice the the other;
Had you the wisest and the louingst Prince,
That ever swayd a Scepter in the world,
This is the love he shall have after life:
Let Princes while they live have love or fear it is fit,
For after death, there is none continues it.

Clo: By my faith my masters, he speaks wisely,
Come we will to the end of the lane, and there we will
Make a bonfire and be merry,
Faith agreed i will spend my halfepenny toward
Another faggot, rather then the new Queen shall
Want a Bone-fire. Exeunt manet Tame.

Tame: I blame you not, nor do I you commend,
For you will still the strongest side defend. Exit.

A Sennet. Enter 4. Trumpetors, after them Sargeant Trumpetor with a Mace,
after him Purse-bearer, Sussex with the Crown, Howard the scepter, Constable
with the Cap of mayntena^ce, Shandoyse with the Sword, Tame with the Collar and
a George, four Gentlemen bearing the Canapy over the Queen, two Gentle-women
bearing up her train, six gentlemen Pensioners, the Queen takes state.
Omnes: Long live, long reign our Sovereign.

Eliz: We thank you all.

Suss: The imperial Crown, I here present your Grace,
With it my staff of Office and my place.

Eliz: Whilst we this Crown so long your place enjoy.

How: Th'mperiall Scepter here I offer up.

Eliz: Keep it my Lord, and with it be you hye admiral.

Constable: This Cap of mayntenance, I present my state
of Office, and my utmost service.

Eliz: Your love we know.

Constable: Pardon me gracious Madame 'twas not spleen,
But that alegance that I owed my Queen,
Madame I served her truly at that day,
And I as truly will your Grace obey,

Eliz: We do as freely pardon as you truly serve,
Only your staff of Office we will displace,
In stead of that we will owe you greater Grace,

Enter Beningfeild. Bening: Long live the Queen, long live your Majesty,
I have bid hard to be the first reporter,
Of these glad tidings first; and all these here.

Suss: You are in your love as free as in your care,
You're come even just a day after the fair.

Eliz: What Is he, my Iaylor?

Bening. God preserve your Grace.

Eliz: Be not ashamed man, look me in the face,
Who have you now to patronize your strictnes on?
For your kindness this I will bestow,
When we have one we would have hardly used
And cruelly dealt with, you shall be the man,
This is a day for peace, not for vengeance fit,
All your good deeds we will quit, all wrongs remit.
Where we left off, proceed.

Shand: The Sword of Justice on my bended knee,
I to your Grace present, heaven bless your reign.

Eliz: This Sword is ours, this staff is yours again.

Tame: This Garter with the order of the George,
Two Ornaments unto the Crown of England,
I here present.

Eliz: Possess them still my Lord, what Offices bear you?

Gage: I Captain of your highness Pentioners.

Brock: I of your Guard.
I Sargeant Trumpetor present my Mace.

Eliz: Some we intend to raise, none to displace;
Lord Hunsdon, we will one day find a staff
To poyse your hand: you are our Cosen,
And deserve to be employed nearer our person:
But now to you from whom we take this staff,
Since Cardinal Poole is now decea'st and dead,
To show all malice from our breast is worn,
Before you let that Purse and Mace be borne,
And now to London Lords lead on the way,
Praising that King, that all Kings else obey.

Sennet about the stage in order, the Mayor of London meets them. Mayor: I from
this City London do present,
This Purse and Bible to your Majesty,
A thousand of your faithful Citizens,
In Velvet Coats and Chains well mounted, stay
To greet their royal Sovereign on the way.

Eliz: We thank you all: but first this book I kiss.
Thou art the way to honor; thou to bliss,
An English Bible, thanks my good Lord Mayor,
You of our body and our soul have care,
This is the Jewel that we still love best,
This was our solace when we were distressed,
This book that has so long conceald it self,
So long shut up, so long hid; now Lords see,
We here unclasp, for ever it is free:
Who looks for joy, let him this book adore,
This is true food for rich men and for poor,
Who drinks of this, is certain nere to perish,
This will the soul with heavenly virtue cherish,
Lay hand upon this Anchor every soul,
Your names shall be in an eternal scrowle;
Who builds on this, dwel's in a happy state,
This is the fountain clear imaculate,
That happy issue that shall us succeed,
And in our populous Kingdom this book read:
For them as for our own selves we humbly pray,
They may live long and blessed; so lead the way.

FINIS.

