THE BAPTIZING of the Eunuch: In three Sermons upon Act. 8.36.37.38.

BY SAMVEL HIERON.

MARK 16.16. He that shall believe and be baptized, shall be saved.

printer's or publisher's device M B


LONDON, Printed by MELCH. BRADVVOOD for SAMVEL MACHAM, and are to be sold at
his shop in Paul's churchyard at the sign of the Bull-head. 1613.

TO MY VERY worshipful good friend GEORGE CHVDLEIGH of Strachley in Deuon
Esquire.
SIR, I have much desired to present you with some testimony of my love. Being
therefore moved to the publication of these Sermons touching the initiating of
the Eunuch by Baptism, into the number of professed Christians, I thought fit
to commend them by this more special inscription to your reading: I preached
upon the whole History, touching what passed betwixt Philip, and this noble
Convert: but least I should be thought to oppress the times with so many of my
publishings in one kind, therefore I selected that which God gave me to deliver
out of this passage; and that principally for the furtherance of their
understanding into whose hands this shall come, in the point of saving faith,
and in the manner of applying Christ unto the soul. My hope is (through Gods
mercy) it may do some good that way. Your self are one to whose soul I wish
the best; as an undissembled argument whereof, I beseech you to accept these
sheets. Your respect to me in my Ministry (out of which, what am I?) does I
confess deserve more: but where power is defective, I must pray you that
syncerity of affection, may make the supply: The truth is I am paid before
hand, for this, and for more then I now make offer off; but yet I will crave
this recompense of you, that if either by this or any other my endeavor, you
receive comfort, you would desire God to make me faithful and profitable in my
function to the end: In assured hope that you will do so, my self do here
promise under my hand to remain. Modbury this 27. of January.

Your worships remembrancer to the throne of grace SAM. HIERON.

THE BAPTIZING OF THE EVNVCH.
ACTS 8.36. And as they went on their way they came unto a certain water, and
the Eunuch said, See, here is water, what should let me to be baptized?

37. And Philip said unto him, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart thou may.
Then he answered, I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God.

38. Then he commanded the chariot to stand still, and they went down into the
water, both Philip and the Eunuch, and he baptized him.


THE FIRST SERMON.
IN this report here made of the baptizing of the Eunuch, The division of the
Tent.
there are two things considerable; 1. The Eunuch his motion for baptism: 2.
Philip his condescending to the motion. Touching the former, this is to be
conceived, that Philip among other things delivered in the opening the doctrine
of Christ Jesus, out of Isaiah, spoke also concerning Baptism: by which those
that profess Christ are admitted into the society and fellowship of believers,
and have also their own personal interest into Christ sealed up unto their
souls. Hereupon these two, Philip and the Eunuch traveling together, and in
their journey coming to a river, the Eunuch made this motion, to a like effect
as if he had thus said, The meaning of the word ^ of the 1. part.
Thou speak of Baptism as a necessary badge of Christian profession, see
here is a place convenient, here is matter for the purpose, let me I pray
thee receive this sacrament, for what should hinder. Now the points of doctrine
to be gathered out of this motion, The 1 Doct.
are these. First, That to an obedient and cheerful hearer, the word of God
is never preached without success. The general purpose of this verse is to
show to us how Philips doctrine wrought upon the Eunuchs heart, and we see
here how powerful it was; For this one discourse prevailed through Gods
mercy, to the enlightening of his mind, making him to conceive the hope of his
calling, and the riches of that glorious inheritance which God has in his
Saints Ephesians. 1.18.
; it wrought also upon his affections in such a measure, that nothing was more
desired by him, then to show himself a Christian, and to have some pledge of
the favor of God in Christ gaged to his soul. An admirable issue of one
sermon, and a notable instance of the blessing of God, upon such an hearer, as
the Eunuch was one who came to hear with desire, and submitted himself to the
authority of the word with an obedient heart. The word never is unprofitable
where it meets with such an auditor. It is said of those three thousand which
were added to the Church by one Sermon of S. Peter's (when the spirit of God
begins to relate their obedience,) that they were such as gladly heard the
word Act. 2.41.
. This was an excellent preparatiue to obedience, when their hearts long for
the word, when it was a joy to them to be taught: David says his heart stood
in awe of the Lord Psalm. 119.161.
; so did theirs, for it is said before they were pricked at their hearts. So I
note, that as it is said in one place of Antioch, that by reason of the number
of believers, the Disciples there were first called Christians Act. 11.26.
, so in another place, the forwardness to hear is reported in the inhabitants
there, as, that they besought Paul to preach the same words to them, and
accordingly at the time, came almost all the whole city together to hear Act.
13.42.44.
: so again in the same Chapter, it is said, that when the Gentiles heard, they
were glad Ver. 48.
: and then strait it follows, Thus the word of the Lord was published
throughout the whole country Ver. 49.
. See what wings were given to the Gospel, by the desire and gladness of
those to whom it was delivered. The word of God by this means grew mightily
and prevailed. The Apostle to the Hebrews, insistes upon the want of this
readiness and yeeldingnesse of the inward man, as the cause of the
unprofitable hearing of the ancient Jews; The Gospel was preached also unto
them, but it profited not, because it was not received with faith in those that
heard it Heb. 4 2.
. I may apply to this purpose as very fitting to it that of Solomon, He that
reproves the wise and the obedient ear, is as a golden earing and an ornament
of fine gold Pro. 25.12.
. His meaning is, that if a man have to do with men of obedient and yielding
hearts, it will be a credit to his pains and labor in persuading; the
success with which his endeavors shall be crowned, will make his speech as
beautiful as an ornament of gold. Now besides these proofs, it is easy to
make it manifest, that success cannot be wanting, where there is such a
disposition to hear, as the Eunuch had: For God has promised to fulfill the
desires of those that fear him Psa. 145.19.
, and that the hearkening ear, which does (as it were) thirst for knowledge,
shall lodge among the wise Pro. 15 31.
. He will guide the meek in judgment Psa. 25.9.
, He will reveal his secret unto such Ver. 14.
, Even that which is called, the hid wisdom of God 1. Cor. 2.7.
, and the mind of Christ Ver. 16. The use
. The use is, to show unto us the true cause, why there is no such profiting by
the word preached, as there should be, and as there was of old in the first
and purer times. Then one Sermon won many, now many Sermons scarce prevail
with one. Surely the cause is, men want that ready, that cheerful, that
forward, that inclinable, that humble disposition, which the good people in
those times had; then they sued to be taught, as the Eunuch here, and those (
Act. 2.) and the Antiochians, and the Iaylor, now it is well, if we will hear
when we be entreated; then they had learned to submit themselves to the power
and authority of the word, now every man is wise and able enough to instruct
himself; then their hearts trembled at the majesty of God speaking in his
ordinance; now they have a kind of base estimation of the means, neither is
it generally apprehended to be the arm and power of God unto salvation. Here
is the very cause, that so much is spoken to the men of this generation without
success, and that so many Sermons, be (as the woman of Tekoah speak in
another case,) as water spilt upon the ground, which cannot be taken up again
2. Sam. 14.14.
, and that so many of the Lords Messengers may lament with the Prophet, and
say, I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, and for
nothing Is. 49.4.
. It is a hard matter to meet with such an one as this Eunuch in a Parish,
that will entreat to be furthered: one that will yield himself as a Disciple
to him who watches for his soul. We have to do with gainsaying people Romans
10.21.
, with men of uncircumcised hearts and ears Act. 7.51.
, such whose necks are iron sinews Is. 48.4.
, not easily bent, they lean to much to their own wisdom Pro. 3.5.
, to be wise in God: If then our desire be to be profitable hearers, let us
labor to be desirous and humble hearers, such as account it no disparagement
to sit in the school of Christ upon the learners form. In the times of
Popery men were taught to be too servile, the Priests took on them to have
dominion over the peoples faith 2. Cor. 1.24.
, there might be no asking why so? if they delivered it. Now, on the other
side, our people are as much on the other hand, too much out of rule, and it is
not known what it is to depend upon the ordinance of God, and to submit to the
means, with that meek and quiet spirit, which is a thing in the sight of God
much set by 1 Pet. 3 4. The 2. Doct.
.

A second Doctrine out of this Motion made by the Eunuch is, That where the
heart is truly touched, and the soul indeed turned unto God, there is a desire
to be partaker of the Sacraments. This Eunuch being now through Philips
preaching seasoned with the saving knowledge of Christ Jesus, does even long to
be partaker of the Sacrament, which might be a pledge of his new birth, and an
earnest of his ingraffing into the mystical body of his Savior Oh Philip, as
thou have taught me, so I pray thee also to baptize me, let me not want the
comfort of the Sacrament, now that I have received benefit by thy doctrine.
This very thing may be gathered out of this, that the Apostles style urged the
use of the Sacrament presently upon the peoples yielding to receive the
Doctrine, as though that should be a trial of them, whether they heard in
sincerity or no. If they had refused the Sacrament, their Hypocrisy had been
eftsoons discovered, if they embraced it in such manner as became them, it was
an evidence that their hearts were seasoned as was meet. Thus John Baptist
bound his hears to the Sacrament Math. 3.
, and Peter, Amend your lives and be baptized Act. 2.38.
, and after that order did the rest proceed. I remember how the neglect of the
Sacrament is made to be a mark of a dispiser. The Pharisees are said to have
despised the counsel of God in John's ministry: and how does that appear. They
were not baptized of him Luke 7.30.
. In the old law, he who professed himself to be one of Gods people, and made
a show of religion, and yet neglected the Sacrament, was called, a breaker of
the Covenant, and was threanep to be cut of Genesis 17.14
. There be just causes of desiring the Sacrament, in him that is enlightened:
1. He knows the use of the Sacraments to be Gods ordinance, and therefore in
obedience to his will he will make conscience thereof, 2. He conceiueth them
to be seals of the righteounes which is by faith Romans 4.11.
, assurances of society with Christ, for which cause they must needs be sweet
unto his soul. 3. He apprehends them to be badges of his profession, and of
his service unto Christ, and therefore he cannot but desire them. 4. He
belieueth them to be bands of the communion of Saints, and in that respect he
must needs affect them.

This is a very behoofull point to be spoken of in these days. because among
men professing godliness, there is not that respect to the Sacraments, that
there should be. The Sacrament of Baptism, the truth is we have received it
in our childhood, but what man of many, labors, to make the right use of his
Baptism, or seeks to know, what it means, and why it was. It seems men
are led with an ignorant conceit, that the good of Baptism is limited to the
time of receiving it, and was only then as a door of entrance into the outward
society of Gods people, whereas indeed there is good use to be made of that
Sacrament, at a man's last breathing, and not at the first instant of partaking
it only. So that I say still, men giving good hopes of some religion to be in
them, are exceeding careless in this point of joining the use of the
sacraments to their customary hearing, and so by that means they deprive
themselves of an unknown and unthought of help, both to provoke to obedience,
and to strengthen faith, and to increase the comfort of the inward man. And as
for the Sacrament of the Lords supper, generally it is made no more reckning
of, then some three-halfepeny ordinary, save only at some season of the year
or at some (supposed) good times, as though seasons and moons and the
influences of the sky, gave virtue to Gods ordinances. Certainly this is an
argument of scanmes of grace amongst men. There cannot but be a stomach to the
Sacrament, where there is felt sweetness in the word. And it is well known
that in those prime days, when zeal was fervent, the belieuers met not
together to hear, but withal they did communicate; and this use continued
many years. It was Popery that first brought in the seldomnes of this service,
and at last drew it to once a year, making the people believe, that in respect
of the difficulty to be well prepared, it was better for them to communicate
in heart with the Priest, then to do it in act. These dregs yet remain among
men and it is an unjustifiable error that they commit, to pass over the
Sacrament of the supper, to some old people or women with child, who must take
it (as was said in the days of superstition) for their viands, Pro viatico
being nearer (in opinion and possibility) to their last passage, and
themselves either to turn their backs, or to sit by, proclayming to the world
their want of appetite to such an heavenly banquet. I say the same reason is in
both the Sacraments, in regard of desiring comfort. And therefore the doctrine
is good hence, that where grace is, there is a desire of the Sacraments, and a
willingness to use them according to the order of him that ordained them, and
where there is little respect to the seals, surely there the covenant it self
is not much esteemed.

A third doctrine out of this motion is, The 3 doct.
That in whom there is any truth of Christianity, in him there is also a desire
to discover and to make it known to the world that he is a Christian. I gather
this out of the Eunuch his request to be baptized, which Sacrament his desire
was to be partaker of, not only for the establishing of his heart, and the
confirming of his faith, but withal that he might have upon him the badge and
cognizance of his new profession, and might show himself not to be ashamed of
the name and title of a Christian. And indeed it was an evidence of great
resolution in this convert, that whereas it would not but breed him some
question and trouble at his return into his own country, to be fallen from
the religion wherein he was borne and brought up, and to be become one of that
new Sect which was every where spoken against Act. 28 22.
. yet he, fearing no hazard of his honor, no loss of his office and dignity,
no incurring the hatred and censure of his countrymen, would needs be
baptized, and as it were enrouled and booked among Christians. This is the
nature of true conversion, albeit it may stir but weakly at the first and
seem almost not to dare to show it self (as we see in the case of Nicodemus
and some other in our Saviors time, whom the opposition of the world made
somewhat slow in the discovery of themselves) yet when it is come to a fuller
grouth, so that a man is more then in the way to conversion, and is indeed
renewed in the inner man, then there will be a desire to make it known, that he
marches under the colors of the Lord Jesus, and has renounced all other
ways of salvation to rest only upon him. So even the same Nicodemus, albeit
in the beginning, when he was but a beginner he came to Jesus by night Ioh 3.2.
. And after spoke on his side at a Convocation of the Pharisees, but covertly
and a farre-oft, so that it could scarcely be smelt, which way he did incline
Ioh. 7.50.
. Yet in time he grew to more opennesse, as in joining with Joseph in the
honorable interring of our Savior Ioh. 19 39.
. And so much it seems to have been the purpose of the Holy Ghost to
insinuate, in the manner of reporting it. Then came Nicodemus also; which first
came to Jesus by night etc. As if he had said, howsoever he was something
timorous at the first, yet now the fire was kindled, and the light thereof
brake forth more apparently. The same may besayd of Joseph of Arimathea
himself, there is no speech of him at all during our Saviors life, and the
text says too, he was a secert disciple ver 38.
. but then (says S. Mark) he went in boldly unto Pilate etc Mark. 15.43.
. So yet although there be much weakness and faintness at the first tasting
of religion, whiles a man is but yet (as it were) in the throws of his new
birth, yet when the work is accomplished; and one is become a Christian indeed,
there is a willingness to make it to appear, and a kind of neglect of all
other things, in respect of this one, that a man may be known to have given
his name unto Christ. Not that the children of God do seek applause, but that
it may be seen they are not ashamed, and do therefore show themselves in
their kind, yea though some outward inconvenience do befall them. It is said of
Paul, that as soon as he had received direction from Ananias, he straight way
preached Christ in the sinagogues etc Act. 9 20.
. As who would say he did even long, until he had given some evidence to the
World what he was, and what change God had wrought in his heart. Thus in the
first times of the Apostles preachings notwithstanding the sharp persecutions
raised up aginst the Truth, yet the believers trouped togethet, and drew
themselves into societies, and joined themselves to the assemblies, and had
fellowshippe with those which were in Christ before them, in those things by
which it could not but be descryed what they were. The text speaking of the
conversion of these three thousand, says, they were added to the Church Act.
2.41.
, which argues that they not only in heart embraced the Truth, but withal
disposed of themselves so, that it was manifest to all, to what number they
belonged. And the number of them that believed (says Luke) grew more and more
Act. 5.14.
. which shows a visible adhering to the fellowship of professors. The like is
intended in that speaking, Barnabas was a good man etc. and much people joined
themselves unto the Lord Act. 11.24.
; so it is said of the conuerts at Ephesus, they came and confessed and showed
their works Act. 19.18.
. when Christ commended mutual love unto his disciples, By this (said he)
shall all men know you are disciples Ioh. 13.35.
, as if he had said, If you be such as you should be, you wild fire to
manifost your selves to be my disciples, you will be willing to have it known
what you are: Now then behold a mark whereby the world shall discern you.
What should I say more in this. It is certain, he that rightly apprehends the
good to be gotten by Christ, and is sensible of some interest in it, for his
own particular, will desire nothing more then that he may show himself to be
his, and to be reputed one of his followers and dependants, yea though it be
with some prejudice in the world, yet he will acount it to be the greatest
honor, can befall him. To return home with the badge of a Christian, out of
all doubt the Eunuch valued it more then his office of Treasurer in the
Kingdom, and he chose rather to hazard both that and all other dignities, then
to go into his country as a secret Christian.

The use.
This deserves to be commended to the care of all that fear God, that how
soever the vain applause of men, be not to be hunted after, and it be
hipocriticall and pharisaicall to practice the duties of godliness to be seen
Math. 6.1.
. yet it is necessary that we should make it to appear what we are and yet we
be not ashamed of that sincerity and godly care, which becomes those that
would be saved. Will some man say unto me; this a needless exhortation unto
us. For (behold) we have done as much for the showing of our selves to be
Christians, as this Eunuch did. He was baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus,
so have we been every one, and therefore you may spare the labor of
persuading that which we have already done. I answer; To receive the
Sacrament of Baptism was to this man sufficient for the declaring of himself
a Christian in his own country, where the name of Christ was either not heard
of or not liked of, and where the Sacrament of Baptism was a thing strange and
utterly unknown, but the case is not so with us. For with us neither the
bearing the name of a Christian nor an admittance by the Sacrament of Baptism,
into the society of Gods people, is enough to prove a man to be a Christian
indeed; because these things are common to many hypocrites with the best
professors. So that albeit Baptism might be a witness of this man's
Christianity, among a people either hating it, or not esteeming it: yet it
cannot be so with us, but some further thing is necessary to the end our
sincerity of religion and Christianity may appear. There be some things as
hateful, among the men of this generation, as the name of a Christian, was or
could be among the Ethiopians, as namely for a man, to make conscience of his
ways, to bind himself to a kind of circumspect walking, to show himself
fearful to offend, and loath to do any thing displeasing to the majesty of
God, to follow after holiness with a kind of striving, to be strait in those
things, wherein men generally take a kind of liberty to themselves, and to
seem not to dare to do diverse things, which the world makes no question of:
these and the like (I say) are as strange, as harsh, as displeasing, as much
subject to censure and hate, in these our days, as ever was the name of
Christianity among the heathen which knew not God. And therefore if we that
profess godliness can frame our selves hereunto, not regarding what we may
lose in credit, in estimation, in rising to preferment in the world thereby,
not reckoning of the reproaches, and evil speeches, and scorn, that may be
cast upon us; this will testify, that we be Christians indeed. When we be not
backward in those things, which are like to bring us upon the stage, and to
make us a matter of note and spectacle unto others. It was a notable evidence
of the Eunuch his faith and piety, that albeit he knew well, that after his
return, the kingdom would be filled with the news, of his conversion, and he
was like to come to an account to his Queen, and the rest of the state, for
his religion: yet baptized he would needs be, it should be his glory to be
known to be a dependant upon Christ crucified. It utterly condemns that
spirit of cowardice which possesses many, who are loath to do ought
appertaining to religion, that might single them out from the multitude, or
make them to be noted amongst men. Think not, I would give countenance, to
that vain singularity which leads some, who take a kind of pride if they can
once bring themselves to be talked of, and so run themselves out of breath,
in a kind of violent and head-stronge zeal, having too much of that
pharisaical disease of despising others Luke 18.9.
. and being as Solomon says, pure in their own conceit, though they be not
washed from their filthiness Pro. 30.12.
, I say my purpose is not to give allowance to any of any such spirit, but I
labor against that faint heartedness of men, reasonably well affected (it may
be) and yet loath to be too forward for fear of espying and forbearing to do
those things which are meet to be done, lest they should incur some
disgrace, or hazard somewhat which they are loath to lose. For a man to cast
himself into peril is rashness and folly, and more then there is any warrant
for: so, for a man to desire to be noted, and to affect a name of somewhat
more then ordinary that is vanity: but, for a man to consider, what his
profession binds him to, and to give evidence to the world, that he respects
the doing thereof, more, then any worldly circumstance, and would feign show
himself not to be ashamed of his Savior and of his words before men, that is
true Christianity, and the thing which I labor out of the Eunuch his practice
here in this place. The Law of governing the ancient Roman army was drawn to
two heads, Non sequi
not to make any rash pursuit against the enemy whereby to run into needless
danger. non fugere.
not to fly before the enemy, whereby to betray the common cause into his
hands. So it must be in this: Neither is trouble to be sought, neither yet to
be declined when it comes. The Eunuch was willing the world might know he had
renounced Idolatry and had given his name to Christ, as the Prince of his
salvation. He thought it not fit, though it might be for the safety of his
outward honor, to smother his profession, and to frame to the times, keeping
his belief in secret to himself. So far, of the Eunuch his motion. A true
convert has ever a love and a desire to the Sacrament, and a care to give
evidence to the World, that he has learned better things then he sometimes
knew.

The 2 part of the whole text.
Now follows Philips condescending to the Eunuchs motion: where we have three
things to treat of. 1 A condition propounded by Philip to the Eunuch upon
which it might be lawful for him to receive Baptism. The particulars of it.
If thou beleeuest with all thy heart etc. 2 The Eunuchs entertaining the
condition: I believe etc. 3 The Baptism it self with the circumstances. Then
he commanded the charet etc. In the first of these two particulars deserve
note. 1. Philips care to inform the Eunuch to the Sacrament: 2. The thing
propounded as a necessary condition to the partaking of the Sacrament. Out of
Philips care, this doctrine springs.

That he that administreth the Sacrament ought to be careful to instruct the
people in things necessary to the comfortable partaking of the Sacrament. The
4. Doct.
Philips course here is exemplare: By his carriage heerin. Every one that is
entrusted with the dispensing of the Sacrament may see what he is bound unto,
namely, to acquaint the people carefully upon what conditions only, they may
receive the Sacraments to their comfort. Philip (no doubt) had taught the
Eunuch, that Baptism is a necessary badge to be put on, by every one, that
would be taken for a Christian, and now, that the Eunuch shows a willingness
to receive that badge, he seeks to bind him, to a due enquiry into himself,
whether he have that in him, without which he can receive no benefit by the
Sacrament. And that thus much ought to be done by every one that medleth with
the giving of the Sacrament, it is easy to prove. 1. The doctrine
appertaining to the right use of the Sacrament is a part of the counsel of
God, and therefore not to be secreted by him, that desires to be pure from the
peoples blood Act. 20.46.
. 2. The Minister is appointed by office to watch for the peoples souls Heb.
13.17.
, and such a watch man he is, that if he see a sword coming, he must give
notice of it, that if the people do die for their iniquity, yet he may deliver
his own soul Ezech. 33.9
. Since then it is a matter of such hazard, and has such a penalty annexed to
it, to press into the use of holy things not being so fitted and so furnished
as is necessary, it is the Ministers part to give warning of the danger, that
so if any man notwithstanding will give the adventure, it may appear that he
is a wilful trespasser, and his own heart may be able to testify, that he
was advised otherwise. 3. It is one part of the Pastors duty, to take away (as
much as in him lies) the precious from the vile Ier. 15.19.
, and to put a difference betwixt the one and the other, the prepared and the
unworthy, that (as far as it possibly may be) Holy things may not be given unto
dogs Math. 7.6
. 4. It is a matter of charity, to which every man is bound, not to suffer his
brother to sin Leu. 19.7.
, but by all the means he can to stop him from it. It is a Ministers duty
much more, as much as he may, to tax the people from committing so great an
evil, as is the entermedling with the seals of Gods Covenant, the due
conditions not observed. 5. There is a particular iniunction, by which those
that serve the Lord in the administration of holy things, are commanded
together with the sanctifying of them selves to prepare their brethren 2 Chro.
35.6
. Now how shall they, prepare their brethren but by teaching them with all
diligence, what things are necessary to the right using of Gods ordinances, and
by charging them as from the Lord, not to dare to provoke him to anger 1. Cor.
10.22
, by their irreuerence, and by careless and profane dealing with those things
which are of so high and holy nature as the Sacraments.

The 1. use
This must first needs make against those who want either ableness or
conscience or both, in this particular, that is, which either know not how to
direct the people depending on them, to the right use of the Sacrament, or else,
knowing somewhat appertaining to it, want compassion over the peoples souls,
and so suffer them to defile Gods ordinances, by coming to them, after a kind
of presumtuous manner, and even to kick against the offering of the Lord 1. Sam. 2
. The matter which God laid to Elies charge about his sons was, His sons ran
into a slander, and he stated them not 1. Sam. 3.13
. The same is our sin, if we labor not with the utmost of our might to stop
the rashness and rudeness of the people, in thrusting themselves into the use
of those visible pledges of his grace, without due provision. God give us all,
that we may consider it, because as the irreuerent and profane dealing with the
Sacraments, is none of the least sins of this generation, so much of the
guilt thereof, it is to be feared will fall upon us, who do not deal herein
so faithfully as we should, in urging (as it is fit) the conditions necessary,
and in inquiring into our people how they be furnished.

This is secondly to be urged against these of the people, The 2. use
who are apt (as the most are) to set at naught the care of their Minister,
seeking to further them in this business. It is a common saying, what need he
trouble himself about us, let him look to himself, he shall not answer for
us, I hope we are of age to consider what we have to do, neither are we so
simple, as not to know, what belongs to these matters etc. Thus it is ordinary
with men to set light by that care which is taken in duty to God and to their
souls, to stay them from running in (as it were) upon the pikes of Gods
displeasure: Men ought to account it a blessing to be so watched for, and be it
that they were never so cunning in respect of knowledge in the nature of those
holy services, yet who is there, that does not need an admonisher. But the
truth is, whatsoever our knowledge is, which yet (among the greatest number is
but raw) yet certainly our care in those businesses is but slender, and happy
is he (if he know his own happiness) that has a faithful admonisher, to make
him hear a word behind him Isa. 30.21.
, when he is reaching out his hand to the use of holy things.

The next is, the thing propounded as a condition etc. The 5. Doct.
wherein we have two things, to handle. 1. The requisitenesse of faith to the
partaking of the Sacrament. 2. The quality of that faith which is requisite.
Touching the former this is the doctrine, That there is a necessity of Faith to
the end a man may be such a partaker of the Sacrament as is meet. The words
are plain, If thou belieuest etc. as if he had said, Thou desire Baptism,
but do thou believe, if thou do thou may with comfort, if not, it will
but increase unto greater judgment. In the opening of this doctrine, I will
thus proceed. 1. I will show the general truth of it. 2. I will teach with
what limitation and restraint it must be understood. The general truth I will
declare touching both Sacraments. For of both in regard of general
circumstances there is the same reason: Neither can there be any cause aleaged
why there should be a necessity of faith, in the right use of Baptism, and not
also in the right use of the Lords supper. Here for proof, I might produce
those general speeches, Whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23.
, and, without faith it is impossible to please God Heb. 11.6.
: But the maine reason is this, the Sacraments are in their nature seals of
righteousness Romans 4.11.
, and therefore it is absurd for a man to offer himself to receive a
confirmation of that thing which he has not, to have a seal, set as it were to
a blanke, to come to have faith strengthened, when (perhaps) there is scarce a
right understanding either of what is to be believed, or of what it is to
believe. And then, the ancient order of the Church heerin is not to be
neglected. For, as touching the Sacrament of Baptism, the course taken with
these whom the Apostles and their associates drew out of Iudaisme and
Gentilisme into Christianity is apparent. They urged them to give evidence and
testimony of their faith, and of their purpose to walk with God in newness of
life. So John Baptist began Math. 3.
, so the rest followed: and the order of asking questions of the Baptized,
Do thou believe, do thou renounce: is very probable to have been in use
even in the Apostles time, whereunto that saying of S, Peter gives a very good
color, where speaking of Baptism, he mentions, the Answer of a good
conscience 1. Pet. 3, 21. (...).
, the stipulation or engagement of the conscience; the baptized giving his
word, that thus and thus he beliueth, and this and this he undertakes. And in
the primitive Church there was in the congregation a certain form or rank,
called Catechumeni, which were first trained up in the knowledge of the grounds
of Faith, before they were baptized, (they being conuerts out of gentilisme)
which grounds what the chief of them were, the Apostle relates ( Heb. 6.)
which points are there termed, The doctrine of Baptismes, because they were the
particulars in which they which desired to be numbered amongst Christians were
instructed before they were baptized. To this also agrees that which is
generally held, that the Creed was digested into such a form, as seems to
be an Answer to a question. The baptized was demanded, what do thou
believe? his Answer was, I believe in God the father etc. Thus for the
Sacrament of Baptism. Now for the other Sacrament, the rule of the Apostle is
perpetual, and always binds, that who so comes to it, must examine himself
1. Cor. 11.28.
, and seeing all search and examination aims at the finding out of some
thing, what should a Christian intending to partake that holy Mystery examine
himself about rather, then about this, whither, he be in the faith or no 2.
Cor. 11.5.
. How is it possible he should be a meet and a worthy receiver if he want
this Grace. And thus I have cleared the general ground of this Doctrine. Now I
come to the limitation thereof. Touching which this I say, that in the
Sacrament of the Lords supper it holds still that none ought to be admitted to
it, but such as are able to give evidence for themselves, that they are
belieuers, but in the Sacrament of Baptism the case is not like. For we must
not hold that the sacrament of Baptism can lawfully be given to none, but to
such as are able (being urged) to give testimony of their Faith: because even
the Infants of believing parents have a right to that Sacrament, albeit as yet,
because of their present state, they cannot (in strait speaking) be said to
believe, nor yet are able to answer a demand concerning Faith, so that the
point touching faith necessary to the Sacrament of Baptism is to be understood
only of those, which are admitted to it being of years. As for example, if a
Turk, or Jew or Pagan, should come amongst us and should desire Baptism, it
were necessary he should first be instructed, in the doctrine of faith, yea and
examined and dealt with, and caused to give public Testimony of his
believing, but we must not stretch this rule so, as that we should exclude from
this Sacrament the children of Beleuers. Indeed the Anabaptists, who dispute
with the utmost of their skill against the Baptism of Infants, do much urge
the practice of the Apostles, and this our text among others, namely that they
are not read to have baptized any but such who by age were able to be
countable for their faith, and from thence they would draw a general
conclusion, that where there is no capablenesse of faith, there ought to be no
Baptism. Hereunto diverse things might be replied but these briefly. That it
is not simply an improper speech to call the infant of believing parents, a
believer, because although he do not now actually believe, yet partly, because
for his parents sake, he is within the compass of the covenant, partly because
of that which may well be hoped for hereafter, as it were hard to term him an
infidel, so it were not harsh to call him a believer: And why not a believer,
as well as a reasonable creature, though yet there is in him no use of reason,
no nor any certainty of ability hereafter to enjoy it: And besides by the
ancient and most received doctrine of the Church, the infants of believers, are
reputed to have a kind of interest into their parents faith, who by faith
appprehend the promise of eternal life as appertaining to their children, as
far forth as to themselves. And what more inconvenience to term such,
believers, in respect of their parents, then to term them holy through them as
Paul does 1 Cor. 7.14.
. 2 The argument is naught from the Apostles practice; for that course which
they took with one certain age of persons, cannot be stretched out to all
without exception. As, when the Apostle delivers a law, that he which does
not labor should not eat r. were it not a notorious absurdity yea and a
wickedness, to keep meat from infants under a pretense that they do not
work. And why? because every man conceiueth that the law belongs only to
those which are of age and ability to labor, and yet neglect it. The same may
be said, of he Apostles proceeding in baptizing; that it extendes only to
those that be of years: to subject infants to the same condition with them
were unreasonable. In Abraham's person, the knowledge of the Nature of the
Sacrament, and an yielding himself to live under the Lords obedience, went
before the receiving of circumcision: yet in Isaac it was not so, he was
circumcised first, and instructed after. It was necessary in Abraham that a
profession of Faith should go before circumcision, it was not necessary in
Isaac, the difference in their ages altered the case of the necessity. 3 As
concerning the Apostles practice it self, there is no certainty for it, that
they baptized none but such as were able to make acknowledgement of their
Faith. There is more probability on the contrary, that they baptized even some
infants, as (namely) when they baptized whole families, as Lydia and her
household Act. 16.18.
, the Iaylor with all that belonged to him Ds. 33.
. Crispus with all his household Act. 18 8
, the household of Stephanas 1 Cor. 1.16.
. Albeit a man cannot make a certain demonstration, that in these general
Baptismes administered to whole families there were some infants baptized with
the rest, yet it were very strange if there should be none, in none of these
households, and to say that there is in such speeches and figurative speaking,
all the family being put for the greatest part of the family, and so under that
color to exclude infants, is but an indifferent evasion, it being a rule, that
we are not to account any thing as figuratively, where there is no necessity,
for the avoiding of some manifest inconvenience like to follow, if the words of
the sentence should be taken properly. Be it that none of all these things will
serve to justify the Baptism of infants (yet unable to make confession of
their faith) yet their interest into the promise of God is a sufficient plea:
that promise is made to them that believe, and to their children Act. 2 39.
. If then the promise belong to infants, why not also the seal of the promise.
It may be, some may make doubt of this reason, because it may seem by the like
argument, that unto infants also ought to be given the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper: They have a right to the promise, and why not also to the seal of the
promise: so may some dispute. Answer, Indeed this moved some among the
ancients to give this other Sacrament even to infants, as Cyprian Sermon. 5. de
lapsis.
. and Augustine De ecc. dog. c. 52.
. the latter of which two, was the rather strengthened therein by mistaking
Christ's words, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you Ioh. 6.53.
, supposing those words to be meant of the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, he
accounted the use thereof of necessity to salvation. But the Truth is, that the
reason fetched from the interest into Gods promise, which does prove infants
to have a right into Baptism, is not of like force, to prove them to have a
right into this Sacrament. For besides the difference betwixt the two
Sacraments in respect that the one is the Sacrament of entrance into the
Church, and therefore agreeing to infants; the other the Sacrament of
proceeding, and therefore fit only for those which are of grouth in Christ;
besides this, I say, there be certain express restraints to be collected out
of the rules set down for the manner of receiving the Lords Supper, as namely
that in using it, there must be an examining of ones self 1 Cor. 21.
. there must be a discerning the Lords body ver. 29.
. there must be a Remembrance Us. 25.
of Christ, which be things whieh infants cannot reach to. Thus have I
endeavored to clear this point, touching the limitation of this doctrine, of
the necessity of faith to the right partaking of the Sacraments, proouing it to
be understood only (in the point of Baptism) of these that are of years, and
that this course taken by the Apostles in baptiszing those of years,, is no
prejudice at all to the baptism of infants, but that still it remains firm
and sure, that children borne in the Church ought to be admitted to the
Sacrament which may be a pleadge of their admission into the Church, and
whereby also much comfort may return unto their parents, God being pleased
hereby to give evidence, of the truth of his promise that he is not ashamed
Heb. 11.76.
. to be called both our God, and the God of our seed also.

The maine and special use of this doctrine is to be a direction to us, The
use.
how we may learn to make the right use of that Sacrament of Baptism, which
in our infancy we received. The best use of Baptism is to use it as a
storehouse of comfort, as indeed it is, being applied a right. Now as no man,
not baptized till he is of years can be comfortably and effectually baptized
unless he believe: so no man baptized in his infancy, can, when he comes to
years, comfortably make use of his Baptism unless he believe. There is an
old popish opinion which is firmly held by ignorant men and women, and it is
this, that Baptism does confer grace of and by it self, howsoever the party
be disposed that receive it. And so people generally hold a conceit, that
there is a kind of virtue and Christendom (as they call it) infused into
them, by the having of this Sacrament howsoever they be affected. But this is a
mere fiction and fancy without truth. It is a kind of lifting up the
Sacrament above the natural condition thereof, and ministers of the Sacrament,
are thereby made workers of miracles, as if their Art did regenerate of it
self. Peter says, that the washing of the flesh does not save 1 Pet. 3.2.
. Simon Magus was baptized and yet after that remained in the gall of
bitterness and bond of Iniquity Act. 13.23.
. and many of the old Israelites were baptized under Moses, with whom God was
not pleased 1 Cor. 10.2.5.
. Paul says, Christ sanctified his Church, by the washing of water, through
the word Ephesians. 5.26.
. So that it is the believing and receiving of the word that makes the
Sacrament to be effectual. Let no man therefore glory in his Baptism, unless
he have Faith. If thou who have been baptized, shall say unto me in some such
manner as the Eunuch spoke to Philip, See I have been baptized, what should let
me to assure my self that I am a Christian. I cannot but answer thee as Philip
did, If thou beleeuest etc. thou may. Let us look to this one thing
therefore, even to our Faith. Faith is the tenure by which we hold heaven,
Baptism is but the seal to confirm it. Faith, if we have it, will appear by
this, It works by love Gal. 5.6.
. and what love, a love to three things: To the author of Faith, and that will
appear by obedience Ioh. 14.15.
. 2 To the word of Faith Romans 10.8.
. For he which is of God hears Gods word Ioh. 8.47.
, and faith cannot but love that whereby it is begotten and built up further. 3
To the household of Faith Gal. 6.10.
, He that loves him which begat, loves him also which is begotten of him 1.
Ioh. 51.
, such an one, will love even the name of a disciple Math. 10.42.
. Try then your Baptism by your Faith, and your Faith by the fruits, otherwise
the water of your Baptism shall not be able to quench the fire of that burning
lake which is the second death. The same must be said of the other Sacrament;
thou say to me again. Lo here are Bread and wine, what should let me to
communicate, I answer still as I am taught here, If thou beleeuest with all
thy heart thou may: If thou come without Faith, thou art no welcome guest to
this banquet; without it thou may eat the Lords bread, Panem domini non
panem dominum: vt August. de Inda.
but not that bread which is the Lord, and thy receiving shall be but a pledge
of judgment and vengeance to thy soul. This point will be quickened by that
which follows touching the quality of Faith.

THE SECOND SERMON.
NExt to the requisitenes of Faith to the well pertaking of the Sacrament,
follows the quality of that Faith which is required: If thou belieuest with
all thy heart etc. The sense of the words here handled.
as if it had been said, Thou desire to be baptized, if thou do believe
and that not formally alone and in show, but in sincerity and in truth of thy
heart thou may, this Sacrament shall return to thy comfort, and be a
pledge of grace unto thy soul. This thus opened does afford two doctrines.

This is the first, The 1. Doct.
That there is a kind of Faith out of which there comes no good unto the
soul of him that has it. This is insinuated in Philips speech, For so much
manifestly is intended, that it was possible for the Eunuch to believe after a
sort, and yet to remain incapable of the comfort, and sweetnsse of the
Sacrament; Suppose thou belieuest, yet if it be not with all thy heart, by such
a Faith thou art not one hairs breadth nearer to salvation, so that the very
nature of the speech presupposes an unprofitable Faith, a Faith which is of no
use, unless it be to the increasing of his damnation that professes it. This
is also easily proved by the Scripture. Our Savior in the parable of the Seed
speaks of a Faith, and the same gotten by hearing which is also accompanied
with a kind of flashing, sudden joy, but yet is but like seed among stones,
withering away for lack of moisture Luke 8.6.13.
. This is that Faith which is called a temporal Faith, or a Faith whose
continuance is only for some little time. Some such Faith may seem to have
been in those, of whom it is said, Many believed etc. when they saw his
miracles, But Jesus did not commit himself unto them. Ioh. 2.23.24.
. There was a certain yielding wrought in their hearts by the power of Christ's
miracles, that surely he was that Messiah, yet Christ did not hold them worth
the trusting to. In this present Chapter it is said, Simon Magus believed Act.
8.13.
. We cannot think his Faith was that which for distinctions sake we term a
Saving Faith: He had as a learned man says of him, August quest. in Leuitic.
the visible Baptism but he wanted the invisible sanctifying. Saint Paul,
mentions a Faith which a man may have and yet be nothing 1. Cor. 13.2.
. James gives a kind of Faith even to Devils Iam. 2.19.
, and speaks of a Faith, which he calls a dead Faith Ver. 26.
. These few testimonies are very pregnant. Satan knows how to transform
himself into an Angel of light 2. Cor. 11.14
, so that there is no good thing but he can counterfeit it and does, and by
that means makes many hypocrites to make a wonderful show. Seeming to be as
sincere and forward in religion as the best. There is no grace which
accompanies salvation, wherewith God is pleased to enrich and furnish his
elect, but he can frame some one or other of his limbs to a shadow of it, yea
and teach them to come so near it as that for the present it shall be a very
hard matter to discern it. There may be somewhat like prayer, which yet is not
prayer, but lip-deuotion; Something like repentance, which yet is not
repentance, but worldly sorrow causing death 2. Cor. 7.10
, something like obedience, which yet is not obedience but gross hypocrisy,
and so in other particulars. Felix trembled Act 24.26.
, Ahab was humbled 1. Kin. 21.27.
, Saul confessed his fault 1. Sam. 26.11
, Esau wept Heb. 12 17.
, Judas had a kind of repenting Math 27.3.
, Herod heard gladly Mar. 6 20.
, Balaam desired to die the death of the righteous Number. 23.10.
. The Apostle seems to acknowledge a taste of the good gift of God etc. in
some revolters, that yet fall away beyond all possibility of repentance Heb.
6.4.5
. Thus still it appears how near a man may come to true religion, and yet
still be in the snare of the Devil, carried up and down as a Captive at his
will 2. Tim. 2.26.
. He may carry the name of a belieuer, and yet miss the end of Faith, the
salvation of his soul 1. Pet. 1.9.
.

The use is, to exhort us all, who think we have Faith, The use
and boast of Faith, and profess our selves to be belieuers to give all
deligence 2. Pet. 1.5.
, and to prove our selves with our best endeavor, whether the faith which we
think we have be such as will not deceive us in the end. We see by that which
has been said, that there is a thing which for the time is as like unto
Faith, as one thing can be to another. The wit of man for the present can
discern no difference, and yet the hauers of it shall not be saved. How
behoofull then is it for us to follow the counsel of Paul, to prove our
selves whether we are in the Faith or no 2. Cor. 13.5
. The life of a Christian is a continual warfare, we have a strong and a
dangerous enemy to grapell with, and there are many particulars of spiritual
armor necessary for our defense; among the rest, there is a shield of Faith
Ephesians. 6.16.
. A careful soldier will try his buckler whether it will keep out shot, or
otherwise be free from being pierced by that kind of weapon, against which it
must be used. Now if faith be a shield, it must be tried that it may be a
shield of proof against the day of battle. Faith is (as I before said) the
Tenure of our Freehold (for by it we stand ^. Cor. 11.24
.) All the evidence we have to show for our inheritance in the kingdom of
heaven is our Faith. Now we know the care that men have about their deeds and
tenures: they examine them, to see whether they be sound, they ask the
counsel of this and the other Lawyer touching them: Such yea and far greater
care ought we to have about our Faith. If that be not good, what becomes of
all our hope for life eternal. And think what a woeful thing it is herein to
be mistaken. I said Faith is the Tenure we hold heaven by. Now put case a man
has continued a suit at law, a great while trusting to a certain piece of
writing which he has in a box, if at the day of hearing, that writing prove
insufficient, what becomes of him? we know he loses all his former cost,
he is cast out of doors, and misseth that which he thought he should have
enjoyed all his days. So in this: A man makes account, he has Faith
sufficient to salvation; hereupon he goes on, without fear of future evil,
at the day of reckning his faith proves counterfeit; think then in what a
woeful case is that man. We may guess somewhat herein by a speech of Christ's.
Many shall say to me, in that day, Lord, have we not in thy name prophesied
etc. and yet it shall be said to them, Depart from me, etc. Math. 7.22.23.
. It seems these will be very confident, and make full account to be saved:
But now when for all this, it shall be said, Depart, we may well tremble to
think upon their misery. For the more sure a man is in his own opinion, the
greater confusion and vexation it will be to him to be disappointed of his
hope. How necessary a matter is this to be urged in these secure times. It
would make a man's heart woe to think how exceeding careful men be in other
things, but how desperate in this point concerning Faith. Is this lease good,
is this bond good, is this cloth for my garment good, is this beast good, is
this ground good, is this husbandry good, is this corn which I have chosen for
my seed good. We abound in these inquiries, and are scarsely ever satisfied,
we are still ielous and afraid, lest it should not be as we desire. But who
amongst many makes a question touching his Faith. who says to himself, Here
is much speaking of Faith, and it is taught that without it there can be no
salvation, what is my Faith which I promise myself I have, such as it ought to
be, sure if it be not, I can never be saved. Who is it that thus communeth
with his own soul. Who keeps this privy audite within himself. I hearkened
and heard and no man spoke aright said Jeremy of old Ier. 8.6.
. He would even deliver up the like verdit of the men of this generation, if he
were now living. It is the great policy of the Diuill, to lead men on, and to
lull them a sleep in their carelessenes, it fills his barnes, and helps to
increase his kingdom. A debating with a man's self touching his hope of a
better life, is a very first step toward heaven. Satan knows that if men
should once put it to the question how their Faith is, they should see such
scantnes in themselves that way, that the very sight thereof would make them
look about and begin a better course; whereas now presuming al is well, they
run on headlong, and will surely be in the pit, before they be ware. When thou
art persuaded and called upon to examine thy self, whether thy faith be right
and sound, why man (says the devil by and by unto thee) wherefore should
thou doubt it, Have not thou believed in God ever since thou could remember.
Have thou done thus well hitherto, and should thou now begin to make
question of thy Faith. Fear not, do not doubt, but thou art even as good a
believer as the best. Thus with these and the like charms, this subtle enemy
rocks men asleep, and encourages them to feed themselves with vain
persuasions, and to trust on lying words which cannot profit Iere. 7.8.
. Let therefore the doctrine taught work to the reforming of this common
evil, from which scarce one of many, is able well to clear himself. We hope
to be saved, we say we have faith, we would take it for a wrong, if any man
should call us unbelievers: Oh let us remember that there is a faith which will
deceive, a kind of believing which is but counterfeit. Let us not content our
selves with supposals, with idle imaginations which have no ground, but let us
bring our faith to the touchstone, and let it be tried thoroughly, whither it
will hold in the day of account or no. There is nothing more contrary to
Christianity then presumption, nor any in worse case, then they which are most
secure, and make themselves believe, that all is with them as it should. We
read that Jacob in his dreamesaw a Ladder upon the earth, of which the top
reached to Heaven Gen 28.12.
. This Ladder betokened Christ, as Christ himself has reference to it, in his
speech to Nathaniel, touching Angels ascending and descending upon the son of
man Ioh. 1.51.
. Now (to apply this to my present purpose) we know that he which climbeth up
a ladder, is especially careful of his footing and hold, and looks
diligently and advisedly to every step. So does he which is in Christ, and is
by him, and through him getting up to heaven; he is always trying whither his
standing be sure, and whither his hold that he has caught, be such as will not
deceive him. Thus he works out his salvation with fear and trembling Phil.
2.12.
. and happy is he who is so busied: And so I have labored to press the use of
this necessary point. In the matter of faith it is a dangerous thing to be
deceived: If a man's faith be unsound, all his hope is overthrown, it is easy
to be mistaken, our Heart is deceitful Ier. 17.9.
, and in our own cases we are partial judges; Satan is cunning and will
beguile us with a shadow of Faith, and there is a faith, which is very like to
true Faith, but yet will deceive us; what then can be more behoofull then to
prove our faith that we may be sure it will not fail us most when we shall
need it most. This is the sum. And to the end we may be the better prepared
for this duty of Trial, I come now to the next doctrine, as the Text gives
occasion, to show what kind of Faith it is which is auailable to life
eternal, and which is therefore called, the Faith of Gods elect Tit. 1.1.
. because it streameth from Election and is a pledge thereof.

The 2. Doct.
The next doctrine then is, That only that Faith makes a man capable of
salvation and gives him an interest into life eternal which is with all thy
heart: This is direct out of the words, If thou beleeuest with all thy heart
thou may: that is, If thy believing be sincere, and thy faith unfeigned, thou
may find comfort in this Sacrament, otherwise it will be to thee but an idle
sign. In all matters betwixt God and us, this is a chief thing which he
requires, that we give him our heart Prou. 23.26.
, and that, that which we profes to do, be done in singlenes. He himself is a
God of truth Psalm. 31.5.
. and therefore can delight in none but such in whose spirit there is no guile
Psalm. 32.2.
. His chosen are called the Israel of God Gal. 6.16.
. and it is the badge of a true Israelite to be without Deceit 1. Ioh. 1.47.
: A double heart is the mark of the ungodly Psalm. 12 2.
. and God commands us to purge out this leaven if we would draw near unto his
Majesty Iam. 4.8.
. The true worshippers shall worship him in Truth, for the father requires
even such Ioh 4 23.
. It remains as a blemish in the name of the old Israelites that albeit they
made a show of seeking God, yet their Heart was not upright with him, neither
were they faithful in his Covenant Psalm. 78.37
. Thus much to show the necessity of vnfainednes, and of doing that with the
Heart, which we do in all things which concern God, and so by consequence in
the matter of Faith. God is Truth, Christ is Truth, the holy Ghost is the
spirit of truth. How can Faith make union betwixt God and us unless it be
Faith of truth 2. These. 2.13
. This point will not be so profitable in the application, unless, we look a
little more nearly into it, to find out, what that special point is, in
respect whereof Faith is said to be with all the heart. The heart is the seat
and fountain of all the affections. A man therefore belieueth with all the
heart, when that which is believed is become (as it were) the center of all his
affections, the maine mark and matter of his love, delight, joy, etc. so that
whatsoever else is loved or delighted in, is so respected only for the sake of
that principal scope, and so far forth as it leads and draws toward it.
As for example: The maine object of Faith is Christ: now then to believe in
Christ with all the heart, is to fasten a man's whole affiance, his whole joy,
his whole contentment only upon him; So that Christ bears the whole sway and
principality in his affections and the maine end, why his Faith works and
strives toward him, and why he desires to be united to him, is not so much
the good and salvation of his own soul, as the enjoying of him, in whom all
fullness dwells Col. 1.19.
, and in whom the Treasures of all godnesse are laid up. There may be a relying
and a believing upon Christ, which may be said to be true, and undissembled,
in this respect, because the party in whom it is, does indeed do that which he
professes to do, neither does speak contrary to his secret thoughts, when he
says he believes in Christ, and yet is not this the Faith with all the heart
here spoken of: As for example: I doubt not but a Papist speaks truly and as
he means when he says he believes to be saved by Jesus Christ, yet
notwithstanding, there wants in him this quality of believing with all his
heart, because he has also a secret dependence upon the help of Saints, upon
the intercession of the virgin Mary, upon the merit of some work, or action of
his own. Here Christ has not all his heart, because he has divided it
betwixt him and some other objects. So again among our selves, I doubt not but
many profess soothly, and without fraud in auouching that they have cast all
their hope of salvation only upon Jesus Christ, and yet there is a defect in
there Faith, and that in this particular, that it is not with all the heart,
because their Heart draws not toward Christ, seeks not to be knit to
Christ only for Christ's sake, and because of that worth and excellency which is
conceived to be in him, but for some other by-respect, and for their own
sakes. For let me make this known unto you, (which is not generally
considered;) it is possible for a reprobate to go thus far; namely, to
acknowledge there is no salvation in any other but in Christ, to disclaim all
hope save only by him, to desire truly and with his soul to have a part in him
and to account himself happy if he might have favor with God through him;
thus far he may come, and yet still Christ has not all his Heart, because the
principal drift and aim of his respecting Christ, is, his own salvation by
Christ: why (will some man say), what shall a man else aim at in believing upon
Christ, but only salvation by Christ. Answer: I deny not but that it is
lawful to love Christ, and to rest upon Christ for saluations sake, but I say
withal, that he which esteems Christ for nothing else but to be saved by him,
shall never be saved by him. My Heart is to my self, it is not to Christ if I
make account of him and seek to him only for my benefit. So then, Christ is
believed with all the heart, when the enjoying of Christ is the scope of our
believing. I desire not to enjoy Christ so much because I would be saved, as
thus, I desire to be saved that I might enjoy Christ. My Heart is to Christ as
to the maine, to mine own salvation as to the inferior, and as to a matter
therefore only worthy the desiring because it leads unto Christ. Thus I hope
we now see, 1. that that Faith which is effectual to salvation is only that
which is a believing with all the heart, and then 2. that that is a believing
with all the Heart, when Christ who is the object of Faith, and is acknowledged
to be a sole and complete savior, is labored after principally for himself,
my heart is toward him for his own sake, more then for mine own salvation
sake. I know I can not depend upon him, and be made one with him, but it will
be for my profit, yet I look not so much upon that, as I do upon him; yea
and I strive to be affected as Job, to continue my Faith, and my trusting to
him, though he should slay me Job. 13.15.
, though I should not only not get good by him, but receive some sharpenes from
him.

We must couple this point with the former, The use
and I wish we may well digest it, and that we could be persuaded to bestow
some part of our thoughts upon it every day. Ardua ras est fides. Hierony.
It is no easy thing rightly to believe. Not every one, that takes the name
of Jesus into his mouth shall by and by be saved, no nor yet every one which
goes further then a superficial naming him. It is possible to understand the
mystery of Christ, to profess truly and vndissemblingly a dependence only
upon Christ, and (as it were) to set up a man's rest on this, that no man can
come unto God the father, but by Christ, and yet in the end to come short. Let
us remember that the very life and glory of faith is to believe with all thy
Heart, that is, in our believing to let Christ have the preeminence, the full
and the very all of our affections. If we can bring our souls once to this,
to value Christ more for his own proper worthes sake, then for own saluations
sake, then are we believers with all our Heart. This is indeed singlenes and
sincerity of affection this is vprightnes of mind: when my faith reaches after
Christ for Christ, I account my own salvation but the Bay, the fruition of
Christ the Maine. These be two things I know which cannot be sundered in
enjoying, Christ and salvation; but yet it is possible to give the one the
precedence above the other in desiring. Let not this seem strange unto us. Who
amongst us, accounts him a friend worth the having, whose chief end in seeking
to be linked in with him in society, is more his own commodity, or some credit
like to accrue to him, then the fruition of him to whom he professes love.
When we can say of a man professing friendship, I know he respects me for
this, or for that, were it not for such a hope, or the expectation of such a
benefit, I am sure he would regard me as little as another man, will we judge
such an one an unfeigned friend? How then shall that be called an unfeigned
Faith, which aims at Christ only for this because there is hope of a
kingdom by believing. This is a mercenary respect, neither is that a true
saving faith which has no higher scope. Would I not draw toward Christ in my
desire and affection, if there were no salvation by his means, is it only to
make a benefit of him, that I do cast my self upon him? and shall this be
called faith? No I doubt not but such respects as these may be found in many
which yet shall be called the least in the Kingdom of God. And thus we may
see how one thing follows upon another: that maine matter of preaching must
be Christ the supreme purpose of hearing must be to find Christ This was
taught out of the 35 verse.
; and so the principal intendement of faith must be to enjoy Christ. To be
saved, may lawfully be an inducement, but sure we shall miss, if it be the
chiefest motive. If we will believe on Christ; he will have all the Heart or
nothing. And so much touching the quality of Faith which I commend to our best
observation, and wish it may be well considered, that we may not beguile our
selves with an opinion of faith. Let it be remembered how near counterfeit
faith comes unto true faith, and wherein the maine difference does consist.
Christ has but half the heart, if we respect him only for this, that upon
his shoulders we may be carried upwards into Heaven. If we could think
Heaven it self not worthy the having but only for his sake, that were
excellent. So far of the condition propounded by Philip, now next of the
Eunuchs undertaking it: Then he answered, I believe that etc.

We have here three things to note. 1 That the Eunuch was able to give an
account of his Faith: 2 That he was ready so to do. 3 What the account was:
The first of these is very apparent: for what is this speech but an account
given by the Eunuch what he believed, and it was so sufficient, that upon it
he was admitted to the Sacrament. So that the doctrine hence is, The 3 doct.
That it is necessary for every good Christian to be able to express for
himself what he believes. This sufficiency of the Eunuch to return an answer
to the inquiry made into his faith, is not to be passed over without noting;
out of all question it was written for our learning, that we might labor not
to be to seek in the things which do concern our souls. This is that which
Peter caleth, a giving a reason of that hope which a man has 1. Pet. 3.15.
: Paul terms it a confession with the Mouth Romans 10.9.
, and makes it a necessary companion of that Faith which brings to salvation;
and Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind Romans 14 5.
, that is, let him that is a believer, labor to conceive distinctly what that
is, whereupon it is necessary for him to rest, that he may be saved let him not
satisfy himself with a kind of reserment to the faith of others, but let him
see that he himself do apprehend that which is necessary: The just must live
by his Faith Heb. 2.4.
, by that which he conceiueth in his own heart, not by subiecting himself to
the opinion of another. This is life everlasting to know thee, the only God
Ioh. 17.3.
: It is not imagination, or supposall, or some loose, and uncertain fancy,
some rauing conjecture, that can guide a man to life; it is understanding, it
is knowledge, such which the hauer, is both able (if need be) to set down
determinately what it is, and to give a reason also thereof to: Thus is it
written, and this I believe; this is my Faith, and this is the foundation
thereof; Why else is it, that the Scripture teaches grounds of the Christian
Faith so exactly? Why is it, that there is any such necessity laid upon us,
which are called to the service of the Church, to lay open the mystery of
Christ? Why (I say) should this be, if it were not the duty of believers, to be
able in heart to comprehend, and with mouth also (if occasion be) to declare,
whereupon they rest, for the salvation of their souls. Indeed what comfort can
there be, or what sweetness in uncertainty, or what possibility to put Satan
to flight, with some confused motion, which a man has catched up he knows
not how. It is the glory of Christians to be fulfilled with Knowledge and
spiritual understanding Col. 1.9.
, to have the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, and to know what is the hope
of their calling etc. Ephesians. 1.17.18
. A shame to them to be children in understanding 1 Cor. 14.20.
, to be dull of hearing Heb. 5.11.
, to be ever learning and yet never able to come to the knowledge of the truth
2 Timothy 3.7.
. These things may serve to prove this doctrine.

The use
In the use it gives full occasion to accuse the ignorance of the times, in
which so many of all sorts, and of all degrees, are utterly unable to give a
comfortable account of that which is necessary to be known unto salvation.
Every parish, every assembly, every congregation swarms with such. There is no
Minister that labors to know the state of his flock, but can be a witness
with me touching this. Men speak of I know not what, hoping well, and of being
of that which they call Gods belief, but (alas) how far be they from that
which Peter calls a Reason of their Hope? The Apostle calls Faith an
evidence Heb. 11.1.
. Now, suppose a man should be called before a judge in a matter betwixt party
and party, and could there be able to speak as little to the point in
question, as the most are able to say in the case of Faith; would the Judge
account their answer a competent evidence, or would he not think himself
wronged to have his ears troubled with such heed-lesse tales. Surely he that
had no better to show for his outward estate, then many have for their future
inheritance into the kingdom of glory, would and well might fear every hour
to be displaced. This is woeful in the clear light of the Gospel, and it is
one of the sins for which the Lord has a special controversy Hos. 4.1.
with the times. And it is a sin so much the more dangerous, because it is
scarsely taken notice of to be a sin. To be a swearer, a whoremaster, a
drunkard, an oppressor, a greedy worldling, a liar, a cursed speaker, these and
the like, partly by the light of nature, partly by some general rules gotten
by continual hearing, are of the most, yielded unto to be sins. But
ignorance in religion, yea even in these points, which are (as it were) the
very life and soul of religion, is hardly taken to be a sin. Who thinks
himself ever the less honest because he is ignorant. Thus (I say) is this
evil, the more dangerous, because it passes away unobserved, vntaxed,
vnblamed, and yet it is a principal sin against which the Lord will proceed at
his judging day 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
and the people that do not understand shall fall Hos. 4.14.
. It is true there is much dullness, much hardness of conceit, much weakness
of apprehension even in the very best, but yet certainly if that be not in us,
which in one place is called a Mind to know 1. Ioh. 5.20.
, in another an endouour to know Hos. 6 3.
, we can never be saved. Remember we how the Eunuch profited by one Sermon, and
consider how many we have heard, who yet (many of us) cannot give so good an
account as the Eunuch did. For let no man think, that this was all, namely
that the Eunuch was able to deliver thus many words, as are here, and no more;
it were an injury to the memory of that holy man, if we should so imagine, and
it were a wrong to the wisdom of Philip if we should think he would let
him pass with a kind of verbal acknowledgement of a matter which he did not
understand. Can we think with any probability, that either the Eunuch said no
more then is here delivered, or that Philip did not feel him again and
again, to see how he was settled? yes undoubtedly: The Eunuch knew the person
of Christ, the office of Christ, knew how the ancient prophecies of the old
Testament were fulfilled in Christ, and was able to show cause why he for his
particular part should think to be saved by Christ, knew how Faith coupleth
unto Christ, how it does procure to a man an interest into the obedience and
righteousness of Christ. These and the like material points out of all doubt
the Eunuch knew. Philip would never have admitted him to the Sacrament of
Baptism, upon the uttering only of a few words, or have left him in such a raw
measure of knowledge, before he had brought him to conceive aright the grounds
of godliness, and that doctrine which is called the doctrine of the beginning
of Christ Heb. 6.1.
. I add this lest any man should beguile his own soul, because of his
ableness to say so much as is here reported to have been spoken by the
Eunuch. I wish the words in every man's heart and mouth, but take heed we make
not a charm of the Scripture, to imagine a virtue in words of which we know
not what to make. Let us labor to speak the Eunuchs words, with the like
knowledge that the Eunuch had; otherwise to say we believe that Jesus Christ
etc. shall not avail us. So much of this, that the Eunuch was able to express
his Faith, and to show for himself what he believed.

The 4. Doct.
The next thing is his readiness to give an account, which affords us this
doctrine, That where the power of Godliness bears any sway, there is no
frowardnes of disposition, when one is dealt with in the matter of Faith. This
I observe out of the modest and yielding disposition of this Eunuch, who was
thus content (as it were) to be catechized by Philip, and to submit himself to
give an account of his believing. No doubt he held it meet, that he which now
took care of his soul, should by him be made acquainted with the state of his
soul. If a man speak in the ears of a fool he will despise the wisdom of
his words Pro. 23.9.
, and such an one being questioned with about religion, answers roughly Pro.
14.23.
, but Gentleness, Goodness, meekenes, are the fruits of the spirit Gal. 5.22.23.
: It was the humor of the Pharisees, in pride of heart to disdain to submit
themselves to John's Ministry, they despised the counsel of God Luke 7.30.
, and they took it in soul scorn when the blind man asked them, whether they
would be Christ's disciples Ioh. 9.29.
, their stomachs could not frame to be treated with as men ignorant in ought
or as liable to an account to any what they believed. It is the commandment of
God that every man in such a case as this betwixt Philip and the Eunuch, should
be ready to give an answer 1. Pet. 3.15.
: and religion where it is does teach men so to be. For as it abateth these
high spirits which are in man by nature, so it makes a man to consider the
good that may ensue, by submitting himself with meekenes, to be communed with
by him that is able to instruct him; If his knowledge be right, this is a
means to confirm it, if it be mistaken, this is the way to better it.

This reprooueth that sturdy and contemptuous humor which is in many now, The
use.
who hold it for a very great disparagement, to be urged to tell how they
believe. It is thought to be a course not unfit to be practiced upon children,
but to urge those to it, that are elder yea though they never so much need
instruction, in deemed insolency in him that undertakes it, and simplicity and
baseness of disposition in those that submit to it: The greatest part
therefore, are so affected, that if they should so be dealt with, they would
have much a do with themselves to bear it well, or not to return the crooked
answer of a froward mouth: By this means their spiritual wound putrisie,
because of their own foolishness Psalm. 38.5.
. They (...) in their Imagination. Romans 1.22.
, They will not be known of their secret ignorance, and by that mean they do
deprive them selves of many an opportunity by which they might be blinded up
in the saving knowledge of Gods truth. A froward Heart never finds good Pro.
17.20.
. This then let us learn hence; Thou whom God has blessed with a faithful
pastor, furnished with the Tongue of the Learned Isa. 50.4.
, and able to minister a word in time to him that is weary, be not unwilling to
lay open to him the state of thy soul, nor think it a wrong to be so communed
with, as may make way to thy further edifying in the mystery of Christ. Our
days are in as bad an extremity as were the days of popery. Then the Priests
had gotten such a tie upon men, by the (so called) Sacrament of confession,
that they diued further into men's secrets then was fit. But now men are grown
to as much strangenes and standing aloof from their spiritual overseers, so
that he which attempts though in never so humble and respective manner to move
a question to them, or to feel their knowledge, shall be requited as Lot, when
he gave good counsel to the Sodomites, Away hence Genesis 19.9.
, or taken up as Moses, Who made thee a man of authority Exodus 2.14
? This is the currish disposition of unregenerate men. They are as thorns,
that cannot be taken with hands the man that would touch them, must be defenced
with iron, or with the shaft of a spear 2 Samuel 23.6.7.
. This makes religion, to grow so slowly as it does, either Philip does not
ask, or the Eunuch will not answer. Thus far of the Eunuchs readiness to
give account; here was no disdain, no haughtiness, no stomacking of the
matter to be thus inquired into, no shaking of the Demander with a cross
reply; here is meekness and calmness of spirit, here is a plain and
direct acknowledgement of what he conceiues. Happy was Philip to have such a
tractable scholar, and happy the Ethiopian to have such a searching Teacher.
God increase the number of such Philips, and make us all such as the Eunuch was
in this particular.

THE THIRD SERMON.
WE are now come to the Account it self, and to the matter of the Eunuchs
confession. I believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God. The plain
doctrine here is, The 1. doct.
That the believing of Jesus Christ be the son of God, is the very substance
of that Faith which is required to salvation. This is plainly to be gathered
hence. The Eunuch desired Baptism, (the badge of a Christian:) Philip
enquireth of him, whether he have that Faith, which makes a Christian, he
answers, I believe so: This answer is approved and taken for sufficient; so
that to believe that which this Eunuch here acknowledges is the very life of
saving Faith, it is the sum of all that is required to salvation, and without
it there is no salvation. And this collection is justifiable from hence so much
the rather, because the chief confessions and abridgements of the Christian
faith, which are in the new Testament, consist upon this point chiefly: as,
that memorable one made by Peter in the name of the rest of the Apostles Mat.
16.16.
Thou art the Christ the son of the living God: then that in John, (which it
may be is the same with the former, in effect I am sure it differs not) We
believe and know that you are the Christ, the son of the living God Ioh. 6.69.
: thirdly that of the blind-man, Do thou believe in the son of God! Lord I
believe Ioh. 9.35.38.
: fourthly, that of Martha, I believe that you are the Christ the son of God,
that should come into the world Ioh. 11.27.
. These solemn declarations of the Faith required to salvation do all
concur in this one general point, Jesus Christ is the son of God. The
doctrine of the Scripture is called, the word of Faith Romans 10.8.
; it is therefore committed to record that men might believe Ioh. 20.31.
. Now the pith of the whole Scripture is, Jesus Christ; He is the end of the
Law Romans 10.4.
, to him give all the Prophets witness Act. 10.43.
, and the sum of the Gospel is, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish but have life everlasting Ioh. 3.16.
. If then Christ be the substance of the Scripture, needs must the building
upon him be the sum of Faith. Faith goes no further then the word, and the
word has no more to teach but this, that God has given unto us eternal life,
and this life is in his son 1. Ioh. 5.11.
. Thus for a general opening of this doctrine. To the end it may be the more
profitable, we must consider somewhat more exactly, what it is, to believe that
Jesus Christ is the son of God: First in general to believe, betokens two
things. 1. To hold a matter to be a truth, and so it is an action of the
understanding power. 2. To trust to a thing, or to rely upon it, and so it is
an act of the will, and issues out of the former. Secondly (according to this)
to believe that Jesus Christ is the son of God, comprehends two things. 1.
To apprehend this as a sound and undeniable truth, that Jesus Christ is the
son of God. 2. To conceive it as a doctrine into which a man's self has some
interest, and so to rely and rest thereupon for a future benefit. First that
this proposition, Jesus is the son of God, is an absolute and undeniable
Truth, it must be resolved: It is the ground work of Faith, and the foundation
without which it cannot stand. It was the errand upon which John Baptist sent
his disciples unto Christ, that they from his own mouth might be made sure,
that it was He that should come, and no other to be looked for Math. 11.3.
. The certainty herein is gotten by the Scripture: and indeed (to believe) as
it is an act of the understanding, Auctoritati debemus quod ^redimus. Augustine.
is properly to assent unto a matter and to take it as a truth: upon the report
and credit of another. So then a man must be possessed with this truth, by the
authority and testimony of the Scripture, that he who is called Jesus Christ,
is the very son of God, whom God of old promised to send being made of a woman,
to be the Prince of our salvation, and to make peace betwixt God and man by his
blood. This is one necessary principle to be appehended unto salvation, neither
can any report settle a man's knowledge in this, but only the report of God
himself speaking to us in his word. Secondly, this must also be laid hold on,
as a matter more particularly concerning the believer. For a bare assent unto
this proposition, (Jesus Christ is the son of God) cannot save. I know who
thou art, (said the evil spirit therein he spoke as he thought and was
persuaded) even the holy one of God Luke 4.34.
. And shall we think that this was all, was intended in the Eunuchs
acknowledgement, that he gave credit unto the Scripture touching Jesus Christ
to be the son of God? God forbid. He might have done so and yet never have
been saved. He had not believed with all his heart, if he had done no more; It
was necessary there should be also a relying, a resting, a casting himself
upon Christ, a trusting to him, an expecting salvation by his means, a fitting
of this general truth touching Christ to his own particular for the discharge
of his soul in the sight of God. And indeed this is so necessary a part of
Faith, that as it cannot be without the former (for a man cannot rely upon
Christ, unless he be certain, he is the person to be relied upon) so the
former is not rightly and truly apprehended unless this latter be attained to,
or at the least endeavored for. For, first generally it is true that the points
and articles of Faith, are so contrived that the failing in one, overthrows
all. Then, secondly, a man cannot properly be said to believe the report of
the Scripture touching Christ, unless he do apply it to himself. For how
does a man give credit to this, that Christ is the son of God, and a Savior,
if he himself do not rely and hang upon him for his own salvation. So that
indeed it is no full and complete assent, where there wants an application of
that Truth which is assented unto, to a man's own particular. How can I believe
Christ to be my Savior, except I know him to be the promised Savior? and how
do I believe him to be the promised Savior, if I dare not trust him with my
own soul, and am backward to depend upon him for my self. And therefore in
this truly says the Apostle, that he makes God a Liar, that does not proceed
from the general doctrine to the point of particular application, that God
has given (us) eternal life 1 John 5.10.11.
. If then we yield (as we needs must) that the Eunuch did more then assent to
this general truth, as it is revealed in the Scripture, and did lay hold upon
it as a matter into which himself had interest, it cannot but follow thence,
that the Faith required to salvation, has in it, beside the acknowledgement of
the Truth in the understanding, an embracing it also in the will, and a
dependence thereon, for the personal good of him in whom it is. And thus of
this doctrine touching that matter and object of Faith, Jesus Christ the son
of God, apprehended by the authority of the Scripture to be so, and laid hold
upon as a Savior.

The use.
The use is, principally to move us to a due and diligent enquiry, whither we
who speak of Faith, and do also make full account of being saved by Christ,
do so believe, as has been described, and as out of all doubt this Eunuch
did; namely, how we be grounded and settled in this by the teaching of the
Scripture, that Jesus Christ is the son of God, in whom only god is pacified,
and then next, how we do depend upon him in particular for our selves, with
what warrant and upon what terms. This is a matter that deserves scanning in
the closet of every heart that would be saved. Certainly it will appear upon
inquiry made, that if this be to believe, surely then the number of believers
is exceeding small. For first, how raw, how confused, how uncertain
(generally) is men's knowledge in this fundamental point, touching the person,
and office of Christ Jesus? How few are able to prove unto their own hearts
out of Gods word, that this Jesus Christ whom we so often name, is that very
person in whom all Gods promises touching life and salvation are yea and Amen
2. Cor. 1.20
, having in him and by him their full accomplishment; that it is he whom God
the father has sealed Ioh. 6.27.
to save his people from their sins. Math. 1.21,
If a man should come to many, who are belieuers by profession, and say, Oh,
thou that make thy boast of Christ, and think under his wings to be
shrouded against the wrath of God, how know thou that this is the person in
whom God will be reconciled to thee, what warrant have thou, in him to find
favor, and acceptance with the Lord! How quickly would they be foiled, and how
easily graueled in this necessary particular, without certainty wherein, all a
man's Faith is but mere presumption. Verily I am persuaded that it is not the
tenth of our ordinary hearers and professors thar can tell how to make this
point good against satan's cauils, with which he will undermine and batter it
in the evil day, that, Jesus Christ is that person upon whom he that desires
salvation must rely. For shame let us not be more remiss and careless for our
souls, then we would be for our outward state. What wise man, will take the
word or bond of another, unless he be sure of his sufficiency to make that
good for which he offers himself, either by word or writing to be engaged?
wherein is a man the nearer to have his bond for many pounds, who (it may be)
is not worth so many groates? Here therefore let us first begin in the matter
of faith, let us labor to see this point well proved out of the testimony of
Gods word, that Jesus Christ is the chief stone elect and precious, put in
Sion, upon whom who so believes, shall not be ashamed 1. Pet. 2.6.
, that he is the way, the truth, and the life, and that as no man can come to
the Father but by him Ioh. 14.6.
, so he which comes by him cannot be repelled. If we would be sound in the
Faith Tit. 1.13.
, and rooted in Christ, let us look to this. It is abundantly cleared in the
Scripture: Search the Scriptures, they are they that testify of Christ John
5.39.
. Well, now as I have discovered the scarsity of Faith, by the common defect in
this maine ground of Christianity, so may I as easily do it in urging the
other part touching the particular application of the general doctrine of
Christ Jesus. For in it there is as great an error as in the other. I know
there is an ordinary making account to be saved by Jesus Christ; but yet,
though therein there is a kind of fitting the doctrine of Christ to
particulars, yet it is not that application which is the life of faith, and
which (out of all doubt) this Eunuch had attained to. For to the Application of
Christ there is more belongs then this, to say, Christ died for sinners, and I
hope by him to escape damnation: Many shall go into Hell, with as much as that
comes to, in their mouths. Application of Christ is a matter of greater
consequence, and has more going to it then so. There must be first a
particular conceiving of a man's own need of Christ: secondly an understanding
how that fullness which is in Christ may supply the particular wants of him
that desires to apply him that so the soul may see how the turn thereof may
abundantly be served by resting upon him: thirdly a diligent noting how the
preaching of the word fitteth the particulars of Christ's fullness, to the
souls particular wants, that so a man may not be (as it were) his own caruer
herein, but may feel how the hand of the Lord works in the business: fourth,
a careful working how the soul is acheered and inwardly refreshed, by that
warmth, which it feels itself to receive by cumming still nearer unto
Christ, how it has more boldness to come to the Throne of grace, how it
finds more sweetness in the doctrine of salvation, how it has more life in
holy services, how it is furnished with more alacrity and greater desire to
walk with God in new obedience? Thus the application of Christ is another
manner of thing then a sudden conceit, that if I and I, shall be saved by his
death: so much is common, but to apply Christ is a thing which few attain
unto. Thou say thou art persuaded that Christ Jesus the son of God is thy
savior, I demand of thee: who did tell thee so? what is thy warrant so to
think? Art thou come to this persuasion by due course, by being first nurtured
in the school of humiliation, to bring thee to see what need thy soul has
of the least drop of the blood of Jesus Christ? has this apprehension been
begotten in thee by the preaching of that word, in which thou have been taught
to whom only salvation does belong? has it been long in getting, and have thou
had much ado to attain to this measure? or is it some sudden and rash
conceit upon which thou have adventured? Take heed and be well advised; To
apply Christ, is excellent, but it is not ordinary, neither is it easy, and he
that never tasted the difficulty that is in it never yet knew what it meant?
Thus I must deal with thee, thus I must advise thee, that professest an
application of Christ unto thy self. And now (for a further opening of the
matter) methinkes that title of a Rock given unto Christ Isa. 28.16. Math.
16.18.
, is worthy the considering, to make this plain. Christ his being a Rock of
safety, argues, that man in himself is plunged into a Sea of Hazard with
which he is ever ready to be swallowed up. Now, suppose we a man suffering
ship-wracke upon our Coast, and at the last after much driving too and fro,
espying a rock, which if he could recover there were some hope of escape. To
this he begins to direct his course, thither he bears with the utmost of
his might: the waves hinder him, the wind and weather are against him, yea often
times when he is come even close to, and is ready to touch it and to lay hold
upon it, a gust comes, or some stronger wave, and carries him into the maine
in despite: Nay, it may be when again he is come yet nearer, and is even in a
manner gotten up, yet there is such an heaviness in his garments oppressed
with water, such benummednesse and weakness in his joints through the
extremity of cold, that he cannot keep that which he has gotten, but again
loses his hold, and is even about to give over his hope, and to resolve with
himself that there is no remedy but he must needs perish in the sea. Well,
yet at the last he renueth his courage, purposing now to make his last
attempt, he recouereth the Rock, to the top he is gotten, where he may look
about and see where he was tossed: But behold, before he can thoroughly collect
his thoughts, here begins a new fear: the water swells, and threatens
to cover even the highest part of the rock, the wind helps it forward, and
aduanceth the pride thereof, and it begins to encounter as with an open
mouth ready to destroy: What is now to be done? Surely nothing but this: He
resolves to keep his standing with his utmost might his hold he determines not
to forsake, here (thinks he)' I will abide, and if I perish I perish. Here
is that true estate of a man laboring in this painful business of applying
Christ. First he is tossed long on the waves of much inward perplexity, and
cries out with David, I stick fast in the deep mire where no stay is, I am
come into deep waters and the streams run over me Psalm. 69.2.
. O God, all thy waves and thy floods are upon me Psalm. 42.7.
. The snares of death compass me, and the griefs of the grave have caught
me Psalm. 116.3.
: At the last by the pointing of the finger of the Gospel preached, the Rock
is espied: Jesus Christ the righteous 1. Ioh. 2.1.
, that Rock, which David calls, The Rock that is higher then I Psalm. 61.2.
, that rock which was resembled by that, into the cleft whereof Moses was put,
that he might see the Lord as he passed by Exodus 33.22.
. For as Moses could not have seen the Lord without death unless he had been
hidden in that Rock: so can no man see the face of God and live, unless he be
put into the cleft of this rock that under the shelter thereof he may behold
him. Well, this rock being once descried, the soul longs greatly after it
Psalm. 63.1.
, and thinks it self should be most happy, if it might arrive at the smalest
Hole Can. 2.14.
thereof. To this therefore it aymeth and labors with the utmost endeavors: (
I endeavor myself, and follow hard Phil. 3.13.14.
. But (alas) much a do there is to get near it, there be many swelling surges
of much doubting, many blustering storms of great discouragements. Ofttimes is
the soul ready even to claspe upon the Rock, but something or other puts it
back, and then there follows even a woeful drooping, and a kind of despair,
ever again to be in so fair a possibility: Oh, then comes in, I am cast out
of thy sight Psalm. 31.22.
, those that told me of salvation by Christ, and of his readiness to receive
those that seek him are all Liars Psalm. 116.11.
: yet at the last, this agony is overcome, and the sinner begins to rebuke
his soul for this faintness. Why art thou cast down my soul and unquiet
within me Psalm. 42.5.
, try yet again, surely there is an end and thy hope shall not be cut off
Pro. 23.18.
. So with much striving, even (as it were) to the loss of breath ( I opened my
mouth and panted Ps. 119 131.
, the former feeling is regained and the soul is come once more under the
shadow of this Great Rock Is. 32.2.
, yea and the feet are set upon it Psalm. 42.2.
, and the soul begins to triumph in safty, ( Return unto thy rest o my
soul Psalm. 116.7.
, I know nothing shall be able to separate from the love of God which is in
Christ Jesus Romans 8.39.
, yea it falls to a discoursing upon the strange manner of her escape, Come I
will tell you what God has done for me Psalm. 66.16.
. But (behold) suddenly a new fear interrupteth all, I said I shall never be
moved, but thou hidst thy face and I was troubled Psalm. 30.6.7.
. My well beloved was gone and past, I sought him, but I could not find him
Can. 5.6.
. What is now left, but to resolve to stick fast, whotsoeuer shall betide. My
soul cleaves unto thee Psalm 63.8.
; my flesh fails and mine heart, but it is good for me to keep me close Ps.
73.26.28.
; either here I must be safe, or no where. Thus have I given you a taste of
the trauill of the soul in the application of Christ. Christ being (as he is
called) a Rock of safely, there is no fitter thing to describe it then this
case that I have named. He that has not had some experience of this in
himself, or at the least shall not now upon the hearing thereof make
conscience to find it true by his own particular, name faith he may, but have
faith he cannot, presume he may, but believe he cannot. He that thinks it an
easy thing to rest upon Christ, and to settle upon him and to apply the
salvation offered in him to a man's own particular, I may boldly say, he does
utterly deceive his own soul, he is yet far from the Kingdom of God. Thou
art upon the Rock, before ever thou know what it is, to be tossed on the
maine, thou art in the haven, before ever thou wast in hazard in the deep;
verily thou art mistaken in the coast, bear out again with speed, this Rock
will cast thee away into a gulf of security, this is not the Cape of
Good-hope, Gods good spirit never lead any man this way into the land of
Righteousness Ps. 143.10.
. I wish all you that hear this, the sweet and comfort of this point. An
assent to the report of the Scripture touching Christ, is necessary to
salvation, but not sufficient; neither was it all that the Eunuch had.
Application of Christ is necessary, My well beloved is mine and I am his Cant.
2.16.
, that is the life of all: But in this the Devil counterfeiteth as well as in
other things, and he can be content men should apply, yea he himself will
help so to do; but his application is a little to quick like the Heritage
that is hastily gotten, but the end not blessed Pro. 20.21.
When Christ is much valued, but not by and by feelingly enjoyed, when he is
much desired but very hardly reached unto, where the soul longs for him, and
sometimes comes to see him, and again loses the sight of him and is
oft-times, almost out of all hope of recovering him, there is application of
Christ. This is not the work of a day or two Ez. 10.13.
, When I tell thee of laboring to believe that Jesus Christ is thy salvation,
if thou say unto me as Peter said to Christ about forgiving his brother. How
often, shall I set about it, until seven times: I must answer thee as there,
yea until seauenty times seven times Math. 18.21.22.
, Why should I beguile thee or my self? If thou be not even every day more or
less at this business, that thou might win Christ Phil. 3.8.
, still considering how thou art fastened on him, and what hold thou have,
still laboring that thou may not loose him, still looking for a new storm
that may put thee from him, still grasping closer about him, still crying with
Peter Master save me Mat. 14.30.
, still harkning to this come of the Lord, the preaching of the Gospel, by
which he pulls thee to him, neither I nor any Minister of God will dare to
promise thee any hope of salvation. If we take a lease, or buy a purchase, we
will have the matter first drawn up into articles, then digested into a form,
then perused and enterlined, and advised upon with the best counsel we can
get, every word shall be waighed, as in a pair of balances, and we will not
suddenly engrosse it, as it must be. Why will we that be so provident for our
earthly things, be so simple and so careless about heavenly? If we have got
but a kind of loose and general apprehension of Christ that he is ours, there
we rest. Oh let us look upon it again, let us beware while we live of a false
title, ask a little more counsel, if we let it alone until the Hearing-day,
a writ of error will not help it. Methinkes, I cannot speak to much against
our great security. Every man seems to be sure of heaven and yet few men ever
knew, what it was to be in hazard of heaven. Work out your salvation with
fear and trembling Phil. 2.12.
. Thus much of the Eunuchs confession. Every man must be able (as he) to give
account of his Faith: Every man must be willing (as he) to give a reason of his
hope. Every man must believe (as he) that Jesus Christ is the son of God. How
he believed this, and how we must believe it, has been showed: God make it
profitable.

Now follows the Baptism it felfe, Then commanded he the Charet to stand
still etc. The words are plain, and the sense is evident to be this; The
Eunuch being found mere for the sacrament of baptism, there was a
commandment for the staying of the Chareot, in which the Eunuch rode and
Philip with him, whereupon they both went into the River, and there by the
ministry of Philip the Eunuch was baptized. The principal things considerable
here, are these two. 1. The place where this Sacrament was administered. The 2.
doct.
2. The action it self. Out of the former this doctrine springs, That since
the cumming of Christ in the flesh there is no betternesse or precedence of one
place above another for the administration of holy things. Lo see here, is
Baptism administered by the highway side, and that in an ordinary River: the
sacrament had been no whit better to the Eunuch, if he had received it in some
hollowed place, or in some consecrared vessel. In the former times that
public worship of God was limited to a certain place, There shall be a place
which the Lord your God shall choose, thither shall you bring all that I command
etc. Deu. 12.11.
, neither was there any lawfulness (ordinarily) for any Altar but at
Jerusalem. There was the Passover only to be solemnized, there only the first
borne to be presented to the Lord. But Christ being manifested in the flesh who
was the body of all former shadows Col. 2.17.
, the distinction of places is abolished, and neither is Gods worship tied to
the Jews Jerusalem, nor to the Mount Garizim of the Samaritans Ioh. 4.21.
, but now, in every place incense shall be offered to my Name says the Lord
Mala. 1.11.
, Therefore Christ's forerunner exercised his ministry openly in the
Wilderness, and baptized in the River of Jorden Math. 3.16.
: and our savior preached in Mountains Math. 5.1.
, by the Seaside, and out of Boats Mat. 13.1.2.
, any where, where the audience was according. So the Apostles, after, preached
in houses, in fields, and baptized in any usual river which came next to hand.
For which cause by all of any sound judgment, that of Constantine the great,
that famous Christian Emperor, worthily renowned for many things, is
notwithstanding taxed, as something superstitious, that after he was converted
from Paganism to the Christian faith, yet he differred his Baptism, looking
still for an opportunity to go to Jordan it self, where our Savior was
baptized, as if there had been some more virtue in that place then in another.
Wheresoever two or three are gathered together in my name etc Mat. 18.20
, there is no exception of place, so that in other things the due form be
observed. The Use.
This might be urged against the superstition of Popery, which is much devoted
to hallowed places, as if some worth were added thereby to the services there
performed; and besides, that simplicity which in the first administration of
Baptism, they have adulterated and corrupted, with intermixing salt, oil,
spittle, cream etc, with the sacramental water, and then (forsooth) the
people must imagine there is more in this confection, and in this compounded
stuff, for the benefit of the baptized, then if the matter were performed with
the naked element as it comes from the brook. This superstition is not yet
thoroughly purged out of many hearts. It is well known what a virtue many think
to be in places, and in vessels etc. The Devil knowing that it is a thing
which cannot be rooted or razed out of man's mind, that when he has to do
with God, there must be somewhat done to grace and sanctify the action,
leads him away with false surmises, and by persuading him that places, and
times, and such like complements and circumstances do give worth to the
business, makes him to neglect that which indeed should make it acceptable.
As for example, if a child be brought to the Church and baptized in a Font, all
is well in opinion, and there is Christendom enough; but the maine thing, as
to learn what that Sacrament is, and wherefore it serves, and upon what
terms it may be a means of comfort to the soul, the people (generally)
desire not to know, it is a trouble to them to be taught, and to instruct
children, when they come to be of years, wherefore they were baptized, and
what the receiving of that sacrament binds them to, who (almost) makes any
conscience? Thus we are all for form, and loose the substance, we esteem the
gift (as Christ said of the blind Pharisees) but set at naught the altar which
must sanctify the gift Math. 23.19.
. This is not spoken to draw men to a contempt of these outward conueniencies:
For albeit I know, that the place it self bettereth not the business, neither
is baptism (simply) better administered out of a Font, in a Church, then out of
a River by the High ways side, yet it were a wickedness for any now under
that pretext to forsake the places put a part for holy uses, or to go out (in
a humor) to preach and to pray, and use the sacraments in the fields, that
were, to avoid one extremity by running into another as bad, and indeed it is
true which is said, that if a man have not good discretion in running from a
mischief he may fall into an inconvenience. In avoiding superstition, In
vitium ducit culpae fugasi care^arte. Horet.
a man may soon become either schismatic or profane. Well are they that can
find and keep the mean. I will not imagine any infusion of virtue into my
prayers, or upon my other devotions, by the frame and building where the year
performed, because I will not be superstitious, and yet I will repair to the
places deputed to such sacred actions, I will not run to Rivers to baptize, I
will not fly into corners to communicate, because I must not forsake the
fellowship, which we ought to have among our selves Heb. 10.25.
, and all things must be done in order 1. Cor. 14.
, neither is God the author of Confusion V. 33.
. So much touching the place: This water was as good as Jordan, or as if it had
been one of the rivers, which issued out of Paradise, and as well, here upon
the way as in the Temple at Jerusalem.

The action it self is in these words, He baptized him: that is, he washed him
with water in the name of the father, the son, and the holy Ghost: So must we
conceive it, although so much be not here expressly said. We may not think
Philip would or did transgress the order set down by our savior to be
observed in the administration of the Sacrament Math. 28.19. The 3. doct.
. Here this Doctrine: That in the Christian church the Sacrament of Baptism
must accompany that preaching of the word. Understand me aright. I mean not by
this that whenever the word is preached the sacrament of baptism must be
ministered (for there is not always occasion of both at the same instant) but
this I intend, that in the Church of Christ there must be a using of this
sacrament, as well as a delivery of the doctrine of salvation. And so much I
gather hence: For we may not think this an arbitrary service, that Philip
baptized the Eunuch when he had taught him, but we must think it a matter he
was bound to, that he whom he had by teaching converted to Christianity, should
from him also receive the badge of Christianity. This is confirmed by our
Saviors own edict, Go teach and baptize etc. Mat. 28.89.
, and the Apostles kept that order Act 2 38.41. Act. 8.12.9.18.10.48.
. Baptism was still an attendant upon the doctrine, their commission was
equally for both; and this course must continue so long as God has a people
upon earth; so much is proved by the promise, Lo I am with you always to the
end of the world Mat. 28.20.
, which as it argues a blessing to be bestowed upon others besides the
Apostles (to whom the words were personally spoken) even to such as should be
employed in that service to the end, so it declares what course is to be held
to the end, Preaching, and Baptizing. And whereas Paul says he was not sent
to baptize but to preach 1. Cor. 1.17
, we must not take it as spoken simply, as if Paul had no commission at all to
baptize, for how then did he baptize Crispus and Gaius, and the household of
Stephanus Ver. 14.16.
, but it is spoken comparatively, namely, that his maine errand on which he was
sent was to preach, and thereupon he was chiefly to attend, leaving the
administration of Baptism unto others. Such a kind of speakeing we shall
find in the Prophet, I spoke not unto your fathers, nor commanded etc.
concerning sacrifices Ier. 7.22.
; did not God speak at all touching those things? yes, but that was not all he
spoke, or the chief thing he gave charge off. So is this place of Paul to be
expounded. Let us a little consider why this sacrament and ceremony of Baptism
was ordained by Christ to accompany the preaching of his word. There are two
maine ends of it. 1. To strengthen faith. 2. To be a testimony of profession.
Baptism serves to strengthen faith two ways. 1. By representation. 2. By
assurance. First the thing it represents, and the thing it assures are all
one, namely, a washing away of the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ.
Baptism shadoweth out this faith. Water well resembles the purging power of
Christ's blood, It cleanses from all unrighteousness 1. Ioh. 1.7.
. Again, the outward washing of the body represents the inward purging of
the soul by the spirit, which stands in justification before God, and
sanctification before men. Hence the scripture speaking of those things, uses
the term of Washing 1. Cor. 6.11.
, and Regeneration is called the Washing of the new birth Tit. 3.5.
. Further, that manner of Baptizing which was in use in hotter countries and in
baptizing men of years, and which was here used in baptizing the Eunuch was a
rite of worthy signification. The going down into the water signified
mortification or fellowship with Christ's death: the staying under the water,
the burial of sin; the coming out, the rising from sin to newness of
life. These were excellent significations and to these Paul has reference, in
those words, Know ye not, that all we which have been baptized into Jesus
Christ, have been baptized into his death? We are buried then with him by
baptism into his Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of the father, so we also should walk in newness of life Romans 6.3.4.
: And we may conceive a Resemblance of these three, in our ordinary baptizings:
in the putting on of the water, in the letting it to remain a time, and in the
wiping it off. Thus Baptism sets before our eyes the benefit by the blood
of Christ and the good that comes by being ingraffed into him. Now as
Baptism represents, so it assures. For the sacraments are not naked signs
and bare shadows of spiritual things, but they are appointed of God to be
pledges unto us of heavenly grace: and so is Baptism, a pledge to a believing
sinner, that as he does see the washing of water to purify the body; so
certainly is his soul cleansed from the guilt of sin by the blood of Christ.
Thus is the first end of Baptism, to strengthen faith. It is also a witness
of profession. First, the common nature of a Sacrament, is to be as a solemn
oath undertaken for the performance of some important matter. Secondly, the
being baptized, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost;
signifies an admittance into the household of Faith, and the addicting of a
man's self to the service of him, whose name is called upon, over him in
baptism, and so testifies his couenanting with the Lord, to deny ungodliness
and fleshly lusts Tit. 2.12.
, and to beware of returning after this washing to a wallowing again in the
mire of old uncleanness 2. Pet. 2.22.
. Therefore is it that Baptism is called the Baptism of Repentance Luke 3.3.
, because it remains as a witness of a promise of repentance, with which the
baptized has bound himself to God. This it is plain. Baptism is of
perpetual use in the Church of Christ, and that for good ends, namely to
strengthen our faith, and to be a continual remembrancer unto us what we
profess. The 1. use.
Now for use, first this may further those that are ignorant in this matter,
how to behave themselves in the use of Baptism as men of knowledge. A general
use there is of baptism amongst us, but the warrant of using it, is not so
well known, as the thing itself ordinarily is received: and the most, in
offering their infants unto baptism, are more led by custom, and carried with
the stream of common practice, then guided by any certain rule from him, who
is the lawmakers of his church. This makes this sacrament to be used so
ignorantly, so superstitiously, so unprofitably. It shall not be amiss
therefore for those that be to seek herein, to learn hence, whence it comes,
that such a water is in use. That which is not done in obedience, though it be
done never so formally in he eye and outward appearance is of no account with
God. Secondly, The 2. use.
this may teach us all, or at least put us all in mind what use to make of our
Baptism. 1. To every one of us so often as we think upon our baptism, it
ought to be a spur to holiness. A servant to a great man, when he looks
upon his livery, cannot for shame if he have any common honesty, be an enemy to
him, of whom he has received it; the sight of it is rather a continual caller
upon him to be faithful to him, into whose service he is entered. So Baptism is
the cognizance of a Christian, and by it we have taken on us to wear (as it
were) the colors of our grand Captain Jesus Christ; the very thought thereof
should restrain us from doing the business of Satan, and work us by all
means to the willing obeying of the Lord, to the studying, learning, and
preaching of his will. How excellent were it, if in doing of many things, which
we rush upon without any scruple, we would say to our selves, Is this according
to promise, is this agreeing to the vow of Baptism? 2. To those that thus make
use, baptism as a motive to Obedience, it is a storehouse of much comfort.
When men's titles to land be in question, they fall to perusing their sealed
evidences; and so a Christian must often look to the will and deed of his
heavenly father sealed up in Baptism and by it he shall have comfort. We
seldom look back so far as baptism, and we limit it only to the present
use, conceiving it as an entry into Christianity, but as a spur, to walk
worthy our profession, and a means to build us up in Christ, we do not use
it, and so we deprive ourselves of worthy comfort. *


