November. 7. 1634.
PErlegi hunc Librum cui titulus, A Divine Poem, entitled, The Hierarchy of
Angels. Qui quidem Liber continet folia 287, aut circiter. In quibus nihil
reperio quo minus cum publica utilitate imprimi possit: ita tamen vt si non
intra annum proxime sequentem typis mandetur haec Licentia sit omnino irrita.

GVILIELMVS HAYWOOD, Capell. domest. Archiep. Cantuar.

THE HIERARCHY of the blessed ANGELS. Their Names, orders and Offices

The fall of Lucifer with his Angels

Written by Tho: Heywood

Vita scelesta vale, coelica vita vent.
LONDON Printed by Adam Islip 1635



TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND INCOMPARABLE LADY, AS FAMOVS FOR HER ILLUSTRIOUS
VERTVES, AS FORTVNAT IN HER REGAL ISSVE; HENRETTA MARIA, Queen: THE ROYAL
CONSORT AND SPOUSE OF THE PVISSANT AND INVINCIBLE MONARCH, OUR DREAD
SOVEREIGN, King CHARLES: Her Highness most lowly and loyal Subject THOMAS
HEYWOOD, In all humility consecrateth these his well-wishing, though unworthy
Labors.

To the Reader.
Generous Reader,
I Shall not need to apollogise beforehand, either for the height of the
subject, or the manner of handling this Work; when the Argument of every
Tractat can speak for the one; and a direct proceeding in the course proposed,
for the other. Remembering the French Proverb, Qui edefie en public place,
Faict maison trop haut on trop basse.
Who builds in the way where all pass by,
Shall make his house too low or hye.


I have exposed my self a subject to all censures, and entreat the Reader not
to undertake me with any sinister prejudice. For my hope is, if he shall
fairly trace me in that modest and careful course which I have traveled, he
may say in the conclusion, Facilius currentibus, quam repentibus lapsus. For I
profess my self to be so free from all arrogance and ostent, that, Vt caveam
timenda, tuta pertimesco. My Iuvenilia I must confess were suitable to my age
then, for being a child, I spoke as a child; but Maruritie has since better
instructed me: remembering that excellent Sentence of Sophocles, Si Iuvenis
luxuriat, peccat; si senex, insanit. Nor forgetting that of Seneca the
Philosopher, Ante senectutem curandum, been vivere; in senectute, been mori.

I have proposed unto you Good Angels and Bad; the excellency of the one,
still continuing in their created Purity; the refractorie rebellion of the
other, damning themselves to all eternity. In the reading of which, I entreat
you to take into your consideration that wholesome observation of Saint
Chrysostom, Natura rerum sic est, vt quoties bonus malo conjungitur, non ex
bono malus melioretur, sed ex malo bonus contaminetur, sic vnum pomum malum
facile centum bonos corrumpti; at centum mala nunquam vnum corruptum efficient
bonum.

Further, to expect any new conceits from old heads, is as if a man should
look for green fruit from withered branches. But as Time the producter of all
things, though he be aged himself, is every hour begetting something new;
sow, on whose heads he has cast such a snow, as no radical or natural heat
can melt, in imitation of him, (who as sure as he knows us borne, will as
certainly provide us burial) will never suffer our brains to leave working,
till our pulses cease beating. But howsoever the manner of our working be, so
the matter which is wrought upon be worthy, the value of the subject dignifieth
the invaliditie of the Undertaker. And thus I take my leave of thee with this
gentle admonition, Heu heu, dij mortalibus nectunt malum,
Quando bonum videt quispiam and non vtitur.


Thin^, THO. HEYWOOD.

The Argument of the first Book.
VRIEL.
A Jove Principium the Creator,
Of all that live sole Animator.
Atheism and Saducisme disputed,
Their Tenants argued and refuted.
A Deity approved by all
Gods Creatures in general.
Into the world how false gods came,
And first begun to usurp that name.
A Quaere made the world throughout,
To find this GOD, of whom some doubt.
The Argument of the second Book.
IOPHIEL.
A GOD bee'ng found, denied by none,
It follows there can be but One:
By the Philosophers confessed,
And such as were of Poets best.
Him, not the Oracle denies,
Nor those the ancient World held wise;
Sage, Sybill, Mage, Gymnosophist,
All in this Unity persist.
Next, That this Power so far extended,
Can by no Sense be comprehended;
Neither his Essence, most Divine,
Be sounded by weak Reasons line.
And last, what names most properly
Belong to this great Deity.
The Argument of the third Book.
ZAPHKIEL.
OF the Universe the Regions three,
And how their parts disposed be:
How governed, and in what order,
In which no one exceeds it is border.
That Moses Arc in all respects
Upon this worlds rare Frame reflects.
Both how and when, by Power Divine,
The Sun and Moon began to shine.
The day of our blessed Sauiors Passion
Compared with that of the Creation.
How every Star shines in it is Sphere,
What place they in the Zodiac bear.
And of the twelve Signs a narration,
Their influence, aspect, and station.
To prove no former worlds have bin,
And this must perish we live in.
The vainness lastly does appear,
Of Plato's Great and Vertent Year.
The Argument of the fourth Book.
ZADCHIEL.
WHat Ternions and Classes be
In the Celestial Hierarchee.
In what degrees they are instated,
How amongst themselves concatinated.
Angels and Doemons made apparent
By Ethnicks and the Scriptures warrant.
Of Visions, and strange Dreams, that prove
Spirits each where at all times move;
Against their infidelity
That will allow none such to be.
Discourse of Favor, Love, and Hate,
Of Poetry, of Deaths estate.
The Essence of Spirits; how far they know;
Their power in heaven and earth below.
The Argument of the fifth Book.
HANIEL.
THe consonance and simpathie
Betwixt the Angels Hierarchy.
The Planets and Celestial Spheres,
And what similitude appears
'Twixt one and other. Of the three
Religions that most frequent be,
Jew, Christian, and Mahumetist:
Upon what grounds they most insist.
Ridiculous Tenants stood upon
In Mahomets blind Alcaron;
Where he discourses the creation
Of Heaven and Angels. A relation,
What strange notorius Heresies,
By the Priscillians and Manichees
Were held. The truth made most apparent
By Text, and holy Scriptures warrant.
The Argument of the sixth Book.
RAPHAEL.
THe Heart of Man bee'ng so adverse
To Goodness, and so apt to pierce
Things most retruse; a course expressed,
On what it chiefly ought to rest.
A scrutinie made, where and when
The Spirits were created. Then,
Of Lucifer, the chief and prime
Of Angels, in the first of time:
His Splendour, Pride, and how he fell
In battle by Prince Michael.
Their Fight, their Arms, the triumph great
Made in the heavens for his defeat.
The number that revolted; and
How long they in their grace did stand.
Some other doubts may plain appear,
Which to this Argument cohere.
The Argument of the seventh Book.
CAMAEL.
OF Gods great Works a serious view,
For which all praise to him is due.
The several Classes that are held
Amongst the Angels that rebel'd.
Of Lucifer the principal,
And his strange figure since his Fall.
Of such as most in power excel,
And of their government in hell;
Their Order, Offices, and Names,
With what prioritie each claims.
The list of those that fell from bliss.
The knowledge that in Demons is,
And how far stretched. Next, of their wrath
Toward Mankind, and what bounds it has.
Discov'ry of those ginnes and snares
They lay to entrap men unawares.
Of Compacts common in all Ages,
And of the Astrologomages.
The Argument of the eighth Book.
MICHAEL.
OF Satan's Wiles and Feats prestigious,
Appearing wondrous and prodigious;
Confirmed by histories far sought.
Of Nouels by bad Demons wrought:
And first of such is made expression,
That still with Mankind seek congression,
(To whose fall they themselves apply)
Called Succubae and Incubi.
To find those further we desire,
Of Water, Earth, the Air, and Fire;
And what their workings be, to know,
As well above, as here below.
How Authors amongst themselves agree,
What Genij and Spectars be,
Faunes, Sylvans, and Alastores,
Satyrs, and others like to these.
With stories mixed, that grace may win
From such as are not verst therein.
The Argument of the ninth Book.
GABRIEL.
OF Spirits called Lucifugi
(From flying light) I next apply
My neere-tyr'd Pen: of which be store
In Mines where workmen dig for oar.
Of Robin Good Fellow, and of Fairies,
With many other strange vagaries
Done by Hob-goblins. I next write
Of a Noone-Diuell, and a Buttry-Sp'rite.
Of grave Philosophers who treat
Of the Souls essence and her seat.
The strange and horrid deaths related
Of learned Magitions, animated
By Satan, the known Trutht' abjure,
And study Arts black and impure.
Of Curious Science last, the vanity,
Grounded on nothing but incertaintie:
And that no Knowledge can abide the Test
Like that in sacred Scripture is expressed.
The Seraphim:
Ex sumptib: Tho: Mainwaringe Armig:



THE ARGUMENT OF the first Book.
A Jove Principium, the Creator,
Of all that live, sole Animator.
Atheism and Sadducisme disputed;
Their Tenants argued, and refuted.
A Deity approved by all
Gods Creatures in general.
Into the world how false gods came,
And first began to usurp that Name.
A Quaere made the world throughout,
To find this God, of whom some doubt.
2 Argument.
The blessed Seraph does imply
The love we owe to the most High.
INspire my Purpose, favor mine Intent,
(O thou All-knowing and Omnipotent)
And give me leave, that from the first of days,
I (Dust and Ashes) may resound thy praise:
Able me in thy quarrel to oppose,
And lend me Armor-proofe to encounter those
Who strive to eclipse thy glory all they can;
The Atheist, Sadduce, and Mahumetan.
That there is a God, who doubts? who dares dispute?
Being in it self a maxim absolute:
Which fundamental Truth, as it is seen
In all things, Light or Dark, Withered or Green;
In Length, Breadth, Height, Depth; what is done or said,
Or has existence in this Fabric, made
By the word Fiat: so amongst the rest,
In man's own Conscience it is deep'st expressed. God in the Conscience.

In the Stars.
Who Is he looks up, and sees a glorious Star
(Be It fixed or wandering) to appear from far
In bright refulgence; can so stupid be,
Not to acknowledge this great Deity?
The Sun.
Who shall the Sun's unwearied progress view,
As at the first creation, fresh and new,
In luster, warmth, and power, still giving chere
To Plants, to Beasts, to Mankind every where?
The Moon.
Wh'obserues the Moon a lower course to range,
Inconstant, and yet constant in her Change;
(Tied to her monthly vicissitude)
And does not think she also does include
The Earth.
A sovereign power? Look down, the earth survey,
The Flowers, Herbs, Shrubs, and Trees, and see how they
The Beasts.
Yearly product: The store of Herds and Flocks
Grasing on pastures, meadows, hills and rocks;
Some wild beasts; others to man's use made tame;
And then consider whence these creatures came.
Rivers.
Ponder the Wels, Ponds, Rivers, Brooks and Fountains,
The lofty Hills, and super eminent Mountains,
The humble Valley, with the spacious Plain,
Fields.
The fair clothed Meadows, and full fields of grain;
The Gardens, Deserts, Forests, Shelues, and Sands,
Fertility and Barrenness of Lands,
Seas.
Th'vnbounded Sea, and vastitie of Shore;
"All these express a Godhead to adore.
Be not in thy stupiditie deluded:
Think but how all these, in one bulk included,
The globe of the Earth.
And rounded in a ball, placed in the mean
Or middle, having naught whereon to lean;
So huge and ponderous! and yet with facility,
Remain immov'd, in their first known stabilitie!
"How can such weight, that on no Base does stand,
"Be swayed by less than an Almighty hand?
Observe the Sea when it does rage and rore,
As menacing to swallow up the Shore;
For all the Ebbs and Tides, and Deeps profound,
Yet can it not encroch beyond his bound.
"What brain conceiues this, but the Power respects,
"Which these things made, moves, gouerns, and directs?
Man.
Do but, o man, into thy self descend,
And thine own building fully apprehend;
Comprise in one thy Body and thy Mind,
Homo microcosmus.
And thou thy self a little World shall find:
Thou have a nimble body, to all motion
Pliant and apt: thou have at thy devotion
A soul too, in the which no motion's seen,
But from all eyes hid, as behind a skreene.
The effects we may behold; from whose command
The gestures come: yet see we not the hand
By which They Are moved, nor the chief Master, He
Who is prime Guide in our agilitie.
Is not so great, of these things, th'admiration;
So excellent a Work, of power to fashion
Atheists anew, and bring them to the way?
Let Us hear but what their own Philosophers say.
One thus affirms: Hermes Tresm^gist.
There Is no capacious place
In Man's Intelligence, able to embrace
Th'incomprehensible Godhead: "and yet trace
"His steps we may, his potencie still seeing
"In every thing that has on earth a being.
Says Auicen: Cicer. de Not. Deor. lib. 2.
He reason wants, and sense,
That to a sole God does not reverence.
A third: Who so to heaven directs his eyes,
And but beholds the splendour of the skies,
(Almost incredible) and does not find,
There must of force be an Intelligent mind,
To guide and govern all things? Arist. Metaph.
A fourth thus:
(and the most learned of them, does discuss;
Seeming amongst the Heathen most to know)
There is a God, from whom all good things flow.
To sing to the great God let us never cease, The Poets concerning God.

Who gouerns Cities, People, and gown'd Peace:
He the dull Earth does quicken; Tit. Calphur. Eglog. 4. Hor. lib. 3. Od. 4.
or make tame
The Tempests, and the windy Seas reclaim:
He has the government of States, can quell
Both gods and men; his power is seen in Hell;
Whose magnitude all visible things display,
He gouerns them with an impartial sway.
Where e're thou mov'st, Lucan, lib 3. de Bell. Civil. Metamor. lib. 8
where so thou turnst thine eye,
Even there is God, there Jove thou may epsy:
His immense power does beyond limit run,
It has no bound, for what he wills is done.
What so thou see throughout the world by day, Petron. Arbit. in Fragm.

Even that does him and only him obey.
If he please, from the dull or fertile Earth,
Or Flowers or Weeds spring, Fruitfulness or Dearth:
If he please, into Rocks he will water pour,
Which (like the thirsty Earth) they shall devour.
Or from the dry stones he can water spout:
The wilderness of Seas the world throughout
Submits to him. At his Imperious will
The rough and blustering Winds are calm and still.
The Floods obey him: Dragons he can slave,
And make the Hyrcanian Tygres cease to rave.
Stat. Sylv. ti. 5.
He is in the most sovereign place instated;
He sees and knows all things he has created.
Nor wonder if he know our births and ends,
Who measures Arctos, how far it extends;
And what the Winters Boreas limits are.
What to this Deity may we compare?
Who does dispose as well the Spade as Crown,
Teaching the counsels both of Sword and Gown:
Meaning the Angels.
For with invisible Ministers he traces
The world, and spies therein all hidden places.
Arist. ad Antip.
Of Alexander, Aristotle thus writes:
It is not numb'red amongst his chief delights,
That he over many Kings has domination;
But, That he holds the gods in adoration.
Who justly on their proud contemners lower;
But unto such as praise them, they give power.
AEneas.
The Times of old, AEneas did admire,
Because he brought his gods through sword and fire,
When Troy was sacked and burnt: for that one piety,
They held him after death worthy a Dietie.
Numa Pompil.
Pompilius for his reverence to them done,
An honor from his people likewise wone:
He reigned in peace, and (as some writers say)
Had conference with the Nymph Egeria.
For him, who knew the gods how to entreat,
And truly serve, no honor was too great.
Virg. AEnead.
But the gods Hater, impious and profane
Mezentius, was in battle rudely slain.
And Capaneus, after that he had
Assaulted Thebes wall (which the gods forbad)
Even in the midst of all his glory fell,
And by a bolt from Heaven was struck to Hell.
Epirus.
The great Epirus, Arcades King, we find,
For spoiling Neptunes Temple was struck blind.
Brennus.
And the Duke Brennus, after many an act
Of strange remarke (as proud Rome having sacked,
And conquering Delphos) yet because he dared
To rob that Church Apollo would have spared; Sacrilege punished.

The god struck him with madness; who straight drew
His warlike sword, with which himself he slew.
The Temple of Tolossa (in their pride)
Great Scipio's soldiers spoiled, and after died
All miserably. And Alexander's, when
They Ceres Church would have surpised, even then
Fell lightning from the skies, which soon destroyed
All in that sacrilegious Act imployd.
Religion from the first of Time has bin, Religion from the beginning

Howeuer blended with idolatrous sin:
Temples, Synagogues, Altars, and Oblations,
Lustrations, Sacrifices, Expiations;
However their zeal with many errors mixed,
"None but upon some god his mind has fixed.
The Lybians, The multiplicitie of gods among the Gentiles.
Cretans, and Idaeans, they
Had Jove in adoration: None bare sway
Amongst the Argiues in Miceane, but she
That shares with Jove imperial sovereignty
Juno. The Thebans honored Hercules:
They of Boetia the three Charites:
The Egyptians, Isis, figured like a Cow:
The Thebans and the Arabes all bow
To Bacchus As twice borne.
Bimater, the god of Wine.
Ionia, Rhodes, and Delphos held divine,
Apollo solely: Cyprus and Paphos boast,
Their Venus, as amongst them honored most.
The Athenians and AEtolians celebrate
Minerua: Unto Vulcan dedicate
The Imbrians and the Lemnians, all their vows.
Fertile Sicilia no goddess knows,
Save Proserpine: The Elaeans, Pluto make
Their Sovereign: And the Boetians take
The Muses for their Guardiens. All that dwell
Near to the Hellespont, think none to excel,
Save Priapus. Priap. god of Gardens, and one of the Semones, i. semihomines:
That were half gods, half men
In Rhodes, Saturn has praise:
Osyris, above all, the Egyptians raise.
The Latians and the warlike Thraciaus run
To Mars his Shrine: the Scythians to the Sun.
All the inhabitants of Delphos Isle
Pray, That Latona on their coasts will smile.
Amongst the Lacones, Neptune sacred is:
And through all Asia, powerful Nemesis.
The Attici have in high estimation
Fortune. The Eleusians have in adoration,
Ceres: The Phrygians, Cybel: Cupid, Those
That dwell at Colchos. The Arcades have chose
Aristaeus: Diana, those of Ephesus.
The Epidaurians, AEsculapius. etc.
So many gods and goddesses did comber
The Nations of the earth, as that their number
In just account, (if Hesiod speak true)
Unto no less than thirty thousand grew.
Against vain Auguries.
As touching Auguries, and their abuse,
(In the precedent Times in frequent use)
To prove that study to be merely vain,
Iliad 12.
Homer has made great Hector thus complain:
Aligeris auibus tu me parere iubes --
The winged Birds thou bid'st me to obey;
But how they take their course, or to which way,
I nor regard, nor care: whether their flight
Be made upon the left hand or the right.
Most requisite it is that I be swaide
By the great thundering Jove's high will, and wade
No farther. He has empire over all,
And whom he list, supporteth, or makes thrall.
That Is the best Bird to me, and flies most true,
Bids, For my Country fight; my Foes subdue.
E're further I proceed, 't were not amiss,
If I resolve you what an Idol is,
Dioph. Laced. in Antiq.
And where they had beginning. I have read
The history of Syrophanes.
Of one Syrophanes, in Egypt bred;
Who as he nobly could himself derive,
So was he rich, and by all means did strive,
Like an indulgent Father with great care,
Fulg. Mythol.
To make his son of all his Fortunes heir.
And when he had accumulated more
Than all his Neighbors: in his height of store,
And fullness of abundance, (as his pride
Was to leave one to inherit) his Son died;
And with him, all his comfort, because then
(He gone) he thought himself the poor'st of men.
In this great sorrow, (which as often we see,
Does seek for solace from necessity)
He caused his statue to be carved in stone,
S'exactly made unto the life, that none
But would have took it for the child; agreeing
So near to him it was, when he had being.
But the sad Father, thinking to restrain
That flux of tears which hourly poured amain
Down his moist cheeks, the course he took to cease it,
Presented him fresh matter to increase it:
Ignorant, That to help the woe begone,
There is no cure like to Oblivion. Sola medicina miseriarum obliuio.

So far it was his moist eyes to keep dry,
As that of tears it gave him new supply.
And this we may from (...) borrow, Idolum ab (...). i species doloris.

The word to us implying, Cause of sorrow.
Whilst there this new made Image had abode,
The Servants made of it their household god.
Some would bring fresh flowers and before it strew:
Others, (left they in duty might seem slow)
Crown it with wreathes and garlands: others burn
Incense, to soothe their Lord, who still did mourn:
And such as had offended him, would fly
Unto that place, as to a Sanctuary;
And (after pardon) several gifts present,
As if that had been the sole Instrument
Of their delivery. By which 't may appear,
'T was not Loves effect, but the effect of Fear,
To which Petronius seems t'allude, when he, Petr. arbitr.

Obliquely taxing all Idolatry,
says, That throughout the world in every Nation,
Fear first made gods, with Divine adoration. Primus in orb deos secit timor
Quid site Tonsor cum stricta n^nacula, etc. Martal lib. 11. Epigram.

Says Martial: If thy Barber then should dare,
When thou before him sit'st with thy throat bare,
And he his Rasor in his hand; to say,
Give me this thing or that: Will thou say nay
Or grant it him? Take 't into thy belief,
He Is at that time a Ruffin and a Thief,
And not thy Barber. Neither can 't appear
Bounty, that is granted through imperious Fear.
Of the word Superstition, the first ground Superstitio, quasi superstitem
facere.

Was, To preserve to the future, whole and sound,
The memory of Fathers, Sons, and Friends,
Before deceast: and to these seeming ends
Were Images devised. Which some would bring
(As their first author) from the Assyrian King
Ninus; whose father Belus being dead; Which was the Image Bell, which in
Daniels time was honored in the province Dura

That after death he might be honored,
Set up his statue, which (as most agree)
Was in his new built city Niniuee:
Whither all malefactors make repair,
And such offenders whose lives forfeit are
By the Laws doom: but kneeling to that Shrine,
Were sanctuar'd, as by a thing divine.
Hence came it, that (as gods) they now abhorred
The Sun and Moon, which they before adored.
With Stars and Planets they are now at strife:
And since by it they had recovered life,
(Late forfeit) hold it as a sov'raigne Deity;
And therefore as it were in grateful piety,
The original of Idolatry.
They offered sacrifice, burnt Incense, gave
Oblations, as to that had power to save.
This, which in Thieves and Murd'rers first began,
In time so general grew, that not a man,
But was of that belief; and so withdrew
That divine worship which was solely due
To the Creator, (and to him alone)
And gave 't to Idols made of wood and stone.
And yet the Poet Sophocles, even then
When the true God was scarsly known to men,
In honor of the supreme Deity,
Vnus reuera vnus est Deus qui fabricauit, etc.
Much taunted the vain Greeks Idolatry.
One God there is (says he) and only one,
Who made the Earth his Footstool, Heaven his Throne:
The swelling Seas, and the impetuous Winds;
The first he calmeth, and the last he binds
In prison at his pleasure: and yet we,
Subjects unto this frail mortality,
Of diffident hearts determine, and devise
To the Souls damage, many fantasies.
The Images of gods we may behold,
Carved both in stone and wood; some left in gold;
Others in Ivory wrought: and we (unwise)
By offering to them solemn Sacrifice,
Think we do God good service. But the Deity,
Aug. lib. 8. de Ciuit. Dei.
(Sole and supreme) holds it as mere impiety.
Saint Austin never could himself persuade,
That such who among the ancient Gentiles made
Their Idol gods, believed in them: for he
Says confidently; Though in Rome there be
Ceres and Bacchus, with a many more,
Whom they in low obeisance fall before;
They do it not as unto absolute things,
That have in them the innate seeds and springs
Of being and subsistence: but much rather,
As to the servants of the Almighty Father.
Yet these did worship something ('t does appear) The Athiest.

As a Supreme, whom they did love or fear.
This Age breeds men so bruitsh natural,
As to believe there is no God at all.
Such is the Atheist, with whom can be had
No competition; one obtuse or mad,
Who cannot escape Heavens most implacable rod.
The Psalmists Fool, who says, There is no God; Dixit Insipiens in cord suo
non est Deus.

Would such but spend a little vacant time,
To look from what is below, to things sublime;
From terrene to celestial, and confer
The Universal, with what is singular;
They shall find nothing, so immense and hye,
Beyond their stubborn dull capacity,
But figures unto them his magnitude.
Again, nothing so slight, (as to exclude
It name amongst his creatures) naught so small,
But proves to them his power majesticall.
Tell me, (o thou of Mankind most accursed) Arguments against Atheism.

Whether to be, or not to be, was first?
Whether to understand, or not to know?
To reason, or not reason? (well be it so,
I make that proposition:) all agree,
That our Not being, was before To be.
For we that are now, were not in Times past:
Our parents too, even when our moulds were cast,
Had their progenitors: their fathers, theirs:
So to the first. By which it plain appears,
And by this demonstration 't is most clear,
That all of us were not, before we were.
For in the Plants we see their set and ruin.
In Creatures, first their growth, then death pursuing.
In Men as well as Beasts, (since Adam's sinning)
The end is certain sign of the beginning. Finis certi^fim. principij sig^u^.

As granted then, we boldly may proclaim it,
There was a Time, (if we a Time may name it)
When there was neither Time, nor World, nor Creature,
Before this Fabric had such goodly feature.
But seeing these before our eyes have being,
It is a consequence with Truth agreeing;
Of which we only can make this construction,
"From some Divine power all things had production.
Ex nihilo, nihil
And since of Nothing, nothing can befall:
And betwixt that which is (be it never so small)
And what is not, there is an infinite space,
Needs must some Infinite supply the place.
"It follows then; The prime Cause and Effector
"Must be some potent Maker and Protector,
"A preualent, great, and eternal God,
"Who before all beginning had abode.
The Elements aagainst Atheism.
Come to the Elements: A war we see
Twixt Heat and Cold, Drought and Humiditie:
Now where is Antipathy, must be Annoy,
One laboring still the other to destroy:
And yet in one composure where these meet,
There Is Sympathy, Atone, and cons'nance sweet.
The Water does not fight against the Fire,
Nor does the Air against the Earth conspire.
All these (though opposites) in us have peace,
Uniting in one growth and daily increase.
"To make inueterate Opposites agree,
"Needs must there be a God of Unity.
What is an Instrument exactly strung,
Unless being played upon? it yields no tongue
Or pleasant sound that may delight the ears.
So likewise of the music of the Spheres,
Which some have said, chym'd first by accident.
O false opinion'd Fool: What Is the intent
Of thy perverseness, or thine ignorance?
Casus and Fortunae, quid?
Shall I design what Fortune is, or Chance?
Nothing they are save a mere perturbation
Of common Nature; an exorbitation
And bringing out of square; these to control,
"Therefore, must needs be an intelligent Soul.
For know you not, you Empty of all notion,
That nothing in it self has power of motion?
And that which by another force does move,
"The cause of that effect must be above?
Motus principium quies.
The Original of Moving must be Rest,
Which in our common Dialls is expressed.
The Sun-beame p^ints the hour; the shadow still
From our shifts to another, even until
Thou tel'st unto the last; yet 't is confessed,
That all this while the Artificer may rest.
The Earth in sundry colors decked we know,
With all the Herbage and the Fruits below.
The Seas and Floods, Fish in abundance store:
Fowls numberless within the Air do soar:
And all these in their several natures clad
So fairly, that her self can nothing add.
From whence have these their motion? Shall we say,
From the Elements? "How comes it then that they
"Should so agree, (being amongst themselves at strife)
"To give to others [what they have not] Life? Nihil dat qd' non habet.

Have they then from the Sun their generation?
Resolve me then, what Country or what Nation
Can show his issue? Have they power innate,
As in themselves, themselves to procreate?
If any of them? tell me, among them all,
Of what extension are they, great or small?
In new discov'ries; if after somewhile, An illustration against Atheism.

We touch upon an unfrequented Isle:
If there we sheds or cottages espy,
(Though thatcht with Reed or Straw) we by and by
Say, Sure men here inhabit, 't does appear;
The props and rafters placed not themselves there;
Nor of their own accord, the reed or straw,
Themselves into that close integument draw.
Nor could the savage beasts themselves inure
Unto a work so formal and secure.
And you, o Fools, or rather Madmen, when
You view these glorious Works, which Beasts and Men
So far from framing are, that their dull sense
Can never apprehend their eminence;
And do not with bent knees, hearts struck with terror,
And eyes bedewed with tears, lament their error,
Submissiuely acknowledge their impiety
And blasphemies against that invisible Diety.
If but to what you see, you would be loath A familiar demonstration from Plants.

To give faith to? In Plants, a daily growth
You all confess: but of you I would know,
When any of your eyes perceived them grow?
In Animals we may observe increase, From Animals.

And every member waxing without cease:
But when did ever your acutest eye
Distinguish this augmenting quality?
Force vegetiue and sensatiue, in Man
There is: with Intellect (by which he can
Discern himself and others) to this hour,
Tell me, Who ever has beheld that Power?
We with our outward senses cannot measure
The depth of Truth, nor rifle her rich treasure:
"Let that Truths spirit then be our Director,
"To bow unto the worlds great Architector.
Or will you better with your selves advise,
And believe those the ancient Times held wise;
And not the least amongst these, The Egyptian Mages,
The Indian Brachmans, and the Grecian Sages;
"Even these approved a God, before Time living,
"Maker, Preserver, and all good things giving.
The poets and Philosophers, of God.
The Poets and Philosophers, no less,
In all their works ingeniously profess;
Theoginis, Homer, Hesiod, Orpheus, All
Upon this great Power invoke and call
To their Assistants. In the self same line,
Rank't Plato, and Pythagoras (both Divine
Held for their reverence done it.) Let these pass:
To speak of your great man, Diagoras,
The Prince of Fools, of Atheism the chief Master:
(As was, of Magic, the learned Zoroaster)
Peruse his Book, you in the Front shall read
These very words: From a sole sovereign Head,
All things receive their Being and Dispose.
What more could he confess? Which the most knows.
Diagoras.
He, on whose shrinking columes you erect
The whole frame of your irreligious sect;
Holding the statue of Alcides (then
Numb'red amongst the deified men)
It being of wood: To take away the glory
From Idols; in a frequent auditorie
Of his own Scholars, cast it in the fire:
Thus speaking; Now god Hercules expire
In this thy thirteenth Labor; 't is one more
Than by thy stepdame was enioyn'd before.
To her (being, man) thou all thy service gave;
Thou now being god, I make thee thus my slave.
The death of Lucian, syrnamed Atheos.
The Atheist Lucian held Gods Son in scorn;
And walking late, by dogs was piece-meale torn.
Yet for the love I to his learning owe,
This funeral Farewell I on him bestow.
Unhappy Lucian, what sad passionate Verse
Shall I bestow upon the marble stone
That couers thee? How shall I deck thy Hearse?
With Bays or Cypress? I do not bemone
Thy death; but that thou dy'dst thus. Had thy Creed
As firm been, as thy wit fluent and high,
All that have read thy Works would have agreed,
To have transferred thy Soul above the sky,
And Sainted thee. But o, 't is to be doubted,
The God thou did despise, will thee expel
From his blessed place; and since thou Heaven have flouted,
Confine thy Soul into thine own made Hell.
But if thou ever knew'st so great a Dietie,
A Savior who created Heaven and thee;
And against him durst bark thy rude impiety,
He judge thy cause, for it concerns not me.
But for thy Body, 't is most just (say I)
If all that so dare bark, by Dogs should die.
Thus says the Atheist: Lo, our time is short, A Paraphrase upon the second
Chap. of the Wisdom of Solomon: Job. 7.14.

Therefore our few days let us spend in sport.
From Death (which threatens us) no Power can save,
And there is no returning from the grave.
Borne are we by mere chance, a small time seen,
And we shall be as we had never been.
Our breath is short: our words a spark of fire,
Raised from the heart, which quickly does expire;
And then our bodies must to dust repair,
Whilst life and spirit vanish into air.
We shall be like the moving Cloud that is past,
And we must come to nothing at the last:
Like Dew exhaled, our names to ruin run,
And none shall call to mind what we have done.
Our Time is as a shadow, which does fade;
And after death (which no man can euade) Chr. 1.19.15. Isay 22.13. and 56.12.

The grave is sealed so fast, that we in vain
Shall hope, thence, ever to return again.
Come then; the present pleasures let us taste,
And use the Creatures as in time forepast:
Now, let us glut our selves with costly wine,
And let sweet ointments in our faces shine.
Let not the flower of life pass stealing by,
But crown our selves with Roses e're they die:
Our wantonness be counted as a treasure,
And in each place leave tokens of our pleasure:
For that is our portion; we desire no more.
Let us next study to oppress the Poor,
(If they be righteous) nor the Widow spare:
Deride the Aged, and mock his reverend hair.
Our strength, make Law, to do what is iniust;
For in things feeble't is in vain to trust:
Therefore the good man let us defraud; for he
(We know) can never for our profit be,
Our actions in his eyes gets no applause:
He checks us for offending against the Laws,
Blames us, and says, We Discipline oppose.
Further he makes his boasts, That God he knows;
And calls himself his Son. He Is one that is made
Job 7.7.
To contradict our thoughts: quite retrograde
Ephesians. 5.13.
From all our courses; and withal so cross,
Isay 53.3.
We cannot look upon him without loss.
He reckons us as Bastards, and withdrawes
Himself from us: nor will he like our Laws,
But counts of them as filthiness. The ends
Of the just men he mightily commends;
And boasts, God is his father. Let Us then see,
If any truth in these his words can be;
And what end he shall have. For if the Upright
Psalm. 22.8, 9.
Be Sons of God, he will aid them by his might.
Mat. 27.43.
With harsh rebukes and torments, let us then
Ier. 11.19.
Sift and examine this strange kind of Men;
To know what meekness we in them can spy,
And by this means their utmost patience try.
Put them to shameful death, be it any way;
For they shall be preserved, as themselves say.
Thus do they go astray, as ev'ly minded,
For they in their own wickedness are blinded.
For, nothing they Gods mysteries regard,
Nor of a good man, hope for the reward:
Neither discern, That honor does belong
Unto the faultlesse Souls that think no wrong.
Genesis 1.27.
For God created Man pure and vnblam'd,
Genesis 3.1.2.
Yea, after his own Image was he framed.
But by the Devils envy, Death came in:
Who holds with him, shall prove the Scourge of sin.
Cap. 5. verse. 1.
But in great boldness shall the Righteous stand,
Against the face of such as did command
Them to the torture; and by might and sway,
The fruits of all their labors took away.
When they shall see him in his strength appear,
They shall be vexed with an horrid fear;
(When they with an amassed countenance
Behold their wonderful deliverance)
And change their minds, and sigh with grief, and say,
Behold these men we labored to betray!
On whom, with all contempt we did incroch,
And held them a mere byword of reproach:
We thought, their lives to madness did extend, Cap. 3.2:

And, there codld be no honor in their end:
How come they now amongst Gods Children told;
And in the list of Saints to be inrol'd?
Therefore, from Truth's way we have deuious bin,
Nor trod the path the Righteous have walked in:
From the true Light we have our selves confined;
Nor has the Sun of Knowledge on us shined.
The way of Wickedness (which leads on
To ruin and destruction) we have gone:
By treading dangerous paths, our selves w' have tired;
But the Lords way we never yet desired.
What profit has our Pride, or Riches, brought?
Or what our Pomp? since these are come to naught.
All these vain things, like shadows are past by; Chr. 29.15.

Or like a Post, that seems with speed to fly: Cap. 2.5.

Or as a Bird (the earth and heaven between) Prove. 30.19.

Who makes her way, and yet the path not seen:
The beating of her wings yields a soft sound;
But of her course there is no appearance found.
As when an Arrow at a mark is shot,
Finds out a way, but we perceive it not;
For suddenly the parted air unites,
And the fore-passage is debat'd our ^ights.
So we, no sooner borne and take our breath,
But instantly we hasten on to death.
In our lives course we in no virtue joyed,
And therefore now are in our sins destroyed.
Th'Vngodlie's hopes to what may we compare? Job. 8.9. Psa. 14. and 143. Pro.
10.25. and 11.7.

But like the dust, that is scattered in the air:
Or as the thin some gathered on the wave, Iam. 1.10.12.

Which when the tempest comes no place can have:
Or as the smoke, dispersed by the wind,
Which blown abroad, no rest at all can find.
Or else; As his remembrance steals away,
Who makes speed, and tarieth but a day.
But of the Just, for ever is the abode;
For their reward is with the Lord their God:
They are the charge and care of the most High,
Who tenders them as the Apple of his eye.
And therefore they shall challenge as their own,
From the Lords hand, a Kingdom and a Crown:
With his right hand he will cover them from harm,
And mightily defend them with his arm.
He shall his Jealousy for Armor take,
And put in arms his Creatures for their sake,
His and their Foes to be revenged upon.
He for a glorious breast plate shall put on,
His Righteousness: and for an Helmet bear
True Judgment, to astonish them with fear:
For an invinc'd shield, Holiness he has:
And for a sword, he sharpens his fierce Wrath.
Nay, the whole World he will muster, to surprise
His Enemies, and fight against the Unwise.
The thunderbolts, by the hand of the most High,
Darted, shall from the flashing lightnings fly;
Yea fly even to the mark: as from the Bow
Bent in the clouds: and in His anger go
That hurleth stones, the thick Hail shall be cast.
Against them shall the Floods and Ocean vast
Be wondrous wroth, and mightily or'eflow:
Besides, the fierce Winds shall upon them blow,
Yea, and stand up against them with their God,
And like a storm shall scatter them abroad.
Thus Wickedness the earth to a Desert brings;
And Sin shall overthrow the Thrones of Kings.
What Atheism is, Doctor Dove in his Confutation of Atheism, Cap. 1.
You hear their doom. It were not much amiss,
If we search further, what this Atheism is.
Observe, That sundry sorts of men there be
Who spurn against the sacred Deity:
As first, Those whom Idolaters we call,
Pagans and Infidels in general.
Gal. 4. Even then when ye knew not God you did service unto them which by
Nature are not Gods.
These, though they be religious in their kind,
Are, in the manner of their worship, blind;
And by the Diuel's instigation won
To worship Creatures, as the Moon and Sun.
Others there be, who the true Godhead know,
Content to worship him in outward show:
Romans 1. They worship the Sun and Moon.
Yet think his Mercy will so far dispense,
That of his Justice they have no true sense:
Psalm. 10. Who say, God has forgotten; he hides his face and will not see.
His Pity they acknowledge, not his Fear;
Because they hold him mild, but not austere.
Some, like brute beasts, will not of sense discuss:
Cor. 1.15.
With such Saint Paul did fight at Ephesus.
Others are in their insolence so extreme,
That they deride Gods name, scoff, and blaspheme:
As Holophernes, who to Achior said; Iud. 6.

Albeit thou such a vain boast have made,
That Isreal's God his people can defend Such was Pharaoh, Exodus 5. and
Rabshakey, Reg. 2.18.

Against my Lord, who does in power transcend;
Where the Earth no greater power knows, near or far,
Than him whom I serve, Nabuchadnezzar.
Diverse will seem religious, to comply
With time and place: but ask their reason, Why
They so conform themselves? They know no cause
More than, To save their purse, and keep the Laws.
There be, to Noble houses make resort;
And sometimes Elbow Great men at the Court, Doctor Dove, in his book against
Atheism

Who though they seem to bear things fair and well,
Yet would turn Moses into Machiuel;
And, but for their advantage and promotion,
Would never make least tender of devotion.
For their Divinity is that which we
Call Policy: their Zeal, Hypocrisy:
Their God, the Devil: whose Imagination
Conceits, That of the world was no Creation.
These have into Gods Works no true inspection,
Dream of no Judgment, Hell, or Resurrection:
Reckon up Genealogies who were
Long before Adam; and without all fear,
(As those doomed to the bottomless Abisme)
Hold, There was no Noah's Ark, no Cataclisme.
Besides; How busy has the Devil bin,
Even from the first, to increase this stupid Sin?
Not ceasing in his malice to proceed,
How to supplant the Tenants of our Creed.
Beginning with the first, (two hundred years 1 Article; I believe in God the
Father.

After our Saviors Passion) he appears
In a full (seeming) strength; and would maintain,
By sundry obstinate Sectists, (but in vain)
There was not one Almighty to begin
The great stupendous Work; but that therein
Many had hand. Such were the Maniches,
Marcionists, Gnostyes, and the like to these.
The second Article he aimed at then; Against God the Son, the second person.

And to that purpose picked out sundry Men,
Proud Heretics, and of his own affinity;
Who did oppose the blessed Sonne's Divinity.
But knowing his great malice to his mind
Did not prevail; he then began to find
God the holy Ghost, the third person.
A cavil against the Third: and picked out those
Who stiffely did the Holy Ghost oppose.
Him from the holy Tria's they would leave;
Mary the blessed Virgin.
Nor yield, The Blest-Maid did by him conceive.
But herein failing; with a visage stern,
That roaring Lion, Those which did concern
The Churches Faith, aimed at: still raising such,
As building on their own conceit too much,
The other Maxims of our known Belief
Mainly withstood. Nay after, (to his grief)
Finding, that in no one he could be said
To have prevailed; he after 'gins to invade
All, and at once: to that great God retyring,
Who cast him down from Heaven for his aspiring.
And to cut off Man's hoped for felicity;
Where he before persuades a multiplicitie
of gods to be adored: He now from Many,
Blinds the dull Atheist, not to confess Any:
Striving (if possible it were) to make
Him, a worse Monster than himself; To take
No notice of his God, nor understand,
That both his life and breath are in his hand:
Insensible, That he who from his Treasure
Leant them at first, can take them back at pleasure:
That He created Sorrow, who made Joy:
(Who reare's, can ruin; and who builds, destroy.)
Nature will teach men, That there is Heaven and Hell.
Which they might gather from bare Natures light;
Observing, That to each day belong's a night:
That as in the one there is a gladsome cheer;
So, to the other does belong a fear:
One figuring the Glory of the Just;
The other, that Hell where Atheists shall be thrust.
A familiar but necessary example.
Next; Let a man be mounted never so high,
Were 't on a spire that is midway to the sky;
Whilst he look's up, with comfort he does gaze
Upon the clouds and the Sun's fulgent rays:
Nor is he troubled, whilst his eyes are bent
Upon the splendour of the Firmament.
But let him thence survey the Earth below,
His heart will pant with many an irksome throw;
His body tremble; sinews and nerves all
Contract themselves, with fear from thence to fall.
The Emblem is; That there is above, a place
Long since prepared for all the Sons of Grace;
Who by a blessed and heavenly contemplation
Look upward, even from whence comes their salvation.
But unto them who seek not God to know,
And only fix their thoughts on things below;
Although no such place visibly appear,
Yet there is an Hell that is full of dread and fear.
Which how can These escape, Mark 1. The Devil says to our Savior; I know
thee, that thou art even that Holy one of God: The like we read, Iam. 2. Acts
19.
who believe less
Than do the Devils? for they both confess
And know there is a God; a Heaven, where placed
They once had been; and for their pride thence cast.
Likewise an Hell, (not threatened them in vain)
Where they both now and ever shall remain.
Shall He who gives us life and length of days,
Pass us without due thanksgiving and praise?
And shall not God be truly understood,
Who in his bounty gives us all that is good?
Or, Shall he nothing from our hands deserve,
Who, what he makes is careful to preserve.
We read of some Beasts, who oppressed with thirst,
And hastening to the rivers margent, Beasts and Birds teach men gratitude
toward God the giver of all good things.
first
Bow down their bodies at the waters brinke,
And fall upon their knees still when they drink.
Birds (as we daily may observe) being dry,
At every drop they taste, look up on high;
As unto Him who sends it them: which speaks,
That without thanks they never wet their beakes.
If Beasts and Birds so grateful be; What then
Shall we imagine of these thanklesse Men,
But, That there is a Gehinnon to contrude
All guilty of such base ingratitude?
That this God is, The Atheists confuted by their own Oaths.
to Atheists may appear;
Because by Him so frequently they swear:
For, Who Is so senseless and obtuse a Sot,
To call to witness that thing which is not?
For, By what Power soever they protest,
The Essence thereof is even in that confessed.
Even Reasons self (maugre this gross impiety) By Reason.

Illustrates unto us, the eternal Dietie.
If we behold a Bark in the Ocean swimming,
We say, Some Ship-wright gave it shape and trimming.
Or, if a Picture in a costly Frame;
It from the Pensill of some Painter came.
Or, where we see an House or Temple stand,
We presuppose some skillful Workmans hand.
Then, If Below we mark the Earth and Ocean:
Above, the Planets in their hourly motion:
So many Winters, Autumnes, Summers, Springs,
And in them, the vicissitude of things:
When we shall all his glorious Creatures view,
Shall we deny him a bare Artists due?
Or, Can we this high potent Undertaker
(Who made both Them and Us) esteem no Maker?
By Philosophy
Philosophy will tell us by her Laws,
That no Effect can be without a Cause:
That every action does an Agent claim:
And every motive, That which moves the same,
Though many causes, Agents, Motions, be;
They are subordinate: and only He
Prime Cause, Agent, and Mouer, who (to our notion)
Is First, of all effect, action, or motion.
Psalm. 104.
Concerning whom, the Psalmist does thus treat:
O Lord my God, thou art exceeding great
In honor, and in Glory shining bright,
Who couers thy great Majesty with light,
As with a garment: that Almighty God,
Who, like a curtain, spreds the Heavens abroad;
And in the unsounded bosom of the streams
Of thy great chambers, have disposed the beams:
Who for thy Chariot, have the Clouds assigned;
And walk'st upon the swiftwings of the wind.
When Man commits evil, he shall find
A God even in the terror of his mind.
Genesis 3.
For, Adam tasting of the Fruit forbid,
(Ashamed) himself within a Thicket hid.
When Herod, John the Baptist had beheaded,
He for that act some fearful vengeance dreaded:
For, hearing of Christ's Miracles, he sed,
Mat. 14.
Surely that John is risen from the dead;
Genesis 4.
Fearing his ghost did haunt him. So when Cain
Had in his wrath his brother Abel slain,
His countenance was dejected and cast down.
For, were there no Accuser but man's own
Conscience it self, he Fear could not eschew;
Prove. 28. Impius fugit nemine persequ^nte.
Because, The Wicked fly when none pursue.
And what are Fears, unto that height extended,
But a mere dread of a just God offended?
Even by Idolaters a God's confessed; Calv. Instit. Lib. 1.

Who rather will adore a Bird, a Beast,
A Fish, a Serpent, Planet, or a Stone,
Nay, even the basest things, rather than none.
Man's appetite, that never can be sated,
Approues a God: for let him be instated
In a small means, a greater he desires:
Give him a Province, and he then aspires
Unto a Realm: a Kingdom let him have,
(Not yet content) he then a World will crave:
Nor rests he there; for, were it in his possession,
Yet bring him in the end to his confession,
He will acknowledge, There is somewhat more
To be acquired; even God, whom we adore.
That men of knowledge should be so ambitious, Arist. Metaph. Lib. 1. cap. 1.
Omnes homines naturaliter scire desideran^.

And in the quest thereof so auaritious;
Yet in that amplitude finding such scant,
That still the more they have, the more they want.
(For in that progress, as they further go,
The more they learn, the more they search to know:)
Besides, Cic. Offic. Lib. 1.
that in this search each one pursu'th
With labor, to inuestigate the Truth.
That simple and pure Truth (the Atheists deny)
Can be no other thing than the Most-High.
Even these, to whom himself he had not shown,
(Save in his Works) confessed him, Empedocl. Deus est euius centru^ est vbique
Circumferentiae aute^ nusquam^ Arist. de Coelo, Lib. 1. Cap. 9. Lib. 2. Cap. 3.
Metaph. lib. 11. cap. 7.
though unknown.
Says one: Each place has of Gods Center sense,
But none can challenge his circumference.
The Stagerite gives him the due applause,
Of the first Cause, and, Of all Causes, Cause;
The Essence of things, Of whom all things subsist;
Author, first Mouer. And unto the list
Of his due titles add's, The Eternal Light,
The most pure Act, Laert. de Vita Aristot.
Immens^, and Infinite. etc.
Whom, the great Flamin Hiero did accuse;
That, against the Countries custom, he should use
The name of one sole God: when all save he
Acknowledged a multiplicitie.
Mercur. Tresmegist. Deus est immutabile ^onum. Mundus factus est propter
hominem: Homo propter Deum.
Goodness Inimitable, He Is likewise styled
By him, who said, The World was first compiled
For Man, and Man for God. There is no doubt
Of God (says Cicero:) The earth throughout
Search, Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
and there is no Nation, in whose breast
A God is not by Natures self impressed. Arnob. aduers. Gentil. lib. 3.

To what can any Atheist this impute;
Niceph. Histor. Lib. 1. Cap. 17. Suidas. Suet. in Octar. ca. 94 70.29.
That at Christ's birth all Oracles were mute,
And put to lasting silence? Whence't might grow,
The Emperor Augustus sent to know,
When all the superstitious Rites were past.
The Oracle thus spoke, (and spoke it is last:)
Me, Puer Hebraeus diuos de. us ipse, gubernat. Ceder^ sede iubet tristemque
redire sub orcum Aris ergo debiac tacitus abscedito nostris: Ara primogeniti
Dei.
An Hebrew Child, God, who all gods does quell,
Bids me give place, be silent, pack to hell:
Henceforth forbear these Altars to adore;
He speaks to you, who never shall speak more.
Upon which answer, his great power to extol,
He did erect in Romes great Capitol,
A Shrine, whereon the Inscription thus does run;
The Altar of Gods first begotten Son.
Isay 9. Natus est nobis Puer. Heb. 2.
A Child is borne to us, Isay says plain:
An Hebrew Child, says Paul; not of the strain
Of Angels; but of Abraham's blessed seed,
And God: There his divine nature is decreed.
God is become a Child: which who shall scan,
Must needs conclude, That Christ is God and Man.
The Oracle, you heard, made that reply:
Hear fully now from Sybels Prophecy;
De Divine. lib. 2.
There shall be borne a King, the World to save.
Yet neither He, nor any Roman, gave
That honor to him living: this they 'xprest,
But lent no faith to that which they confessed.
For Lentulus thinking she did divine
Of him, took part with factious Cateline;
In hope, most of the Senate to remove,
And by that means, his Countries Savior prove.
Lucius Florus, Lib. 4. Cap. 1. Virg. AEclog 4:
Virgil, to Saloninus it applied,
(The son of Pollio) whom he Deify'd;
Because the Father to that hopeful Lad
Was his great Patron. Some suggest, He had
Knowledge of a Messiah, to be borne
Just at that time, the blessed Age to adorn.
Because when Herod (who at that time reigned
King of the Jews) was unto Rome constrained
To tender his Allegiance, always guested
At Pollio's house, where he was nobly feasted.
To which place Virgil frequently resorted;
Antiq. lib. 15. Cap. 23.
(For so of him Josephus has reported.)
This was Constantine, syrnamed the great.
But Constantine was first, made Proclamation
Amongst all the Romans, of Christ's Incarnation.
Some of their Prophets, in an Enthean fury,
Predicted, That a King should come from Jury,
To Monarchise the World: which when they knew, Ios. Bell. Iud. lib. 7. Cap. 12.

They gave it not to Jesus, (as his due)
But to Vespasian did the style resign,
Because 't was he that conquered Palestine.
At Christ's Nativity (as some relate)
Those Heathen gods whom they did celebrate Dio, Romans Hist. lib. 37.

With divine Worship, and did most extol,
Fell from their Shrines in the high Capitol.
Their Styles in Brass engraved, and in Marble rac't,
That Time, by Lightning, blemished and defaced.
Which had a president of like remarke,
When Dagons Image fell before the Arc.
In the first month, and sixth day of the same, January 6.

When great Octauius Caesar took the name
Augustus; did the Wisemen Offerings bring
To Christ, saluting him both God and King.
What time, all Forfeits, Debts, Bills of Account,
(Which did unto an infinite surmount)
Kept in the Empires Chamber, were by fire Oros. hist. lib. 6. cap. 2.

To ashes burnt. Which showed (if we retire
Into our selves) He came into the World,
That Savior of Mankind; on whom were hurled
All our transgression, trespass, sin, offense: Coloss. 2.

With which He, and He only can dispense,
Who, to repair the former Adams loss,
Had all these with him nailed upon the Cross.
Then, out of Wells and Fountains issued Oil,
Which from the Earths moist intrals seemed to boil:
Which did express, He was the Sole appointed
To bear the title of, The Lords Anointed.
Upon which miracle, Augustus made
A solemn Edict to be drawn, which said, Doctor Dove against Atheism, ca. 13.

That he no more a Lord would called be,
Since there was borne a greater Lord than he.
Herod's great Temple, which did seem to aspire
Even to the clouds above, was set on fire Th. Godwin, in Moses and Aaron.

By Titus soldiers; and to such a flame
It grew, no humane help could quench the same.
Just at that time the Oraculous Temple fell,
In Delphos reared; where many a doubtful Spell
Was vtter'd, (by a fearful Earthquake shook
And torn asunder, as being Thunder-strooke:)
Genebr. Chron. li. 2 an. Chapter 69.
And neither of them could be since repaired,
It being an attempt that no man dared.
Theod. lib. 30. cap. 11.
The apparancie of which miraculous ruin,
(In both so famous) to the Times ensuing
Sozimen. lib. 5. cap. 19, 20, 21.
Left it to be remark't, That from their fall,
The Gentile Customs were abolisht all;
And the idolatrous worship (frequent then)
Began to steal out of the hearts of men:
That Christ his doctrine, newly set on foot,
Might in our souls take deep and prosperous root.
Against the Sadduces, who deny the resurrection.
What think you of the pestilent infection
Of those which did deny the Resurrection,
In our blessed Sauiors and the Apostles days?
A Sect the Sadduces began to raise:
A people of dull brain and devilish quality,
Denying God, and the Souls Immortality.
These, when they listened to his blessed tongue,
And heard him preach aloud to old and young;
How far his Fathers power and might extended,
With Majesty not to be comprehended;
The glory of the Saints; and wretched state
Of the Unregenerate and the Reprobate:
Matthew can tell you how they did behave them,
And what reproof the mouth of Wisdom gave them.
Mat. 22.31.
Thus our blessed Savior said: Have you not read,
Touching the resurrection of the Dead,
What God has spoke to Moses? I am the God
Exodus 3.6:
Of Abraham, of Isaac, and Jacob:
(So much to your dull understandings giving)
God is not of the Dead, God, but the Living. etc.
Amongst those, with blind Will seduced thus,
Was Theodorus Cyrenaicus
Accounted; one that seeming to look high
In knowledge grounded on Philosophy,
Would by his Inferences make 't appear,
We had no God at all to govern here;
But all things by mere Nature did subsist
(Which showed, he was no good Theologist:)
But when his vain Positions were disputed
In Athens, they not only were confuted;
In Schola Perepaseticorum.
But (his weak Tenants hist out of the Schools)
He rank't in the Nomenclature of Fools:
A ridiculous assertion of the Atheist.
For thus he argued: If a God there be,
He must be a thing living (such as we)
Called Animal: If live, he must have sense:
If sensible, ('t was his next inference)
He must of force be subject to mutation:
If mutable; then, by that transmigration,
Capable of corruption: And if so,
Subject to perish. Then from hence must grow
This full conclusion; That it may befall
In time, this Being not to be at all.
Nay thus he will not leave it, but proceeds;
(For Ignorance, an Insolence still breeds)
If to this God (says he) no body's lent,
He then can have no soul, by consequent:
Having no soul, all action he is deprived.
Or if he have a body, that is derived
From substance; therefore subject unto change.
Appears not this as frivolous, as strange,
To any Understander? Who but knows,
That every action of the body grows
From the Intelligent Soul? whose faculty A refutation of the former Argument.

Allows it motion and dexterity.
Therefore, o miserable Worm, I can
In this afford thee scarce the name of Man.
Open but the eyes of Nature, and look out
Merely with them, (none else) and thou no doubt
Wilt find thy selfe's obfuscate and obscured
So void of sens'ble light, and so immured,
With palped darkness, to be blind at least,
And nothing diffring from the irrational Beast.
And therefore that of Zenophantes may Zenoph. against Atheism.

Be well conferred on thee. Hear him thus say:
Had Brutes the art of Painting, they of force
Must draw themselves; a Horse, figure a Horse;
An Ass or Mule, their Like: the reason, why
They 're capable of no sublimitie
Beyond themselves; nor have further extension,
Than merely their own brutish apprehension.
Such childish and vnmomentary grounds
These Atheists build upon: which whosoever sounds
But with the line of Reason, shall descry
Their irreligious fond impiety.
He that shall with himself exactly way What Atheists are.

Those gross and absurd lies, may soon display,
That they are arrogant, full of vainglory,
Irregular from truth, and refractorie;
Vnlearn'd, replenisht with all lust and vice;
Seducers, Mockers, full of Riotise;
Time-soothers, Flat'rers, perfidious all,
In word, deed, thought, mere diabolical.
Now these, because themselves have left the best,
The Tenants of Atheists.
And, against Nature, heinously transgrest;
Of the Creator having no respect,
And casting on their own souls a neglect;
By ill example, others would persuade,
That Divine Laws for policy were made;
That Hell's a Bug-beare to keep men in fear;
That Scriptures to that end devised were:
Persuading others, to eat, drink, and play,
Since after death, there is no further day
Ede, bibe, ^nde, post mortem nulla voluptas
To be Accountant in: Their lusts to cherish,
Since that the Soul must with the body perish.
That Man was made unto no other end,
Than please his appetite, be his own friend:
And, That all evils, even with good things run,
If politiquely, and in private done.
Such are their actions and their lives: but when
They 're brought unto the Test, behold them then!
At the last gasp most ready to catch hold
Upon the least hope, durst they make so bold.
Look on your father Aristotle, the best
(And Ipse) that Philosophy professed:
When unto him (who all strange Nouels sought)
Amongst others, Moses his first book was brought,
Called Genesis: Those few words having read;
God in the first beginning created
The Heavens and Earth, [etc.] Away with this, says he,
'T is full of fables and new fantasy,
That speaks of many things, but nothing proves;
And that a true Philosopher not loves.
Aristotle at his death.
But drawing near his end; when he began
More truly to consider, What was man;
He into strange anxieties does grow,
Whether the Soul, immortal were, or no?
His body trembles, every joint does shake;
And these ('t is said) were the last words he spoke:
Pollutedly into the world I came;
Sad and perplexed I lived; and from the same,
Much troubled I depart. O, pity me,
Eus Entium, vel vt alij, causa causarum.
Thou, of all Beings only known to Be.
If from the wisest of you all, this came;
Learn to know Him who only writes, I am.
He is Heavens King, and Lord of Earth alone; In Trinitate est Alius, and Alius
non Aliud and Aliud. Aug. de Trin.

In Person three, but yet in Godhead one;
Truly Omnipotent, All-knowing, and
In Heaven and Earth, of sovereign sole command:
His Nature, simple, bodilesse, unseen;
Vncirconscribed, to whom nothing has been, Gods Infinity.

Is, or shall be superior understood:
Great, without quantity; without quality, good;
Most perfect, without blemish; without Time,
Eternal; in his potencie sublime:
Strength, without Weakness; Life, without Decay;
Present each where, and yet does no where stay;
All things at once, without advice, directing;
All things at once, without least pain, protecting.
He is without beginning, and yet gives
A First, to each thing that subsists and lives:
Who has made all things changeable; yet He
Stable, and free from mutabilitie.
Himself without place; all things else instating;
Without materials, all his works creating:
In greatness infinite; goodness, incomparable;
In virtue, strong; wisdom, inestimable.
So secret, no man can deceive his trust:
In Counsels, terrible; in Judgments just:
Copious in Mercy, glorious in his Name,
Holy in all his Works; (always The same.)
Eternal, Sempiternall, Liuing-God;
Inchangeable, in Essence, or Abode:
Whom Space cannot enlarge, nor Place confine;
Constant in Purpose; and in Act, Divine.
Him, Need compells not; nor can Chances sad
Disturb: neither can Joyful things make glad:
Oblivion takes not; nor can Memory add
To him; Unborn; to whom old Time can lend
No 'ncrease at all; nor casual Chance give end:
He before Worlds (Those are, and These must be)
Was, Is, and shall live to Eternity:
Above all Apprehension, Thought, Opinion.
Therefore to Him be all Praise, Power, Dominion;
All singular Honor, Glory (with Congruity
Of Saints, Angels, and Men) to perpetuity
Be ascribed; with all the Attributes extending,
Through all unwearied Worlds, and without ending.
QVod Deus est, scimus: sed quid, si scire velimus;
Vltra nos imus: sed quod sit sumus and imus;
Vltimus and primus, scimus, plus scire nequimus.
The English:
That there is a God, we know:
But what he is, to show,
Beyond our selves we go.
His Height and Depth below.
Him, First and Last, we know;
But more we cannot show.
THEOLOGICAL, Philosophical, Moral, Poetical, Historical, Emblematicall,
Observations, to the further illustration of the former Tractate.
THat nothing in these short Tractates may appear difficult to the Ignorant, I
hold it necessary unto my present purpose, (as willing to be understood by
all) to illustrate whatsoever may seem obscure, as well by Precept as History.
Which though the Learned may pass over, as things to them familiar and well
known: yet unto others, (neither frequent in reading, nor well traveled in
language;) no doubt, but some of our marginal Annotations, with other
particular Observations, may in their careful perusal, benefit such as read
not only for fashion, but use, and make it not their pastime, but their
profit. For that was the end to which industrious Authors first aimed their
Indeauors, and spent so much Ink and Oil, in their days labors, and nights
watchings. Nor do I this without president, and therefore am the more willing
to pattern my self by example.

Atheism and Impiety (says Cardanus Paschal.) is a mere contempt of
Religion, Lib. de Virtu^. and Vitijs.
and therefore by consequence, the Fountain of Impiety, and Breeder of all
Calamity. The contempt of Divine Worship is injustice against God, our
Parents, and Country; as adverse to Reason, as Goodness: and all that are
thereunto obnoxious, either believe not there is a God, or believe him to be
what he is not; or knowing, despise him: by which they become as negligent in
Humane actions, as careless of Divine. From hence arise wicked cogitations,
blasphemous speeches, and nefarious proiects; al which are abominable in the
sight of God and man, as in all their refractorie courses professing no
reverence or regard of the Creator: by which they can have no commerce with any
thing that is essentially good or honest.

In Athens a strict Edict was made, A law in Athens against Atheism.
That all such as were proved to be Divum Contemptores, (i.) Scorners or
Despisers of the gods, should be conuented before the Areopagitae; and being
convicted, their goods were sold at a public outcry, and their irreligions
graven upon pillars, to make their persons odible. Those also who aimed their
injuries and insolences against their Parents, Countries, or any superior
Magistrates, were not only branded with infamy, but their bodies punished
with great severity. Of the former Iuvenal thus speaks: Iuv. Satyr. 3.
Sunt qui infortunae iam casibus, omnia ponunt;
Et nullo credunt mundum rectore moveri:
Natura volvente vices, and lucis, and anni;
Atque ideo intrepid^ quaecunque altaria tangunt.
Some, all the Power, to Chance and Fortune give,
And no Creator of the world believe.
Say, Nature guide's the Sun's course, and the year:
These touch the holy Altars without fear.


What may we think then of Cheopes King of Egypt, remembered by Herodotus;
Herod. lib. 2.
who caused all the Temples throughout his Provinces to be fast shut and barred
up, left any of his people should offer divine sacrifice unto the gods. In
Suidas.
We read likewise of Diagoras melius, (before spoken of) who flourished in the
eighty eighth Olympiad: This Man, because he persuaded the People from the
worship of their gods, was not only banished Athens, (the city wherein he
taught) but after his confinement, a Talent was proposed for a reward to him
that would kill him. These and the like were (no doubt) altogether ignorant,
That man was created for the service of God; and, That there can be no surer
sign of the imminent ruin of a Kingdom and Commonweal, than Contempt of
Religion: of which (says Basil) no Creature is capable, but Man only. Where
no Religion rests, there can be no virtue abiding, says Saint Augustine.
Therefore, the first Law that ought to be imposed on man, is, The practice of
Religion and Piety: for if we did truly apprehend the virtue thereof; from
thence the Voluptuous man would suppress his pleasures; the Covetous man
acquire his wealth; the Proud man derive his felicity; and the Ambitious man,
his glory: being the Bodies health, and the Souls happiness, and indeed, the
only mean to fill the empty corners of the heart, and satisfy the unlimited
affects of the Desire.

Cap. de Atheism^.
Josephus Langius reports, That diverse learned and religious men supping
together by appointment; a professed Philosopher (or rather a profane Atheist)
had intruded himself among them; who in all his arguing and discourse spoke in
the contempt of Religion, and the Souls future felicity: often uttering these
words; Coelum Coeli Domino: Terram autem dedit filijs hominum; (i.) Leave
Heaven to the Lord of heaven: but the Earth he gave to the sons of men. At
length he was struck with an extraordinary judgment, being tormented at once
in all the parts and members of his body, so that he was forced to exclaim and
cry, o Deus, o Deus; o God, o God. Which the rest observing, one of them
vpbraided him in these words: Think thou, o Natural man, to contemn so
great a Deity, and to vilify his holy Ordinance, and escape unpunished? Whom
another thus seconded, Do thou now begin to distrust thy philosphy? and to
call upon, and complain unto him, whom til now thou either would not, or
did not know? Why do thou not suffer that Lord of heaven to rest quietly
in that heaven which he has made, but that thou thus importunest him with thy
clamours? Where is now thy Coelum Coeli Domino? etc.

Lucian (of whom I before gave a short Character) was surnamed Samosatensis,
Volat. in Antropol^
because borne in Samosata, (a city situate not far from Euphrates) he was
called Blasphemus, Maledicus, and Atheos. He lived in the time of Traianus
Caesar, and was at first an Advocate or Lawyer, and practiced at Antioch, a
city in Syria: but it seems, not thriuing by his parsimonious and close-fisted
Clients; he forsook that profession, and retired himself, though to a less
profitable, yet a more pleasing study, namely, to be a follower of the Muses.
Volaterranus reports of him, That he was a Christian, but after proved a
Renegade from that Faith: and being demanded, Why he turned Apostata? his
answer was, That he had gained nothing by that profession, more than one bare
syllable added to his name; being christened Lucianus, where before his name
was plain Lucius. His death (as the best approved Authors relate of him) was
wretched and miserable: The death of Lucian a professed Atheist.
for walking late in the evening, he was assaulted by band-dogs, and by them
worried and torn in pieces. A most condign punishment inflicted upon him,
because in his life time he spared not to snarle against the Savior of the
world. And me-thinkes the Epitaph which he composed upon his own Timon of
Athens, syrnamed Misanthropos, i. Man-hater, might not improperly be conferred
upon himself: Hic iaceo vita, miseraque Inopique solutus
Nomen ne quaeras, sed male tale peri.
Here do I lie deprived of life,
Most miserable and poor:
Do not demand my name, I died,
Remember me no more.


Superfluous it were to make much foreign inquisition abroad, seeing so many
domesticke judgments at home. Far be it from me to judge, but rather to fear,
that many of them have been made remarkable among us, by reason of Irreligion
and Atheism. I forbear to nominate any, both for the dignity of their places,
and greatness of their persons: The strange prodigious effects of Atheism.
yet has it been no more than a nine days wonder, to see the loss of heads,
the breaking of necks from horses, some pistolled when they have been least
prepared; some stabbed with their own poniards, others providing halters for
their own necks; a son thrusts his sword through the womb of the mother
which conceived him; one brother insidiates the life of another; the husband
has killed his wife, the wife slain her husband, and both of them their
children; the master his servant, the servant his master; the mistress her
maid, the maid her mistress. And what can all these be, but the fruits of the
neglecting of the Lord God, and the contempt of his Sabbath.

Much to be lamented it is, that these things should be so frequent amongst
Christians, nay our own kingdom; when even the Ethnicke Poets in their
writings have expressed not only an honor due to their gods, but even unto the
days dedicated unto their memories. Plautus uses these words; Plaut. in
Milite.
Quod in diuinis rebus sumas sumptus sapienti lucro est, etc. i. That which a
wise man bestows upon Divine worship, is no loss but a gain unto him. And
Ovid speaking of their holy days, Lib. Fast. 1.
Postera lux oritur, linguisque animisque fauete:
Nunc dicenda bono, sunt bona verba die. etc.
The Feast is come, your tongues and minds compel
To speak good words, this day becomes them well.
Keep your ears free from vain and mad contention;
Workmen cease work, be free from reprehension.
And Tibullus upon the like occasion and argument; Tibul. Eleg. lib. 2. Eleg. 1.
Luce sacra requiescat humus requiescat Arator. etc.
Upon the sacred day let the ground rest,
Nor let it be with the rude Plow oppressed.
Your yokes unloose; of labor there is no need;
Let your crowned Oxen at the manger feed.
All Holy Days a privilege should win,
In which let not the handmaid card or spin.


How people ought to come prepared to their sacrifices and offerings, is thus
lively expressed in Ovid: Innocui veniant, procul hinc, procul impius esto
Frater, and in partus Matter, etc.


Thus interpreted: The Innocuous hither come; Fast. lib. 2.
Brothers profane
And impious Mothers from this place abstain.
He that shall think his father lives too long,
Or that his mothers life may his state wrong;
The moth'r in law, that hates her step-sonnes life;
And the Tantalidan brothers (still in strife)
Be banished hence: Medea come not here,
Nor Progne, nor her sister, let appear
In that choice place where we the gods applaud;
Nor any that has gained his wealth by fraud.
So careful were the Poets to commend Virtue to posterity, and to lay a
black aspersion on Vice to all perpetuity; that such as were pious and
addicted to goodness, they striued to memorise, if not immortalise; and those
of the contrary that were irreligious, and despisers of the gods, they labored
in all their Records to expose their lives and actions to aspersion and
obloquie. For example:

For their chastity these were made remarkable: Those famous for Chastity.
Penelope, the daughter of Icarius, and wife to Ulysses. Evadne, daughter to
Philax, and wife to Capanaeus. Laodamia, daughter to Acastus, wife to
Protesilaus. Hecuba, daughter of Cissaeus, wife to King Priamus. Theone
daughter of Thestor, wife to King Admetus. And amongst the Romans, Lucretia,
daughter of Lucretius, wife to Collatyne. etc.

For their Piety these: Those famous for Piety.
Antigona the daughter of Oedipus, who gave sepulture to her brother Polynices.
Electra daughter of Agamemnon, for her love to her brother Orestes. Iliona,
daughter of Priam, for her goodness extended toward her brother Polidore and
her parents. Pelopaea, daughter of Thiestes, for revenging the injuries done
unto her father. Hypsipilae, daughter of Thoas, for preserving the life of her
Parent. Calciope, for not forsaking her father in his misery, after the loss
of his kingdom. Harpalice, daughter of Harpalicus, for interposing her self
in battle, preserving her Father, and chasing his enemies. Agave, the daughter
of Cadmus, who in Illyria slew the King Lycotherses, by which she restored her
Father to his kingdom. Xantippe, who when her father Myconus (or as it is read
in Valerius, Lib. 5. cap. 4.
Cimonus) was shut up in close prison there to be famished, preserved his life
with the milk from her breasts. Tyro, the daughter of Salmoneus, who to save
her father, sacrificed the lives of her own children. etc.

And of men, Damon, who snatched his mother from the fire. AEneas, for bearing
his father on his shoulders through swords and flames. Cleops and Bitias (or
according to Herodotus, Cleobis and Biton) the sons of Cidippe, Priest unto
Juno Argiua, for drawing their mother in her Chariot unto the Temple, when her
Oxen were absent, and the penalty of her not being there was no less than the
loss of her life. etc.

Those that have built Temples.
Some they have eternised for erecting of Temples; as Pelasgus the son of
Triopa, who was the first that built a Church consecrate to Jupiter Olympius,
in Arcadia. Thessalus reared another to Jupiter Dodonaeus, in Macedonia,
situate in Molossus. Eleuther was the first that erected an image unto Liber
pater, and taught how it should be honored. Phronaeus, the son of Inacus, was
the first that built a Temple to Argiue Juno. Otrira the Amazon, and wife of
Mars, laid the foundation of that in Ephesus, and dedicated it unto Diana.
Lycaon, the son of Pelasgus, erected another to Mercury Cillenius, in Arcadia.
etc.

Such as of mortal men have bin immortalised.
Some for diverse vettues known to be in them, they have immortalised, and of
men, made gods: to encourage others by their example. As Hercules, the son of
Jupiter and Alcmena, for his justice in supplanting Tyrants and Usurpers. Liber
Pater, or Bacchus, the son of Jupiter and Semele, for being supposed to be
the first that planted the Vine. Castor and Pollux, the sons of Jupiter and
Laeda, and brothers to Helena, for their valor and virtue. Perseus the son
of Jupiter and Danae, was for the like, translated into a star. So was Arcas,
the son of Jupiter and Calisto (who first gave that province the denomination
of Arcadia) related into one of the Septentriones: and Cynosura the Nurse of
Juno into another. The like we read of Asclepius the son of Apollo; Erodine,
and Ariadne, the daughter of Minos and Pasiphae; who being forsaken by Theseus
in the Isle Naxos, and found by Liber Pater, was placed amongst the stars, by
the name of Libera. Pan, the son of Mercury and Penelope, was for his care over
the herds and flocks, made one of those gods called Semones, Half gods, half
men.
i. Semi homines. So Croton, the son of Pan and Euphemes, (who was said, in his
infancy to have sucked with the Muses) was transferred into the star called
Sagittary. So were Icarus, with his daughter Erigone: he, changed into
Arcturus; and she, into the celestial Sign Virgo. As Ganimed the son of
Assaracus, into Aquarius. etc.

Others for other causes have had free ingresse and regresse in and from Hell.
Those that returned from Hell.
As Ceres, when in her maternall piety she sought her daughter Proserpina, and
found her in the arms of Pluto. Liber Pater, when in his filial duty he made
descent to visit his mother Semele. Hercules, when he brought thence Cerberus.
Protesilaus, to re-visit his wife Laodamia. Alceste, for her husband Admetus.
Theseus, in search of his dear and entired friend Perithous. Orpheus the son
of Oeagrus, to fetch thence his best beloved wife Euridice. Castor and Pollux:
Ulysses and AEneas, (the one the son of Laertes, the other of Anchises) to
visit their fathers. Hippolitus the son of Theseus, who was after called
Virbius. Adonis the son of Cymizes and Smirna, by the intercession of the
goddess Venus, whose Paramour he was. Glaucus the son of Minos, restored to
life by Polyidus the son of Caranus. etc.

Now of the contrary; Of those branded for their Impiety.
such whose barbarous cruelties and strange impieties were related unto us,
were, Sylla the daughter of Nysus, who by cutting off his purple lock,
betrayed unto the Enemy his life and kingdom. Ariadne the daughter of Minos,
who slew her brother and sons. Progne the daughter of Pandion, who murdered
her son Itis, begot by her husband Tereus. The Daiedes or Danaes, daughters
of Danaus, for cutting the throats of their husbands and kinsmen, the sons of
AEgiptus. The Lemniades, or women of Lemnos, who in the same Island most
cruelly slew their sons and fathers. Harpalice the daughter of Climenus, who
killed the child which her incestuous father begot on her own body. Tullia
the daughter of Servius King of the Romans, who caused her chariot to be drawn
over the body of her dead father: for the horridness of which fact, the street
in the city Rome where this was done, was called Vicus sceleratus.

Of those abhorred for Incestuous congresse, Of the Incestuous.
the most remarkable were, Iocasta, who had issue by her son Oedipus: and
Pelopaea, by her father Thiestes. Harpalice, with her Sire Climenus. etc.

Some are to this day made infamous for killing their husbands: Wives that slew
their husbands.
As Clitemnestra the daughter of Thestius, for conspiring with Egistus in the
murder of her Lord Agamemnon, the son of Atreus. Iliona the daughter of Priam,
for killing her husband Polymnestor K. of Thrace. Semyramis Queen of Babylon,
for the death of Ninus King of Assyria. Helena, (after the death of Paris)
Deiphebus the son of Priam. Agave, her husband Lycothersis in Illyria: and
Deianeira, for sending the poisonous Shirt to her Lord Hercules of Lybia. etc.

Others for killing their wives: Men that slew their wives.
As the same Hercules his wife Megara, the daughter of Creon King of Thebes.
Theseus Antiopa the Amazon, and daughter of Mars. Cephalus the son of Deionis
or of Mercury, Procris, the daughter of Pandion, by his vain jelousie, etc.

Fathers that slew their daughters.
Fathers for killing their daughters: As Agamemnon the great General of the
Grecian Army, in their famous expedition against Troy; who sacrificed his
daughter Iphigenia to the goddess Diana. Climenus the son of Oeneus, slew
his daughter Harpalice, because she killed her child, and served it in unto him
at a banquet. Hyacinthus, his daughter Spariantides, upon an answer returned
from the Athenians. Erichthaeus the son of Pandion, his daughter Colophonia
upon the like occasion. Cercyon the son of Vulcan, his daughter Alopes, for
committing incest with Neptune. AEolus, his daughter Canace, for the like done
with her brother Mallaraeus. etc.

Mothers that slew their children.
Of mothers that most cruelly and unnaturally have murdered their own
children; we read, That Medea the daughter of O^tes King of Colchos, slew her
two sons, Machareus and Pherelus, begot by Jason. Progne the daughter of
Pandion, killed her son It is which she had by Tereus. Ino the daughter of
Cadmus, young Melicertes, begat by Athamas the son of AEolus. Althaea the
daughter of Thestius, Meleager, by Oeneus the son of Partha^n. Themisto the
daughter of Hypseus, Plinthius and Orchomenes, her two sons by Athamas. Tyros
the daughter of Salmoneus, two sons begot by Sisiphus the son of Eolus.
Agave the daughter of Cadmus, Penthaus the son of Echion, at the imposition
of Liber Pater. etc.

Of men Selfe-murtherers.
So likewise of Selfe-murtherers; Egeus the son of Neptune, and father of
Theseus, cast himself headlong into the sea; from whose death it still
retains the name of Mare Egeum, i. the Egean sea. Euhemus the son of
Hercules precipitated himself into the river Lycorma, which is now called
Chrysorroas. Ajax the son of Telamon, slew himself for the loss of Achilles
his armor. Lycurgus the son of Briantus being struck with madness by Liber
Pater, laid violent hands upon himself. Agrius the son of Parthaon being
expulsed from his kingdom by Diomedes King of AEtolia, slew himself. So
Ceneus the son of Elatus. Menicus the father of Iocasta, (or as some call
him, Menaetis) precipitated himself from the walls of Athens. Nisus the son of
Mars, having lost his purple lock, cast himself upon his sword and so died.
As likewise Climenus, the son of Coeneus King of Arcadia, after he had
committed incest with his daughter. Cyniras the son of Paphus King of
Assyria, after he had committed the like with his own natural child.
Hercules cast himself into the fire, and so perished. Adrastus with his son
Hipponous did the like. Pyramus the Babylonian slew himself for the love of
Thisbe. And Oedipus the son of Laius destroyed his own life, for having
incestuous Issue by his mother, whose name was Iocasta. etc.

Of Women that so dispairingly died, Women that slew themselves.
these: Hecuba the wife of Priam cast her self into the sea: as Ino the
daughter of Cadmus did the like, with her son Melicertus. Anticlia the mother
of Ulysses, and daughter of Antolychus, strangled her self, because she heard
a false rumor of her sons death. The like did Stoenobaea the daughter of
Iobates, and wife of King Praetus, for the love of Bellerephon. Evadne the
daughter of Philacus, because her husband Capaneus was slain at Thebes, cast
her self into the same funeral fire in which his body was burned. AEthra the
daughter of Pythaus, for the death of her children: Iliona, for the death of
her parents: Themisto, for her children: Erigone, for her father. Phedra, for
the incestuous love borne to her step-sonne Hyppolitus: Phyllis, for Demophoon:
Calypso daughter to Atlas, for the love of Ulysses: Dido the daughter of Belus,
for AEneas. etc. Time would sooner fail me than History: yet these I have
introduced to this purpose, to show, That Atheism, and want of the true
knowledge of God, has bin the cause of so many Murders and Incests; and has
made so many Parracides and Fratricides, and indeed has been the ground of
all prodigious acts and inhumanities whatsoever.

Something is requisite to be spoken of Idolatry. Of Idolatry.
The word is derived from (...) and (...), i. Cultus, and Colo: The definition
thereof is, Cultus Deo debitus, and Creaturae exhibitus: i. The worship that is
due only to God, confer upon the Creature. An Idol is, when any Statue or
Image (in which either some Deity or any other thing shall stand for a Power,
a Patron, Protector, or Savior) is represented and worshipped: Of which kind
was the golden Calfe. Exodus 37.4.
Basil says, Acts. 7 41.
upon the third of Esaias; What thing can appear more vain and ridiculous, than
for a man to profess himself to be the workman of his God and Maker.

To show how abominable Idolatry was in the eyes of the Almighty, I will only
quote you one place out of many, in the holy Text: Deuteronomy. 4^5.
Take therefore good heed unto your selves; for you saw no Image in the day
that the Lord spoke to you in Horeb, out of the midst of the fire: that you
corrupt not your selves, nor make you a graven Image, or representation of any
figure, whether it be likeness of male or female, the likeness of any beast
that is on the earth, or of any feathered foul that flies in the air, or of
any thing that creeps on the earth, or of any fish that is in the waters
beneath the earth. And lest thou lift up thine eyes to heaven, and when thou
see the Sun, the Moone^ and the Stars, with all the Host of heaven,
should be driven to worship them and to serve them, which the Lord thy God
has distributed unto all people under the whole Heaven. Verse. 25.
And again: If you corrupt your selves, and make any graven Image, or
likeness of any thing, and work evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to
Provoke him to anger^ I call Heaven and Earth to record against you this day,
that you shall shortly perish from the land whereunto you go over Jordan to
possess it; you shall not prolong your days therein, but shall utterly be
destroyed, and the Lord shall scatter you among the people, and you shall be
left few in number amongst the Nations whither the Lord shall bring you; and
there you shall serve gods, even the work of men's hands, which neither see nor
hear, nor eat, nor smell. etc.

Lib. 2. cap. 1. Deuin. Instit.
Men (says Lactantius) both forgetful of their Name and Reason, deiect their
eyes from heaven, to fix them upon the earth, fearing the works of their own
fingers; as if it were possible the thing made, could be more noble and worthy
than the Artificer that made it. The Poet Sedulius writes thus: Heu miseri! qui
vana colunt, qui cord sinistro
Religiosa sibi sculpunt simulacra. etc.
O wretched men, that such vain things adore,
And your religious sculptures fall before,
With corrupt hearts: who not the God that laid
The worlds great frame; but what your selves have made,
Honor and fear. What madness is it, or folly,
Man should imagine his own Work so holy,
To worship it? Or to a Bird or Brute,
Serpent, or Dog, himself to prostitute?


Saint Augustine, de Bono Conjugali and Habit. has these words; Satius est
fame mori quam Idolothytis vesci. And Hieron. ad Damas. Aptandus est omnis
sermo ad destructionem Idololatriae: (i.) All speech ought to be fitted and
applied to the subversion and destruction of Idolatry.

Idols named in the Scrip.
The names of the Idols mentioned in the sacred Scripture be these; Adonis,
Adramelech the Idol of the Sepharuaims, it bore the figure of a Peacock or a
Mule: Asdod of the Philistines, which is likewise called Dagon: Anamelech,
which bore the semblance of a Horse or Pheasant Cock, belonging to the
inhabitants of Sepharuaim: Arza, an Idol worshipped by King Ela in his own
house. Afima adored by the Hemathaeans, like a wild Goat. Asteroth the goddess
of the Sydonians, in the figure of a Sheep: Baal a common Idol among the
Gentiles: Baal Berothe the god of the Sichemites: Baal peior or Baal phegor, of
the Moabites, which some have said to be Priapus: Baal zebub, of the
Accarronites and the Ecronites: Baal zephon of the Egyptians: Bell of the
Babylonians: Chamos (vel Chemosch) of the Ammoreans and Ammonites, which was
otherwise called Baal peior: Canopus of the Egyptians: Chium an Idol of the
Israelites; which some interpret, Sidus, a Star or planet: others,
Saturninus, like a Fish, but from the waste upward like a beautiful woman.
Namaea, which some think to be Diana, because worshipped in her Temple at
Ephesus: Draco, a Babylonian Idoll^ Esch, an Idol in the Temple of Fire, which
was worshipped by the Persians: Gad, a military Idol, which some called Mars;
others, ^upiter; others, Fortune; others interpreted it, The Host or Army of
Heaven. Hercules, who was sacrificed unto by the Tyrians: Jupiter Olympius,
Jupiter Xenius, gods of the Gentiles: Malcholme, (which was also called Molech
and Milcholme) an Idol amongst the Ammonites: Meni, an Idol worshipped most
by Merchants; which some interpret to be Mercury; others, the Fates, the
Planets, and number of the Stars. Niphlezeth, some interpret it Priapus;
others, an horrid Effigies; and it was adored by Maacha the mother of Asa.
Nabaam is the same with Nibchaz the Idol of the Hevites: Neabo, a Babylonian
Idol: Nechustan is supposed to be that which the Jews worshipped in the form
of a brazen Serpent. Nergal the Idol of the Cuthaeans, and was figured like a
Wood-Hen or shee-Pheasant. Orimasda is the same with Vrchasdim, that is,
Holy-fire. Rimmon, an Idol of Syria: Remphan, the Idol of a Planet, of which
Stephen makes mention in the Acts. Sucot Benoth a Babylonian Idol: Sychuth,
one belonging to the Israelites: Thartak the Idol of the Hevaeans: Thamnaz, one
that was worshipped by the Israelites; which some interpret Adonides; others,
Bacchus. The golden Calfe in the Desert, made by Aaron: the golden Calfe in
Dan, set up by Ierobos: the golden Calfe in Bethel, instituted by Jeroboam the
son of Nebat: and Vrchasd^m, which was called Ignis Damonum, and Ignis sacer,
which the Chaldaeans worshipped: and for all these, we have them catalogued in
the holy Text.

The confutation of Atheism being debated much, and determined by many, I have
therefore been the more brief therein; though I must confess, in regard of
the great irreligion and impiety practiced by profane persons and licentious
livers of this Age, it is a Theme that would ask longer circumstance: but it
is my purpose, rather to present you with satietie, than surfeit. Yet when I
consider, how careful and obseruant the very Heathen were in the service and
reverence done to their Idols, and see what a neglect is now used in the
adoration of the Creator and only true God; it is to be feared, that even
AEneas amongst others will be called to attest against us in the later day; who
in that terrible night of the sack and firing of Troy, having made his passage
through sword and flame, yet in that extreme exigent not for getting to take his
household gods along, thus spoke to his aged and decrepit father: AEn. lib. 2.
The piety of AEnean
Tu Genitor, cape sacra manu patriosque penates
Me, bello ex tanto digressum and caede recenti
Attrectare nefas, donec me flumine viuo
Abluero, etc.
Which I thus paraphrase: You Father, take these sacred things to bear,
For your innocuous hands are white and clear.
Once touch my Country gods, for me to dare
(But newly rusht out from so great a War
And recent slaughter) were a wicked thing,
Till I have lav'd me in some living Spring.


The subtilty of the Devil.
Such and so great has been the subtlety of the Devil, the old adversary of
Mankind, that all his labor and study has bin from the beginning, to alienate
and intercept Man from doing the service which belongs to his Redeemer; and to
assume and appropriat unto himself, that which is only due to the everliving
and eternal God, namely divine Adoration. Neither has he traded with the
Ignorant and vnletter'd only; but to give his juglings and impostures the
greater countenance, he has practiced upon great Artists, grave Philosophers,
politic Statesmen, nay even excellent Princes, and upon such who by his own
Oracles have been pronounced the wise men of the world. Concerning which, the
Authors are many, the histories frequent: amongst which I will give a taste of
some few.

De Civit. Dei, lib. 10 cap. 6.
S. Augustine speaks of many seeming miracles wrought by the Image of Isis, or
rather by the Devil, to delude man and draw him from the worship of the true
God.

Miracles wrought by the Image of AEscul.
The Image of AEsculapius, honored among the Epidaurians, and after brought to
Rome (as one of the twelve tables testifies) was with a Greek Inscription
long kept in the Family of the Maffaeans, and wrought diverse strange wonders. I
will for breuities sake express but one or two of them, and those verbatim, by
transcription from Hieronimus Mercurialis a learned Physician.

Illusions of the Devil.
In those days (says he) one Cato a Roman brought this word to a blind man
from the Oracle, That he should present himself before the altar of that
Image, and there kneeling, should remove himself from the left side to the
right, and putting his five fingers first upon the eyes of the Idol, and then
upon his own, he should receive his sight; which was accordingly done amidst
a great confluence of people, who highly applauded the miracle.

Again, one Julian vomiting blood continually, and despairing of all humane
help, had answer from the Oracle, That he should present himself before the
altar of AEsculapius, and to take thence the nuts of a Pine apple, and eat them
with honey for three days together: which doing, he recovered his pristine
health.

Diodorus Siculus makes mention of an oblation made to Gerion and Iolaus, Lib.
1^. By Gerion and Iolaus.
by the children of the Leontinians; which whosoever neglected, was either struck
with blindness, deafnes, numnesse, lamenesse, or the like: but having
performed all the ceremonies required at the Altar, they instantly recovered
their health again.

In Castabula (if we will believe Strabo) there was a temple dedicated to Diana
Persica, By Diana Persica.
to which all such virgins as vowed perpetual chastity, might familiarly walk
upon hot irons, or tread upon burning coals, and never feel heat or fire.

The like he reports to be in the city of Feronia, scituat at the foot of the
mountain Saractes; where all the Votaresses belonging to that Shrine may do
the like: which shows the malice and ambition of these malevolent Spirits,
which would usurp the power of the Almighty. Besides, their Oracles have a
great appearance of truth, and for most part, such as put any confidence in
them, they would take unto their protection; but the contemners of their
superstitious rites they would severely punish.

Aristides a potent governor in Smyrna, Aristides.
when a mighty and prodigious earthquake was near at hand, was forewarned by
the Image of Esculapius, to go up unto the mountain Atis, and there to offer
sacrifice. Which he accordingly did, and was no sooner got up to the middle
part of the ascent, but in the region below happened such a terrible shake of the
earth, that villages and cities were demolished; only the mountain Atis, in
which by that prediction he was secured, felt at that time no such calamity.

Plutarch and Liuy both write, That Camillus having distressed the Veians, made a
solemn sacrifice to Juno Veientana, Juno Veientana.
and besought her to be still propitious unto the Romans: saying further, that
if she so pleased, they would transport her statue to Rome. At which request
the image opened her arms, and embracing Camillus, told him, That with much
willingness she accepted his devotion.

The Athenians gave divine honor to Pan the god of sheepheards, Pan.
because meeting their Ambassador Philippides in the Parthenian groves, he
promised them his assistance in the great battle of Marathon fought against
the Persians.

Cleomenes King of Sparta sacrificing to Juno, Juno.
demanded what success he should have against the Argiues, with whom he was at
that time in opposition. Whereupon, a flame of fire suddenly issued from
betwixt the breasts of the goddess: which omen was by the Haruspices or
Soothsayers thus interpreted, That he should not wholly conquer; the city he
should surprise and consume with fire, but the prime citadel he should not
enter: And so it happened.

Annibal and Amilcar great Captains of the Carthaginian army, besieging
Agrigentum, the soldiers ruined and demolished all the ancient sepulchers that
stood without the city, to make their rampires and fortifications, the better
to secure themselves against the enemy within the city. But coming near unto
that famous monument in which Thereon was interred, and to leuel that as they
had done the other; the ancient structure seemed to be touched with fire from
heaven, and many Demons and spirits were seen, not only to stand as champions
in defense of the place, but with irresistable fury to set upon, and assault
the whole army, till the one half at least perished in the conflict: among the
rest, Annibal himself expired. To appease whose implacable fury, Amilcar
sacrificed an Infant to Saturn; and cast certain priests from an high rock,
precipitating them into the sea, to qualify the wrath of Neptune.

Lib. 5. Cap. 13.
Natalis Comes tells us, That one Pegasus transporting the image of Dionysius
(otherwise called Bacchus) from Eleutheria a city in Boetia, into the Province
of Attica; the Athaenians suffered it to pass by them negligently, without
doing unto it any reverence or ceremony. For which contempt they were plagued
with a disease in their secret parts: to be released of which, Pegasus
consulted with the Oracle; which enjoined them to erect a sumptuous temple to
that Idol in the city of Athens: which was held in great adoration for many
years after.

Lib. 12. Cap^ 7.
Athenaeus remembers unto us, That when the Iapitae took down the Images from
the Temples of their gods, with this scoff and taunt added, That their places
should be preserved for some other that were more potent and powerful: in the
execution of this, a sudden fire fell from above, which so terrified and
astonished them, that they not only instated them in their former places, but
from that time forward held them in much more fear and reverence.

Lib. 8.
Herodotus speaks of one Artabanus a great Persian General, who because he had
the statue of Neptune in contempt, was by the reason of a sudden inundation,
himself with the greatest part of his Army drowned. The same Author
witnesses, what a severe Revenger Apollo was of any affront or injury offered
unto him, who when Carthage was oppressed by the Romans, and his image there
erected being despoyled of that golden garment which was then upon it; the very
hand which snatched it from his shoulders was after found amongst the spoils
of the city.

In Hallicarnassus, at all such Solemnities when any Sacrifice was to be
offered unto Jupiter Ascraeus, an whole heard of Goats made a voluntary
presentment of themselves before the Altar, and when the rest of the
superstitious ceremonies were finished, they all departed of themselves, save
only one, which voluntarily stayed behind to be offered by the Priest.

Caelius reports, that in Daulia there was a Temple dedicate to Minerua, to
which there belong certain Dogs (or rather Devils) who when any of the Argiue
nation came to present their Devotions, would fawn upon them, in sign of a
free and loving welcome. But if any Barbarian or stranger entered the place,
they would fly in their faces, as ready to pluck them to pieces. We read
likewise of the Temple of Hercules in Rome, situate in Foro Boario, which will
endure neither Dogs nor flies. As also that dedicate unto Achilles amongst the
Boristines, to which no manner of Birds or Foul dare to approach.

Herodotus delivers unto us, Lib. 8.
That when those Persians which Xerxes brought into Greece, came but to approach
Diana's Altar, which stood just before the Temple of Apollo in Delphos; some of
them were destroyed by lightning and tempestuous showers of Hail; others, by
the ruin of two great parts of the mountain Pernassus were crushed and
shattered. Moreover, such hissings and dismal howles were heard to issue from
the Temple, that the rest extremely terrified, fled the place: who being
pursued and oppressed by the Inhabitants, suffered an infinite slaughter.
Insomuch that their small remainder, with much difficulty recovered the
interior parts of Boetia for their safety. To these distressed and dispairing
men appeared two warlike Hero's, mounted on two mighty steeds, the one
Philacon, the other Antonous; these stayed them flying, and gave them
encouragement: which was after, the ground of an incredible superstition.

These are the malignant Spirits, refractorie and rebellious, and in continual
opposition with the Maker of all things, by such prestigious juggling; thinking
to rob him of his honor, and as far as lies in them, to confer it upon
themselves. And this they do not, either because they are ignorant that all
service and reverence is due from the creature to the Creator; or that either
good or profit may arise unto them by any possible reconcilement, or the least
mitigation of that irrevocable sentence denounced against them: but it
proceeds from a malicious envy and cursed despite, because they themselves
as Traitors and Rebels are excluded the presence of the Almighty for ever; they
seek likewise to draw frail and weak man into the same condemnation and
judgment. For well they know, there is no sin more odious and abominable in
the eyes of the Almighty, than Idolatry, or by him punished with more severity
and bitterness.

Look no further than upon Solomon the son of David, whom God had blessed
with honor, riches, and wisdom above all others before him, or that were to
succeed him in the future: yet when he betook himself to the service and
worship of other gods (to Astarton the goddess of the Sidonians, to Chunos the
Idol of the Moabites, and to Moloch the Abomination of the Ammonites) even for
that only cause was the kingdom cut off from his succession, and only one of
the twelve Tribes (namely the Tribe of Judah) and that for his servant David's
sake, left to his son Roboam; all the rest given to Jeroboam the son of
Nebat. So much concerning false gods, and the prerogative they strive to assume
to themselves: how they would cheat the Everliving God of that divine
Adoration due unto Him, and to Him only; and not to their own benefit, but to
the utter ruin and perdition of Mankind.

Lib de sacerd. Romany.
As touching Augures and Augurie, Pomponius Laetus tells us, That the practice
and profession thereof has been ancient: it began amongst the Chaldaeans, Of
Famous Augures amongst the Grecians
and from thence descended unto the Grecians; amongst whom, Amphiarus, Mopsus,
and Calchas were held to be chief: as likewise Amicus the son of Elatus,
Amphiaraus the son of Oeclius, (or as some will have it, of Ayello) Tyresias
the son of Eurinus, Manto the daughter of Tyresius, Polyidus the son of
Coeranus, Hellenus and Cassandra the son and daughter of Priam and Hecuba,
Theone the daughter of Proteus, as likewise Theoclemenus; Telemus the son of
Proteus; Telemus the son of Eurimus; and Sibilla Samia, whom some call
Cumaea. etc.

The Hetruscians borrowed the Art from them; and the Latins from the
Hetruscians. Nay even Romulus, Romulus the first great Patron of Auguries.
the father of the Roman Nation, was a prime professor thereof; insomuch that
he instituted Magistrates and Officers for the execution of those Ceremonies.
Neither was there any enterprise of any weight or consequence attempted among
them, without consultation first had from the Augures and Wizards. For whom
there was a stately Temple erected: The Augure or Sooth-sayer sat with his
head covered, his face toward the East; having in his right hand a crooked
staff, with which in diverse strange postures he divided the region of the
air, to observe from which the Birds did appear: his right side being toward
the South; his left, the North. The robe he wore was called Laeua, from the
warmth thereof, as being lined with furre throughout, and guarded with crimson
and purple.

Having slain the Sacrifice, he offered up certain prayers called Effata; The
Ceremonies used.
and so from those signs which followed, and according to the prosperous or
adverse omen, he framed his predictions. Of some he made his conjectures
according to their appearance; and those because they were besought in his
Orisons, were called Impetratiua. Others were not desired, and such were termed
Oblitiva. There was a third, of accidents which unexpectedly offered themselves
in the time of the ceremony, of which there were five distinct kinds; one
from thunder and lightning; a second from the chirping or chattering of Birds;
a third from crumbs cast unto Hens or Chickens; a ^ourth from four footed
beasts, either their meeting, or crossing the way, or else by appearing in some
unaccustomed and unfrequented place: the fifth and last arose from diverse
casualties happening on the sudden, as the hearing of some strange prodigious
voice or sound, the falling of salt, the spilling of wine; Ov. Met. lib. 3.
Fab. 1.
and these chances were called Dira, from Dei ira contracted, i. the wrath of
the gods.

Such signs as happened in the time of their Divination, on the left hand, were
held to be tokens of good luck; because the right hand in giving a gift, or
bestowing a reward, is opposite to the left hand of the receiver; and so of the
contrary: for Sinistrum, though in all other things it implies as much as
Disaster; Serve. An. li. 2.
yet in these divining Ceremonies it is still taken in the contrary sense: as
Auis sinistra portendeth good fortune, and Intonuit Laevum signifies as much
as God speed, or Go on and prosper. And therefote Lipsius says, That the
Grecians have called the left hand Aristeron, from Ariston, which in their
Language signifies, Best.

We read of three sorts of these Sortiligers or Fortune Tellers; Aruspices,
Auspices, and Augures: Aruspices. Auspices. Augures.
The first did divine and predict of things future, from the intrals of beasts,
in the Sacrifice ab Aras inspiciendo, i. from inspection into the Altars. The
Auspices, quasi Avispices, ab Aves inspiciendo, i. from looking upon birds, had
their denomination. The Augures took theirs, ab Avium garritu, i. from the
crowing or chattering of Birds. Unto all which, Ovid seems to allude, in this
Distich: Hoc mihi non ovium fibr^, tonitrusve sinistri
Linguave servatae, pennave dixit Avis. Trist. li. ^. El. 9.

Not the Sheeps intrals, nor the left hands Thunder,
Nor the Birds tongue, or wing, presaged this wonder.
And as it is very well observed in the Historia Anthologia, from the two last
of these arise those Latin Phrases so frequent amongst us, Bonis Avibus, or
Bo^is Auspicijs, which are interpreted, With god luck or fortune; and Malis
Avibus, With evil speed or bad success: and because they would enterprise
nothing Inauspicate, (that is, without the counsel of the Augures) from thence
Rem Auspicari has been translated, To initiat or begin a thing.

Romulus the first founder both of their Order and College in Rome, appointed
only three unto the ministry of these ceremonies. But Servius Tullius after
he had distinguished Rome into four several Tribes or quarters, he added to
the number of the Augures a fourth; and made an Edict, That they should all be
selected and chosen from the Patricians, who were the Patriots and noble
Fathers of the City, such as we call Senators. But in process of time, Quintus
and Cneius Ogulinus being made Tribunes of the people (as much as to say,
Protectors of the Plebe or Commons) obtained, Their number increased.
That to ioin with these four, five other should be made choice of out of the
Comminaltie. At which time the Senate made an Edict, That they should never
exceed the number of nine. Notwithstanding which, when Sylla was Dictator he
added six more, which made up the number fifteen: of which the eldest was
called Magister Collegij, i. Rector of the College.

Their prerogative.
These Wisards had a prerogative above all the other Priests and Flamines in
Rome: for if one of them were convicted of any heinous crime, he was not put
out of his place, nor excluded from executing his office, neither could he be
disabled, nor any other substituted in his room. Although the Roman custom
was, that if any other Priest, of what place or quality soever, had been a
notorious delinquent, he was ipso facto confined, and some other deputed unto
his office.

The absurdity of Augury.
The absurdity and mere imposture of this Divination or Soothsaying, Marc.
Cicero ingeniously observes in Pompey the Great, Crassus, and Julius Caesar,
to whom all the Chaldees and Wisards not only promised prosperous and long
lives, but assured them of timely and peaceable ends. Yet of their tumultuous
employments in the passage of their time upon earth, and of their wretched and
miserable deaths, Histories make ample and frequent mention.

Lib. 7. cap. 2. A notable story concerning the vainness of Augury.
Fulgosius tells us of one Misonianus, who being employed in a certain
expedition amongst the horsemen of the Roman Army, perceiving them in their
march to be at a sudden stand, and wondering why they advanced not as before;
he perceived presently, that the cause of their sudden stay was, by reason that
the Augur had espied a Bird sitting upon a tree, and awaited whilst she proved
her wing in voluntary flight, by which he might conjecture of the success of
their business. In derision of which folly, he addressed his bow, and with
his first arrow struck her dead to the earth: when smiling to himself, he
turned to his companions and thus said; Most certain it is, that little
counsel and small aid is to be expected from these poor irrational
creatures, to enquire from them what can either help or hinder us: when you see
it apparent before your eyes, they are not able to prevent the disaster
impending over their own heads.

Whether this Southsaying take it is original from the Chaldees, (who were
great searchers into curiosities) or no, I am not willing to make any further
inquisition, as not being much material to my present purpose. But of this I
am most certain, That it was in continual use and practice amongst the
Canaanites, Augury much used amongst the Gentiles.
and from thence conveyed unto the children of Israel; which how abominable it
was in the sight of God Almighty, and that such diabolical superstitions
should have any place amongst his chosen people, Cap. 9. verse. 32.
you may read in Leuiticus these words; Ye shall not regard them that work
with Spirits, neither Soothsayers, ye shall not seek to them to be defiled by
them: Cap. 18. verse. 10.
I am the Lord your God. Again in Deutronomie; Let no man be found amongst you
that makes his son or his daughter to go through the fire, or that uses
Witchcraft, or a regarder of the Times, or a marker of the flying Fowls, or a
Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that counsels with Spirits, or a Soothsayer, or
that asks counsel at the dead: for all that do such things are an
abomination to the Lord, and because of these abominations, the Lord thy God
does cast them out before thee, etc.

Let us then believe, that it is God only, and not Fate, which gouerns all
things: To confirm which, I will conclude with that of the Poet Statius: --
Heu ducas Fati tenor, est ne quod illi Silv. lib. 5:

Non liceat? quantae poterunt mortalibus annis. etc,
O the strict Laws of Fate! Can that have being,
That is not with thy constant will agreeing?
Or is it in thy brasse-leav'd book decreed,
We to our graves in such Post-haste should speed?
Not so. Would the Creator take in hand
To command Time, the swift hours still would stand:
In Hells blind dungeon, Death his head should hide,
And the idle Sisters lay their work aside.


Of all Idolatry in general, Cap. 44. verse. 9.
we thus read the Prophet Esaias; All they that make an Image, are Vanity,
their delectable things shall nothing profit, and they are their own witnesses,
that they see not nor know; therefore they shall be confounded. Who has made a
god, or molten an Image, that is profitable for nothing? Behold, all that are
of the fellowship thereof shall be confounded: for the Workmen themselves are
men, let them all be gathered together and stand up, yet they shall fear, and
be confounded together. The Smith takes an instrument, and works it in the
coals, and fashioneth it with hammers, and works it with the strength of his
arms: yea, he is an hungered, and his strength fails; he drinks no water,
and is faint. The Carpenter stretches out a line, he fashioneth it with a red
thread, he plaineth it, and pourtraieth it with the compass, and makes it
after the figure of a man, and according to the beauty of a man, that it may
remain in an house. He will hew him down Cedars, and take the Pine tree and
the Oak, and takes courage amongst the Trees of the Forest: he planteth a
Fur tree, and the rain does nourish it, and Man burns thereof, for he will
take thereof and warm himself; he also kindles it and baketh bread: yet he
makes a god and worshippeth it; he makes an Idol and boweth unto it: he
burns the half thereof even in the fire, and upon the half thereof he
eats flesh: he rosteth the roast and is satisfied; also he warmeth himself
and says, Aha, I am warm, I have been at the fire: and the residue thereof
he makes a god, even his Idol, he boweth unto it and worshippeth, and prays
unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my god. They have not known nor
understood; for God has shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their hearts
that they cannot understand; and none considers in his heart, neither is
their knowledge nor understanding to say, I have burnt half in the fire, have
baked bread with the coals thereof, have roasted flesh and eaten it; and shall I
make the residue thereof an abomination? shall I bow to the stock of a tree?
He feeds on ashes, a seduced heart has deceived him, that he cannot deliver
his soul and say, Is there not a lie in my right hand? etc.

An Emblem.
LEt us enquire no further into things retruse and hid, than we have
authority from the sacred Scriptures.

The Emblem is; A young Maid, who by her careful nurse had a covered box
delivered unto her, charily to be kept; with an extraordinary charge, upon no
occasion to open it, for thereby she might incur some danger. But the girl in
vain curiosity (for, Ruimus in vetitum) the more desirous to know what was
within, Cui peccare licet, peccat minus.
uncovered the lid, and out flew a Bird, which she lost; neither, had she kept
it, had she been much better by the retaining thereof.

The Divine application of which, suteth with that of Basil, who writes thus;
Animi morbus est, male and superflue, de Deo querere: i. It is the disease of
the mind, to enquire, euilly and superfluously of that which concerns God.
Which agrees with that of Saint Augustine; Lib. 11. de Ord.
Deus melius scitur nesciendo: i. God is the better known by seeming least to
know. De Sanct. Trin.
And Hillary uses these words; Deus religione intelligendus est: pietate
profitendus: sensu vera persequendus non est, sed adorandus: i. God, by
Religion is to be understood, by Sanctity to be professed, but by the outward
sense not to be searched into, but only adored. For we read, Deuteronomy. 29.29. The
secret things belong to the Lord our God; but the things revealed belong unto
us, and to our children for ever, that we may do all the words of the Law.
And Ecclesiasticus 3.22. Seek not the things that are too hard for thee,
neither search the things rashly that are too mighty for thee. Upon the like
occasion, the Prophet David, Psalm. 131. says thus: Lord, mine heart is not
haughty, nor my mind lofty; neither have I walked in great matters, and hid
from thee. We also read, Romans 12.3. For I say, through the grace that is
given unto me, to every one that is amongst you, That no man presume to
understand above that which is meet to understand, but that he understand
according to sobriety, as God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith.
Further we read, Prove. 25.27. It is not good to eat too much honey, for to
search their own glory is no glory. Upon which Emblem, Jacob. Catsius, Emblem.
3. thus writes: Ov. lib. 2. Eleg. Quod licet ingratum est: quod non licet
acrius vrit.
Fida tibi Nutrix, hac pixide sacra latere,
Dixerat, and satis hoc, debuit esse tibi,
Quid tractare manu? quid cernere virgo requiris?
Quaeque tenere manu, quaeque videre nefas?
Sacra Dei reuerentur habe, quid faderis Arcam
Tangis? io^ Cohibe stulta manus.
In multis nescire iuvat, scivisse nocebit
Saepe perire fuit, quod reperire vocant.
Thus paraphrased: The faithful Nurse said, Sen. in Octav. I^ facere laus est
quod decet, non quod licet,
In this box lie hid
Things sacred; ('it was enough that she so did:)
Why, Virgin, busiest thou thine hand and eye?
What couet'st thou to handle? What to 'spy
From things which are too mystical and dark?
Restrain thine hand, forbear to touch the Arc.
In some way, he is best learned that least knows:
Many there be, in seeking, themselves lose.
A moral interpretation hereof is thus made: Silendo stolidus sapienti par
est: i. A fool silent may be taken for a wise man. According with the French
Proverb, Sans language le fol est sage. Erasmus also in Apotheg. says, Est
aliqua sapientiae pars; Silentio Stultitiam tegere: i. It is some part of
wisdom, to cover our folly in silence. And suting with this is that of the
Poet Martial: Ov. 2. Fast. Brutus erat stulti sapiens imitator ve esser.

Tutus ab insidijs dire superbe tuis.


Cum te non novi, Dominum regemque vocaui;
Cum been te novi, iam mihi Priscus eris.
Being unknown, I called thee Lord and King:
But, know thee, Priscus, thou art no such thing.


The Emblematists conceit upon this, as follows: Hac dum clausa fuit sub
pixide, mira latere
Regalesque tegi quisque putauit opes:
Mox vt aperta fuit, spectacula ludicra vulgo
Probat, and e capsa parua volauit auis
Dum siluit tua lingua virum te Basse putaui,
Testatur puerum te sine mente sonus;
Qui loquitur populo, se praebuit ille videndum.
Vel fatuus presso, dum silet, ore sapit.


Thus paraphrased: This Casket being shut, was thought to hold
Some wondrous wealth, as Jewels, Pearl, and Gold.
But being opened to the vulgar eyes,
Nothing of value's seen; a Bird out flies.
A man I held thee, Bassus, whilst thou smiled
And nothing said: but, having spoke, a child.
Man, when he speaks, upon the stage is brought;
The Fool, whilst mute, a wise man may be thought.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
I Sought thee round about, o thou my God,
To find thy abode.
I said unto the Earth, Speak, art thou He?
She answered me,
I am not. I inquired of Creatures all
In general,
Contained therein: they with one voice proclaim,
That none amongst them challenged such a Name.
II.
I asked the Seas, and all the Deepes below,
My God to know.
I asked the Reptiles, and what ever is
In the Abisse,
Even from the Shrimpe to the Leviathan
My enquiry ran:
But in those Deserts, which no line can sound,
The God I sought for was not to be found.
III.
I asked the Air, if that were he? but know
It told me, No.
I from the towering Eagle, to the Wren,
Demanded then,
If any feathered Foul amongst them were such?
But they all much
Offended with my question, in full quire
Answered, To find my God I must look higher.
IV.
I asked the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars; but they
said, We obey
The God thou seekst: I asked what Eye or Ear
could see or hear;
What in the world I might descry or know
Above, below:
With an unanimous voice all these things said,
We are not God, but we by him were made.
V.
I asked the Worlds great universal Mass,
if That, God was?
Which with a mighty and strong voice replied,
(As stupify'd)
I am not he, o Man; for know, that I
By Him on high
Was fashioned first of nothing: thus instated,
And swayed by Him, by whom I was created.
VI.
I did enquire for him in flourishing Peace,
But soon 'gan cease:
For when I saw what vices, what impurity,
bred by Security,
(As Pride, Self-love, Lust, Surfeit, and Excess)
I could no less,
Than stay my search; knowing, where these abound,
God may be sought, but is not to be found.
VII.
I thought then I might find him out in War;
but was as far
As at the first: for in Revenge and Rage,
In spoil and strage,
Where unjust quarrels are commenc't, and Might
Takes place above Right;
Where Zeal and Conscience yield way to Sedition,
There can be made of God no inquisition.
VIII.
I sought the Court; but smooth tongued Flattery there
Deceived each ear.
In the thronged City, there was selling, buying,
swearing and lying.
In The Country, Craft in Simpleness arrayed:
And then I said,
Vain is my search, although my pains be great;
Where my God is, there can be no deceit.
IX.
All these Demands are the true consideration,
Answer, and attestation
Of Creatures, touching God: all which accited,
With voice united,
Either in Air or Sea, the Earth, or Sky,
Make this reply:
To rob him of his worship, none persuade us;
Since it was He, and not our own hands made us.
X.
A scrutiny within my self I than
Even thus began:
O Man, what art thou? What more (could I say)
Than Dust and Clay?
Frail, mortal, fading, a mere puff, a blast,
That cannot last;
In'a Throne to day, tomorrow in the Vrne;
Formed from that Earth, to which I must return.
XI.
I asked my self, Who this great God might be
That fashioned me?
I answered, The All-Potent, solely Immence,
surpassing Sense;
Unspeakable, Inscrutable, Eternal,
Lord over all;
The only Terrible, Strong, Just, and True,
Who has no End, and no Beginning knew.
XII.
He is the Well of Life, for He does give
To all that live,
Both breath and being: He is the Creator
Both of the Water,
Earth, Air, and Fire: Of all things that subsist,
He has the list^
Of all the Heavenly Host, or what Earth claims,
He keeps the scrole, and calls them by their names.
XIII.
And now, my God, by thy illumining Grace,
Thy Glorious Face,
(So far forth as thou will discovered be,)
Methinks I see.
And though Invisible and Infinite,
To humane sight
Thou in thy Mercy, Justice, Truth, appearest;
In which, to our frail senses thou come nearest.
XIV.
O, make us apt to seek, and quick to find,
Thou God most kind:
Give us Love, Hope, and Faith in Thee to trust,
Thou God most just:
Remit all our offenses, we entreat,
Most Good, Most Great
Grant, That our willing, though unworthy quest,
May, through thy Grace, admits us amongst the Blessed.
Condiscendit nobis Deus, vt nos consurgamus ei.

Augustine.
The Cherubim
Ex sumptib Guilielm: Toomes.



THE ARGUMENT of the second Tractate.
A God being found, denied by none,
It follows there can be but one,
By the Philosophers confessed,
And such as were of Poets best.
Him, not the Oracle denies,
Nor those the ancient world held wise:
Sage, Sybel, Mage, Gymnosophist,
All in this Unity persist.
Next, That this Power, so far extended,
Can by no sense be comprehended:
Neither his Essence, most Divine,
Be sounded by weak Reasons line.
And last, what names most properly
Belong to this great Deity.
The second Argument.
GOds Knowledge, treats the Cherubim:
He nothing knows, that knows not him.
A Deity confessed, Whence the multiplicity of gods sprung.
(which All adore)
It follows to be only One, no more:
The multiplicitie of gods accruing
From Men, their idle fantasies pursuing.
Some think, From auatitious Priests they 'rose,
Unto themselves, fat Offerings to dispose.
Some, from the Poets fictions; who to grace
Their Friends, or Princes of more eminent place,
Gave to them, after death, such adoration,
Which after grew common to every Nation.
These I let pass, as known. But to proceed
With what I purpose; Many have agreed
In this sole Godhoods Unity: to which use,
Although I numerous Authors could produce,
Yet I Will insist on few. One does thus treat;
Wisdom in man is only then complete,
When it upon this singular point is staid,
Lict. lib. 2. Divin. Inst. cap. 9.
There Is but one God, that is he who all things made.
He further argues: If of either sex
You maintain gods; all such I shall perplex
With this one reason: Where a Male has being,
And Female; these betwixt themselves agreeing,
Must needs have copulation: they, to expel
Immodestie, have place wherein to dwell.
For it is not probable, That such, in view,
And openly, like Beasts their lusts pursue,
Or make their amorous meetings; because they,
By their example, teach all things that may
Instruct in Virtue. And if Houses? then
By consequence they Cities have, as Men.
If Cities? they have Fields; if Fields? they till;
If plough, and sow, and reap? then needs you will
Allow them mortal: for it is understood,
All must be such, as live not without food.
The first argument followed.
Begin where we now ended: If not eat?
They neither reap nor sow? not needing meat?
Therefore, no Fields: no Fields? no Houses? so,
No Houses? then no Cities: therefore know,
No chaste commixtion can be. Tell me now,
Where Is Juno, Pallas, Venus? I, or you
Sybel or Rhea? Therefore I maintain,
Gods are the invention of Man's idle brain.
Philosophers and Orators touching this Unity.
Ask Proclus, Tresmegistus, or Simplicius,
Cicero, Philolaus, or Iamblicus;
Theophrastus, Plato: Or of Poets, these;
Sophocles, Orpheus, and Phocilides;
In all their Works and Learnings great variety,
They still conclude, There Is but one sovereign Deity.
Says Zeno, They Are like mad that trust in many,
As those (e contra) that believe not any.
Sympl. in Arrian. Epict.
Simplicius speaking of the Unity
Of this Diuinest Essence, thus says he;
All things that be, or beautiful, or fair,
From Divine Pulchritude derived are:
All Truth, from Divine Truth; all we can name
TO have Being, from the first Beginning came:
He Is the sole God, Beginning, and the Spring
(In his own Power) of all and every thing.
All things from Him proceed, to come, or past;
Those which were first, the present, and the last.
From His sole Goodness many goods arise;
His Unity brings many Unities.
His one Beginning is the source and ground
Of many more Beginnings, (after found:)
In this Beginning, Unity, and Good,
I would have one God only understood.
The reason? Because He Is the Prime of All, A confirmation of the former
argument

In whom consists the Offspring general
Of each thing that has being. He besides,
Is of all Causes, Cause, and still abides;
The Goodness, of all Goodnesses: And so,
Of all gods, the Great God; None else, we know.
When Cicero would distinguish betwixt those Cic. lib. 2. de Not. Deor.

We Idols call, and Meaning the Atheist.
Him that does dispose
The Fabric he has built; he does debate
Thus with himself: They Are made; He uncreate:
They, weak and feeble in their proud'st o^tent;
But He, All-able, and Omnipotent.
They, unto Natures Laws subject and thrall:
But He, the God of Nature, Them, and All.
One God, one Unity, in it self agreeing, Merc. Tresmeg.

Is the sole Root and Seed of all things being:
Without which, nothing is, naught has been made. Philolau^.

Another, thus ingeniously has said;
There is one God, whose Power is stretched far,
Immouable, and always Singular^
Like only to himself. And (in effect)
The chief of the Perepateticke Sect Arist. Metap. 2. Metaph. ^.

Affirms to us as much: who does apply
His reasons, grounded on Philosophy
And Nature, thus: All motions (says he)
Ascend up to the Primum Mobile,
And the first Mouer; which he there does name
To be the Sole and Prime, on which Heavens frame,
With universal Nature, does depend.
And this he elsewhere further strives to extend,
Thus speaking: The first Mouer's One, and He,
Ever Eternal we conclude to be.
Plato.
Of Divine Plato it is recorded thus,
Who writing to King Dionysius;
Only (says he) by this note shall you know,
Whether my purpose serious be, or no:
You shall observe how I my Letter frame;
If one sole God I invoke and name,
What Is weighty I intend: but if the rest
I nominate, think then I sport and jest.
Orpheus.
Orpheus, of Poets the most ancient,
(And in that noble Title eminent;)
He, that is said to give each god his name,
And to derive the offspring whence he came;
Yet in his best and deepest Theory,
Left to the world, as his last Legacy,
That there was one sole God, Omnipotent,
Immortal, and for ever Permanent;
Invisible, common Parent unto all
Mankind, and other Creatures, great and small:
Author of War or Peace; whose Providence
Gouerns the World; and whose high Eminence
Has in the Imperial Heavens a golden Throne;
Whose Footstool is the Earth, to tread upon:
Who stretches his right hand beyond the vast
Alpha and Omega:
Unlimited Oceans bounds; The First and Last;
Before whom, each high Mountain, and low Vale
(Moved at his presence) tremble and look pale.
The Worlds sixth Columes at his anger shake;
And the Seas bottomless Abysses quake.
Orpheus again.
And elsewhere thus: We may from Reason gather,
By Jupiter he intends God Almighty.
Jove is sole King, the universal Father
And Parent of all things, always the same,
One Power, one God over all that we can name;
And over them great Lord: having besides,
One Regal Bulk, or Body, which abides
To all Eternity: In which, what is being,
A necessary Observation.
Has revolution, no way disagreeing,
Yet maintains Contraries. In Him you may
Find Fire and Water, Earth, Air, Night, and Day.
Phocilides, of this Union.
As much as this, Phocilides confessed:
There is one potent God, sole Wise, sole Blessed.
The Egyptians.
The Egyptians in their curious inquisition,
(A Nation the most given to superstition,
And to Idolatrous worship;) and yet they
In all their Hierogliphycks did pourtray
But one sole Jupiter, whose picture was
Placed over their ports and gates, in stone or brass;
So likewise in their Temples: in his hand
A trisul^ thunderbolt, or fulminous brand.
And, as the Writer of their story tells,
Him they as God acknowledge, and none else.
Says one: The God of Nature I will sing, Ma^il. Astron. Lib. 1.

Infused in Heaven, Sea, Earth, and every thing;
Who this great Mass by'impartial covenant swayes;
Whom (in alternate peace) the World obeyes,
By which it lives and moves: since but one Spirit
Dwells in each part, and does the whole inherit;
O'reflying all things with invisible speed,
And giving shape to all that therein breed.
Unless this Frame, of Members, near ally'de, Obser.

And well context, were made, and had one Guide
And Lord thereof, the Vast to manage still;
But were to be disposed by humane skill;
The Stars could have no motion, the Earth no ease;
Time would stand still, and a cold stiffenesse seize
On agitation; Planets would retain
No influence, but slothfully remain
In their tired Spheres; Night would not fly the Day,
Nor Light give place to Darkness: at a stay
All things should stand: the soft shoures should not dare
To cheer the Earth; nor the cool Winds the Air:
Rack should not chase the clouds, floods should not feed
The Sea; nor the Sea, Rivers at their need:
Nor should the sovereign Part over all parts stand,
Ordered and swayed by' an equal Parents hand.
For now, neither the Waters nor the Stars
Be unto us deficient; nothing bar's
The Heavens in their dispose, whereby to guess,
They alter in their Gyring more or less.
Motion does cherish but not change; for all
We see the world contains in general,
Are managed and disposed by fair accord,
And still obedient to their Prince and Lord.
He therefore is the God that all things guides,
Who in his Divine wisdom so prouides,
That Creatures here below, merely terrestrial, The power and operation of
the Planets.

Have poured into them (by the Signs Celestial)
A strength, infused to honor or disgrace,
Not hindered by the distance of the place.
Notwithstanding which, Sapiens dominabitur Astris.
Stars have a power in Nature, ministering Fate
To Nations, private persons, and each State;
Which operation we do hold as sure,
As the Heavens give the Fields a temperature,
By which they in their seasons spring and grow;
Or, are the cause that the Seas ebb and flow.
Alibi.
He Is only God, that is unchanged by Time;
Nor young, nor old, but ever in his prime:
Who suffers not the Sun, backward to invade
The transuerse Arctos, or run retrograde
And steer a new course: neither from the West,
Return the same way to his last nights rest;
Nor shows the same Aurora to stronds new;
Nor lets the Moon an erring course pursue,
Beyond her certain Orb; but to retain
A constant change in her increase and waine:
Nor lets the Stars (above impending) fall,
To circumvolve the Earth, the Sea, and all.
Aurel. Pruden. in Symach.
Think now you hear this God, long silence break^,
And to a merely Ethnicke man thus speak:
Thou (slighting me) have to thy self devised
A thousand gods, and equally us pris'd;
Thinking to minch me into parts, and fleece
Me of my right. But know, no part or piece
Can be from me extracted, no form taken,
That am a simple Substance: Then in vain
Thou think to parcel me by thy decision.
Of compound things it is eath to make division:
But I was made by none; nor therefore can
I, piece-meal'd or dissected be by Man.
All things, from nothing, were first made by me;
"Then, part of mine own work how can I be?
Therefore to me alone thy Temples rear,
And worship me in honor and in fear.
Paulo post.
As those of Marble, so the Mind I praise,
Where steadfast Faith a rich Foundation lays
On golden piles; and when the Buildings rise
In snowy Piety, to daze men's eyes:
With vnsway'd Justice rooft, to keep o utraine;
And where the walls within, chaste Blushes stain,
In stead of Vermil: and the whiteness clear
Proceeds from palenesse, bred by holy Fear.
The Sybels.
The Oracles that from the Sybels came,
Who in the former world were of great fame,
(Though amongst the Learned it be a question still,
Whence they inspired were with Prophetique skill,
The good or the bad Sprite) er'd not, to say,
There is but one sole God, Him we obey.
These be their words: In this we all agree;
There Is one true God, above all Majesty,
Omnipotent, Invisible alone,
Unborn, All-seeing, and yet seen of none.
Apollo, Apollo, Delphicus. doct. S^roz Lib. de Nature. Mag.
asked by one Theophilus,
How many gods there were? made answer thus:
(His Unity not daring to deny)
There Is only one true God, Potent, and High;
Begotten by Himself, Sufficient, Able;
Untaught, and without Mother, solely Stable:
To speak whose Name, no Language can aspire
Or reach into: whose dwelling is in Fire.
And such is God, The Devils themselves confess this sole God.
of whom, I and the Rest
Am a small portion, as being professed
His Ministers and Angels. By which Name,
The Devil expressed himself to have an aim
To Divine worship; which 'He that did create The Devils ambition.

All things, so loath is to communicate.
He, by the mouths of our forefathers, and
The holy Prophets, (who did understand
His sacred will, The Scriptures) has so framed,
To have his Singularity often named.
As thus: Deuteronomy. cap. 4.
Because the Lord is God alone,
Peculiar, and besides him there is none.
Again: O Israel attend and hear;
The Lord thy God is One, him thou shall fear.
The God of gods (I hear the Psalmist say)
Does only work great wonders, Him obey: Psalm. 85.

For amongst the gods none's like him. Go and tell
(Says he) unto my people Israel,
I am the Lord thy God, and none but I,
Who brought thee from the Egyptian slavery, Exodus 6.20.

And from the house of Bondage set thee free,
"Therefore thou shall adore no God save me.
Lycurgus, Lycurgus.
in the Proem of his Laws
To the Locrenses, (not without great cause)
These following words prefixed: Needful it were, Stob. Ser. 42.

That all the people which inhabit here,
Should be persuaded. There Is one God above,
By whom all living Creatures breathe and move.
Who, as in all his Works he is expressed;
So is he not the least made manifest,
In our inspection to the Worlds great frame,
The Heaven, and goodly order of the same.
Be no man of that stupid ignorance,
"To think that such things are disposed by chance.
Ioh. Billius, in Antholog. Sacr.
The gluttons Belly is his god, (the cause)
In that his Appetite prescribes him Laws.
The griping Auaritious man has sold
His Soul, (so dearly bought) to purchase Gold.
Voluptuous men, solely deuote to Lust,
Their Idol's Venus; for in her they trust.
The Ambitious, his All-Honour'd makes, his Fame;
As, before Gods, preferring his own Name.
And is not he, vain Studies does prefer
Before his Christ, a mere Idolater?
And do not all those that ought higher prise
Than Him, to Idols offer sacrifise?
Gods true worship.
But he that shall believe in him aright,
Shall have access to his Eternal Light:
When those that have Religion in disdain,
And Piety in contempt, (and so remain)
They strive to have no being, (to their shame)
And to return to nothing, whence they came.
All such as are not numbered amongst the Saints
Whom evil thoughts possess, and Sin supplants,
Have lost themselves, as hid behind a Skreene;
How then can the least part of them be seen?
But those that through their Savior prove victorious,
They in Heavens kingdom shall be great and glorious.
Arist. lib. 2. Physic.
Two Principles (as some Philosophers write)
There are, Eternal both, and Infinite;
Makers of things, yet in their Natures vary,
As being in themselves mere contrary.
The Unity of the Godhead not to be divided.
Their error note: If two such in their prime,
Of power, should have existence at one time;
Since two so great, must greater be than one,
Even in that clause the Infinite is gone.
This proved.
Being distinct in number, and divided,
Needs must they be by several motions guided.
One borrowes not of the other, for majoritie:
Being equal two, there can be no prioritie.
And contrary (as I before have said)
In opposition? they must needs invade
The agreeing Fabric; and so, without cease,
Disturb old Natures long-continued peace.
Neither from these two Equals can arise
A third, this their great strife to compromise.
Again; If two, one needless is, and vain,
Or, as we call it, Vacuum.
Empty. Now it is plain,
That Nothing cannot have in Nature place;
For she has Vacuum in continual chase,
And is at war with 't. Therefore I hope none,
But will confess a Godhood, and that one:
"One Monarch of the world, the great Effector,
Of all therein sole Parent and Protector.
All such as of their multiplicitie speak, A confirmation of the former
argument

Disable them, as wanting power, and weak;
As if naught gouer'nd were that has been made,
Which One can do, without another aid.
Him only a true Monarch we may call, The Illustration.

That has no parted kingdom, but swayes all.
But where a Principality (misguided)
Is amongst several Optimates divided;
It needs must follow, In no One can be
An absolute and exact sovereignty:
For none of these, but by usurping, dare
Challenge the whole, where each have but a share.
There is a certain Bound which circumscribes
His Jurisdiction; Each has several Tribes
To govern and dispose. Should we agree
In many gods, it then perforce must be
concluded, There can be no Sovereign Mind,
Since every one has but his Lot assigned:
When as of Power it is the true condition,
Not to be ty'de to stint or exhibition;
"But as the sole Supreme and Principal,
"Guiding, disposing, comprehending all.
If God be perfect? he can be but one, Note.

As having all things in himself alone.
The more you make, the more you shall deprave
Their Might and Potencie, as those that have
Their virtue scanted; so allow not any:
Since all things cannot be contained in Many.
By which it is manifest, Those that maintain Omnia esse in multis non possunt.

More gods than one, be people vile and vain;
In the like blasphemy ready to fall,
With the dam'nd Atheist, who knows none at all.
The opinion of the Manichees.
The Manichees, they hold a strange opinion,
That two betwixt them share the high Dominion;
Who as they did create, so guide it still:
One, Good disposes; and the other, Ill.
The first is Lord of Light, and gouernes Day:
The last, of Night, and Darkness bears chief sway.
One, Heat in charge has; and the other, Cold:
Yet who, by daily proof does not behold,
That by the sole and Divine Providence,
Man, with all Creatures, of them both has sense,
And from them comfort? That the Night for rest
Was made, to cheer Man, wearied and oppressed;
As well as Day, whose cheerful light prepares
Us to our needful and best known affairs.
Do we not see, from what we counted bad,
Much good to us, great solace has been had?
Again, That seeming- Good, forged by the Devil,
Has been to us the occasion of much evil?
Heavens blessings let us taste in their community,
Ascribing all praise to the God of Unity,
"This sempiternall Mind, this Consummate
"And absolute Virtue, that did all create;
"This Power, who in himself has his Stabilitie,
"Majesty, Wisdom, Strength, and true Soliditie:
"From whose Sublimitie no man's so mad
"To think he can detract: To whom none add.
"This, of himself all Fullness, all Satietie;
"Is then the sole Incomprehensible Deity.
Sometimes, what is proper unto Man alone,
Deuteronomy. 22.10.
Is given to this Trias, three in One:
Psalm. 17.8.
As, when we attribute unto him Wings,
It straight unto our aphrehension brings,
Psalm. 3.13.94.16.
How he protects and shadows us. If Ears?
With what facility and grace he hears
Genesis 29.24.
Our devout Prayers. And when, his Arm stretched out?
Deuteronomy. 4.34.
That of his Power and Strength we should not doubt.
Exodus 8.19.
His Finger named, does to the world aver
His Virtue, and, that no Artificer
Exodus 31.18.
Can work like him. His Skill; The glorious frame
Psalm. 27.89.
Of this great Machine, does to all proclaim.
His Face, sometimes, his presence does imply;
Sometimes, his favor and benignity.
Psalm. 6.1.59.14.
If we read Wrath; we must consider then,
Those Judgments that impend over sinful men;
And with what terror, when they come, they fall.
His Hand, does unto our remembrance call Job. 19.21.10.8.

His Potencie, Protection, Power to guide; Psalm. 31.6.

With all such things as are to these ally'de.
His Nosthrils, by which he is said to smell, Genesis 8.21^

Does unto us his Acceptance tell,
Of Sacrifice and Prayer. His Incenst Ire Ier. 39.37.

(Again) it notes, when thence fly sparks of fire. Deuteronomy. 32.10.

His Eyes emblem to us, that choice Respect Nehem. 16.

And Favor which he bears to his Elect. Job. 10.4.

Sometimes they'import his Providence Divine Psalm. 17.2.

Sometimes, they wrathfully are said to shine Psalm. 14.2.

Against the Wicked. By his Feet are meant, Sam. 2.22.28.

Stabilitie and Power Omnipotent. Amos. 9.4.

By the Apple of his Eye he would have known, Psalm. 18.7.110.1.

Th'Indulgence that he bears unto his Own. Mat. 22.24.

The Divine Wisdom, knowing how dull and weak Deuteronomy. 30.10.

Man's heart and brain is, taught the Text to speak Psalm. 17.8.

To our capacities. The Prophets, they
Did not of this great Deity display
The absolute perfection; but so leave it,
That by a glimpse we far off might conceive it.
His Eyes being named, it must impresse in me,
That God does every thing at all times see.
Or if his Ear? then must I presuppose,
That, hearing all that is spoke, he all things knows;
That, having wings to mount himself on high,
In vain can Man his incenst vengeance fly.
O, whither from thy Sprite shall I depart? Aug. li. de Pen.

Thou, that in every place at all times art?
Fly thee, none can; but unto thee repair,
All may, in their humility and prayer,
Appealing to thy Goodnsse. For, What place
Can shadow me, when I shall fly thy face?
If soar to Heaven? thy Presence does appear:
Or if to Hell diue? Thou art likewise there.
There is no way an angry God to shun; Aug. sup. Psalm. 74.

But, to a God well pleased, for refuge run.
Now to proceed: The Scripture Phrase does reach
No farther, than our stupid sense to teach;
That by corporeal things we may prepare
Our hearts to know what things spiritual are;
And by Invisible, make demonstration
Of what is unseen, beyond man's weak narration.
And for this cause, our passions and affects
Are in the Scriptures, for some known respects,
Conferred on the Almighty; when it is said,
Genesis 6.6.
God did repent him that he man had made.
Ier. 18.8.
Or when he is wrathful? herein is not meant,
That He is angry, or, He can repent:
But it is a Figure from the effect arose,
And that the Greeks call Metanumikos.
The Names the Scriptures attribute to Him,
Sometimes Jehovah, sometimes Elohim:
And when the glorious Trinitie's proclaimed,
Pater, filius.
The Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are named.
Spirit. sanctus.
More appellations the Text affords;
Deus Coeli.
As, The Great God of Heaven, The Lord of Lords,
Dom. Dominat.
The Lord of Armies, and of Hosts; the God
Possessor Coeli.
That in the Highest Heaven has his abode;
Dom. Abr. Isa^ Jacob.
The God of Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; and,
Educt. Isra. ex AEgyp.
He that brought Israel from the Egyptians land;
God of the Spirits, of all Flesh, and he
D. Spir. universe. carm.
Lord God of Israel is known to be.
Dom. Deus Isr.
Him, by the name of the Hebrews God we praise,
Deus Hebr.
God of our Fathers, The Ancient of all days,
Deus. Patr. nost. Antiquus dier.
And, David's God. Yet further denomination;
Deus deor. Just. Grand. Salut.
The God of gods, of Justice, Joy, Salvation,
(These titles it ascribes to Him alone)
Redemp. Israel.
Isreal's Redeemer, Isreal's Holy one;
Sanctus Israel.
Protector, Father, Shepherd: then we sing
Protect. Pater. Pastor.
To Isreal's God, to Jacobs, the great King:
Rex Israel. rex Jacob.
So, to the Everlasting King, and than
Rex magnus.
King of all Worlds, before the World began.
Rex sempiternus.
Whose Power, whose Goodness, shown to every Nation, etc.
Rex seculorum.
Extracts from me this serious Contemplation.
Sovereign and holy God, Fountain and Spring
Cle. Mar. Vict. in Genes.
Of all true Virtue, the Omnipotent King;
Of whom, by subtle search in things to'acquire,
Is not in Man's conception (a thing higher
Than his weak faculties can comprehend;)
Yet not to know this God, he should offend.
For how can it with reason consonant be,
One Godhood should remain in persons three?
And they in such a firm connexure linkt,
To be (although in separat) yet distinct.
Thou art without beginning; and again,
Thou shall to all Eternity remain,
Knowing no end: The Only and the Same,
Whom Time cannot impair, nor Age reclaim.
The space of things, Thou do in space exceed,
And art contained in none. How should thou need
That which thy Self have made? Or how should Sense
Allot thee place, who only art Immense?
Nor is it in Man's frailty to devise,
How, Thee in the least kind to 'annatomise,
Or tell what thou art like; thy Image being
A thing excluded from all mortal seeing:
Unless thou, of thy most especial Grace,
Wilt show some shadow of thy glorious Face.
No part of thee thou have presented here,
Save what does in thy marvelous Works appear.
No Strength can move Thee, (of the Land or Ocean)
By whom we are, and in whom have our motion:
Thou art the Mind, and Substance of all pure
And holy minds: Thou art the Reason, sure
And steadfast, whence all other Reasons flow,
That are from perfect Wisdom said to grow.
Thou art that Virtue, of all Virtues head:
Thou art the Life it self; and thou art read,
Father of Life, as being known to give
Breath, (with their Being) to all things that live.
The Light it self, and yielding Light to all;
The Cause and Strength of things in general,
Beginning, it is beginning had from thee;
And whatsoever first began to be,
Upon the sudden out of Nothing shined:
Which, filled with thy great Power, were so refined,
That either strength of knowledge they retain,
Or excellent shape, such as does still remain.
The sacred Scriptures are sufficient warrant, More particularly of the
Trinity in Unity.

By many Texts to make the Trine apparent:
As from the first Creation we may prove;
God did Create, God Said, the Spirit did Move: Genesis 1.1. God created.

Create imports the Father; Said, the Son,
The Spirit that Moved, the Holy Ghost. (This done) Genesis 1.3. God said.

Come to the Gospel, to Saint Paul repair; Genesis 1.2 The Spirit moved.

Of him, Through him, and For him all things are;
To whom be everlasting praise, Amen.
In which, it is observed by Origin, Observation.

Of, Through^ and For, three Persons to imply; Romans 11.36.

And the word Him, the Godheads Unity.
Obser.
Let Us in Our own Image, Man create,
Genesis 1.26.
(Says God:) which Solomon does thus explicate;
Eccles. 12.1.
Remember the Creators in the days, etc.
Obser.
Which word, those well verst in the Hebrew Phrase,
Gen 11.7.
Read in the plural. So, when God did frown
Obser.
On Babels Tower, he said, Let Us go down.
Genesis 19.24.
When Sodom was consumed, it is said again,
Obser.
The Lord that fire did from the Lord down rain.
So, when Christ's Job. 12.41. Isay 6.3.
Glory Isay would declare,
To'expresse, Three Persons in on Godhead are;
He, Holy, Holy, Holy, named: To show,
We might a Ternion in an Union know.
Come to Christ's Baptism, you again shall see,
Obser.
In the same Trine, the perfect Unity:
The Father (the first Person) is comprised
By sending down a Voice: The Son's baptized
By John in Jorden: and then from above
The Third descends, in figure of a Dove.
Obser.
So likewise when Duke Moses went about
Deuteronomy. 6.4. The Original reads it. Iehoua, our God Iehoua: The first intending
the Father. Our God, the Son: Iehova again iterated, the Holy Ghost:
To comment on the Law; lest they should doubt
Of this great Mystery, Hark to my word
O Israel, (said) The Lord our God's one Lord:
In which word One, the Unity is meant
Of the three Persons, solely Omnipotent.
In which (by Galatinus. 3 reasons why Christ is called Our God.

1. A Savior. 2. A Redeemer 3. A Mediator.
Obseruat. concerning the two natures of Christ, his Divinity and Humanity.


One) it is well observed, That he
The second Person in the Trinity
Meant in the second word, who has the name
To be Our God: It Is because we may claim
Just interest in him. And though all the Three
May be called ours; more (in particular) He.
One reason is, Because he Heaven forsook,
And on himself our humane nature took
In all things like, (so did his Grace abound)
Save only that in him no sin was found.
Next, That he bore our sins, freed our transgression:
And last, For us in Heaven makes intercession.
Obser.
Two natures in one person so allied,
Some hold, in Man's creation tipify'd;
From Earth, his body Adam had ('it is Genesis 2.7. The Lord God also made the man
of the dust of the ground, and breathed in his face the breath of life, and the
man was a living Soul.

Athe^. in Symb.


said;)
His Soul, from Heaven: both these but one Man made.
Christ's humane nature had with man affinity,
(Being very Man) and from God his Divinity,
(Being very God:) In both so to subsist,
Godhood and Manhood make up but one Christ.
In Jacob's Ladder, figured, this we see, Obser.

(Which Ladder, Christ himself professed to be;) John 1.51.

Of which, the foot being fixed upon the ground;
The top to heaven; thus much to us does sonnd:
That in this Scale, at such large distance set,
The Heaven and Earth at once together met.
So, Christ's Humanity from Earth was given;
But his Divinity he took from Heaven:
As from Earth, Earthy; as from Heaven, Divine;
Two Natures in one Person thus combine.
The choicest things about the Arc were framed Obser.

Of Gold and Wood; Wood, worthless to be named,
If with Gold valued; for the Cedar's base,
Compared with the Ophir Mine: yet had it grace,
With it is rich tincture to be ouerspred.
In this respect the Godhood may be sed
To be the Gold; the Manhood, baser wood:
And yet both these (as truly understood)
Made but one Arc: So, the two Natures raise
Betwixt them but one Christ. He forty days Obser.

Fasted in the Desert, and did after grow
Hungry: by which the Text would have us know
He Is God, because of his miraculous fast: Ignat. Mar. in Epist. ad Phil.

He Is Man, because he hungry grew at last.
He slept at sea, when the great tempest rose; Obser.

This showed him Man, as needful of repose:
When he rebuked the Winds, and Surges tamed, Mat. 14.

He, his great Godhood to the World proclaimed.
He wept over Lazarus, as he was man; Obser.

But (four days buried) when he raised him, than
He appeared God. He died upon the Cross Obser.

(As he was Man) to redeem Mankindes loss;
But at his death, when the Earth with terror shook,
And that the Sun (affrighted) durst not look
On that sad object, but his light withdrew
By strange Eclipse; this showed him to be true
And perfect God: since, to confirm this wonder,
The Temples Veil was seen to rend asunder:
The Earth sent forth her Dead, who had abode
Long in the earth: All these proclaimed him God.
The tenth of the seventh month, the Hebrew Nation How Christ was typically
figured in Aaron.

Did solemnise their Feast of Expiation:
So called, because the High Priest then confessed,
How He, with all the People, had transgrest; Tisri, our month September,
Leuit 15.

(His and Their sins:) Observe how thence ensu'th
A fair agreement 'twixt the Type and Truth.
Leuit. 16.3.
Aaron the High Priest went into the place
Called Holiest of Holies: Christ (by 'his grace
Heb. 9.12.
Made our High Priest) into the Holiest went,
Namely, the Heaven above the Firmament.
Exodus 30.10:
Aaron, but once a year; He, once for all,
Heb. 9.12.
To make way for Mankind in general:
Ibid.
He, by the blood of Goats and Calves; but Christ,
By his own blood (the blessed Eucharist.)
Heb. 9.
Aaron went single in: and Christ alone
Esaias 63.3.
Has trod the Wine Press, (and besides him none.)
Leuit. 16.4.
He, with his Priestly robes pontifically;
Christ, to his Office sealed eternally
Leuit. 16.
From God the Father. Aaron took two Goats;
Which ceremonial Type to us denotes,
That Christ assumed two Natures: that which fled,
Theod. in Leuit. Quaest. 12.
(The Scapegoat called) to us deciphered
His Godhoods imp'assibilitie: And comprised
In the other, (on the Altar sacrifis'd)
His Manhoods suffering; since that Goat did bear
The Peoples sins. Which in the Text is clear.
2 Cor. 5.22.
Saint Paul in his Epistle we read thus;
That Christ (without sin) was made Sin for us.
Hence grows that most inscrutable Divinity
Of the three sacred Persons, the blessed Trinity:
Which holy Mystery has an extension
Above Man's brain, or shallow apprehension;
Nor can it further in our breasts take place,
Than we'are enlightened by the Spirit of Grace.
How should we then, Finite and Mortal, grow
By meditation, or deep search, to know;
Or dare ambitiously, to speak or write
Of what Immortal is, and Infinite?
And yet, amongst many other devout men,
Greg. Naz. Carm. 3.
Hear something from the learned Nazianzen.
The Monady, or number One, we see,
In this great Godhood does arise to three;
Deus est indivise vnus in Trinitate, and Inconfuse Trinus in Vnitate. Leo Pap.
And then this mystical Trine (sacred alone)
Retyres it self into the number One:
Nor can this Divine Nature be dissect,
Or separated in the least respect.
Three Persons in this Trias we do name;
But yet the Godhood still One and the same:
Each of the Three, by right, a God we call;
Yet is there but one God amongst them all.
When Cicero, Cic. de Not. deor.
with grave and learned Phrase
Had labored long, the Godhood to emblaze;
He does conclude it, of that absolute kind,
No way to be deciphered or defined;
Because, above all things He Is superior known,
And so immense, to be contained in none.
A prime and simple Essence, uncompounded;
And though that many, laboring to have sounded
This Divine Essence, and to'haue given it name,
They were not able: yet to express the same
As 't were afar off, Epithites devised,
And words in such strange circumstance disguised;
Nothing but quarrels and contentions breeding,
As Natures strength, and Reasons, much exceeding.
The Martyr Attalus (when he was brought Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. li. 6. ca. 21.

Before a Tyrant, who esteemed naught
Of God or goodness) being asked in scorn,
What name God had? A space from him did turn,
And after some small pause made this reply;
(As the Author does of him historifie)
"Your many gods have names by which the are known;
"But our God being but One, has need of none.
Wise Socrates forbad men to enquire, Socr. apud Zen.

Of what shape God was. Let no man aspire
(Says Plato) what God is to apprehend, Plat. in Timae.

Whose Majesty's immensenesse does extend
So far; and is so'vnimitably Great,
Beyond all utterance, or the hearts conceit.
Why then is it so difficult and rare,
Him to define? It is, because we are
Of such straight Intellect, narrow and rude,
Incapable of his great Magnitude.
Our infirm sight is so obtuse and dull;
And His bright fulgence is so beautiful.
Hence comes it, by no other names we may
Call this great God, than such as best display
His Excellence, Infinity, and all
Wherein He'appeares solely Majesticall.
According to his Essence, Thom. prim. part. 9.56.
Him to know,
Belongs unto Himself: Of Gods Essence.
the Angels go
By mere Similitude: Man, by a Glass
And Shape of things; and can no further pass:
For he, by contemplation in the Creature,
As in a Mirrhor, sees the Divine feature:
So Holy men by speculation viewed
The nature of this toplesse Altitude.
Ruffin. in Epist. Heron. Tom. 9. Epist. 19.
'Twixt Us (says one) and this great Mystery
There is such distance, such remote degree,
As the Creator (whom we must prefer)
Is before the Creature; and the Artificer
Is, (than the work he makes,) more excellent:
As He that has been before all Descent,
And always is; is of more noble fame
Than that which was not, and from Nothing came.
Then cease not till to this thou have atcheev'd,
"God is not to be questioned, but believed.
Greg. in Mor. 16.
When Gregory would show the Vbiquitie
Gods Vbiquitie.
Of this vncomprehended Deity;
The Almighty and Omnipotent God (says he)
Is Every where, At once, and Totally:
In Part he is not, as confined to space;
But He is All of Him, in Every place:
And then least found, when, with unfaithful heart,
He, that is All, Each-where, is sought in Part.
Mat. 3.
Therefore our Savior, when he would declare
To his Disciples, That no Mortals are
Able to view the Father, but the Son:
That, by the glorious Fabric, by him done,
And by his other Creatures, they might see
(As in a Glass) his Might and Majesty;
Uses these words: By Heaven you shall not swear,
It is the Throne of God, (He Is resiant there)
Nor by the lower Earth you shall protest,
It is the Basse on which his foot does rest.
What we are enjoined.
We for our parts, all curious search lay by,
Only submit our selves to the Most-High,
In all obedience humbly to confess
Him for the Fountain of all Happiness,
Goodness and Grace: to give him thanks and praise,
First, for this Life; next, our Increase of days;
But chiefly, that we Reason have and Sense,
With tongues to magnify his Excellence;
And Looks sublime, to cast them up and view
Whence we receive all Good: and as His dew,
Give Him the Glory, that He did not frame
Us Beasts, and Mute, that cannot praise His Name.
Thales Milesius, Thal. one of the Wise men of Greece.
of the Argiue Nation,
Was (in like sad and serious contemplation)
For three things wont to thank the gods: The first,
That he was borne in Greece, bred up and nursed
Not amongst Barbarians: And in the next place,
Because no Female, but of Masculine race:
The third and last, (which most his joys encreast)
Because created Man, and not Brute Beast.
Boethius says, Boet. lib. 4. Pros. 6.
It is not fit, frail Man
Secrets Divine too narrowly should scan;
Only to have them so far understood,
That God disposes all things to our good.
The knowledge to Salvation tending best,
He in his Scripture has made manifest:
But not to enquire for that, which should we find,
Our limited and vncapacious mind
Could not conceive; or say, in some degree
It did, not make us better than we be.
The Office of a true Father God has don;
This Body He has made, Lact. Div. Inst lib. ^1. cap. 12.
which we put on;
The Soul, by which we breathe, He has infused:
All that we are is His, if not abused.
How we were made, or how these things were wrought,
If in His holy Wisdom he had thought
Fit we should know, no doubt they had been then
Published unto us by the sacred Pen.
Elsewhere He says, Lact. ca. 2. lib. 9.
His will was, we should know
(Besides the general duty which we owe)
Only such things as tend to our Salvation:
As for all other curious Intimation, Ne suitor vltra crepidam.

It Is most profane; and therefore Heaven forbid,
We pry into those things He would have hid.
Why should we seek for what we cannot know?
Or knowing, Illustration.
by it cannot better grow?
Sufficient it is that we enjoy the Fire
Unto our use; What need is, to enquire
From whence it has it is heat? We daily find
The benefit of Water in the kind;
What more would it avail (being still the ^ame)
If we did know whence first the moisture came?
So of the rest. Then let us be content
With the proportion of the knowledge leant.
"Be grateful for Heavens Blessings, and surrender
"All praise and thanks unto the Bounteous Sender.
Hiero ad Sim.
The Tyrant Hiero, in his height of pride,
Willing, What God was, to be satisfied?
Asked An ancient Greek Poet.
Simonides. He, after some stay,
Demanded first the respit of a day:
But that being past, Hiero again inquired.
He told him, That to know what he desired,
Two days were requisite. These likewise over,
And being still demanded as before;
The Tyrant once again required the reason
Of his delay, by doubling still the season:
Who thus reply'de; The more that I the same
Contemplate, still the further out of frame
My senses are. Macr. lib. de Somn. S^ip.
This Plato did pursue,
Saying, of God he only thus much knew,
As, That no man could know him. Hence exists
The opinion of the best Theologists;
That his great Attributes are by negation
Better expressed to us, than Affirmation.
As much to say, More easy it is to show,
What He is not; than what He is, to know:
As, That god is Not Made; No Earth, No Fire,
Water, or Air. Ascend a little higher.
God is No Sphere, No Star, No Moon, No Sun;
God is Not Changed, suffers No Motion;
God, No Beginning had, therefore No End:
With infinite such, that to the like intend.
All which infer, That by no affirmation
Can be expressed his full denomination.
Leave thousand Authors at this time alone,
Greg. s^p. Ezech. Hom. 7. and Mor lib. 2.6.12.
My purpose is but to insist on one.
Before our Minds eyes let us place (says he)
What this great Nature Naturant may be;
Natura Naturans.
Which All things Holds, Fills All, does All Embrace,
Super-exceedes, Sustaines; and in One place.
Not in one place Sustaines, and in another
Super-exceedes; here Fills, and in the the other
Embraces: but by Embracing, Fills; and then,
By Filling likewise does Embrace again:
Sustaining, Super-exceeds; Super-exceeding,
Sustaines: In all these no assistance needing.
Greg.
The same says in another place; We know,
God's Within All, Without, Above, Below:
Above, by Power; Below, by Sustentation;
Without by Magnitude; in the same fashion,
Within All, by Subtilitie: Above, reigning;
Descend Below, He Is there, All things containing:
Without, He compasses; Penetrates Within:
Not in one place Superior, (that were sin
To imagine) in another place inferior;
Or several ways exterior and interior.
But He, the One and Same, totally to'appeare.
(Vncircumscrib'd) at one time every where.
By Governing, Sustaining; by Sustaining,
Governing; by Embracing, Penetrating;
Penetrating by Embracing; Above, Guiding;
Below, Supporting: what is without abiding,
Still Compassing; and what is within, Replenishing:
Without Unrest, All that is above Protecting;
Without least Pain, All that is below Sustaining:
Without Extenuation, Inly Piercing;
Without (without Extension) Compassing.
But, Would thou have me what God is discuss? Cardanus.

Thee (with Cardanus) I must answer thus:
"To tell thee that, I should be a God too:
"(A thing which none but God himself can do.)
And now, with pious reverence to enquire Of the names belonging to God.

Of that All-Potents Name, which some desire
(No doubt) to be instructed in; as far
As leave will give, a little let us dare.
Some call Him God, of Giving; as they would Deus, a Dando.

Infer to us, He gives us all that is Good.
Others would by Antiphrasis imply,
That it from Desit comes: The reason why? Desit quod ei nil deest.

As most approved, to be that only He
In whom not any thing can wanting be.
Others confer on this invisible Being,
Theos; as much as we should say, All-seeing. A (...) vel (...) i. Video.

Some, of Deomai, [i. Timeo] that is, To Fear;
Because that every Nation far and near
Should dread His Name. But no Tongue can express
His Celcitude and high Almightinesse:
Which in his Wisdom He has kept concealed,
Nor to his Servant Moses once revealed.
Whom, though in all things else He pleased to use
Familiarly, as one whom He did choose
To be his Peoples Captain; when he came
To ask that? Answered, I Am what I Am.
Some are of opinion, it was the word Iehova which was held so sacred.
Which sacred words, the Hebrews chosen Nation
From Age to Age had in such veneration,
That save their priests none might pronounce that phrase:
And they, but on some solemn Festival days.
Now therefore, This, long meditating on
(The wisest of all Men) King Solomon;
Finding no word that could define Him right,
Quod Nomen eius? Prove. 30
Or manifest his Magnitude or Might:
Astonished and confounded, does exclaim
In these few words; What might I call His Name?
As should he say; By what Voice, Sound, what Tongue,
Can this Eternal Deity be sung?
Can a Word do it? To think it, Heaven forbid;
Since from our Frailties'tis retruse and hid.
Excuse me (Reader) then, if I desire
To search no further than Such durst cnquire.
Lumen est Vmbra Dei; and Deus est Lumen Luminis. Plato.
Explicit metrum Trastatus secundi.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogriphicall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractate.
HOw Idolatrous Worship first crept into the world by the instigation of the
Devil, many Histories give ample testimony. Amongst others, Idolatry brought
by AEneas to Rome.
That AEneas carried his Penates or household gods into Italy, after the surprise
and combustion of Troy; which thence were derived unto the Latins, and to the
People of Rome. We read likewise, That diverse of their Kings and Princes, as
Romulus, Numa Pompilius, Carmenta, or Carmentis, Julius Caesar, and others,
being related amongst the Indigites, had Divine honors decreed unto them. But
of this and the like Idolatry, Cap. 14.
Solomon in his Book of Wisdom thus speaks: That is cursed which is made
with hands, both it and he that made it: he, because he made it; and it,
because being a corruptible thing, it was called god. For the Ungodly and their
ungodliness are both hated alike of God: so truly the work, and he that made
it, shall be punished together. Therefore there shall be a Visitation for the
Idols of the Nations, for of the Creatures of God, they are become
abomination, and stumbling blocks unto the souls of men, and a snare for the
feet of the Unwise. For the inuenting of Idols was the beginning of whoredom;
and the finding of them is the corruption of life: for they were not from the
beginning, neither shall they continue for ever; the vainglory of men brought
them into the world, therefore they shall come shortly to an end. When a Father
mourned grievously for his Son that was taken away suddenly, he made an
Image for him, that was once dead, whom now he worshippeth as a god, and
ordained to his servants ceremonies and sacrifices. Thus by process of time
this wicked custom prevailed, and was kept as a Law, and Idols were worshipped
by the commandment of Tyrants. etc.

Not much dissonant from this is that which we read in Cicero an Ethnycke
Author. Cic. of Idolatry.
The life and common custom of Man (says he) has taken upon him, that for
some benefits received by excellent Men on earth, they have therefore
transferred them into the Heavens. Hence, Hercules, Castor, Pollux,
AEsculapius, and others, had Deities ascribed unto them. It likewise came to
pass that Poets, by Verses and Numbers composed according to their affections
or fancies, for flattery or reward, Deified many Princes and Patrons. Which
evil and mischief had original from the Graecians; by whose lightness, it
is incredible, how many mists of falsities and errors they have been the
Authors of.

Five Reasons why the Atheists doubt of a God.
There be diverse conjectures made by the Theologists, Why men should doubt or
make question whether there be a God or no? I will reduce them into the number
of five.

1 Reason.
The first arises from the despoiling of the Image of God in Man by Original
sin: The horrible deprauation and malice of the Heart, in the which the
illustrious apparances of the Godhood ought naturally to have residence.

II.
The second is, Because with these bodily eyes we do not look upon Him in this
World, as when we are in the presence of an earthly King, a Prince, or a Judge.

III.
The third grows by reason of the miraculous events, into whose causes we are
not able to search, and which might be conjectured to fall out otherwise, if
there were a Just God, seeing and guiding all things with equity and justice:
As, the prosperity of the Wicked, and adversity of the Godly: as also, That
grievous and crying sins are not punished in this world with all celeritie
and severity.

IV.
The fourth springs from the tyranny of Death, which snatcheth away the Good
with the Bad: which some men, destitute of the light of the Divine Word,
mis-interpret to their own destruction.

V.
The fifth and last they ground from the power of the Devil, who does delude
and seduce them with diverse prestigious gulleries; and dulls their senses, and
obdures their hearts, not only to doubt whether there be a God? but altogether
to forget Him. By which means, they enter unadvisedly and rashly upon sins
heinous and horrible. Notwithstanding the former, there be other inducements,
which merely drawn from natural reason, without the strength of the
irresistable Word, might be sufficient to withdraw men from such impious
infidelity.

Pregnant reasons to prove a Deity, drawn from humane understanding
First, all the works of God contained within the universal Machine, are evident
demonstrations of a wise, powerful, and all-sufficient Maker and Protector; of
whom the wisest of the Gentiles were sensible, and that such an one must of
necessity be, gave these reasons: I.
First, The admirable and inimitable feature of Man, supplied and adorned with
the innumerable testimonies of a Deity: insomuch, that not without great cause
he is styled a little and succinct world within himself; in whom there is a
perspicuous knowledge to distinguish good from evil, which is the rule by
which to direct all the necessary actions of humane life: neither is there any
thing in him (though in outward appearance of small value or validity) which
is not a lively and plentiful representation of a Deity; which is the more
visible, in the exact consideration of every particular limb and member of his
body.

The second is of the Conscience; II.
for in all detestable and facinorous actions, as Murder, Incest, Parricidie,
and the like, the Conscience is by a secret instinct sensible of a God, who
has inspection into the act, as seeing it when it was committed, and ready to
revenge it being done; howsoever it be concealed from the knowledge of the
Civil Magistrate.

A third is, III.
The pulchritude, order, effect, propagation, conservation, and duration of the
things in the world.

A fourth, IV.
The distinction of every Species, which we see daily and yearly to propagate
and multiply upon the earth.

A fifth, V.
The Societies, Kingdoms, and Empires, which are not planted and settled
rashly; or by chance, confirmed, sustained, and changed.

A sixth, VI.
The great and remarkable punishments of impious and wicked malefactors, who
though they escape the hand of the temporal Judge here below, yet cannot
escape the rod of the Auenger above; for it is a general rule, observed as
well in Morality as Divinity, That for the most part, heinous sins have
horrible punishments impending, which never could be executed if God were not
the Executioner of his own Justice.

The seventh, VII.
The blessing and benefits conferred upon good and godly men; nay even amongst
mere Naturalists, we see honor and offices bestowed upon such as are meriting
and well meaning.

The eighth is, VIII.
The Order of Causes, which in the nature of things does not proceed into
Infinites, but of necessity they comply and return to some prime Mouer, by
which they are governed, and in which they insist.

Lastly, IX.
Prodigies and Signs, which forewarne great and strange accidents, as
Eclipses, Comets, Earthquakes, Gapings and openings of the earth, in which
whole Cities and Islands have been swallowed up in an instant; monstrous and
prodigious births, etc. But I now proceed to speak something concerning the
Unity of the Godhead.

This is he of whom Petrarch speaks, Lib. 1. de Vita Solitar.
in these words; Who sees and hears us before we speak: He who said unto
Moses being silent, Why do thou call unto me? He preuents our words, and
anticipates our actions. He who knows our very thoughts afar off, long before
they be conceived: He who hears our prayers before they yield any sound: He
who spieth our necessities before they appear unto our selves: He who knows
our ends before we find our beginnings: and though He proves us to be
wretched and unworthy, yet is always ready to show us his grace and mercy.
And this is the sole God of Love and Vnitie^ of whom Boethius thus speaks:
Lib. 2. Metr. 8.
Quod Mundus stabili fide
Concordes variat vices:
Quod pugnantes semina
Foedus perpetuum tenent. etc.
That the World with stable Faith,
Concordant courses varied has:
And that the wearing seeds of things,
From a perpetual covenant springs.
Why Phoebus in his golden Throne,
The Roseat Morn and Day brings on:
Or Why those Stars that Hesperus
Does usher forth to shine on us,
The Moon takes charge of, all the night.
Or why the Waves that hourly fight,
And with impetuous clamors rore,
To menace, not invade the shore;
(For further than it is limited bounds,
No spot of Earth, the Water drownds.)
It Is Love that Sovereign Empire has,
Of Heaven, Earth, Sea, that calmes their wrath;
And in a league of unity
Binds all the states of things that be.


So the Poet Claudian: 4 Hon. Consul.
Nonne vides operum, etc.
See not the World in glorious splendour shine?
Not by Force governed, but by Love Divine:
How (vncompel'd) in a most sweet desire,
From Age to Age the Elements conspire;
And, how the traveling Phoebus is content
With his mid-road-way through the Firmament,
To no hand erring. How the Sea's restrained,
As, willingly in his own bounds contained.
And how the Air, wandering throughout the world,
Is hourly this way tossed, and that way hurld. etc.


Pythagoras Samius, Philosophers, Of one God.
in his Metempsuchosis, or transmigration of Bodies (as Cicero witnesses of
him) was wont to say often^ There is one God, and not as many think, without
the administration of the world; but Totus in Toto, All in All. His Scholar
Philolaus affirmed no less, thus speaking; There is one God, Prince of the
Universe, who is ever Singular, Immouable, and like only unto Himself.

Lactantius, Diuinar. Institut. lib. 1. cap. 4. says, That Seneca the
Philosopher, though in his Writings he inuocated many gods; yet to show that
he believed but One, you shall read him thus: Do thou not understand the
Majesty and Authority of thy Judge, the Rector and Governor of Heaven and
Earth, the God of gods? of whom all inferior Deities adored amongst us have
their dependence. Again in his Exhortations: He when he first laid the
foundation of this beautiful Machine, and began that, than which, Nature never
knew a Work greater, or better; yet, that all things might be governed by
Captains and Commanders, (though his sole Providence, as He created, so still
guides all) he begot other gods, as his Ministers and Superintendents.

Damascenus a Greek Author writes thus: Obser.
One has produced all things, who is adored in silence; and is as the Sun,
which directly looked upon is scarce seen: the nearer, the more obscurely; but
next it, takes away the very apprehension of the Opticke senses.

Iamblicus, de Secta Pythagorica, says, That there is of all things, one
Cause, one God, the Lord of all, of whom every good thing ought to be
petitioned. According to that of Horrace, Epistol. ad Lollium: Lib. 1.
Sed satis est orare Iovem, qui donat and anfert,
Det vitam, det opes. -- etc.
Sufficient'tis, if we to Jove do pray,
Who life and wealth can give, or take away.
And Ovid, Lib. 1.
lib. de Art. Amand. -- facile est omnia posse Deo.
An easy thing it is to God to do all things.


He is likewise the aim and end of all Contemplation: nor is He any other
thing to be contemplated, than as an Abstract from a Multitude, to an Unity.
This Unity therefore is God himself, Prince of all Truth, Felicity,
Substance, and of all Beginnings. To this, that of Lucan seems to allude:
Lib. de Bell. Civil. 8.
-- si numina nasci
Credimus? --
To think the gods were borne, we should be mad,
Most certain it is, they no beginning had.


Hear what Proclus says: Who is the King? The sole God of all things: who
notwithstanding he is separate from them, yet from Himself produces all
things; and to Himself conuerteth all Ends: The End of Ends; and first Cause
of Agitation and Working; and Author of all Good. If thou dare believe Plato,
He is neither to be expressed nor apprehended. Therefore this prime Simplicity
is sole King, Prince, and Ex-superance of all things that have being: He is
supereminent over all Causes, and has created the substance of the gods, so
far as there is in them any appearance of Good.

Porphyr^us, in his Book wherein he discribeth the life of his Master
Plotinus, says, That God in his Unity has generated and produced Many: but
so, that this multitude cannot subsist, if this Unity does not still remain
One. And, That they neither are of themselves, nor have any power to make
others blessed and happy, Boethius has these words: Lib. 3. Metr. 6.
Sedet Interia Conditor altus, rerum regens flectit habenas,
Rex and Dominus, Fons and Origo, etc.
In the Interim sits the Builder high,
And in his Regal Majesty,
Directs the reins of every thing,
The King, the Lord, the Well and Spring:
Who as he is King, has Power and Might;
The Onely-Wise, that judges Right.


Apuleius, Lib. de Mundo, Apothegmes concerning God.
tells us, That one being asked, what God was? answered, He was the same
that the Steeresman is in the Galley, The Rein-holder in the Chariot, The
Leader of the Song in the quire of Voices; The Captain in the City, The Emperor
in the Army; such and the same is God in the World.

Eusebius the Philosopher was wont to say, That no man ought to dispute whether
there was a God or no; but constantly to believe there was. For in a question
propounded (says he) whosoever shall hold the Impious Opinion, contendeth with
all the art he can to prevail in the Argument. Ser. 78. Plut. in Apoth.
Stobaeus.

Alexander the Great being in the Temple of Jupiter Ammon, when he was saluted
of the Priest, by the name of the Son of Jupiter: It is no wonder (replied he)
that I am so, seeing he is generally the Father of all Mankind; and out of
these he selecteth the best and most excellent to be his Children in peculiar.
Modestly interpreting the Oracle; because when the Priest in palpable flattery
called him Jupiters Son (as being naturally and lineally descended from him,
as Hercules and others) he only acknowledged him to be his Father, as he was
the Parent of all things; and those peculiarly to be his Children, who by their
virtues and eminent actions came nearest to the Divine Nature.

Athenodorus was wont to say, Fulg. li. 7. ca. 10.
Man ought so to live with man, as if God, the Rewarder of Good, and Revenger
of Evil, at all times, and in all places, were a spectator of his actions with
humane eyes. Further he says, Know thy self then to be free from
Voluptuousness and sinful desires, when thou demandest nothing of God, but
what thou art not ashamed to ask him openly: for what a madness is it for any
man to whisper that in Gods ear, which he would blush that any friend, much
more a stranger, should know. Sen. Epist. 10.
Therefore he concludes with this admonition: So live amongst Men, as if God
saw thee: so speak unto God, as if Man heard thee.

Demonax being importuned by a dear friend of his, to travel unto the Temple
of AEsculapius, and there to make intercession to the god for the health of his
son, who had labored of a long sickness; made him this answer: Do thou
think the god to be so deaf, that he can hear us in no place but his Temple?
Thales also being asked, Apoth. ex Laerti^.
What was the most ancient of things? answered, God. And being demanded his
reason? replied, Because he only was without beginning.

Philo with other Jews being accused to Caius Caligula, (by one Appion) That
they had refused to give Divine honor unto Caesar; and for that cause being
commanded from the Court: he said to the rest of the Jews his Companions in
that adversity, Be of good comfort, o my friends and countrymen, against whom
Caesar is thus grievously incensed; Eusebius. lib. 2. de Eccl. Hist.
because of necessity, Divine aid must be present where Humane help is absent.

Antelicedes coming into Samothrace, of purpose to be initiated into their
Divine Ceremonies; was demanded of the Priest, What one excellent thing he had
done, and of special remarke, in the former passage of his life? Who answered
with great modesty; If I have ever done any act of that high nature to be any
way pleasing unto the gods, they themselves are not ignorant thereof.
Intimating, What an arrogant folly it were, by the commemoration of his own
worth, to commend that to the gods; which, whether he spoke or were silent,
could not be concealed from them.

Plut. in Lavon.
Dercillidas being sent of an Embassy to King Pyrrhus, who with a mighty and
puissant army had entered into the country of the Spartanes; demanded of him
the reason of that hostility and sudden invasion. To whom Pyrrhus replied, That
it was because they had deposed and expelled their King Cleominus; whom (says
he) if you call not again, and re-instate him your Prince, restoring him to
his pristine dignity, they should understand, and shortly, to their great
damage, that they were no stronger, or of greater power, than other of their
neighbors, whom he had before defeated and overcome. To whom Dercillidas made
this present answer; If Cleominus be a god, we fear him not, as those that
have not any way trespassed against his Deity: and if he be but man, we fear
him the less, as being in his best, but equal to one of us. In which he
reproved the proud menaces of Pyrrhus: for the gods, who punish whom they
please, and cannot be damnified again, by whom they chastise, harm none but
the Impious and Delinquent: Idem.
and man, of man is alike to be feared.

Let us next examine the ancient Poets, to find what they thought of this one
and only God. Sylius Italicus gives him a denomination in these words: Lib.
6. de Bell. Punic.
The Poets.
Insticiae, Rectique Dator, qui cuncta gubernas.
Giver of Justice and of Right,
Thou all things gouernst by thy Might.
Nothing is more great, Lib. 1. Od. 12.
says Horrace: Vnde nihil maius generatur, etc.
Than whom, naught greater can have birth,
His like, or second, on the earth.
All things are to Him subjected, Lib. 4. de Trist.
says Ovid: Nilita sublime est supraque pericula tendit,
Non sit vt inferius suppositumque Deo.
Naught so sublime, or above danger placed,
But is to Him inferior, and abas't.
His Will and Disposition is immutable, Lib. 1. Achill.
according to Statius: Ne pete Dardaniam frustra Theti mergere classem.
Thetis, in vain thou do both fret and frown,
As menacing the Dardan fleet to drown.
The Fates forbid: an order is decreed
Amongst the gods, that they shall better speed;
Who in a violent and impetuous rage,
Asia and Europe filled with blood and strage.
But Jove himself has now prefixed a day,
Wherein the effects of war perforce must stay.


He may be known by the effects of his Works; Lib. 3. de Bell. Civil.
as Lucan: Ignarum mortale genus per fulmina tantum
Sciret adhuc, Coelo solum regnare Tonantem.
Ignorant Mankind, Thunders self will tell,
(If nothing else) that Jove in Heaven does dwell.


Boethius calls him the Fairest and most Perfect, Lib. 3. Metr. 9.
etc.

-- Tu cuncta superno
Ducis ab exemplo, pulchrum pulcherrimus ipse
Mundum, etc. --
Thou have from high example all derived;
And be'ing thy self the Fairest, thou have strived
To make the world a fair work: in thy mind
Framing all things alike Fair in their kind.
It is He which disposes of the seasons, Lib. 2. Met. 6.
says Boethius.

Sig not tempora proprijs
Aptans officijs Deus, etc.
Unto their proper offices
The seasons He appointed:
Those courses that He has decreed,
He will not see dis-jointed.
He is himself Immouable, yet gives motion to all things which he has made:
Plaut. in Rud.
As Plautus, etc.

Qui Gentes omnes, Terras, and Maria mouet:
Eius sum Ciuis Ciuitate Coelitum.
He that all Nations, Earth, and Seas does move,
I am his Citisen, in his place above.
He gives to all Creatures a generatiue virtue in their kind, says Seneca
the Tragic Poet. Sen. in Hyppol.


Providet ille maximus mundi pareus. etc.
When He that did the World create,
Perceived the ravenous threats of Fate,
The provident Parent had a care,
That loss, by Issue to repair.
In Captiv.
It is He who sees and hears all things, says Plautus: Est profecto Deus qui
quae nos gerimus,
Audit and videt, etc.
There is a God, intentive to
All things we either speak or do.


Lib. Met. 8.
It is He that both will and can do all things, says Ovid: -- Immensa est,
finemque potentia Coeli
Non habet, and quicquid superi voluere peractum est.
The Power of Heauen's immense, and has no end;
Against their wills, in vain is to contend.


He only knows the true courses of the Signs and Planets, ordering and
disposing them. According to the excellent Poet Virgil in his AEtna: Virg. in
AEtna.
Scire vices etiam signorum and tradita jura. etc.
The Laws and Courses of the Signs to find,
And why the Clouds are to the earth inclined;
Or why the Suns fire looks more pale and bright,
Than does his blushing Sisters, Queen of night.
Why the Years seasons vary; whereupon
The youthful Spring, the Summer vshers on.
And why the Summer grows soon old and spent:
Why Autumn her succeeds incontinent:
And Winter, Autumn. Or to have true notion,
How these proceed in an orbicular motion,
To understand the Poles, and how they are swayed;
Or wherefore the sad Comets are displayed.
Why Hesperus, the night-stars does fore-run;
Or Lucifer, to warn us of the Sun,
Is last that shines, and brings up all the train.
Or, for what cause Boetes drives his Waine.
Or tell the reason, wherefore Saturnes star
Is steadfast: That of Mars still threatening war. etc.
These and the like to order and dispose,
It must be a Divinity that knows.


If He should keep back his hand, which is as much as to say, to take away
Love and Unity from the Works which he has made; all things would be ready
to run into disorder, and to return into the former Chaos. Lib. 2. Metr. 8.
To which purpose read Boethius: Hic si frena remiserit
Quicquid nunc amat invicem.
Bellum continuo geret. etc,
If He the bridle should let flacke,
Then every thing would run to wrack:
And all his Works, that now agree
In mutual Love, at war would be.
And in this new conceived Wrath,
What now with sociable Faith,
In friendly motions they employ,
They then would labor to destroy. etc.


The gods know better, what is convenient and profitable for us, than we our
selves can apprehend or imagine: therefore their wills and pleasures ought
always to be petitioned. Satyr. 10.
Witness Iuvenal: Nil ergo optabunt homines? si consilium vis
Permittas ipsis. etc.
Must therefore Man wish nothing? Shall I show
My counsel? Fit it is that the gods should know
Of what we stand in need: let us then tell
Our wants to them, who can supply us well;
For they have store of all things, and know best,
How every man to fit to his request.
And if we be devout to them in prayer,
We soon shall find, they have a greater care
Of us, than we our selves have: we with'a blind
And inconsiderat motion of the mind
(As led by lust) desire first to be sped
Of a fair Bride. Next, being married,
We long till we have Issue; ignorant still,
Whether to us they may prove good or ill.
The gods alone, in their foreknowledge see,
What kind of wife, what children these will be.


Ovid by the way of a comparison has made Him a grateful Lib. F^st. 2.
and liberal Rewarder of all goodness that can be in man, whatsoever: Dij pia
facta vident: Astris Dolphina recepit
Jupiter: and Stellas iussit habere novem.
The gods take note of pious acts:
The Dolphin's made Divine,
And placed in Heaven by Jove himself,
With stars in number nine.


In Capt^^is.
And Plautus alluding to the same purpose, speaks thus: Been merenti, been
profuerit.
Male merenti, par erit.
To him that merits well, he is good again:
But vengeance he stores up for the profane.


In Her^. O^t.
Seneca speaking, how fearful a thing it is to incur the wrath of God; and
withal, how vain and effectlesse the anger of Man is, compared with it; says
thus: Coelestis ira quos premit, miseros facit:
Humana nullos, etc.
Man's anger is in vain, and no man thralls:
Heavens wrath is terrible, on whom it falls.


That God is the most equal and Just God, of all men and all things; the
Auenger of the Wicked, and Protector of the Innocent; hear Plautus thus
speaking: In Rudente.
Quotidie Ille scit, quid Hic quaerat malum,
Qui Hic litem adipisci postulet perjurio.
He knows what evil, daily man acquires:
And who, that to accomplish his desires,
Would compound strife, by perjury. But when the Bad,
Of their false Causes, from the Judge have had
A sentence of their sides, all is but vain;
For He, the matter judged will judge again:
And then, the Cause uprightly having try'de,
How shall the (before) perjured man abide
His doom and mulct? All such as shall abet
Bad Suits, to them his punishment is great.
But the Just man, that neither fawned, nor bribed,
His name he in his Tables has inscribed.


Another holds, that the actions or cogitations of men are so far inferior to
the hidden ways of the gods, that they can no way either damage or profit
them in the least degree whatsoever: as Lucan; Lib. 3. de Bell. Civil.
-- si Coelicolus furor arma dedisset?
Aut si terriginae tentarunt Astra gigantes. etc.
If either rage should move the gods to war;
Or if the earth-bred Giants should now dare
To menace Heaven? Man's piety and love,
By arms or vows, could no way profit Jove.
The reason is, no Humane apprehension
Can once conceive the immortal gods intention.


And that all praise and thanks are to be rendered unto him, even for the least
of his innumerable benefits daily and hourly conferred upon us; Eclog. 1.
read Virgil of Tytirus: and howsoever he intended his words, I take them as
they lie.

Oh Milibaee, Deus nobis haec otia fecit;
Namque erit ille mihi semper Deus, etc.
O Melibaeus, God this leisure gave;
And I (but Him) no other god will have.
From this my fold a tender Lamb of mine
Has oftentimes been offered at his Shrine.
Thou see (by his leave) how my Oxen stray;
And on my rude Pipe, (what I please) I play.
And so much for the Poets. Diverse Nations, but especially the Egyptians,
Hierogliphicks concerning God.
made certain Hierogliphyckes to express this sole and supreme Deity: First,
by the Storke, who is a Bird that has no tongue; and God created all things in
a temperate and quiet silence. Inferring upon this, That Man ought not to speak
of him too freely or rashly, nor to search too narrowly into his hidden
Attributes: Pier. lib. 7.
for so says Pierius. By the same reason he was Hierogliphically prefigured
in the Crocodile, that frequents the river Nilus: as the selfsame Author
testifies.

The Egyptians did interpret him by a Circle, which has neither beginning nor
end: Lib. 39.
thereby figuring his Infinity. Pier. Valor. So likewise by the Eye: for as in
all other creatures, so especially in Man, the Eye is of his other members the
most beautiful and excellent, as the moderator and guide of our affections and
actions. So God is the bright Eye that directs the world; who by the Apostle
James is called the Father of men, unto whose eyes all thoughts lie naked and
open; who looks upon the good and bad, and searches into the reins of
either, etc.

The opinion of the Vadiani concerning God.
Epiphanius writes, That the Vadiadni, who were after called Antropomarphitae,
were of opinion. That God had a body, and was therefore visible. Now the maine
reason upon which they grounded this error, was, because they trusted more to
the outward senses, than to the inward Intellect; bringing their authority
from Genesis, wherein they had read, That the first man Adam did subsist of
soul and body, according to Gods own Image. As also from many other Texts of
Scripture, Psalm. 23. Esaias 25. etc.
in which the like members and attributes belonging to man, are ascribed unto
God. But this Heresy, as Saint Augustine witnesses, was utterly rejected and
condemned: for if God were circumscribed or included in a natural body, He
must then necessarily be finite, and therefore not present in all places at
once, which takes away his Vbiquitie. Besides, he should be compounded of
matter and form, and therefore subject unto accidents: all which being the
Characters of Imperfection, are no way liable to the Sempiternall, Immortal,
Omnipotent, Invisible, and the most consummate and absolute Deity. Ad Ephesians.
Therefore Saint Paul makes this acclamation: Blessed is the sole-Potent, King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords, who has Immortality, and whose dwelling is in
inaccessible Light, whom no man ever saw, or can see, etc.

Now the reason why, as well members belonging to man's body, as the affections
and passions of the mind, are in diverse places of the holy Scripture conferred
upon God (as to rejoice, to be angry, etc.) is not because he is composed of
outward lineaments, and framed or fashioned as man; or that he is truly angered,
or pleased, does walk, ascend, descend, or the like; but that the Holy Ghost
does accommodate himself to the imbecilitie and weakness of our shallow
capacities and understandings, that we may be more capable of the power,
wisdom, and incomprehensible works of the Almighty. Therefore, says Saint
Ambrose, is God said to be angry, to denote unto us the filthiness and
abomination of our sins and offenses; in his book entitled, Of Noah's Arc.
His words be these: God is not angry, as mutable; but he is said to be so, that
the bitterness of our transgressions, by which we justly incur his Divine
incensement, might thereby be made more familiar and terrible: as if our sins
(which are so grievous and heinous in his sight) caused that He who in his own
nature is neither moved to wrath or hate, or passion, might be provoked to
anger.

Of the same opinion is Eutherius: In what place soever (says he) the sacred
Scriptures either ascribe the passions of the mind, or any distinct part of
the body, to the Almighty, as Head, Hand, Foot, Ear, Eye, or the like; or
other motions of the soul, as Anger, Favor, Forgetfulness, Remembrance,
Repentance, etc. they are not to be understood carnally, according to the bare
letter of the Text: but all things concerning him are spiritually to be
received; and therefore we are not to believe, that God has at any time been
visible to our forefathers, as he is to the blessed Saints and Angels, though
in many places of the sacred Scriptures he is said to appear unto them (as,
to our first father Adam in Paradise, when he spoke to him these words,
Increase and multtply: Or when he reproved him for eating of the forbidden
Tree, etc. Nor when he spoke unto Noah, and commanded him to build the Ark. Nor
when he promised unto Abraham the Patriarch, That in his Seed all the Nations
of the earth should be blessed. Nor when he often spoke to the great Prophet
Moses, in the Bush, in mount Sinai, and elsewhere) but it is received for a
truth, that those forms by which God either appeared, or was heard to speak,
was by the service and ministry of his holy Angels; as S. Augustine most
learnedly disputes in his third and fourth book De Trinitate.

Therefore Hieronimus Cardanus, a man of most excellent learning and judgment,
in his book entitled, De Deo and Vniuerso, i. Of God and the World; after he
has by many probable reasons and approved testimonies proved, That God by no
humane understanding was to be comprehended; only that he was a singular
Cause, one only God, Attributes belonging to God.
the Original, Fountain, and Beginning of all things, the sole Immensenesse
and sovereign Perfection; contemplating nothing but Himself; of such Light,
that he is only himself capable, of such claritie and brightness, that he
beholds either Hemisphere at once, as well the remote as the nearest regions
of heaven and earth; Immouable, no way obnoxious to variety or change; of such
splendour, that mortality cannot abide or endure his sight or presence; of a
most subtle essence, always resting. When this and much more he had delated,
of His Inscrutabilitie and incomprehensible Deity, he concludes his
disputation in these words Quaeris ergo quid Deus sit? si scirem, Deus essem:
nam Deum nemo; novit, nec quid sit quisquam scit, nisi solus Deus. i. Do
thou therefore demand what God is? If I did know, or were able to resolve thee,
I should be a god too; for no man knows God, or what he is can any man tell,
but God only. etc.

The same Cardanus, Lib. De Vniuerso, touching the late Proposition handled in
the precedent Tractate; viz. What Name belongs to this Incomprehensibilitie;
thus argues: Since what God is cannot be known, how much less can any proper
or peculiar name be given unto him, because names are for the most part derived
either from the nature or property of that thing or party which is to be
named. If then by no possibility we can conceive what the Divine Essence is,
how can we confine it to any proper or competent denomination.

One Scotus, of a most fluent wit and an acute understanding, has searched,
endeavored, and excust even almost all things, to find out some name or
Character, in which might be comprehended or contained what God was, as,
Wisdom, Goodness, Justice, Mercy, Truth, and the like, at length he
contrudes all those several attributes within the narrow limit of two bare
words, namely Ens Infinitum: as if it were the most absolute contraction that
Imagination could beget. And this he labors to flourish over with many witty
and pregnant arguments, too long in this place to relate, for they would
require too large a circumstance.

Concerning the name of God, it is generally observed, That none can properly
be conferred upon him, because he is only and alone. And yet to distinguish
the Creator from the Creature, needful it is that it should be done by some
attribute or other: Greg. in Theol. de Not. Christi.
which ineffable name in the Hebrew language consists of one word containing
four letters, i. Jehovah, which descends of the verb Haiah, fuit, which is
as much as to say, He Was, Is, and Shall be. Which declares his true property;
for as he has bin always, so he shall be eternally: for Eternity is not
Time, nor any part of Time. And almost all Nations and Languages write and
pronounce the word by which the name of God is specified, with four letters
only, four being a number even and perfect, because he has no imperfection
in him. The Esclauonians, Boeg. Chaldaes, Eloi. Mahumetans, Abdi. Indians,
Zimi. Ettuseians, Lsar. etc.
For besides the Hebrews, the Persians write the name of God, (...); and the
Wisards and Soothsayers of that country, (...): the Arabians, Alla: the
Assyrians, Adad: the Egyptians, (...): The Grecians, (...) The Latins, Deus:
the French, Dieu: the Spaniards, Dios: the Italians, Idio: the Dutch and
Germans, Got: the English and Scots, Godd, with a double d, as has been
observed in all Antiquities. He is likewise called Alpha and Omega, which are
the first and last letters of the Greek Alphabet. His Epithites or
Appellations in Scripture, are, Almighty, Strong, Great, Incomprehensible,
Uncircumcised, Unchangeable, Truth, Holy of Holies, King of Kings, Lord of
Lords, Most Powerful, Most Wonderful, with diverse other Attributes. Some
define him to be a Spirit, Holy, and True, of whom and from whom proceeds the
action and agitation of all things that are; to whom, and to the glory of whom,
the end and conclusion of all things is referred.

Iustine Martyr, in his Dialogue with Tryphon the Jew, defines God in these
words: I call him God, that has essence in Himself, and is continually
permanent in one and the same kind, without receiving any change, and has
given beginning to all the things that are created. Cicero calls God a
certain Intelligence or Spirit, free and ready, separate from all mortal
mixture or concretion, knowing and moving all things, and having in himself an
eternal motion. So much many Ethnyck Authors have acknowledged, as in their
Works is to be frequently read.

Dionysius in his book de Divin. Nominib. is of opinion, that all things which
denote perfection and excellence, are in God most eminent, and on Him
deservedly to be conferred. On the contrary, all such things as are subject
unto imperfection or defect, because they do not fall within His nature, are to
be removed and banished from his description. Therefore in these words, Ens
Infinitum, i. Infinite Being, he includes the prime, chief, and soueraign
Truth, Sovereign Goodness, Sovereign Mercy, Sovereign Justice, Wisdom,
Power, Benignity, Beneficence, Clemency, Intelligence, Immortality,
Immobilitie, Invariabilitie, Amabilitie, Desiderabilitie, Intelligibilitie,
Stabilitie, Soliditie, Act, Active, Mouer, Cause, Essence, Substance, Nature,
Spirit, Simplicity, Reward, Delectation, Pulchritude, Iucunditie, Refreshing,
Rest, Security, Beatitude, or whatsoever good, laudable, or perfect thing can
fall within the conception or capacity of Man. But when all have said what
they can, let us conclude with Saint Augustine, Solus Deus est altissimus quo
altius nihil est: Lib. 1. de Mor. Eccles.
Only God is most high, than whom there is nothing higher. And in another
place, Lib, 1. de quaest. novi and ve^us Testament.
Quid est Deus? est id quod nulla attingit opinio: id est, What is God? He is
that thing which no Opinion can reach unto.

There is no safety to search further into the Infiniteness of the Divine
Nature, than becomes the ability of finite Man, lest we precipitate our
selves into the imputation of insolence and arrogance. For God says in Job,
Comprehendaem sapientes in Astutia eorum: Which is as much as had he said, I
will make it manifest, that the wisdom of all those who seem to touch Heaven
with their fingers, and with the line of their weak understanding to take
measure of my Nature, is their mere ignorance; and let them beware lest their
obstinacy (without their repentance, and my mercy) hurry them into
irreuocable destruction. Augustus Caesar compared such as for light causes
would expose themselves to threatening dangers, to them that would angle for
small Fish with a golden hook; who should receive more damage by the loss of
the bait, than there was hope of gain by the prey.

There is reported a fable of an Huntsman, who with his Bow and Arrows did use
to insidiate the Wilde-beasts of the Wilderness, and shoot them from the
couerts and thickets; insomuch that they were often wounded, and knew not from
whence. The Tygre more bold than the rest, bad them to secure themselves by
flight, for he only would discover the danger. Whom the hunter espying from
the place where he lay concealed, with an arrow wounded him in the leg, which
made him to halt and lagge his flight. But first looking about him, and not
knowing from whom or whence he received his hurt, it was the more grievous to
him. Him the Fox meeting, saluted and said, O thou the most valiant of the
beasts of the Forest, who gave thee this deep and terrible wound? To whom the
Tygre sighing replied, That, I know not; only of this I am sensible to my
damage, That it came from a strong and a daring hand. All ouer-curious and too
deep Inquisitors into Divine matters, may make use of this unto themselves.

Sentences of the Fathers concerning the Trinity in Unity, and Unity in
Trinity.
Distic. 3.
AVgustine, lib. de Trinitate, we read thus: All those Authors which came
within the compass of my reading, concerning the Trinity, who have writ of
that subject, What God is? according to that which they have collected out of
the sacred Scriptures, teach after this manner; That the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, of one and the same substance, in an inseparable equality,
insinuate one and the same Unity: and therefore there are not three gods, but
one God, though the Father begot the Son: therefore he is not the Son,
being the Father: The Son is begot of the Father, and therefore he is not the
Father, because the Son. The Holy Ghost is neither the Father nor the Son,
but only the Spirit proceeding from the Father and the Son; and to the
Father and the Son coequall, as concerning the Unity of the Trinity.
Neither does this infer, that the same Trinity was borne of the blessed Virgin
Mary, crucified under Pontius Pilat, buried, and rose again the third day, and
after that ascended into heaven: but it was only the Son who died and
suffered those things; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as they are
inseparable, so they have their unanimous and unite operations.

And again, Lib. 1. de Trinitate: Neither more dangerously can a man err,
neither more laboriously can a man acquire, neither more fructiferously can any
thing be found, than the holy Trinity. Lib. 7. Conf. O Eterna Veritas, and Vera
Charitas, and Chara Eternitaes, Tues Deus meus, etc. O Eternal Verity, and
True Charity, and High-prised Eternity, Thou art my God, and to thee day and
night do I suspire. And Lib. 5. de Trinitat. cap. 1. We so understand God, if
we can conceive him, and as far as we may apprehend him, That he is Good
without Quality, Great without Quantity; a Creator, without need of his
Creature; present, without place, containing all things, without habit, without
confinement to localitie, all and every where, Everlasting without Time; making
all things mutable, without change in himself, suffering nothing. And
whosoever does think God to be such, though by no inquisition he can find out
what he is, let him piously beware, as far as in him lies, to imagine any
thing of him that he is not.

Justinius Martyr says, In Expos. fidei.
Vnus reuera est Vniuersitatis Deus huius, qui in Patre, and Filio, and Spiritu
sancto cognoscitur. i. There is in truth one God of this Universe, which in the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost is apparently known. Aug. sup. Mat. 6
Another Father says, God is in Himself as Alpha and Omega; in the World, as
a Creator and Protector; in the Angels, as a sweet Smell and Comeliness; in
the Church, as the Father of his Family; in the Just men, as an Helper and
Guardian; in the Reprobate, as a Terror and Horror.

Tertullian says, Cont. Prax. c. 6.
Let the Sacrament of the Oeconomia be ever observed, which disposes the
Unity in Trinity; the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, three not in
State, but Degree; not in Substance, but in Form; not in Power, but in
Species: yet of one Substance, one State, and of one Power, because one God; of
whom these Degrees, these Forms, these Species subsist, which are in the name
of the Father, Son, and the Holy Ghost. And as Clemens Alexandrinus says, Lib.
3. Pedeg.
Let us praise the Father, the Son, with the Holy Ghost, who is One and All
things, in whom are All things, by whom All things, every way Good, every way
Beautiful, every way Wise, every way Just, to whom be Glory World without end.

Aug. says further, Lib. 9. de Ciuit. Dei.
Whosoever of the Philosophers (whose opinion was of God) held, that he was of
all creatures the effectiue; of all Knowledge the Light, of all actions the
Sovereign Good, That from him unto us are derived the beginning of Nature, the
truth of Doctrine, and the happiness of Life; those before the rest we
prefer, and that they come nearest unto us we confess. And in another
place: Ser. sup. Iob^ 19. Sup. Psalm. 5.1.
This only God is all things unto thee: If thou be hungry? Bread. If
thirsty? Water. If thou be naked? in Immortality he is thy clothing. And
elsewhere; Whether we be in tribulation and sorrow, or whether we be in
prosperity and joy; He only is to be praised, who in our adversity
instructs us, in our joy comfort us. Let the praise of God never depart
from the heart and tongue of a Christian; not to praise him only in our joy,
and speak evil of him in our sorrow; but as the Psalmist himself writes,
Let the praise of God be always in my mouth. Do thou rejoice? acknowledge
then the Father that smileth upon thee. Art thou in sorrow? acknowledge the
Father, who is thy chastiser. Whether he cherishes or corrects thee, it is
done to him for whom he prepares his heritage.

Greg. sup. Ezec. Homil. 17. and Lib. 2. Moral.
We read Gregory speaking of this sole and only God thus: He remains between
all things, He is without all things, above and below all things; Superior by
his Power, Inferior by his Sustentation, Exterior by his Magnitude and
Greatness, Interior by Subtlety and Finenesse: Above, governing; below,
containing; without, Mor. lib. 18.
compassing; within, penetrating. And elsewhere: Therefore God declares his
praises unto us; that hearing him, we may know him; knowing, love him, loving,
follow him; following, gain and enjoy him. To which the Psalmist alludeth,
saying, The strength of his Works he will show unto his People, that he may
give them the inheritance of the Nations. As should he more plainly have
said, Therefore he shows the power of his works, that such as hear him might
be enriched by him.

Lib. de Fide, 1. cap. 1.
Ambrose thus writes: The Assertion of our Faith is, That we believe one God,
not as the Gentiles do, separate the Son from the Father; nor as the Jews,
deny the Son begot of the Father within time, and borne of the blessed
Virgin: Nor as Sabellius, to confound the Father and the Word, making thereby
them to be one and the same person: Nor as Photinus, to dispute how the Son was
borne of the Virgin: Nor as Arrianus, to make more and unlike potestat^s, and
more gods, according to the error of the Gentiles; because it is written, Lib.
3. de Sp. 5. cap. 22.
Hear o Israel, the Lord thy God is one God. Again, if the Seraphims did
stand, how did they fly? or if they did fly, Idem sup. Luc. Lib. 1.
how did they stand: (as Esaias 6. verse. 2.) If we cannot comprehend this, how
shall we conceive what God is, whom we have not seen? Again, God is not seen
in place, but in a pure heart; with corporeal eyes he is not sought, not in
sight circumscribed, not by touch felt, not by voice heard, not by gate
perceived; being absent, seen; being present, invisible. And elsewhere, For our
understanding, De Fide contrae Arrian. cap. 6.
for our strength, for our faith, let us strive to see what God is, and whether
any thing may be compared unto him? Certainly he is the same; of whom to
speak? is to be silent: whom to value? he is not to be rated: whom to define?
he still increases in his definition. He with his hand covers the Heaven,
and in his fist graspeth the whole circumference of the Earth; whom by our
Boldness we lose, by our Fear we find, etc.

Hier. contra Pelagium: Deus semper largitur, semper Donatur est, etc. God is
ever giving, and always a Donor; it suffices me not that he gives once,
unless he gives always. I ask that I may receive; and when I have received,
I crave again. I am covetous of enjoying Gods benefits, neither is he
deficient in bestowing them, nor am I satisfied in receiving them: for by how
much the more I drink, by so much the more I am thirsty.

Saint Bernard in one of his Sermons says, Ser. 6. de Vigil. Not.
Quid tam necessarium perditis? quid tam aptabile Miseris? quid tam vtile
Desparatis, etc. What thing is so necessary to the Lost? what so to be desired
of the Wretched? what so profitable to the Desperate? as Christ, the Health,
the Form exemplar, the Life wholesome; the Health of the Weak, Ser. de Not.
Flame to the Fervent, Life to the Hoping: He came a Physician to the Sick, a
Redeemer to the Sold, a Way to the Erring, a Life to the Dead: He came with
Health, with Ointments, with Glory; not without Health, Jesus; not without
Ointment, Christ; not without Glory, the Son of God. And elsewhere; How rich
art thou in Mercy? Idem Ser. 57.
How magnificent in Justice? How munificent in Grace? o Lord our God, there is
none who is like unto thee; so plenteous a Giver, so liberal a Rewarder, so
holy a Releaser: by thy Grace thou respectest the Humble; by thy Justice thou
iudgest the Innocent; by thy Mercy thou sauest the Sinner. etc.

Philosophical Sentences concerning God.
ALl men have notion and knowledge of the gods; Arist. de Coel. lib. cap. 3.
and all of them assign a sovereign place to one Divine Power, as well the
Greeks as the Barbarians. Met. lib. 11. cap. 10.
The nature of things cannot be ill governed: The principate and dominion of
many cannot be profitable, therefore of necessity there must be one only
Prince and Ruler. Lib. de Mund. cap. 6.
What the Pilot is in the Ship, what the Charioter is in the Chariot, what the
Leader of the Song is in the Chorus or Antheme; what the Law is in the City; or
the General in the Field; Ibid:
the same is God in the world. God, if thou respectest his force? he is the
most able: if his feature? he is the most beautiful: if his life? Immortal:
If his virtue? he is the most excellent.

Seneca says, Sen. ad Lucil.
God is near thee, with thee, within thee (so I say, Lucilius:) A sacred
Spirit has abode within us, the obseruer and Register of whatsouer we do, be
it good or evil; and according as we use it, so it deals with us: none can
be a good man without God. Can any add to his form or feature without him? he
gives all magnifique and erect counsels to every good man: Ibid.
and who can doubt (my Lucilius) but, Idem. Epist. 92.
that we live and breathe is the gift of God immortal. The first worship of
God is, to believe there is a God: next, to allow of his Majesty: then, of his
Goodness, without which no Majesty can be. To acknowledge that it is he who
governs the world, ordering all things as his own, and takes all mankind to
his protection.

In Timaeo.
Plato auerreth, That the world was made by God, and that he is the great
Creator; that his Charity was the cause of the creation thereof, and the
original of all things: that he is the sovereign good, transcending all
substance or nature. To whom all things have recourse, he himself being of
full perfection, and not needing sacietie.

Lib. 1. de Not. deor.
Cicero concludes thus: What can be more manifest and plain, than when our
contemplation is beat upon Heaven and heavenly things, but to stay our selves
upon this, That there is one sole power, of a most excellent mind, by which
all these are governed? It is so manifest that there is a God, Idem.
that whosoever shall dispute against it, we shall hold him for no better than a
mad man. He says also, There was never great and eminent man without divine
inspiration. And, That it is an evil and wicked custom, to dispute wherein
there is any question, Whether there be a God or no? be it from the heart or
otherwise.

De deo sacrat.
Lucius Apuleius writes, That the chief or sovereign God is Infinite, not
only in the Exclusion of place, but in the excellency of nature. Idem.
That nothing is more perfect or potent than God. That he is free from all
passions, and therefore can neither be sad nor rejoice: neither to will or nill
any thing that is rash or sudden. That he differs from men, in the sublimitie
of place, perpetuity of life, Lib. 3. de Not. deor.
and perfection of nature. To which I will only add that of Diagoras, the
remarkable Atheist, remembered by Cicero: who when he came to Samothrace, and a
friend of his speaking after this manner unto him; O thou, who art of opinion
that the gods have no care of Mankind: Do thou not observe from so many
written Tables, That multitudes of men have escaped shipwreck, by making vows
to the gods, who else had bin drowned in the sea? To whom he answered; The
Answer of a mere Atheist.
I see indeed and hear of diverse, who after their escape, have left such
memory of their gratitude behind them: but amongst them all I find no
remembrance of any one man who perished by Storm or Tempest, etc.

Apothegmes concerning God.
THales being demanded, Laert. in eius vita.
what God was? made answer, He only that had no beginning, and shall never see
end. He said also, That men ought to believe there is a God, and that he sees
all things, and fills all places; which is a great reason to enduce men to be
more chaste and virtuous. Val. Max. li. 7. cap. 2.
The same being asked, whether the actions of men could pass without his
knowledge? he answered, No, nor their very thoughts. Intimating, that we ought
not only to keep our hands clean, but minds pure also: since we are to
believe that the Divine Power is interessed in the secrets of our hearts. Ex
Laert 1.
Again being demanded, What in all the nature of things he held to be the
first and most ancient? replied, God. And being importuned to show his reason;
said, Because he never began to be.

Cato Vticensis, Plut. in Caton.
when things unhappily succeeded with Pompey the Great, and that the victory
inclined to Julius Caesar; said, In Divine things there is much darkness and
mystery: for when Pompey enterprised designs beyond all right and equity,
his affairs succeeded well with him; but now when with great justice he
undertook the liberty and patronage of the Commonweal, fortune was adverse
unto him.

Xenophon was wont to say, Apoth lib. 7.
That men in their prosperity ought most to worship and honor the Divine
Powers; that when necessity or adversity happen, they may call unto them as
to their beneuolent and best friends. But men for the most part now, in their
prosperity so stupidly forget them, that in there extremity they can hardly
find the way unto them.

Iamblicus said, Lib. de Myster.
As when the Sun rises in the East, darkness cannot endure his presence,
but the night flies, and is suddenly chased away, no way hindering his light
and luster: So the Divine Power every where showing his refulgence, and filling
them with all good things, no perturbation can in the presence thereof have
place, but is suddenly dispersed and scattered.

Stobaeus reports of Calicratides Pythagoricus, Sermon. 83.
That he held opinion, That the World was therefore called by the Greeks
Kosmos, because by the common Diacosmesia, i. the comely administration of all
things, it was directed and governed by One who is the best; and truly that
one Optimate is God himself, who existeth after his thought and will, Living,
Celestial, Incorruptible, the Beginning and Cause of the dispensation of all
things whatsoever.

Illustrations by the way of Comparison, concerning God.
Fibr. de proem. and poen.
AS the Sun which is visible unto us, we no way can behold but by the help of
the Sun it self; and we behold the Moon and the Stars, being aided by
their own luster (so that for the aspect of the light we must of necessity be
beholden to the light:) so God by himself illustrateth the knowledge of
himself, none cooperating, none aiding, as a thing transcending the strength
of all things.

In cap. 11. Mat. Hom. 28.
Saint Chrysostom says, As that man who will venture to sail into an
unbounded Ocean, when he has gone as far as he can and can find no end of his
journey, strives to return the same way, and to arrive at the same port from
whence he first launched: so the ancient Philosophers and Orators, striving to
find out the Essence and true nature of the great Deity; overcome in their
speech, and confounded in their knowledge, confessed at the last they could
proceed no further in his search, because it was incomprehensible, and not
within the compass of their mortal capacities.

Resp. ad Ortho. Resp. ad quaest. 113. fol. 321.
Iustine Martyr uses this comparison: As that which is one, or the Monady, is
the beginning of all number, yet helps nothing to the perfection thereof (for
if it were not the beginning of number, yet notwithstanding it were perfect in
it self; or being made the beginning of number, it is neither lessened nor
augmented:) so God before the Creation was perfect in himself, and after the
Creation was not multiplied nor augmented; and therefore none of these things
whatsoever proceeding from the Creation, can either increase or add unto God.

In Cap. 1. Job.
D. Basilius makes this similitude: As there is no man who does not only
praise, but admire the Sun, his greatness, his pulchritude, the simmetry of
his rays, and splendour of his light; notwithstanding, if he shall with great
diligence and constancy behold it, the sharpnes of his sight shall be thereby
much debilitated and abated. Even so (says he) I find my self much defected
and disabled in my knowledge and understanding, when I earnestly labor and
study to find out what God is. Ad Paul. presb.
Of whom Thalasius says, Quod lux est videntibus and visis, etc. The same
thing the light is to the seer and things seen, God is unto the Intelligents
and the Intellects; who as he is unknown to us according to his Essence, so is
he immense according to his Majesty.

Iustine Martyr says, As this common Sun diurnally visible unto all, De recta
Con^ess. sive de sancta and co-essen. Trin. fol. 26.
shines neither more nor less upon one man than another, without partiality
or difference communicating his virtue equally unto all; yet such as are of the
quickest and sharpest sight receive more of his splendour than others (not that
he shines more brightly upon them than the rest, but by reason of their
excellent perspicacitie) and such as have weak eyes are not sensible of so
much luster, because of their dullness: so ought we to think of the Sun of
Justice, who is present indifferently to all according to his Essence; but we
mortal men, dull and blind sighted, by reason of the sordid nature of our
sins, being unfit to entertain the excellency of his Divine splendour; yet
his proper Church, by the pure and clear eye of Faith, by the help and grace
of the Holy Ghost is much more able to entertain it. For as the Sun shining
alike on all, is not alike apparent unto all; so the Word according to the
Essence thereof being present to all, yet is it no where so truly and
pathetically received and conceived, as in Gods proper Temple.

I conclude these with Plutarch: In Moral.
As to some (says he) it is less evil or damage, not to see at all, than to
see imperfectly: (As it happened to Hercules, who looking upon his children and
taking them for his enemies, ^lew them) So it is less sin in man, to believe
there be no gods at all; than knowing them and believing them, either so
carelessly to despise them, or so maliciously to offend them, etc.

To such as shall dream of many, De Civ. Dei, lib. 1. cap. 2.
or more gods than one, Saint Augustine gives this answer; Nec ideo Troia
perijt quia Minervam perdidit, etc. Let no man be so vain and idle, to imagine
that Troy perished and was utterly destroyed, by reason of the stealing thence
the statue of the goddess Minerva^ but let them first examine what the
goddess lost, before they lost her. If you say, Her Keepers; you then say
true: for her keepers being slain, it was no maisterie to take her thence,
being but an Idol: neither was it the Idol that kept the men, but the men
that kept the Idol. Against all reason therefore it was, to adore such a
statue for a Protectresse and Guardian of the place and people, who was neither
able to secure her self, nor safeguard those who had the charge of her Temple
and person.

He adds in another place, That the kingdom of the Jews was founded and
established by and in one God alone, De Civ. Dei, lib. 4. cap. 34.
and not many; being protected by him so long as they truly served him. It was
He who multiplied the people in Egypt; whose women in their childe-birth
invoked not Lucina, neither did their men in passing the Red sea call upon
Neptune: they solicited no Nymphs when they drank water which gushed out of
the rock: neither did they sacrifice to Mars when they conquered Amalek: but
they achieved more glorious victories by the power of their one and only God,
than the Romans ever obtained at the hands of their multiplicitie of gods.

Lact. lib. 1. de falls. relig. ca. 3.
What need (says Lactantius) has the world of many gods, unless they imagine
that one of himself is not able to undergo so great a charge? He that is not
omnipotent cannot be a God: and if he be omnipotent, what need has he of any
partner. If God in himself be omnipotent, there can be but one; for if the
superior Power be imparted amongst many, then no one can be All-sufficient.
Besides, the more they are in number, by consquence they must be the weaker in
power. Concluding thus, The divine power which belongs unto God alone, cannot
be divided among many; for whatsoever is capable of division, muw necessarily
be subject to corruption, than which nothing can be more repugnant to the
Divine Nature. Concerning which, I observe an excellent Emblem from Jacob.
Catsius, Embl. lib. 3. with which I purpose to conclude this second Tractate.

The Emblem.
A Fisherman having fastened his boat by a rope unto a great Rock, seeming to
pluck the rock (which is immouable) unto him, but draws both himself and
his vessel unto it, by the which he reaches the shore. The Motto, Quod movet,
quiescit. Concerning which, Herman. Paeinander uses these words; Omne motum,
non in moto, movetur, sed in quiescente; and id quod movet quiescit. To which
Buchanan alludeth, in his Paraphrase upon the 103 Psalm, in these words: Ille
flammantis, super alta Coeli
Culmina, Immotum solium locavit
Et suo Nutu facile vniversum
Temperat Orbem.
The Lord has prepared his Throne in Heaven, and his Kingdom rules over all.
And James 1.17. Every good giving and every perfect gift is from above, and
comes down from the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness nor
shadow of turning. The effect of which the Author thus explicates: Tu Rupes,
qui cuncta trahis, qui cuncta gubernas,
Et tamen intereate penes alta quies:
Nulla subit te cura (Pater) tamen omnia curas;
Astra solumque moves, nec tibi motus inest.
Thou art the Rock, draw'st all things, all do guide;
Yet in deep settled rest do still abide.
Untouched with care, thou car'st for all that be:
Mov'st Heaven and Earth, yet motion's not in thee.


According with this is the saying of Seneca the Philosopher; Necessitate, non
aliud effugium est quam velle quod ipsa cogit. i. There is no other avoiding of
necessity, than to be willing to that which it compells thee to. It is Catsius
word upon the foresaid Emblem; Ad trahens, abstrahor. Upon which I read him
thus: Fata reluctantes rapiunt, ducuntque sequentes:
Cedere qui non vult sponte, coactus abit.
Fates, the Rebellious, force, the Obedient shield:
Who strive against them are compelled to yield.


Seneca the Tragic Poet, in Oedip. we read thus: Fatis agimur, cedite Fatis,
Non sollicitae possunt curae
Mutare rati foedera Fusi
Quicquid patimur mortale genus,
Quicquid facimus venit ex alto.
Yield to the Fates, for they us lead:
Not all our cares can change the thread
Decreed upon; what ever we
(Subject to frail mortality)
Suffer, or act; if rest or move,
Even all of it comes from above.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
To find out God.
I 'Haue wandered like a Sheep that is lost,
To find Thee out in every Coast:
Without, I have long seeking him,
Whilst Thou (the while) abid'st Within.
Through every broad Street and streit Lane
Of this Worlds City (but in vain)
I have inquired. The reason why?
I sought thee ill: for how could I
Find Thee Abroad? when Thou mean space
Had made Within, thy dwelling place.
I sent my Messengers about,
To try if they could find Thee out.
But all was to no purpose still;
Because indeed they sought Thee ill:
For how could they discover Thee,
That saw not when thou entredst me?
The Senses.
Mine Eyes could tell me; If He were
Not Colored, sure He came not there.
If not by Sound, my Ears could say,
He doubtless did not pass my way.
My Nose could nothing of Him tell,
Because my God he did not Smell.
None such I Relisht, said my Taste;
And therefore me He never past.
My Feeling told me, That none such
There entered; for he none did Touch.
Resolved by them how should I be,
Since none of all these are in Thee?
We eanner attribute these to the Creator
In Thee, my God? Thou have no Hew,
That Man's frail Opticke sense can view:
No Sound the Ear hears: Odor none
The Smell attracts: all Taste is gone.
At thy Appearance: where does fail
A Body, how can Touch prevail?
What even the brute Beasts comprehend,
To think Thee such, I should offend.
Yet when I seek my God, I'enquire
For Light (than Sun and Moon much higher:)
More clear and splendrous above all Light;
Which the Eye receives not, it is so bright.
I seek a Voice, beyond degree
Of all melodious Harmony:
The Ear conceiues it not. A Smell
Which does all other sents excel:
No Flower so sweet; no Myrrh, no Nard,
Or Aloes, with it compared;
Of which the Brain not sensible is.
I seek a Sweetness, (such a bless)
As has all other Sweets surpast;
And never Pallat yet could Taste.
I seek That to contain, and hold,
No Touch can Feel, no Embrace Infold.
So far this Light the Rays extends,
As that no place^ It comprehends.
So deep this Sound, that though it speak,
It cannot by a Sense so weak
Be entertained. A Redolent Grace
The Air blows not from place to place.
A pleasant Taste, of that delight,
It does confound all Appetite.
A strict Embrace, not felt, yet leaves
That virtue, where it takes it cleanes.
This Light, this Sound, this Sauouring Grace,
This Tastefull Sweet, this Strict Embrace,
No Place contains, no Eye can see:
"My God Is; and there is none but He.
Fecisti nos Domine ad Te; inquietum igitur est Cor nostrum, done^ requiescat
in Te. S. Augustine.
The Throne.
Ex muner: Iokan: o^ Math: Christmas Artist:



THE ARGUMENT of the third Tractate.
OF th'Vniuerse, the Regions three,
And how their part^ disposed be;
How governed, and in what order,
In which no one exceeds his border.
That Moses Arc, in all respects,
Upon the Worlds rare Frame reflects.
Both how and when (by Power Divine)
The Sun and Moon began to shine.
The Day of our blessed Saviors Passion
Compared with that of the Creation.
How every Star shines in his Sphere;
What place they in the Zodiac bear.
And of the twelve Signs a Narration;
Their Influence, Aspect, and Station.
To prove no former Worlds have bin;
And This must perish we live in.
The vainness lastly does appear,
Of Plato's Great and Vertent Year.
The second Argument.
ALl Glory to the Holy-One,
Even Him that sits upon the Throne.
The Thrones.
We from the Workman, to the Work proceed:
The powerful Doer, to the glorious Deed.
This Universe, Created first, then guided,
Into three ample Regions is divided: The three divisions of the World.

The first is called Super-coelestiall:
The next, Celestial, or Ethereall;
Both constant in their kinds: The third does vary,
(In which we live) as merely Elementary.
The Supercoelestial Mansio^.
The First, of Angels is the blessed dwelling;
(The later two many degrees excelling:)
The Next, of Stars and Planets keeps the features:
The Last, of Man, Beast, and all Mortal Creatures.
The natures of the 3 several divisions.
The first does with incredible Luster shine:
The second unto it (as less Divine)
Participating both (lest Time should fail)
Darkness and Light, weighes out in equal Scale.
The third enioyes both these, (as who but knows it)
But how? So, as the second does dispose it.
The First, does Immortality contain,
A stable work, and ever to remain.
There Is in the Second too a stable face,
But yet Mutation both in work and place.
There Is in the Third, all Change, but no Stabilitie,
'Twixt life and death A constant Mutabilitie.
Like the pure nature of his Divine mind
Angels, Celestial Bodies, Beasts, etc.
He made the First: Then, Bodies in their kind
Void of corruption, He the Next created:
The Third, full of all Frailties fabricated.
The Elements proper to every several division.
Four Elements He placed in the Lower,
Four in the Upper, in the Highest four:
Terrestrial, these, Earth, Water, Air, and Fire:
Elem. Terrestrial.
Celestial and Etheriall, that aspire
Elem. Celestial.
To place more eminent, in this order run,
Luna, Mercury, Venus, and the Sun.
Super-Coelestiall, and of highest state,
The Angel, the Arch-Angell, Principate,
And Seraphim the last. The Earth, commixt
Of all things to corruption apt, he fixed
In the Worlds lowest part, but not to move.
The self same Power ordained in Heaven above
Continual motion: but to such we call
Elem. Super-Coelestiall.
Natures which are Super-Coelestiall,
He gave Intelligent Force abiding still,
And not to suffer change. So (by his Will)
This our inferior Water is in great
The difference betwixt the superior and inferior Eleements.
Discord with Fire, and suffocates his heat:
Water Celestial feeds it without cease;
To which the supreme Region gives increase.
Terrestrial Air lends Breath; Celestial, Joy,
And Solace free from trouble or annoy.
Super-coelestiall, every Good thing lends.
So, by the Might that through this Work extends,
This lower Fire consumes, and all things burns:
Fire next above, the Heat to Liuely'hood turns:
Fire super-eminent (which to reveal
No Frailty can) kindles with Love and Zeal.
The ancient Cabalists and Rabbis say, The Cabalists and Rabbis concerning
the Arc.

(Who knew the old Law well; for those were they
Who took upon them to explain't) That He,
Whose high incomprehended Majesty
Is beyond all dimention, when he gave
Moses direction, In what form he would have
His Tabernacle fashioned; that the same
Was a mere model of the whole Worlds frame.
For instance, 'Twas into three parts divided; The consimilitude betwixt the
Arc and the World.

So the large Universe, Divinely guided,
On three parts does subsist, answering to those
God in the former Fabric did dispose.
Now as that part which is sublunary,
Being lowest of the three, does always vary,
As subject to corruption and mutation,
By reason of the Elements alteration;
As seen, in Life begun, then Death pursuing; For Instance.

The Original of things, and then their ruin;
And these in a vicissitude. Even so,
The Arkes first part (as suting this below)
Was without couerings, open to the air,
And subject to all weathers, foul as fair:
For in that Court there was no difference had,
The Just and Unjust met, the Good and Bad,
Profane and Holy; Creatures of all fashion
Were to this place brought, in whose Immolation
And Sacrifice, was then expressed the quality
Of Life and Death, (the Type of our Mortality.)
Now of the contrary two Regions be,
Or Temples, which comparatively we
(As in the former references) call
Celestial, and Super-coelestiall.
And these are placed in eminent degree
Beyond the rage of force or injury,
Of Alteration, or the stain of Sin,
(Since the proud Lucifer first fell therein,
And was precipitate thence:) So that the two
Parts of this earthly Tabernacle do
Answer the former, as alike extended;
Against shoures, storms, hail, snow, cold, and heat defended,
By a fair Roof, so that all sordid, base,
And unclean things, in them can find no place.
Again, as both are Holy, yet the one
Is above the other Sacred, being the Throne
Or place of the blessed Angels, seated higher;
In which they in a most harmonious Quire
Sing Halleluia's: so in this below
There be two holy rooms (as all men know)
The first of them we only Holy call;
Sanctum Sanctorum.
The other, Holy, Holiest of all.
Again, as this Terrestrial world does yield,
As well to Men, as brute Beasts of the field,
Both house and harbor; and the next above,
(In which the seven bright errant Planets move)
Shines with celestial splendour; but the third,
Beyond these two, blessed Mansions does afford
Unto the Angels Hierarchy. The same
Was visible in Moses curious Frame:
In the first Court thereof were frequent, Men
And Beasts together; in the second then
The Candlestickes with seven Lights did shine clear;
But in the third (most Holy) did appear
The Cherubims, with wings far stretched. Again,
Exodus
As Moses (so the Scripture tells us plain)
A second Consimilitude.
Ten Curtains to his sacred Machine made;
So in the three parts of the world, are said
To be no less than ten distinct Degrees.
And first of the Super-Coelestiall, these,
The first degree.
The Angels, Archangels, and the Principates,
Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Potestates,
The Cherubims and Seraphims; Then He,
(Above all these) the supreme Deity.
The second.
In the Celestial ten, and thus they run,
Luna, Mercury, Venus, and the Sun,
Mars, Jove, and Saturn; Then the Starry Heaven,
Crystalline and Empyriall, make them even.
The third.
In this below the Moon, where we now live,
Are likewise ten Degrees, to whom we give
These Characters; first, the four Elements,
Mystae, Impressions, Herbs, Fruits, Trees, and Plants,
Beasts, Reptile Creatures, and the tenth and last,
Materia prima: so their number's cast.
Again, as in this Tabernacle were A third Consimilitude.

Just fifty strings or taches, which did bear
So many Rings, by which the Curtains hung,
All uniformly, and in order strung:
So this Worlds Fabric, (subject to frail end)
Of fifty Rings or ^oinctures does depend;
And of these, twenty Universal are;
Twenty and nine be styled Particular;
General the last. The first twice ten amount
Thus in their order, and by just account:
Unity in it self; Parts with Parts knit;
Essence with Essence; and the next to it,
Propriety with Essence; Form not estranged
From Subject: the Transforming with Transchang'd; The opinions of all the best
Philosophers.

Art, with the subject Matter dealing sole;
Parts Separable annexed to the Whole;
Inseparable parts on the Whole depending:
The Cause joined to the Effect; and that extending
To the Intrinsicke: then, the Inward Cause
Joined to the Effect; but subject to the Laws
Of a Beginning: Cause Final with respect
Only unto the Primarie Effect:
Then the Cause Final, which does never vary
From the Effect, which is called Secondary:
The Primarie Effect with the Cause met;
The Secondary Effect in order set
Even with the Cause: Form likewise, that is allied
To Form: the Middle with the Extremes complied:
The thing Corruptible, on that to wait
Which no Corruption can participate. etc.
The rest, particular Conjunctions be,
Still corresponding unto each degree
Of the Worlds triple Regions; Ten Terrestrial;
Celestial Ten; Supercoelestiall,
Nine only: That which thirty makes complete
(As the most General) titled is the great
Conjunction of the world with him that Made it;
(Of the Foundation, and the God that Laid it.)
All these particular steps seeming perplexed,
Thus you shall find amongst themselves connext.
'Twixt the first Matter and the Elements, there The former explained.

A Chaos is: twixt the Elements appear,
And what is called Mixed, Impressions: Now between
The stones and Earth, a kind of Chalk is seen;
'Twixt Earth and Metals, that which the Artist calls
Of Marga, i. Inherens, Marle, or white clay to till the Earth.
Margasites, with other Mineralls.
'Twixt Stones and Plants, Male-Pimpernell has place:
'Twixt Plants and Anaimals, Zoophitae, according to Budaeus, are those that
are in part living creatures, in part Plants.
Zophita's race,
Participating both: being such as have
Both sense and growth, and yet are forced to crave
Their nutriment, (with their increase and chering)
From their own roots, but to the stones inhering.
Creatures that Water and of Earth partake,
Are Otters, Beauers, Tortoises, who make
Use of two Elements: 'Twixt Sea and Air,
The Flying Fish, that does to both repair:
Betwixt mere Animals and Man, is set
The Ape, the Monkey, and the Marmoset:
Betwixt the Bruits that only have quick sense,
Meaning the Angels.
And those that have a pure intelligence,
Man has his place. From the first propagation,
There is of things a tenfold generation.
The first composure has a true descent
From the first Matter, and from Accident,
Cinis signif. Ashes, cinders, etc.
And Cinis called: The next exsists of three;
Matter, Form, Accident, such the Elements be:
From two sole Elements the third has being,
Vapor and Exhalation; one agreeing
With Air and Water; the other does aspire
To take his nature from the Air and Fire:
The fourth, his essence and existence shrouds
Beneath three Elements; such be the Clouds:
The fifth to their Creation have accited
The whole four, to their natural forms united;
Such, Mettalls be, and Stones: ( Plants, they survive
By virtue of a Body Vegetati^e.)
The seventh has Life and Sense, and does include
Beasts of all kind, Irrational and Rude.
The eighth, Gods Image, (of far more respect)
Man, who has Life, with Sense and Intellect.
The ninth, (of a more subtle Essence far,
Inuisibilitie, and Excellence) are
The Angels. But the The Creator of all things.
Tenth! Who dares aspire
Further of his Eternity to enquire?
Or go about to apprehend, That He
"Who contains all things, should contained be?
He, who of Nothing, All things did compact;
Whose Will's his Work, and every Word his Act;
Who, as He made all Creatures, still does feed them,
Of his mere goodness, (not that He does need them:)
Who in all places, without Place does dwell,
"Sovereign, Immense, the Only does excel.
This leads me to a needful Contemplation, The weakness of Man's wisdom.

To think how vain is Wisdoms ostentation;
Since we Gods praise can no way more advance,
Than by acknowledging our Ignorance.
Which thus the Apostle does anatomise: Ad Corinth. The wisdom of the World.

If any in this world would be held wise,
Let him be then a fool, so, wise to seem;
Since the Worlds wisdom is in Gods esteem
Mere foolishness. To think our selves exact
In any thing; we but from Him detract.
Wisdom shall publish her own commendation, The excellency of Divine
Wisdom. Ecclus. 24.

Rejoicing, in the Center of her Nation,
Of God be honored, in his Temple tryd'e,
And before his great Power, in triumph ride.
Her presence, by her people be desired,
And in all holy meetings much admired:
In confluence of the Chosen she shall stay,
And by the Blessed be much praised, and say,
Of all Gods Creatures, the first borne am I, The birth of Wisdom:

And issued from the mouth of the Most-High.
The Light that fails not, was by Me first made;
The lower Earth, as with a Cloud, I shade.
My dwelling is above, where Light first shone;
And in the Pillar of the Cloud, my Throne.
Alone, the Compass of the Heaven I round,
And can the Seas vnbottom'd Channels sound;
All Seas, and Earth, and Nations, I enjoy,
And with my Power, all Proud Hearts I destroy:
In all these things I wished that Rest might cease me,
In some Inheritance that best might please me.
So, the Creator gave me a Command;
Even He that made me by his Powerful hand,
Appointed, That in Jacob I should dwell,
And placed mine Heritage in Israel;
That I, amongst the Chosen, might take root.
(And willingly I did assent unto 't.)
From the Beginning, er'e the World was made,
By Him I was created, not to fade:
I served Him in his holy Habitation,
Prove. 8.23.
And so in Sion had my settled Station.
My power was in Jerusalem, his best
Exodus 31.3.
Beloved of Cities, where he gave me rest:
Psalm. 132.8.
An honored People did my Name advance,
The portion of the Lords Inheritance.
The beauty and honor of Wisdom.
Like a strait Cedar I am set on high,
That seems in Lebanon to brave the Sky.
I like a Cypress tree my branches fill,
That has took root on top of Hermon hill.
And like a Palm about the banks I grow;
Or like a Rose planted in Jericho:
Like a fair Olive in a pleasant field;
Or a Plane tree, where furrows water yield.
The sweetness thereof.
Besides, like to the Cinnamom I smell,
Or bags of Spices, being mixed well.
I, as the best Myrrh, a sweet odor gave,
Such as the Galbanum and Onix have;
That sent which does the pleasant Storax grace,
Or rich perfume that sweetens all the place.
My boughs I like the Terebinth have spread,
(Branches, with Grace and Honor furnished.)
Ioh. 15.2.
As does the Vine, I made my clusters swell:
My Fruit was of an odoriferous smell;
The flowers I bore were of a pleasant hew,
And from their fruit, Honor and Riches grew.
Wisdoms Children.
I am the Mother of fair Love, of Fear,
Knowledge, and holy Hope, (to me all dear.)
And unto every Child my womb forth brings
(As God commands) I give eternal things.
All grace of Life and Truth in me remain;
All hope of Life and Virtue I retain.
Come to me then, you that desire me, still,
And of my blessed Fruits freely taste your fill:
For my remembrance does breed more delight,
Psalm. 19.10, 11.
Than Honey to the hungry appetite.
My'Inheritance is of much sweeter taste
Than Hony-combes: my Name shall ever last.
Wisdoms effects.
Who eats me, after me shall hunger sore;
And he that drinks me up shall thirst the more.
Who so shall to my counsel lend an ear,
Ruin or sad Disaster need not fear.
He that works by me never shall offend:
Who makes me known, shall life have without end.
These of the book of Life are the contents,
And Moses Law in the Commandments: Exodus 2.1. and 24.3.

The Covenant of the most high God, to 'inferre
The knowledge of that Truth which cannot err,
Commanded as an Heritage most sure,
To Jacobs House for ever to endure.
Then, with the Lord the signs of valor leave,
And be not saint or weary, to Him cleave.
The Lord Almighty for your God you have;
He Is but one God, and none but He can save.
Who has ordein'd, That there in time shall spring
From David's Line, a high and mighty King, A prophecy of the Savior of the
world.

To sit upon the Throne for evermore;
Whom all the heathen Nations shall adore:
He fills all things with his Wisdom, so
As Physon and as Tigris ouerflow Genesis 2.11.

In time of new Fruits. The Understanding He
Makes to abound, as we Euphrates see,
Or Jordan, rise in Harvest. As the Light,
So Knowledge he makes shine, equally bright:
Which in the exercise thereof excells,
As Geon in the time of Vintage swells.
The first man of her knowledge stood in doubt,
Nor shall the last man truly find her out:
For the conceptions fashioned in her brain,
Are more abundant than the boundless Maine;
Yea, all her hidden Counsels more profound
Than the great Deep, which never line could sound.
Out of my mouth, I (Wisdom) floods have cast; Her fruitfulness.

Am (like a Rivers arm) grown broad and vast,
And like a Conduit pipe of water clear,
Run into Paradise to hide me there.
I Will water my fair Garden, (then I said)
The pleasant ground which I have fruitful made:
Into a Flood my Ditch grew, at the motion,
And instantly my Flood became an Ocean.
For I make Doctrine like the Light to shine,
(The Mornings Light) by me it is made Divine.
The Earths lower parts (even those that are most deep) Her Power:

I will pierce through, and look on all that sleep;
For I have power to awake them from the dust,
And lighten all who in the Lord shall trust.
There is a Doubt, in which some men desire
To be resolved, (What will not Man acquire
To attain the height of science?) as to know
At what time Time began: further to show,
In which of the four seasons of the year,
The Sun, the Moon, and Planets did appear.
Some say, When God the Worlds fair frame begun,
And all things else created; That the Sun
Was found in that Sign which we Aries call,
Equinoctium vernale Mart. 11.
Which is the Summers AEquinoctiall.
Others affirm, It first began to shine
And show his glorious splendour in the Sign
Called Libra (that is the balance and euen'st Scale)
It is by our account the 11 or 12 day of Semptemb.
Which was the AEquinoctiall Autumnale.
Their reason is, because just at that time,
All the Earths fruits are ripe and in their prime.
(This was the opinion of the Egyptians, Arabians, and Graecians; as
Lincolniensis reports in a Treatise of the World which he wrote to Pope
Clement. As likewise of Vincentius in his Historical Myrrhor.)

Grounded upon the Text, (whose power is great)
Deuteronomy 32.3.
That God made all things perfect and complete.
Others there be who would begin the year,
Which is the 11 or 12 day of June.
And say, In Cancer it did first appear.
Others say Leo: grounding their opinion,
Because in that Sign it has most dominion.
As Julius Firmicus, an ancient and approved Author, and of great judgment in
Astrology, in his third book De Creatione: being induced to that belief,
because Leo is called the House of the Sun.

But that which has the greatest approbation,
Is, That the Sun had first illumination
In the Sign Aries: for (as Authors say)
"Summer in midst of March claims her first day.
Of this opinion were S. Hierome, S. Ambrose, S. Basil, and diverse other
Authors Christian and Ethnycke, etc.

And though perhaps amongst the Learned and Wise,
In circumstance some difference may arise;
And some of them would have the World begin
In March; As Adam, Bishop of Vienna, in his Chronicle.
others, in April: it is no sin
To believe either, since they all agree,
That in the AEquinoctiall it must be.
Which is uncertain; since by proof we find,
It is not to one certain day assigned.
The AEquinoctiall is not permanent and fixed to one day, but ofttimes varieth:
for we read, That our Savior Christ suffered in the AEquinoctiall, which was
then the five and twentieth day of March; and now it is the eleventh of the
same month. Whereby it may be presumed, That heretofore in the revolution of
Times and Seasons, it has happened in April, etc.

Hence likewise may another doubt appear,
Namely, In what month to begin the year:
Some say, in March; some, April. To decide
That question, let the Scripture be our Guide,
Which says, (and credit ought with us to win)
In the month Nisan let your Year begin. Exodus 12.

Nisan is March with us: And Vincentius in his first Chapter of the Historical
Myrrhor says, That the Hebrews began their year in March, because in that
month was the AEquinoctial, when the World was created. This opinion was also
approved by some Naturalists; as amongst others, Elpacus, in his Historical
Tractate; who affirms, that the Chaldaeans being great Astrologers, were
confident, That the first day of the Creation, the Sun entered into the first
point or degree of Aries.

The Romans year begins the first day of January, in regard of the
superstitious devotion which the Gentiles had to their God Ianus. According to
Macrobius, Marcus Varro, lib. 9. Ovid in Fastis, and others. The Christians
likewise begin theirs from the Nativity of our blessed Lord and Savior.

It likewise is coniectur'd by the best
Of all that have Astrology professed,
Both Jews and Christian Authors, That the Sun
At it is Creation, in that Sign begun,
In which the Son of God for Mankind died, The day of Christ's Passion
compared with the first day of the Creation.

Was nailed upon the Cross, and crucifi'de:
And that apparently is known to all,
Was in the Summers AEquinoctiall.
So that the same day that it first shone bright,
And the same hour, his death eclip'st it is light. According to the
computation of the time of the year.

Another reason's given: For the same day
That the Sun enters Aries (say they)
There Is no part of the Earth, but from the Sky A second reason.

He looks upon, with his All-seeing eye.
But when his course Diurnal he does take,
In any place else of the Zodiac,
There are some parts as hid behind a Skreene,
In which his glorious luster is not seen.
A probability of the former reason.
Most probable it is, He the first day
He enters his great Progress, should survey
All places, and all Creatures, such to cheer,
Which He till then beheld not half the year.
Besides, Christ's Passion did on that day fall,
When it appeared most visible to All;
That all Gods Creatures having sense and breath
Might note the Eclipse that happened at his death.
Whether the Moon in her creation were in the full or waine.
About the Moon too Authors disagree;
Some, when she was created, say, That she
Was in her plenitude and full. Again,
Some hold she was defective, in her Waine:
Such as she now appears unto our view,
Thin, and two-horn'd, and (as we call her) New.
There were two opinions concerning the Moon. Saint Augustine in Genes. Cap.
5. says, That it were very inconvenient to believe, that God in her Creation
should make her any way defective. Yet diverse have argued the contrary; and
say, it is more probable, that she began her first day in Conjunction,
increasing in her age answerable to our account: but their opinions are neither
held Authenticke nor Orthodoxall: for amongst others, Rabbanus commenting upon
the twelfth Chapter of Exodus, agrees with Saint Augustine, as holding
conformity with the sacred text, which says, Genesis 1.16. God made two great
Lights; the greater Light to govern the Day, the lesser to illuminate the
Night.

To leave their Arguments, and come more near
Unto the point, this doubt we soon shall clear.
In the same instant that God made the Sun,
With it, this glorious Light we see, begun,
Which luster'd half the Earth: and we may say
Truly, In that part of the world was day;
But the other moity (not yet disclosed)
To his bright eye, by the Earth was interposed,
And there was night: to which (no doubt) the Moon
Entering into her office full as soon,
The several offices of the Sun and Moon began at one instant.
Displayed her splendour. As both were created
At one self instant; both at once instated
In several Orbs, (by the great Power Divine)
Even so at once they both began to shine;
And still in the same offices abide,
The Sun the Day, the Moon the Night to guide.
Who did at first without defect appear,
And with a perfect Iustre filled her Sphere.
Here I cannot omit a remarkable note borrowed from a learned Gentleman much
practiced in the Holy tongue; That Shemesh in the Hebrew being the Sun, it
properly signifies a Servant; and so the very name reproues all such as adore
it for a god.

We shall not deviate much, Of the Stars and Planets, as the Poets have
deciphered the^
nor order break,
If something we of Stars and Planets speak.
Not far from the North Pole Star does appear
Unto our view, the great and lesser Bear,
Those Arcti called. Arcti.
The Vrsa Mayor, Calisto.
she
Whom Jove held once the Fairest on earth to be: Arctus mayor.

And when (her Lycaon.
Father slain) she did profess
Her self to be a Virgin Votaresse;
The Amorous god, like one of Dian's maids,
Is soon trans-shap'd, and so the Nymph inuades:
Whether by force or fair means know I not,
But 'tweene them two young Arcas was begot; Archas, of whom the kingdom of
Arcadia took name.

Who proves an Archer, and to strength being grown,
Ready to shoot his mother, then unknown.
Jove stayed his hand, and by his power Divine,
Made them two Stars; Arctus minor.
and next the Pole to shine.
Some, that he Arch^s was, will not endure;
But rather to be Jove's Nurse Cynosure. Agliasthenes, qui Naxica conscripsit.
Serpent.

'Twixt these the mighty Serpent is confined,
Her head and tail about both Arcti twined;
The Hesperian golden Apples said to keep,
So wakefull, it was never known to sleep:
But after slain by Hercules, naught bars
Juno, but she will place him amongst the Stars.
The Charioter Boots, Artophila^.
who his Car
Drives 'bout the Poles in compass circular,
About whom Authors are divided thus,
Some think him Arcas, others Icarus.
The Crown Septentrionall (as most have said) Coron^.

Enamored Bacchus fitted first and made
For Ariadnes brows, being first his Bride,
And by the god soon after stellifi'de.
Eugonasin, Eugonasin.
whom Hercules we call,
And from the Articke Circle seems to fall,
Yet steadfast in his course, conspicuous in
His Club, the Hydra, and the Lions skin.
Lyra.
Lyra the Harp in by-corn'd fashion made,
Some think the self same, on which Orpheus played;
Who for his Musicks skill was so advanced,
That Beasts, and Trees, and Stones about him danced.
Olor.
Next him the Swan, with wings displaid and spread,
Stuck full of Stars, one fulgent in her head;
And therefore in the Heavens thought to be placed,
Because Jove, Laeda in that shape embraced.
Cepheus.
Next whom, Cepheus has place, King of the black
And Sunburned Moors; in whom is now no lack
Of Divine splendour: him the Authors say
To be the Father of Andromeda.
Cassiopeia.
His wife Cassiopeia durst compare
With the Nereides; therefore in a chair
Sits with her arms fast bound, not moving thence:
(A just infliction for her proud offense.)
Andromeda.
Andromeda the sequent place does claim,
Daughter to these to whom we last gave name;
Who for her love to Perseus was so graced,
Her, amongst the Spheres Celestial, Pallas placed.
Perseus.
Perseus shines next, who in his right hand bears
A crooked Harpee; in his left appears
The Gorgons head; his burnisht helm of steel,
And plumes like wings fastened to either heel.
Heniochus.
Auriga mounted in a Chariot bright,
(Else styled Heniochus) receives his light
In the aestiue Circle: in that station named,
Because he was the first who Coursers tamed,
And in a foure-wheel'd Wagon taught them run,
To imitate the Chariot of the Sun.
Ophincus Anguiteneus:
The Serpentarius ( Ophincus who
Is also called) the Astrologians show
To be a young man rounded with a Snake
Stuck full of starry lights: and him they take
For AEsculapius, who a Dragon slew,
And was the first who Physic taught and knew.
Sagi^^^.
The Arrow placed in Heaven (still to remain)
Alcides shot; by it the Egle slain,
Who then did on Prometheus intrals tire,
Because from Jove he stole Celestial fire.
Which being risen, you shall find it fixed
The AEstiue and AEquinoctiall line betwixt
Next shines the Princely Egle, Aquila.
who is sed
To' have snatched from earth the Trojan Ganimed,
And bear him up to Heaven for Jove's delight;
Both his Cup Bearer now and Catamite.
The Dolphine, Dolphia.
figured with his crooked train,
Is therefore said his glorious Orb to gain,
Because when good Arion played and sung,
He listened to his voice and Harp well strung,
And from the ship whence he was dropped before,
Swam with him safe to the Tenarian shore.
The Horse amongst the other Stars enrolled, Equus^

The Articke Line directly does behold;
And is that Pegasus, the winged Steed
Which Perseus backed, when from the Whale he freed
Andromeda: he in mount Helicon
Struck with his hoof clear water from a stone
(From him called Hippocrene) the Muses Well;
Whence all high Raptures may be said to swell.
Deltoton we a mere Triangle call, Deltoton.

'Twixt the AEstiue Line and the AEquinoctiall;
Like the Greek letter d.
Delta. It sends light
From four coruscant Stars: and as some write,
Therein is figured the World For in these dais the fourth part, called
America, was not known. Cetus. Pistrix.
Tripartite.
Others, because that Delta does emply
Dios, (the word that God does signify)
It had it is place. Next it, appears the Whale
(By Perseus slain) in the Circle Hyemal;
For it is great strength and bigness so transposed,
And Pistrix called. Eridanus fluvius.
Eridanus, enclosed
As in a bed of Stars, is seen to shine,
The face in object of the Antarticke Line.
Some Writers call 't Oceanus, and those
Not of mean judgment: others, Canopos,
(Of the bright splendour) Canopos an Isle
Whose bounds are washed still by the Egyptian Nile.
The Hare was said to make Orion sport
In hunting, Lepus^
and was stellified for it,
Placed in the Winters Circle. Next shines He
The Son of Neptune and Euriale; Orion.

Who in his course was said to be so fleet,
To run over Rivers and not drench his feet:
Or on the land through well-growne Meadows pass,
Yet with his weight not once to bend the grass:
Slain by an Arrow from Diana sent;
After, translated to the Firmament,
Armed with a Club and Sword in hostile guise;
And in his Course does still with Cancer rise.
Lelaps, or Canis mayor.
The greater Dog by Jupiter was set,
To watch when he with fair Europa met;
After bestowed on Procris: and by her,
On Cephalus her husband. Some aver,
It was Orions Dog (who took delight
In hunting much:) which Star does shine so bright,
It for the flame can scarce be looked upon;
And therefore by the Greeks called Syrion.
Procion, or Canus minor.
The less Dog did to Icarus pertain;
Who 'cause he mourned, his Master being slain,
And was the cause the Murd'rers were descried,
Thought therefore worthy to be stellifi'de.
Him, in the Milky Circle you may spy,
Fixed between Cancer and the Gemini.
Argo.
The Ship, called Argo (for it is speed was such)
Does almost the Antarticke Circle touch:
In this, the ancient Heroes launcht from Greece
To Colchos, and brought thence the Golden-Fleece.
Philiris, vel Centaurus.
Chiron, from Saturn and Philiris bred,
You may perceive to lift his star-crown'd head
Betwixt the Antarticke and the Hyemal Lines,
And for his justice showed on earth, there shines.
He AEsculapius and Achilles tought;
And for his great sincerity, 't was thought,
The gods would suffer him to live for ever,
But by a Shaft drawn from Alcides Quiver:
The head thereof in Hydra's blood being dipped,
Upon his foot it through his fingers slipped:
A small wound it appeared; but searched and tried,
Fester'd, Gangrened, and of that hurt he died.
Ara.
The Altar, to it is Sphere celestial borne,
With Aries sets; rises with Capricorn.
On which the gods their Coniuration made,
When Tytans Issue did the Heavens invade.
And men (since them) who great things enterprise,
Before the attempt, on Altars sacrifice.
Hydra is figured with a Cup and Crow.
Hydra.
The reasons why, would be too long to show.
This ougly many-headed Monster, bred
In Laerna, was by Hercules struck dead.
To take the length of three whole Signs 't is said,
Cancer, the Lion, and the Heavenly Maid.
The Stars of Piscis, whom we Notius call, Piscis, or Notius.

Are twelve in number, and Meridionall.
It, with a yawning mouth seems to devour
Water Aquarius from above does pour:
Who for a courtesy to A goddess worshipped among the Egyptians.
Isis done,
A constant place amongst the Stars has won.
Since whose translation to that glorious Seat,
Of diverse Fish the Syrians will not eat,
But keep their shapes and figures cast in gold,
And these to be their household gods they hold.
The reason why one Circle in the night, Circulus l^cteus, or the Galaxia.

(When all the rest 's black, does alone shine bright,
(And therefore, Lacteus called) some hold to be;
Juno vn'wares took Mercury in his infancy.
Hermes on her knee,
Danced him, sung to him, and upon him smiled,
And vowed she never saw so sweet a child:
To take him as her own she then decreed,
And called for milk, the pretty Babe to feed.
But when him to be Maia's Son she knew,
By Jupiter; the Lad from her she threw,
And called him Bastard, and began to frown,
And in her rising cast the Pitcher down:
Spilt was the Milk, and wheresoever it lyte,
The place appears (than all the rest) more white.
The golden Ram, styled Prince of all the Signs, Of the twelve Coelest.
Signs.

Rising, his Crest he tow'ards the East inclines, Aries.

In the AEquinoctiall Circle: with his head Higin. de Sign. Coelest. lib. 3.

Reaches Deltoton: with his feet does tread
Upon the Pistrix. Thus his story was:
Phrixus and Helles, bred from Athamas Hesiodus.

And Nebula, were at domesticke strife Pherecides.

With their proud Step-dame, and pursued her life.
But thence cast out, into the Woods they came;
Where wandering long, their Mother brought a Ram,
Who mounting on his back, she bids them fly:
They take the sea; but soon the wind grows high,
And, the waves troubled: Helles is afraid,
Lets go her hold, and then down slides the Maid.
The angry billows her of life bereave,
She forced her name unto that Sea to leave. The sea called Hellespont, from
Helles there drowned

But Phrixus to the Isle of Colchos steeres,
And, when arrived, before the King appears,
Who for he had so past and escaped the Brine,
There offered up the Beast at Mars his Shrine.
But the rich Fleece, whose every hair was gold,
(Which did amase King Octa to behold)
He left to him: which with such care he kept,
That to a monstrous Dragon that never slept,
He gave the charge thereof, till Iafon landed,
Who the swift Argo at that time commanded:
But by Medea's aid (as most aver)
He bore from Colchos both the Fleece and her.
Nigidius.
Some think the Ram therefore immortalis'd,
By reason that when Bacchus enterpris'd
An expedition into Africa,
And was distressed for water by the way;
A Ram was seen out of the Sands to make,
Whom they pursued, but could not overtake,
Till he had brought them unto Fountains clear;
Which having done, he did no more appear.
Bacchus, who thought him as Divinely sent,
Because his Army was nigh tired and spent
With heat and thirst; and by that means preserved,
Who else in that wild Desert had been starved:
To Jupiter called Ammon, there erected
A stately Temple; and withal directed,
(His Statue reared) that for the Beasts more grace,
They on his forehead two Rams horns should place,
Taurus.
(For so we find him figured.) Why the Bull
Has place above? Some think, because Jove's Trull
Euripides.
Europa, he from Sidon into Creet
Transwafted; whilst the wave never touched her feet.
Eratosthenes
Some hold him rather for that Beast of note,
On whom Pasiphae did so madly dote.
Others, for Io, in an Heifers shape
By Jove transformed, Queen Juno's rage to escape.
The reason is, because the As ashamed of the fact.
head's sole seen;
The hinder parts as hid behind a Skreene.
Pherecides.
He looks upon the East, and in his face
Athinaeus.
The Hyades (five Sisters) have their place.
They, Nurses unto Bacchus have been thought,
Called the Dodonean Nymphs, and thither brought
Therefore called Pluviales.
By his great Power. Nor are they seen in vain,
Who never rise but they portend some rain.
They were called Atlas Daughters; and took name
From their sole brother Hyas, who to tame
A Lion striving, was deprived of breath;
For whom the Sisters wept themselves to death.
The Pleiades, they be in number seven, These we call the seven stars

Dear Sisters, and together shine in heaven.
Six only seen at once. The reason why?
Six with the gods congrest: but one did ly
With Sisiphus a Mortal: for which reason
She hides her face, as had she done some treason.
The Gemini, who lovingly embrace, Gemini.

Take on the right hand of Auriga place,
Above Orion, who his rise begins
In the mid place betwixt the Bull and Twins.
Such as deep knowledge in the Stars profess,
Castor and Pollux call them. Others guess
Them to be Ze^us and Amphion, who
Were most kind Brothers. To which some say no, Higinus.

But that Triptolimus and Iasion claim
Site in that Orb, and in the Heavens the name.
But of the first the opinion best does please,
And that they are the two The sons of Tindarus Father to Hellen.
Tindarides,
Brothers to Hellen; two the most entire
That e're could yet boast of Celestial Fire.
They in their life the Seas from Pirates freed:
And after death, it was by Jove decreed,
To set them so, that from their glorious Sphere
They may behold what ever is done there.
To curle or calm the Ocean they have power;
To clear the Air, or dampe it with a shower;
To toss the Robbers ships on shelues and sands,
And steer the Merchants safe to foreign lands.
In Wracks they can preserve, in storms appease;
No stars have more dominion on the Seas:
Over which they are known to bear such watchful eyes,
That when one sets, the other's seen to rise.
The AEstiue Circle Cancer does divide Cancer.

Just in the middle; but a little wide
From Hydra (yet above) his eyes reflect
Directly on the Lions stern aspect.
But why the Crab should be allowed his Sphere,
It may be asked? I Will tell you what I hear.
When mighty Hercules did undertake
To combat Hydra, near the Lernian Lake;
As with his club he made the Monster reele,
This crept behind and pincht him by the heel. The Crab.

At which the Prince (more angry for bee'ng stayed
In his hot sight) looked back to see what aid
Hydra had got: and when the C^ab he spied,
Pamasis.
(A Worm so base) his fury was supplied.
Then, with a look of anger mixed with scorn,
He stamped upon it, until he saw it torn
And shattered all to pieces, with one spurn
Half burying it in the earth. Then did he turn
Again upon the Monster; nor withdrew,
Till Hydra (with her numerous heads) he slew.
This seen by Juno, who the Crab had sent
To vex the Hero; she incontinent
The limbs dispersed did suddenly combine,
And placed it one amongst the Twelve to shine;
Who bears upon him Stars that shine (but dull)
Stars called Asini, from Asses.
Called Asini; yet make his number full.
The cause of their translation, thus we read:
When all the gods assembled, and made head
Against the Giants, (in that glorious war
Where hills and rocks were tossed and thrown from far)
It is remembered how, amongst the rest,
To take the gods part, Liber Pater pressed
Satyrs and Sylv^nes: Shepherds he from Pan,
And Neatheards took: not sparing god nor man
That near to him were known to have abode;
Not his own Priests, and they on Asses rode.
Now when the battle was to join, the cry
On both sides 'gan to mount up to the Sky:
At which the poor beasts much affrighted, they
Above the rest, were loudly heard to bray.
The Giants hearing it, not knowing whence
That noise should come; began to hatch suspense,
How Jove had made of such strange Monsters choice,
Whose strengths perhaps might match that horrid voice:
Which made them faint and fly. Away they ran;
And by this means the gods the battle wan.
For which, those Asses which so loud had brayed,
Lights (though but dull) were then for Cancer made.
Leo.
Leo, whose, look does bend unto the West,
Seems as he did upon the Hydra rest,
Not far from Cancer; in his Sphere so put,
His middle does the AEstiue Circle cut:
And is amongst the Signs the Noblest held,
In greatness too to have the rest excelled.
Him in Nemea Juno's said to breed, Nigidius.

In constant hope that he should after feed
On Hercules; whom sternly she did hate,
Him seeking by all means to insidiate.
But when they came to grapple, he (before This is held by some to be the first
of his 12 Labors:

Scarce thought of) vnaffrighted at his rore,
Gave him a brave encounter; and so fair,
That one hand tangled in his curled hair,
His other on his throat he fastened sure;
And thus they wrestled, who should long'st endure.
His claws he fixed upon Alcides Brawnes,
And roared so, that he shook the Woods and Lawnes:
He tore the flesh till the bare bone was seen;
Still the bold Hero, swelled with noble spleen,
Kept fast his hold: nor could the Lions grin
(Though terrible) the least advantage win,
But that he shook him by the throat, the beard,
Gnasht teeth against teeth, and was no more afeard.
At length the Lion (almost spent) began
To'abate his rage: when this Heroicke man
Redoubled ire on fury, till ashamed,
A Beast by him should be so long untamed;
Although invulner'd, he put all his strength Some hold, Juno made his skin
invulnerable.

Into one gripe, so strangled him at length:
Then cast him on the ground (scarce seen to sprall)
Being said to make an earthquake in his fall.
Juno when she beheld her Lion slain,
Willing his memory should still remain,
Prepared him place in the high Architect, Periandrus Rhodius.

Where to this day he keeps his stern aspect.
The Virgin has beneath Boots, sted,
Who seems to drive his Chariot over her head; Virgo.

Towa'rds the back part of Leo she does shine,
And with her right hand touch the AEstiue Line
She does: part of her body (seen by chance)
Above the Crow and Hidra's head advance.
Now, who she was, it is fit we should enquire. Higinus.

From Jupiter and Thetis some desire Aratus.

To claim her birth. Some think (and those of name)
She from Ascraeus and Aurora came.
Some, that she is Altergatis, are assured;
And others, Fortune; since her head's obscured.
Some, Ceres, on whom Proserpine was borne,
(As holding in her hand fresh ears of corn.)
Others, her life from Jove and Themis give;
And say she in the golden World did live:
As then called Iusta. And in her young days,
Nation'gainst Nation did not forces raise,
To'inuade each other: no man then for gain
Dared in a thin rib'd bark to cross the maine:
No craft was known, no fraud was understood.
The vdders of their cattle leant them food;
The Fleece their garment, only to defend
From wind and weather, (for no other end
Was clothing made) Pride was a Monster then,
Unheard, unthought; one fashion was to men,
Women another: for no change they knew,
One garb they kept, and studied nothing new.
None idle was, but lived by his own sweat:
The brook their drink; the herbs and roots their meat.
And in those days did Justice reign sole Queen;
Through all her Court no vice was known or seen.
The grave Nobility that her attended,
Were from the first most ancient House descended;
And all allied: Wisdom the Kingdom guided;
And for the Household Industry provided:
Good Providence, a man well struck in years,
Eyed the whole State, and sat amongst her Peers.
Labor was then a Lord in great request,
Saw nothing want, and claimed place with the best.
Sincerity, and Purity in heart,
In Counsel sat; and these did claim a part
In all her just proceedings: nothing past
The Table, but by them was first and last
Considered of. Her Women that did wait,
Were fair, but simple and immaculate:
Humility was one, Chaste Love another,
And Bashfulnesse a third: These from their Mother
Virtue, a most unblemished breeding had,
All bent on Good, as knowing nothing bad.
Zeal and Innocuous Truth became the State;
For none but such did on her person wait.
Pride.
But when Pride first made her ascent from hell,
To take the Worlds survey, she 'gan to swell;
And in her tumerous thoughts presumed to reign
Over the whole Earth, the Air, and boundless Maine:
With insolent vain hope to atchieue at last,
(by force) that high place whence she first was cast.
Of most assured victory she vaunts,
When she behold her six Concomitants,
Gluttony, Wrath, Sloth, Envy, Avarice, The 7 Deadly Sins.

Lust; and no one but a notorious Vice,
And able in their own power to subdue
Mankind at once, when they shall come in view.
These setting forward in this proud ostent,
Began to fight, and conquered as they went:
Few escaped their fury, saving those that fled;
And Pride since domineeres in Justice stead;
Who when she saw those Fiends began to sway,
(For all her subjects were now made their pray.)
The earth quite left, up to the Heaven she soared,
Where, by some good men she is still adored.
But reigning there in such high eminence,
She by no prayers can since be drawn from thence.
Some say, Apollo did beget this Maid
Of Chrisotheme; and her Name is said
To be Parthenon: but we are not bound
To credit such as write upon no ground.
Others, the daugher to Icarius,
Erigone; whose story I read thus:
When Bacchus trauell'd in an humane shape, The story of Icarius and Erigone.

To reach men know the sweetness of the Grape,
And so to'encourage them to plant the Vine
(As then unknown) his course he did incline.
After a tedious long itineration,
To where Icarius had his habitation
With his fair Daughter: he being one of quality,
Received him with such liberal hospitality,
That Liber Pater at his parting thence, Who is also called Bacchus or
Dionysius.

(To show his gratitude) in recompense,
Left with him certain vessels filled, and bad,
When he and his their full contentment had;
He the Grapes virtue should to others tell,
And by the taste show wherein't did excel.
So left him. After, his obsequious Host,
From his own Country, to the Atticke coast
Made expedition, with a Cart or Waine
Laden with Wine; with no more in his train,
Than she, and his Dog Mera. Those he met
First with, were certain Shepherds newly set
To a spare dinner. Here he thought to rest:
But first, because he would augment their feast,
He sent his daughter to a village by,
What in his Scrip was wanting, to supply.
The Swains all bad him welcome in a word,
And told him, what their bottles could afford,
He might command, (cool water from the Well.)
He thanked them first; and then began to tell,
What a sweet tasted juice he had in store,
Presuming, such they never drank before.
So bad them try, and not the virtue doubt:
They did so; and the Mazer went about.
No one but now on this new liquor dotes,
And swears, the like went never down their throtes.
They from a taste, a deeper draught desire;
And each one strives, his elbow to lift higher.
Still as they more desired, the more he drew,
A common Proverb in our English tongue.
And drank so long until the ground looked blew.
Nay after that, they bad him still supply them:
He now through fear, not daring to deny them,
Filled up their wooden dish even to the brim;
Until at length their brains began to swim,
Supposing the ground shook; and much ado
They had to stand, each man appearing two.
The fruits of Drunkenness.
Being thus 'toxt, they'gan to apprehend,
That they were poisoned, and now near their end.
Therefore before their deaths, they all agreed
To be revenged on him that did the deed.
And with this wicked resolution, took
Their staves in hand, and at the good man struck.
One, with his sheep-hooke aiming at his head,
And thinking with one blow to strike him dead;
Not guiding well his weapon in that state,
Mist him, and hit his fellow on the pate.
A second threats him with a deadly wound;
But his arm swaruing, only beats the ground.
A third says, Fie, can you not guide your blows?
And stepping forward, tumbleth on his nose.
Let me come (says a fourth) with my pell mell:
And with that word, fell over him that fell.
A fifth says, Nay, it is I must crack his crown:
But turning round, he struck the next man down.
And then a fixed with fury yawn'd and gaped;
But by indenturing, still the good man escaped.
O, but alas his fate was come! and now
All guirt him round, and (though nor where nor how
Their blows were aimed or fell, they could devise,
Themselves being battered both in face and eyes)
Icarius, whose life they had in chase,
(Poor man) was only found dead in the place. Icarius slain.

And then their fury somewhat did appease:
The wine still working, sleep began to seize
Upon their eye lids; which they took for death,
Now giving summons to their parting breath.
Bee'ng friends and neighbors, ready to forsake
The world, a solemn leave they needs must take
Amongst themselves: and well as they could stand,
They aim to take each other by the hand;
But by the weakness of their knees and feet,
Although their hands miss, yet their foreheads meet:
And so they make a staggering shift to 'embrace
And bid farewell ( A proverb frequent among Drunkards.
to one another face.)
In drunken tears their parting they deplore,
From that day forward never to see more:
Their souls departing now they know not whether:
So, their legs failing, fall asleep together.
Mera the Dog in the interim, A remarkable story of a dog.
when he found
His Master to lie dead upon the ground,
Looks in his face, does mourning, by him sit;
(Who in the skirmish had both barked and bit.)
Then runs to find his Mistress. When he meets her,
In stead of whining, he with howling greets her;
And that too, so untunable and shrill,
She doubts it the presage of some great ill.
His tail he wags not, as he wonted erst,
Her tender heart, his look dejected pierst.
At meeting, he, whose custom still had bin
To fawn and leap, and with a smiling grin
To entertain her; now with a sad frown
Does usher her the way, (his head cast down)
And often looks back in such a pitteous guise,
She may perceive tears dropping from his eyes:
Which, passion in her rather did provoke,
Because he looked as if he would have spoke;
For all the ways he could, he st^iv'd to tell,
How by those bloody Swains her Father fell.
And thus the Damsel followed her sad Guide,
Unto the place where all the grass was dy^de
With her dear fathers blood, (he pale and wan;)
She falls upon him, striving if she can
To revoke life. But finding at the last,
It was as vain, as call back day that is past;
She silent sat, and so the Dog did too;
From her observing what he ought to do.
It Is worthy note, their grief at this disaster,
She for a Father, Mera for a Master:
If she cried out and shreek'd; he howled, and so,
As if he would out do her in her woe.
Then up she rose; and he starts up, to see
What she intends. Who then upon the tree
Beneath which the Coarse lay, casts up her eye,
Weary of life, and now resolved to die.
Then from her knees her garters she vnty'de,
And of them both she makes a knot to slide:
The noose she puts about her neck, prepares
For speedy death. The Dog upon her stares,
Wondering what she is about^ he sees her clime,
And (as he feared the worst) now thinks it time
To prevent further mischief; from his throat
First sends an howl; then catches by her coat.
Thinking to pluck her back: but she more quick,
Ascends; the piece still in his teeth does stick,
Torn from the rest. And she has leisure now,
(By tying fast her garters to a bow)
Her self to strangle. There she dangling hung:
At which the Curre a new black Sa^tus sung;
Did first on the one, then on the other sta^e,
(Him dead on earth, her dying in the air.)
Dispairing then of both, he runs among
The drunken Swains, the cause of all this wrong,
(Who still lay sleeping:) One he bites by the ear;
Another takes by the nose; and a third tear
By the leg and arm; where-euer his teeth light,
Blood follows after: what is next in sight
He fastens; and withal, such noise did make,
That now (the Wine left working) all awake.
Who roused, and stretching of themselves, began
To recollect what past: They spied the Man
Lie dead, whom they had murdered; and the Maid
New hanged upon the tree. At which afraid,
(As touched in conscience) from the place they fled:
But still the Dog remained to guard the Dead.
Innocent blood spilt never goes unrevenged.
Observe Heavens justice in revenge of guilt,
And care of blood innocuous, to be spilt.
Bacchus (whom Liber Pater else we call)
So at their deaths grieved, and incenst withal;
As that the Athenian Damsels and choice Maids
With such a desperate frenzy he inuades,
No night coud pass, but of those best allied,
Some one or other by their own hands died.
Therefore unto the Oracle they send,
To know by what means they the gods offend
In such high nature? And withal entreat,
How they may stop a punishment so great.
Answer's returned, That plague was sent because
They (both against Divine and Humane laws)
Had suffered two such to be rest of b^^^^h,
And they neglected to revenge their death.
Resolved of this doubt, they study now,
Neglect, and all contempt to disavow.
Their bodies they enquire, give them humation;
Build them a monument; an inundation
Of tears is spent, the gods wrath to appease:
By search the Murd'rers are found out, they seize
Upon their persons; judge them to be lead
To the same place, there hanged till they be dead.
This done, they undertake to plant the Vine,
And of their Tomb, late reared, they make a Shrine;
Where year by year, the first fruits of the Must
They offer up to their now rotten dust.
But their two Spirits (which can never dye)
The gods commanded to be fixed on high:
Icarius, of Arcturus bears the name: Arcturus.

She the Celestial Virgins place does claim. Virgo.

Mera the Dog translated too we find,
Because he showed himself to both so kind;
That future Ages might record him, they
Changed him into the Star Canicula. Canicula.

Libra, Libra.
that swayes the reins, in equal skale,
Above weighes Justice, left on earth it fail;
(The upright balance of all wholesome Laws)
It Is held between the Scorpions spacious claws
(Called Chelae.) It, late Writers solely embrace:
The Higin^ Arat. Virg. li. Geor. 1.
Ancients lend it'mongst the Twelve no place.
The skaly Scorpion's fixed amongst the rest, Scorpio.

Whose former parts appear to be so pressed
By the AEquinoctiall Circle, that it shows
As if it did support it. Some suppose
It is of such dimension, that the tail
Extends to the Circle Hyemal:
The claws expanded, mighty breadth do carry,
Spreading themselves beneath the Serpentary.
The cause of it is stellation to enquire,
And why so beautified with heavenly fire,
Nigidius.
Comes next in course. Some render in account,
It was first seen on the Chilippian Mount,
(An eminent hill in Chios) and there bred,
The insolent Orion to strike dead:
Who, for he braved Diana in the chase,
And crossed her game (not willing to give place
To any Female,) making boast withal,
No forest Beast but by his darts should fall,
'Till they were quite destroyed; she for his pride
This Scorpion sent, which stung him, and he died.
Then the chaste Goddess, for this service done,
So much from Jove by fair entreaty won,
His body after was transferred on high,
And no Sign more apparent in the Sky.
Sagittarius.
The Sagittary with his bow still bent,
Draws the string up to his ear, as with intent
To shoot at random. Further he is expressed,
With his face always looking tow'ards the West.
He from the feet to shoulders stands within
The Winter Circle: upwards from the chin
He looks above it; and his Bow so placed,
As that the The Galaxia which some hold to be the Path which leads to Olympus
hall where the gods sit in Counsel.
Milky path (so often traced)
Diuides his bow. He dreadful is to sight,
As setting headlong, rising still upright.
Some hold him to be Croton, the sole heir
Unto the Muses Nurse (of feature rare)
Sosythaeus Traged. Scriptor.
Euschemes called, whom Jove did dote upon.
Her Son was said to'enhabit Helicon,
Where with his bow and arrows hunting still,
All such choice game as he was known to kill,
He brought to the nine Sisters, and (the sweat
Wiped from his face) with them sat down and eat.
After repast, when they together sung,
Or played upon their Viols, sweetly strung;
He danced to them, still keeping time and measure,
With his rare postures adding to their pleasure.
Nigidius, de Crotone.
For which, at their request, Jove was content
To'allot him that place in the Firmament:
And in remembrance of his former skill,
His Bow and Shafts to bear about him still.
The shape equinall does his speed imply,
Since (rather than to run) he seemed to fly.
Grim Capricorn erects his horned crest, Capricornus.

Whose horrid looks incline unto the West:
With bristled curles thick clothed in his back,
And compast with the Circle Zodiac:
His feet displayed, the Poles may almost span:
Some style him by the name of AEgipanes were Beasts like men, having Goats
feet: Or woodgods.
AEgipan.
Precipitate he tumbles in his set,
(As hurled from high) but rises without let.
The reason why he was transposed first,
Some hold, Epimenides in Ida.
because that he with Jove was nursed.
He went with him unto the Tytans war,
And therefore others think him made a Star: Aratus in Phaenom.

What time his Dam the Goat was likewise sed,
To gain her splendant Orb. This Goat was called Amalthea.
It Is she that fed
Jove with her milk. His hinde-parts like a Fish
Are portrayed in the Heavens: the reason this,
When all the gods below here were assembled, Eratosthenes

Typhon (beneath whose burden the earth trembled)
A mighty Giant, terrible and grim,
Assaulted them. Who all afraid of him,
Fled, Ovid, Met.
and were hotly followed: the pursuit
Continued long, till they nigh destitute
Of their own power; the Monster to escape,
Each turned themselves into a sundry shape:
Apollo to a Crane; the Air he takes:
Venus, a Fish; and to the Sea she makes:
Hermes, an A Bird only breeding in Egypt.
Ibis figure does provide:
And Mars turns Pigmee, lest he should be spyde.
The chaste Diana much amazed thereat,
Is forced to change her self into a Cat.
Juno, for fear, forgets her scoulding now,
Appeares'sore Typhon like a simple Cow.
Bacchus into a Goat; and Jove a Ram,
By which means safely he to Egypt came:
Since in his flight, part of the seas he crossed,
Some think those skales upon his skin embost.
In The Winter Circle does Aquarius stand, Aquarius.

And points to Capricorn with his left hand;
But with his right to Pegasus does strain,
Seeming to catch and hold fast by his maine.
Aquarius and Hippocoon.
His object is the East; and in his Rise,
His head is first seen, whilst his body lies
Quod eius ex oren plurimi Imbres fiunt:
Oscur'd some while. He Is called Hyppochoon,
Whom some take to be Ganimed, the son
Aratus.
To Troylus and Callirroe; whose sweet feature
(Scarce to be matched in any second creature)
Jove was enamored of: and whilst he strayed
On Ida Mount, and with his fellows played;
Sent down his AEgle (soaring then in the Sky)
Who snatched him thence, and bare him upon on hye.
Nigidius.
Some take him for Deucalion, and the ground,
Hegesinax.
Because when in the Deluge all were drowned,
Save He and Pyrra (for those Jove adored)
He caused, that by them Mankind was restored.
Aratus in Ihoenom.
Others would have him Aristaeus, strive
From Cyrene and Apollo to derive
His breeding. Further say, she was comprest
In the mount Orpheus: which is also ghest
To be A mountain so called from her.
Cyrenis. Write him nobly famed
For finding Agriculture: He proclaimed,
To teach men how to plow, sow, plant, and till;
So that they reaped great profit by his skill.
[Who when he had by observation found,
That when the fruits waxt ripe upon the ground,
Canicula, into which Mera was translated
The Pest-infusing Dog^ star, Mil-dewes sent,
And strange rots, from his rays malevolent;
Which proved not only over the Grain to'haue power,
And Herds and Flocks with Murraines to devour;
But by his ever ill-dispos'd aspect,
Men's bodies with diseases to infect:]
Made suit unto the gods (but Neptune chief)
They would be pleased to'asswage this common grief.
To which they gave assent, and ordered so,
These winds some call Ec^esiae.
That when this bad Star rose, cold winds should blow,
For forty days together; by increase
Of whose pure gusts, the infection past, might cease.
Which done, the gods amongst themselves agreed,
By joint consent, to'inuest him for the deed.
The one of the two Fishes some define
Pisces.
Boraeus; placed betwixt the AEstiue Line
Aratus.
And the AEquinoctiall: fixed (they likewise say)
Beneath the right arm of Andromeda,
Eying the Articke Pole. The other has site
(Called Notius) in the Zodiac, and shoots light
Not far from the AEquinoctiall Line. Viz. one North, the other South.
The last
Called Boreal; the first, Aust^al (soth' are placed.)
These, in the flood Euphrates an egg found,
Of an huge bigness, in the riues drowned:
Which from the Deep they 'twixt them gently bore,
And laid it dry and safe upon the shore.
That a Dove hatched: The birth of Venus, according to most of the Greek Poets
before named.
and from it Syria came
(That goddess which we Venus likewise name.)
Who this their kindness bearing still in mind,
Sought some fair opportunity to find,
To show her gratitude^ and then being great
With Jupiter, of him she did entreat,
He would be pleased, their goodness to requite,
B^ whom her birth and being came to light.
He, who the goddess nothing could deny,
To send her pleased thence, fixed them in the Sky,
Where with a radiant fulgence either shines,
Both making one of the Celestial Signs.
Since when, these people, rather than to taste
That kind of Fish, have vowed perpetual Fast:
And with such reverence they all Doves entreat,
To die themselves, ere these Birds kill and eat.
But let me not (o Courteous Reader) wrong
Thy patience, Concerning the worlds original.
with insisting here too long:
I will not bring Philosophers to brall
And quarrel 'bout the Worlds original.
Of which, These were the several opinions of diverse Philosophers.
their curious Ce^sures some have past,
That this was ever, and shall ever last.
Others, That many worlds have bin'tofore;
And this bee'ng ended, we shall still have more.
Some Heretics so impudently bold,
To draw their grounds from Scripture. These of old
Have by Authentic Authors been confuted,
Therefore not needful here to be disputed.
The World it self does to all Tongues proclaim The World it self, best
Witness of the World.

It Is own first off spring, and from whence it came.
In The Elements first: As thus; The Earth does shift
Into the Water, (by the Almighties Gift;)
Air into Fire does pass, (as it is expressed;)
Air into Water too. So of the rest.
And yet this permutation cannot be,
But in the course of Time. Now all agree,
Time, of all Motion to be the true Measure:
And where is Motion, cannot be the Treasure
Vbi motus est nulla Eternitas.
Of Durabilitie, and always lasting.
We either see the swelling Ocean hasting,
To fill his Tide, or to his Ebb decline:
(There Is no cessation in the moving Brine.)
Sometimes the gentle Air blows cool and soft:
Sometimes again the Whirle-windes beat aloft.
As now the Moon does in her Waine appear,
And then some few nights after fills her Sphere.
The Sun is in perpetual travel: so
The Stars: nay even the Herbs and Plants that grow.
Of what the Earth yields, or from Heaven is leant,
" Time is the sole producting Instrument.
This being proved, now let us, if you please,
Time examined, to prove a beginning of all things.
Examine Time, whilst we consider these.
We read, how they which sacrificed first,
Religious Abel were, and Cain the Accursed.
The invention of letters.
The ancient Writer Philo does make mention,
That Letters had from Abraham their invention:
Which he the Chaldaeans and Phoenicians tought.
These (after) Linus from Phoenicia brought,
And spread in Greece. Cadmus, some say, devised them,
And within Sixteen Characters comprised them.
To which, they say, Palan^des added four:
Simonides to them, as many more.
Sim. Meli^us.
Memnon spoke Hierogliphycks, thinking so,
To instruct men a nearer way to know.
Of Writing.
Another, Writing taught; so by degrees,
First from Palm leaves, them to the rindes of trees,
They grew to Paper and to Pens. Some Rhyme,
Some writ in Prose. All these produced by Time.
At first, the Arcadians upon Acomes fed,
And, save the Earth, looked for no softer bed.
Dainties and Down were both as then unknown:
Whence then is our Effeminacie grown;
Now in such use? Those Surfets we desire?
Superfluous Fare, and Pydenesse in Attire?
Against Pride.
When our first Parents were in skin coats clad;
(For better Weeds then, were not to be had.)
No food save Fruits; no drink save Water small,
" Time, still in motion, has produced these all.
For, grant that Man from everlasting were,
A needful observation.
Without beginning: How may it appear
He spent his days? Triptolemus, we read,
And Ceres, were the first that devised Bread.
What did they eat before? An idle kind
Of Creatures sure they were, that could not find
The use of Garments, nor of wholesome Food;
With infinite things, since practiced, and held good.
They built no Cities; The first erectors of famous Cities.
for all such of Name,
Known History directs us whence they came:
And both by whom, and in whose reigns erected.
Rhemus and Romulus the place selected,
In which to plant great Rome. Paris, that is
Of populous France the chief Metropolis, Paris Al. Lutetia.

Paris the Trojan built; after the firing
Of famous Troy, thither himself retyring,
With Francon one of Hectors noble Sons:
For so the Chronicle with Carrion runs. Carrion Chron^l.

Naples (that we As so first called.
Parthenope have read)
Was founded by the warlike Diomed.
Parma, by Trojan Chrysus, Pallas friend.
Ancona likewise boasts her to descend
From the Thessalian Dolopes. Florence grew
From Scilla's soldiers, who did first make new
Those stately walls. Ca^thage Queen Dido reared;
If Virgil or Eusebius may be heard.
Troy, from King Troos. Thebes, from Busiris came.
Of Genoa, Genuinus laid the frame,
(Young Phaetons companion.) Brixium, Verona,
Patauia, All these buil^ by several men as their Chronicles yet record.
Aquilaea, Barcelona,
Rhodes, Malta, Nicomedia, Sarragosa,
Venetia, Placentia, and Tolosa:
These for the rest suffice; the Ages tell them
Of their vain errors, and withal refell them.
The first is by all Writers understood, Of the Ages.

From the Creation to the general Flood. The first Age.

The next, from Noah to Abraham's birth accounted. II.

The third, III.
from him to David's time amounted.
The fourth, IV.
from David's days, fell just upon
The Jews Captivity in Babylon.
The fifth, V.
from fair Ierusalems surprise
By Nabuchadnezzar, does just arise
Unto our Sauiors blessed Incarnation.
The sixth descends to this last Generation. VI.

And though some Histriographers divide
These into Seven; In Hist. Eccl.
by Eusebius it is deny'de,
And diverse others: all in this agreeing,
(Though not in number) That the World had being
In Adam and our Grandam Eve, created
By Gods own hand; in Paradise instated:
That most of all those many years are past,
And, That this Age we live in is the last.
Grammar. The original of Arts, etc.
Grammar, in Greece was by Prometheus sought,
And after was to Rome by Crates brought,
Before the time of the third Punicke war.
Rhetoric.
Of Rhetoric, these the Deuisers are,
Tysias, which Corax after did refine;
With Gorgias, syrnamed Leontyne.
Log^cke.
Cleanthes was the first Logic professed;
Crisippus, Daphila; and amongst the rest
Numbered, Dionisodore and Euthidenius were.
Art of Memory.
The art of Memory did first appear
In old Simonides. Euclides found
Geometry.
Geometry: And Sapho laid the ground
Music.
Of Music; or as some, Thersander will:
Physic.
Others, Pythoclides. Physickes first skill
Serapius claims. And Apis, AEgypts King,
Surg^rie.
To be of Surgerie the source and spring.
The Ship.
Noah, the Ship: The Lyre or Harp.
and Mercury the Lyre.
Pyseus was the ground of Music higher,
Trumpet.
Namely the Trumpet. Thales (most have said)
Horologie.
Was he, the Horologe devised and made.
Astrology.
Astrology, Anaximander taught:
Statues and Pictures.
Pictures and Statues, first Cleanthes wrought.
Virtue of He^bs:
Chiron, of Herbs and Simples searched the cause,
Laws.
With their true virtue. And the first made Laws
Wine.
Was Rhadamant. Bacchus did plant the Vine:
City walls.
And Tharsus unto Cities, Walls assign:
Which after, the Cyclopians did adorn
Turrets. Corn.
With sumptuous Turrets. The first use of Corn,
War.
Queen Ceres: Ninus, War: the art of Minting,
Minting.
And use of Coin, did AEginata: Printing,
Printing.
Iohn-Gutenburgh. But he that first did find
That Devilish enemy to all Mankind,
Ars tormentaria devised by a Friar whose name is not known.
Powder, the Gun and Bombard; his great'st fame
Is, That to future Times he left no Name.
Nay, have there not new Worlds been found of late?
Against their opinions, who did intimate
There could be no Antipodes. All concur,
(After much factious arguing and huge stur,
By ancient Sophists and Philosophers broacht)
That such who either on more Worlds incroacht,
Or would th'Eternitie of this maintain,
Are mere erroneous, fabulous, and vain.
Yet note how cunningly some dare dispute,
Presuming on a knowledge absolute.
Of the Intelligences in their kind, Arist. de Intell. Perf.

The perfectest and best disposed, we find,
Is, their Celestial Orbs and Circles still Pbys. 1.4.8:56

To keep in motion; causing them fulfill
Their natural office: To which purposed end,
Their perfectness and goodness they extend.
For it is the nature and the property
Of truly Good and Perfect, still to be
Indulgent to the Inferior, and their State
To them, in some sort, to communicate.
And from this Spring or Fountain, managed so,
All final Causes and Efficients flow.
Now if the World, with all contained therein, The argument followed.

Eternally before Time has not bin,
Then these Intelligences, for a space,
Beyond all computation (though in place)
Had idle been, by which it is understood;
In that they neither perfect are nor good.
Proceeding further; God and Nature strive,
In all the works they fashion or derive,
To make things for the best. Now who but knows,
'Twas better for the World, (in their dispose)
And the more noble work, Esse melius qua^ non Esse.
To have been ever,
And so unto Eternity persevere;
Than once not to have been, (as many say)
And so in time to perish and decay.
Besides, what was made new, might have been don
In space precedent, before Time begun;
And so from all Eternity: and God
(Who has from Everlasting his abode;
Whose Potencie and Wisdom we adore)
Unchanged is, nor can be less or more.
And therefore since To be, is better held,
Than Not to be, (which cannot be refell'd;)
So better it is, (with reason best agreeing)
The World to have ever bin, than not to 'had being.
And so by consequence, always remain,
Much better, than to be dissolved again.
To conclude which, De Coel 22.
this grave Philosopher
(By most approved Testates) does infer
Common consent; because none can deny,
Coel^m Dei Seeds.
But Heaven to be the Seat of the Most High.
Then, if He be eternal? needs must be
The Mansion which receives him, old as He.
This only I have drawn from Infinites:
Now hear of him, what learned Procopius writes.
Procop. against Arist.
He that all Natures secrets seemed to know,
And of unsounded Learning made great show;
Standing upon the Nigroponticke shore,
And there observing then (with diverse more
Of his own Sect) how seven times in one day
It eb'd and flowed, to their great wonder: they
Demanding from him to be satisfy'de
Of this Afflux and Reflux (Ebb and Tide)
The natural reason: he after long pause,
Quoniam Aristot. mare capere non potest: Capiat mare Aristotelem.
Not able to resolve them of the cause,
Vtter'd these words; Nay then, since that I see
I cannot take the Sea, the Sea take me.
And from the promontorie where he stood,
Without more stay, he leapt into the Flood.
Now how could he, incapable to pry
Into a Natural cause. himself comply
To search into that dark and hidden Treasure,
Which is unbounded, vast, and without measure?
Retire to Reason, on which they erect
Their Reasons confuted by Reason.
The weak frame of their falling Architect.
What consonance with Reason can there be,
But in so long a perpetuity,
So many Miriads of years; but needs
They must have known what later time new breeds,
Against vain Curiosity.
Within few thousands? They that wade so far
Into these curiosities, but mar
What they would seem to make; What vndeuis'd
Is left to us? or what vnenterpris'd?
Unless their brains they yet would stretch more hye,
And practice how with Daedalus to fly?
To walk invisible? or by their breath
To make frail man incapable of Death?
Great is the confidence (I well might say
Presumption) that these Bodies, Dust and Clay,
Ambitiously assume; who dare aspire,
After things Supernatural to `enquire;
Striving (if possible) themselves to inuest
Even in the secrets of the Almighties breast.
What madness is it for an heavy load
Of putred Flesh, that only has abode
Here in the lower world, (denied by Nature)
Or to add to, or take off, from his stature;
Being debarred all possible means to fly,
Or mount himself betwixt the Earth or Sky?
Either like bold aspiring Phaeton,
To aim at the bright Chariot of the Sun?
Or with his waxen wings, as Icarus did,
Attempt what God and Nature have forbid?
What is this less, than when the Giants strove
To mutiny and menace war against Jove?
This notwithstanding, plainly does demonstrate The Nobility of Man's Conceit.

A great Nobility in Man's conceit;
Whose Apprehension, howsoever rude,
Yet is still aiming at such Altitude.
Yet note how these, who others would have schooled,
In seeming most wise, most themselves have fooled.
Even Divine Plato blushed not to attest,
(Yet he for judgment honored above the rest) August. de Civ. Dei. li. 12.
ca. 13.

That he in Athens, and the self same place
In which he then taught, with much love and grace;
Had read the self same Lectures, years ago
Full fifteen thousand, adding some few mo;
And the like term of years expired, again
In the same School he should appear as then;
To the same Scollers reading the same things.
Observe but what this ouer-weening brings,
Mere folly, if not madness: To the Wise
('Among many others) let what is spoke suffice.
But why should I end here, and not discuss
The ground, how Plato came besotted thus. The opinion of the Platonists.

There is a year, that in Times large progress
Is ANNVS MAGNUS called: Others, no less
Trauell'd that way, it ANNVS VERYENS call: Annus magnus vertens, au^ Munda^us.

And some, ANNVS MVNDANVS: These are all
The known names given it; and in this it is said,
The Stars and Planets, howsoever swayed,
Be they or fixed, or wandering; in this year
Return to their first state, and then appear
In their own Orbs, unwearied, and instated
As fresh and new as when at first created.
Macrobius thus describes it; Then (says he) Macr. in Somn. Scip.

This Great and Vertent Year is, when we see
All Stars and Planets brought to their first station,
After their much and long peregrination.
By which they would infer, That all such men
As are now living, were existent then
In those past Ages: and hereafter too
Shall in that state subsist which they now do;
Ridiculous absurdities.
Bear the same names and syrnames, have the same
Fathers and Mothers, from which we first came;
With the same country, fortunes, and appear
(As long before, and now) so in that year,
When it shall come in Times long revolution.
And though of us there be a dissolution,
It is but for a space: Vicissitude
Shall still from time to time see us renewed,
Like these Celestial Bodies. How absurd
The Tenet is? it scarcely does afford
A Schoole-boyes answer. For if this were true,
These Books which we write now, before were new;
And by all such as now peruse them, read:
And in the future, having long been dead,
When this year Vertent comes, we shall again
Be borne as heretofore; on earth remain
Just the same time, and lead the self same lives,
Have the same Neighbors, marry the same Wives,
Get the same children, have that house, that land
We now enjoy; live under the command
Of the same Sovereign; see just judgment done
On Malefactors, who shall after run
Into like forfeit; by that Judge be try'de,
And dye again where they before-time died.
To buy, to sell, to build, all that we see
Here done, once was, and shall hereafter be:
And to reduce all parcels to one sum,
Catacl. diluvium, i. Delug.
So the past Cataclisme must again come.
Yet these most fabulous assertions, tho
They sweetened Plato, with a many mo
Reputed wise; were by them that respected
Reason above Will, exploded and rejected:
In that, reputing the Professors Fools;
And their Positions hist out of the Schools.
The Jewish Rabbis likewise held them vain:
And I leave this, to touch an higher strain.
Nihil notum in Terra: Nihil Ignotum in Coelo. Bern.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogriphicall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractate.
COncerning the three divisions of the World, Sublunarie, Celestial, and
Super-Coelestiall, as also, what a true correspondence the Arc of Tabernacle
of Moses had unto them, being a small, yet a most curious model of the greater
and most admirable Fabric; has been sufficiently discoursed. And therefore
as well to avoid prolixitie, as other impertinent circumstances, I purpose with
no iterations to trouble or tempt the patience of the Reader; but rather
proceed to the illustrating and enlarging of such things as have been merely
epitomized, and little more than mentioned in the premises: and first to
define unto you what the Would is.

Mundus, or the World, The definition of the World.
is in the Hebrew Language Holam; which implies thus much, Quod iam per
aliquot secula subsistat: In quo rerum ortus and interitus sit^ed. Which is to
subsist and continue for certain Ages, and in which shall be the birth and
destruction of things. The word in the Original directly reproving all such as
are of opinion, That it has always been, and shall ever last. The Greeks
call it Cosmos, which signifies Ornament: Which the Latins, for the perfect
and absolute elegancie thereof, call Mundus, i. Clean, because, than it, there
is nothing more neatly polished, Cap. 1. and 4.
or more rarely beautified: for so says Pliny. Possidonius, in Meteor, calls
that Mundus, or the World, which consists of Heaven and Earth, Celestial
and Terrestrial natures; or of gods and men, and of those things which were
created for their use. Some call it Muudus, quasi Ornatus Muliebris, a Woman's
Ornament: or Munitus, i. Defenced. Others a Mouendo, i. Moving; because Mundus
is that kind of Ornament which women carefully put on in the morning, and
carelessly throw aside at night. Mundus Muliebris, as Vlpian will have it, is,
per quod Mulier mundior fit; That by which a woman is made more fair and
spectable. Amongst which necessaries he reckons up her Myrrhor, her Matula,
her Unguents, boxes of Ointments, etc.

What the opinions of diverse Fathers were concerning the World.

Gregory.


Of this vain World which men so much dote on, hear what Gregory in one of
his Homilies says; Ecce, Mundus qui diligitur fugit: i. Behold, the World, of
which they are so much besotted, passes away from us. The Saints (whose
memories are only remaining unto us) did scorn it when it was most
flourishing: they had long life, constant health, riches in plenty, fertility
in Issue, tranquillity in peace; yet when in it self it most flourished, in
their hearts it most withered. But now when the World begins to grow old and
barren, in our hearts it is still green and burgeoning; Death, mourning, and
desolation beguirts us on all sides; yet we, hood-winked by the blind will of
Concupiscence, are in love with the bitterness thereof; we follow it flying
us, we lean unto it shrinking from us, we catch hold upon it falling with us.

Chrysostom, Sup. Mat. 24. Hom. 4.
Chrysostom we may read thus: As when we see a very aged man, we presently
conjecture that his end is near, but yet we cannot presume of the day of his
death, when that shall be: so when we truly consider the World, and from how
long it has been, we know the end thereof cannot be far off; yet of the time
when this dissolution shall be, Hom. 5.
we are altogether ignorant. Again in another place: As all men assuredly
know that they shall die, by seeing others daily to depart the world; yet
think not of their own ends, nor how soon they shall follow them: so we
certainly know that the World shall one day be consumed; yet scarcely will we
give belief to our knowledge. Elsewhere he uses these words: Hom. 5. de Poen.
As it is a much easier thing, and sooner done by man, to pull down than to
build, to ruin than, to erect, (as in all structures it is commonly seen:) it
is not so with God; for he with more facility makes, than marreth; builds,
than casts down; sooner justifies than destroys. For he made the whole
frame of the World, with all the Creatures therein, in six days; and yet that
only city Jericho he was seven days in destroying.

Lactantius, De praem. Div. lib. 6. cap. 4.
You may find it thus in Lactantius: Who can be so foolish or idle, to make any
thing frivolous, and for no use? by which he can neither receive pleasure nor
profit? He that builds a house, does not build it only to be a house, and to
be called so; but he has a further purpose, to make it habitable, and for
some or other to dwell therein. The Ship-wright that makes a ship, does not
spend all that labor and art, that it may only be called a Ship; but his
intent is to make it fit for navigations. So he that models or fashions any Cup
or Vessel, does not do it only to the end that it shall retain the name of
such a thing; but to be employed in those necessary uses for which the like
things are framed. So of all other things, there is nothing made for show only,
but some service. Even so the World was created by the Almighty, not only to
be merely called so, and retain the name; neither did he frame his Creatures
for the World it self, as if it either needed the heat or light of the Sun,
the breath of the winds, the moisture of the clouds, or nourishment from those
things which it self yearly produces: but he made all those things for the
use of man; and that man in it should magnify and glorify his Name. I
conclude these with that remarkable saying of S. Chrysostom, upon Matthew: An
excellent saying of saint Chrysostom.
Habemus pro Mare, Mundum, etc. We have for the Sea, the World; for the Ship,
the Church; for our Mast, the Cross; for the Sails, Repentance; for our
Pilot, Christ; for the Wind, the Holy Ghost, etc.

Diverse of our ancient Poets made no question of the dissolution of the World,
but that as it had a beginning, so consequently it must have an end. Though
others were of a contrary opinion, as shall be made plain unto you in the
sequel.

Lucan lib 7. de Bell. Civil. uses these words; Communis mundi superest rogus
ossibus astra The Poets of the World, and the ruin thereof.

Mixturus. --


Id est, There is a common fire yet to come, which with our bones shall mix the
Stars.

As likewise Seneca in Hercule Octas: Mundo conueniet dies,
Australis Polus corruet, etc.
Upon the World a Day shall call,
When as the Australl Pole must fall;
And whatsoever by Lybia lies,
What Spartan Garamas espyes:
The shrinking Northern Pole shall flat,
And utterly subvert. Nay what
Is at that season found to be
Placed beneath either Axle-tree:
What the North wind has blown upon,
Shall all be in that ruin gone.
The Sun shall then cast off the day;
The Heaven it self shall quite decay,
And have a sure and certain end.
The gods shall not themselves defend,
But either Death, or Chaos, shall
To former Nothing turn them all.
No face shall be of Earth or Sky,
And Death must be the last shall dye.


Lib. 1.
Ovid agrees with Seneca in this: for you read him thus in his Metamorphosis:
Esse quoque in fatis reminiscitur adfore tempus, etc.
Amongst the Fates there is registered a Time,
When Sea and Earth, and all the Heavens sublime
Shall burn at once: and all this goodly Frame
Must be consumed, and cease to have a name.


Lib. 5. de Not. deor.
Lucretius you may likewise hear to the same purpose: Principio Maria and
Terras Coelumque tuere.
First look, o Memmius, on the Sea, the Land,
And Heaven, whose triple nature understand:
Three bodies, three forms, so unlike, yet such
As cannot for their shape be admired too much.
Yet this great Mole, and Machine of the world,
Shall in one day be into ruin hurled.


Seneca in his Tragedy of Octavia thus speaks: -- Nunc adest Mundo Dies, etc.
Now to the World a Day draws near,
And that the last that shall appear;
Which by Heavens ruin shall make immolation
Of this most wicked Generation;
That a new Stock may thence arise,
Of better Natures, much more wise;
With a condition like sincere,
As in the Worlds first Age they were.


Hither may that speech of Tindarus in Plautus, morally, and not altogether
improperly be applied: Hic ille est Dies cum nulla vitae salus
Sperabilis est mecum,
Neque exilium exitio est, etc.
This is the Day, in which no hope
Or health of life can be by me expected.
Exile can be to me no end;
All help, all comfort I have now rejected.
Unto my crafty fraudulencies,
Which were unlimited and kept no bound;
For all my cunning sycophancies,
No shelter, no evasion can be found:
Neither for my perfidiousnesse
Can intercession any way prevail;
For my apparent wickedness
There is no purchase of reprieue or bail.
For all my craft, fraud, and deceit,
There is no way by which I can euade:
It now too late is, favor to entreat:
All that I kept concealed, is open laid;
My juglings are made manifest,
Bootlesse it is my punishment to fly.
And since I have so far transgrest,
Doubtless that I, an evil death shall dye.
All these may serve to express the Worlds dissolution.

Now concerning the Creation, Lib. 2.
hear Claudian, in Laudem Stellicon; speaking of the great power and strength
of Clemency.

Principio magni custos Clementia mundi. etc.
She that Clemency is styled, Of the creation of the World.

Was first who on the great World smyl'd:
She is the Zone that Jove embraced;
And still she dwells about his wast.
The middle Firmament she swayes,
And both the heat and cold allayes:
And she is to be understood
The eldest of the Heavenly Brood.
For Clemency did first vnty
(As pitying the deformity
Of the rude Chaos) all that Heap,
And caused the Light from thence to leap,
Dispersing Darkness. She Is the prime,
That with clear looks made Age and Time.
Having heard the Poets, let us now hear what the Philosophers say. The
Philosophers concerning the world Lib. de Coelo.
Aristotle uses these words, Non plures Mundi sunt, etc. There are no more
Worlds, nor more can be; if this consist of the universal Matter, as of
necessity it must. And again, Lib. Phys. 4. All things that are under heaven
in time grow old, corruptible, and vile.

As concerning the multiplicitie of Worlds, The multiplicity of worlds.
diverse Philosophers held with Many; and of these, some to be greater, some
less: of which, certain of them to be enlightened with Sun, Moon, and the
rest of the Planets; others, to have no illumination from any Star or
Celestial body: and others again, to have the benefit and use of far more of
these heavenly Lights than we in this inferior world enjoy. Moreover, that some
of these worlds daily increase and grow greater; others of the contrary are
obnoxious to contraction and diminution: of which, sundry of them are quite
destitute of Plants, Creatures, and Inhabitants, etc. But which appears most
childish and ridiculous to all that are apprehensiue of any humane reason; they
maintain, That these worlds by mutual wearing and ruin (according to our
plain English Phrase) fall foul one upon another, and are interchangeably
shattered and broken life so many glasses or earthen vessels. Metrodorus was
of such madness, The opinion of Metrodor.
that he blushed not to attest, That it was as preposterous to all true
Judgments to think, that in so infinite a Vacuum there should be but one
world; as in a large and spacious field there to be but one spike or blade of
grass. But these delirements and imaginary Chimaera's have been opposed by
the better experienced Sophists; as Pythagoras Samius, Thales Milesius,
Anaxagoras, Anaximander, Melissus, Heraclitus, Zeno Citicus, Met. lib. 1.49.
etc. as is more amply expressed by Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers. Above
the rest, Plato with his Scholar Aristotle conclude upon one World, namely
this in which we now live and reside. To make this plain, let is go no farther
than the definition of the World, Metaph. 12.28.
according to Aristotle: The World (says he) is that in which all things are
contained, and without which there is nothing that is or can be found.
Aristotle's definition of the World.
So by consequence, if there were any thing without the world, then the world
could not contain all things, and therefore no world. But to omit as many
arguments (and those too, unanswerable) as would swell this single leaued Pagin
into a many-sheeted Volume; in these few words this question may be fully
determined. There is but one world, and that perfect; as there is but one most
perfect Creator, the absolute Prince and Governor thereof: without which world
there is neither Place, Vacuitie, nor Time. Place there is not, because there
can be no Place without a Body: if there be no Body? then no Motion: if no
Motion? all Time is excluded: Nam Tempus est mensura motus: i. For Time is the
measure of all motion. Let us leave then these wrangling and selfe-opinioned
Sophists to their errors and for our own satisfaction (as an vnfailing refuge)
sanctuary our selves in that which the Holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of
Moses; In principio creavit Deus coelum and terram: In the beginning God
created the heavens and the earth, Genesis 1.
etc.

Manifest it is then, that there is but one world; of which some have striued
to maintain the permanencie, as that it was without beginning, and shall
always continue without end. Amongst others, Astron. lib. 1.
we may read Manilius thus: Haec eterna manet divisque simillima forma,
Cui neque principium est vsquam, neque finis in ipso, etc.
It shall for ever last, in feature clad
Like to the gods, which no beginning had;
Neither shall it have end, but shall remain
Like in the whole, in all parts like again.


In another place he speaks thus: Ibid.
At manet incolumis Mundus, etc.
The World abides safe, and all things therein
Revolving, as it did but new begin:
Which length of Time shall not decrease; nor Age
Diminish ought: Motion shall not assuage
It Is speedy course, nor shall it ever slack
Or tire in the swift progress: but look back,
As it has been, so shall it ever be.
The same in all things we the World now see,
Our Fathers did behold it in times past,
So shall our Sons; for it shall always last.


But as the Poets differ in their censures; so against that of Manilius before
rehearsed, Lib. de Bell. Civ.
I will oppose that of Lucan: by which you shall easily perceive what
contrariety there was in their opinions; both of them being mere Ethnycke and
natural men.

-- sic cum compage soluta
Secula tot mundi suprema coegerit hora, etc.
So when the junctures of that goodly Frame
Shall be dissolved, and turn to whence they came;
And the last hour shall then contract in one
So many former Ages, past and gone,
To hide in the first Chaos: Then shall all
The Planets and the Stars aethereall
Be mixed among themselves; and from the top,
The fiery Lights into the Sea shall drop.
And when all things in this disorder stand,
The Land shall rob the Sea; the Sea, the Land;
Phoebe shall prove contrarious to her Brother,
And as he takes one course, she choose another.
Disdain she shall to keep her oblique way,
And claim from him the guidance of the Day.
And the discording Machine shall contend,
To bring the torn worlds covenants to end.
Philosophers concerning the beginning of the World.
Now give me leave a little to insist upon the opinion of some Philosophers,
concerning the beginning of the World. Thales Milesius (pronounced by the
Oracle to be the wisest man of that Age, Thal. Milesius.
that lived in Greece) held opinion, That Water was the first beginner and
breeder of things, The World to have beginning from Water.
and therefore the initiating of the whole Universe: (for so both Aristotle and
Plutarch report of him.) The weak foundation on which he built, was, because
he saw and found by experience, that there was a moisture in the seeds of all
things, as well the Elements as others; yea even the natural and vital heat
to have it is sustentation and nutriment from Humor; and that being exhausted,
both to be extinguished together, and so consequently the union and composition
of the body to be instantly dissolved. To this opinion the ancient Poets seemed
to adhere, when they made Oceanus and Thetis (the god and goddess of the Sea)
the two Parents or Father and Mother of Generation, and the infernal Styx, the
unalterable Oath by which the gods themselves contested.

Anaximenes:
Anaximenes, the auditor of Anaximander, reasoned, That all things were begot
or procreated from Air. From Air^^
Induced thereunto by these reasons; That Air was capable of all impression,
action, and quality, and naturally apt to be transchanged from one form into
another: a property which the rest of the Elements cannot challenge. Of the
same mind with his Master, was Diogines Apolloniates; only this added, That
of Air condensed or rarefied, many works may be generated.

Hipparchus and Heraclitus Ephesius gave the sole pre-eminence to Fire, as the
beginner of all things. And with them assented in opinion Archelaus
Atheniensis; From Fire.
reasoning thus, That Fire condenst or moistened is made Air; but a degree more
thick and gross, Water; and at length made more constrict, turns to Earth.
So bring them retrograde; Earth rarefied, conuerteth to Water: by Evaporation,
into Air; and being purified, transmigrateth into the nature of Fire. And by
reason of the perpetual shifting of this one element, the order of the birth
and breeding of all things to consist; and hence likewise new works to arise.

Hipparchus Metapontinus ascribed the like primacie or prioritie of place (with
Anaximenes) to Air, as of all the Elements the most noble, and fullest of
vivacitie and liuelyhood, and of the smallest and most subtle parts;
consisting of its own innate vigor; all things penetrating, all things
producing, all things augmenting, all things conseruing, and to their first
perfection all things reducing.

Anaxagoras Clazemonius conferred the first generation upon small and similarie
particles. Opinions contrary to the ^ormer.
Leucippus, Diodorus, Epicurus, and Democritus, into their Schools obtruded,
Plenum, and Vacuum, Full and Empty. Atoms.
To the Plenum, full, they gave the names of Atoms, which are no other than
those small Bodies perceived and seen only in the Sun, where it pierces
through a shadow; and these are neither to be disseuered, cut, or divided;
neither are they apt to color or change. Of these Atoms (though their natures
be all one) yet of them they make these distinctions: The first is taken from
the place; Of Atoms, some superior, others inferior, anterior, posterior. etc.
of which some are called superior, some inferior; some of the right hand, some
of the left. The next is taken from their order, of which some are anterior,
others posterior. The third and last from form; as some are round, some
square, others triangle, etc. Hence it is, that Cicero in his book D^ natura
deorum thus writes, That of Democritus his Atoms, some are light, some
sharp, some crooked, some cornered, others adunct, etc. And of these Atoms
diversely joined, Leucippus and Epicurus were of belief diverse worlds were
framed; no otherwise than of three and twenty letters the Language and
Scripture of all men and nations does consist.

Others (as Pythagoras) would deduce the first beginning from Number; Creation
from Number.
and attributes the greatest honor of all to Numerus De^arius, i. the number
of Ten; because it seems he had observed, that all Nations proceeding in their
account, there pause, break off, and begin anew. It would ask too long a
circumstance to dilate upon the Monady or Unity, the Dualitie, the Ternarie,
Quaternary, Quinary, Senary, Septenary, Octary, Monary; and to show either the
strength and virtue, or the deficiencie and weakness of them, according to the
first Deviser.

Anaximander conferred the original of things from Infinites: C^eation from
Infinites.
Xenophanes put them upon One, and that to be without motion. Parmenides upon
Two, namely Calor and Frigus, i. Heat and Cold; the Fire, which gives the
Motion; and the Earth, which supplieth it with Form. Empedocles and
Agrigentinus held the elements to be eternal; and that of their amity or
disunion, all things whatsoever had their beginning. Plato and Socrates sorted
the prime procreation from Three, God, Idaea, and Matter. Zeno admitted but
Two, God and the Elements. The Hebrews held, Matter, Form, and Spirit. Some
of the Greeks, and amongst them especially Hesiod, and of the Latins Ovid,
they stood with a Chaos. To reckon up all their opinions; and quarrelling
arguments to confirm them, would grow to as great an infinite as Democritus
his Atoms, which were an vpossible thing to number: for as in the maine they
differ one from another, so they are at great distance and contrariety among
themselves.

Lib. 1. Concerning seue^all opinions.
S. August^ contra Manich. uses these words, Compescat s^ humanatemeritas: id
quod non est, non quaerat: ^e illud quod est, non inveniat: i. Let man's
rashness bridle it self: That which is no^, let him by no means seek, lest
that which is, he can no way find. And in another place: Multo facilius
invenia^ syderum conditorem; Humilis piet^s, Ser. de Eclips. Sol^^.
quam siderum ordinem superba curiositas: i. The Maker of the Stars is more
easily found by humble piety, than the order of the Stars by proud curiosity.

Euclides.
Euclides the Philosopher being demanded by one, What kind of things the gods
were? and what manner of works they most delighted themselves in? made him
this answer, That he was not very familiar with their persons, nor much
acquainted with their purposes; only so much he understood from them, That
above all things they hated such polupragmaticall Inquisitors. Demonax when one
solicited him to know, Max^ ser. 21.
Whether the World were animated? And had Spirit and Life? And again, Whether
it were fashioned round, after the manner of a Sphere or Globe? cut him off with
this short answer: Why do thou, friend, thus trouble thy self to enquire so
much after the World, who oughtst rather to apply thy diligence to live
uprightly in the World?

Idem sermon. 22.
Seneca in his Epistles speaks to this purpose: Why do thou trouble thy
self about questions, which were better for thee to be ignorant of, than to be
resolved in? What tends it to Virtue, or good Life, to study perfectness in
the enarration of Syllables, to labor Words, travel in the strict laws of a
Verse, or to keep fabulous Histories in memory? Which of all these can take
away from thy fears, or bridle thy irregular desires? Music can show us
which are the lacrymable notes, but can it demonstrate unto us in our misery,
how not to utter a lamenting voice? Geometry teaches how to measure spacious
grounds and fields; when it should rather instruct us how to take measure of
our graves, and how much quantity of earth would serve for our bodies; how we
ought not to spend or wast any part of our Inheritance; and not how to measure
much, and purchase little. No Artificer but can tell, which things are
triangle, which round, which square, with the quantity and dimention thereof;
but can he search into the depth or secrets of the heart, or into the mind of
a man, to know how straight or capatious it is? Thou know a line if it be
right and direct: but what does that profit thee, if in what should guide the
perfect and upright line of thy life thou be ignorant? In another place he
says, Epist. 45.
Sophismata nec ignorantem nocent, nec scientem iuvant: i. These sophismes and
impertinent riddles neither hurt the Ignorant, nor benefit the Knowing, etc.

Many of these unnecessary curiosities being delivered to Spiridion and diverse
other Bishops, in the Nicene Council, to be resolved; and amongst others, That
it was absurd to conceive, that God in his infinite eternity, before four or
five thousand years past, should now at length make this world, and to endure
so short a season, what did he then before it? or what could he find himself
to do after it? To whom Spiridion, as the mouth of the rest, gave this answer;
That lest he should be said to do nothing in that Vacuum, he was then making
a place of eternal torments for all such ouer-curious Inquisitors, etc. And
therefore all Orthodoxall Doctors and Divines, with the whole Catholic Church,
against these former exploded opinions, Cap. 1.
conclude out of Genesis, That there is one world made by God in the beginning
of Time; and that all the generations of Mankind were propagated and proceeded
from the Protoplasti, Adam and Eve, our first great Grandfather and
Grandmother: and whosoever shall presume to search further, are not only guilty of
unprofitable curiosity, but worthily branded with irreligious impiety.

Moreover, Temporum quorundam cognitionem, Deus sibi ipsi reservavit: i. The
knowledge of some times and seasons God reserues to himself: for we know that
the time in which the Messiah was to come into the World, was concealed from
the Patriarchs and Prophets, though with many prayers and tears they besought
it. Besides, our Lord and Savior would not show his Disciples of the last day,
when he was to come to judge the world, though they vehemently entreated it in
these words; Tell us when these things shall be? and what sign of thy coming
and consummation of the world? Moreover, to show what a great secret it was; Of
that day (says he) and that hour no man knows, no not the Angels of heaven,
but the Father only. So likewise after he was risen from the Dead, being asked
by his Apostles, When the kingdom of Israel should be restored? he told them,
That the eternal Father had reserved the knowledge of that time unto himself:
Mat 24.
For (says he) It is not for you to know the times and the moments, Mark 14.
which the Father has put in his own power, etc. Pius pulsator plerumque
invenit, quod temerarius scrutator invenire non potest (says a learned
Father:) The godly knocker does oftentimes light upon that, which the curious
inquisitor by much search can never find.

Therefore as Socrates advised all men, most especially to beware of those
viands and delicacies which persuade and provoke them to eat when they have no
appetite or stomach; and to abstain from all such wines as tempt them to
drink when they are no whit athirst: so ought we in all our discourse labor to
avoid all such vain and unprofitable questions, which resolved help not, and
undecided hinder not. But as the AEgles when they rest, and the Lions when they
walk, the one pluckes in his tallons, the other his claws, to keep them
sharp, as loath to dull them til they meet with their prey; so it is not fit
that we should trouble our heads, or exercise our wits upon things impertinent,
but rather reserve them for things only behoofull and necessary.

Plautus in Sticho says, Curiosus nemo est qui non sit malevolus; There is
none that is curious, but is euilly disposed. And again, in Haecyra, Tua quid
nihil refert percontari desines^ i. That which concerns thee not, enquire not
after. I conclude with that of S. Bernard in one of his Sermons; Curiosus for as
engreditur, and exterius omnia considerat, qui sic interea despicit, preterita
non respicit, presentia non inspicit, futura non prospicit: The Curious man
walks abroad, and considers all things according to their outward appearance;
inward things he looks not after; to past things he looks not back,
present things he looks not into, future things he looks not toward.

Concerning the Elements (of which I had occasion to speak, in proving that
the World it self is of the World the best witness) Aristotle says, Lib. 2.
de par. cap. 2.
That the beginnings of the Elements are Heat, Cold, Moisture, and Drought:
likewise, That they have all a repugnancie among themselves, and therefore they
cannot be everlasting. Of them the Poet Manilius thus speaks; Ignis in
AEthereas volucer se sustulit Aras,
Summaque complexus stellantis culmina Coeli, etc.
The swift Fire lifts it self above the Air,
And mounts aloft, to embrace round the fair
And bright roofes of the starry heavens; it claims
Prime place, and guirts them with a wall of flames.
Air next, with subtle breath it self extends
Both through the middle part and spacious ends
Of th'empty world, with gentle breathings feeding
The Fire next to the Stars. The third succeeding,
Is that moist Element which fills the Ocean,
Ebbing and flowing with continual motion:
The moving waves a gentle steame do breed,
Which bee'ng exhaled from them, the Air does feed.
The Earth, remotest from the former height,
Sits lowest, as suppressed with it is own weight.


Procopius says, Procop of the Elements.
Drought or dryness is proper to the Earth, which challenges it to it self:
Cold likewise is inherent to the Earth, but not peculiarly, because it has
that quality common with the Water: and as Water challenges Coldness, so it
has humidity common with the Air: and as the Air claims humiditie, so by a
kind of fellowship, it draws a kind of heat from the Fire. And as the Fire
does vindicate heat as proper to it self, so it participates of dryness with
the Earth, which claims that quality to it self. Thus it is manifest, what
is proper to eueric Elcment by it self, and what is common among them, which
they borrow one from another, by which they are commixt and knit one to
another. It was necessary that they should be first distinct and separate,
that every of them might preserve his own nature: needful it was also that
they should be commixed, that thence might grow the composition of Bodies, so
that one might adhere to another according to their common quality. Therefore
God, the best Workman, and who was able to give to every thing the most proper
attribute, called Dry, the Earth, but not the Earth, Dry; as you may read in
Genesis. Of the Elements and likewise of their property, Metam. lib. 15.
Ovid thus speaks: Quae quanquam spacio distant, tamen omnia fiunt
Ex ipsis and in ipsa ^adunt, etc. --
These, though they distant be in space, yet all
Are of them made, and into them they fall:
The Earth resolved, does into moisture slide,
And Air: The Air when it is rarify'de,
Turns into Fire; yet does not so remain,
For the same order is dissolved again.
The spissed Fire turns into thickened Air;
The Air condenst, to Water makes repair:
The Water grost, by Natures secret gift,
Looks back, and does into The Earths substance shift.


You have heard of six Ages, The Ages.
according to that computation of Time from the Creation to the present. But
the Poets have included them within the number of four, Gold, Silver, Brass,
and Iron. AEtus comes of AEvitas, which is as much as AEteranitas, contracted
by the figure Syncope. Plautus in Trinummo says, Sapientis aetas condimentum
est, sapiens aetati cibus est, etc. Age is the sauce of a wise man, and a wise
man is the meat of Age; for not by Age, but by travel and industry, Wisdom
is obtained. The first Age, which was called AEtas Aurea, was free from lust
and excess, and full of piety and justice; in which all things needful for
the use of man were enjoyed in a community, and was said to be most eminent in
it is purity under the reign of Saturn. Of which Iuvenal, The Golden Age.
Sat. 6. thus speaks: Credo pudicitiam Saturno rege moratam,
In terris visamque diu, -- etc.
I do believe that Modesties chaste stain
Was frequent on the earth in Saturnes reign;
And then continued, when an homely cave
A narrow dwelling to the people gave,
A little hearth, small fire: when beasts and men
Slept in the shadow of one common den.


To the same purpose it is which Boethius alludeth, Met. 5. li. 2.

Foelix nimirum prior aetas,
Contenta fidelibus Arvis, etc.
Happ'ly was the first Age spent,
Which was with faithful fields content:
It was not lost in vain excess;
By eating little, drinking less,
The Herb gave wholesome seeds at first,
And the clear Fountain quenched their thirst.
Beneath the shadow of the Pine
Men slept: then in the Oceans brine
No Keele was washed, no unknown guest
On any foreign shores did rest:
No blood was shed through bitter hate,
No arms took up to pluck on Fate.
For what should hostile fury do,
Or stir up mad men's spirits unto?
When wounds were made, and blood was spilt,
Yet no reward proposed for guilt.
We read Tibullus thus, Eclog 3. lib. 1.

Quam been Saturno viuebant rege, priusquam
Tellus in Longas est patefacta vias, etc.
How well did men live under Saturnes reign,
When as the earth vnmeted did remain,
And no long journies known; the Sea not cut
By any crooked stearne, as yet vnput
To such new burdens: and the wandering wind
To play withal no limber sail could find.
Nor did the erring Mariner so far
Travel, or yet find out the constant star
By which to steer: nor (as they now do) rome
From remote places, to bring traffic home.
The servile yoke did not the Bull disturb;
The vnbackt Iennet knew no bit or curbe^
The dwelling house no door had, but stood open;
Nor was the stone prefixed that bounds the scope
Of common fields: the hollow Oak, the Hiue
That yielded honey; neither did they drive
Their Cattle home, but with their vdders swelled;
They flockt unto the milk pale vncompell'd:
No wrath, no war, no Armies to invade,
For no Smith then knew how to cast a Blade.
After the death of Saturn the Silver Age succeeded, The Silver Age.
less good than the first, and yet not altogether so bad as that which
followed. Of which Ovid, Metam. 1. makes this short expression: Postquam
Saturno tenebrosa in Tartara misso,
Sub Jove Mundus erat, -- etc.
Saturn into dark Tartarus being hurled.
Jove then assumed the Scepter of the world.
Then came the Silver Offspring, and that was
Courser than Gold, and yet more fine than Brass.


Of which Tibull, Eleg. 3. lib. 1. thus speaks: Nunc Jove sub Domino caedes
and vulnera, etc.
Now under Jove's dominion breaks forth strage,
And wounds, with th'hasard of the Oceans rage;
And that which men do covet most to fly,
They have found out, a thousand ways to die.


Then came the Brazen Age, The Brazen Age.
worse than the two former, yet not altogether so wicked as the last: of which
Ovid, Met. lib. 1. makes mention: Tertia post illas successit ahaenea proles
Saevior ingenijs, -- etc.
The third succeeds, the Brazen Issue styled,
More cruel in their natures, and more vild;
More apt to horrid Arms than those forepast,
And yet not all so wicked as the last.


The Iron Age.
The Iron Age is the last, of which the so^e Po^t in the self same book makes
this description; -- de Duro est vltim^ Ferro, etc.
The fourth of Iron; into whose veins are crept
All those grand mischiefs that before^ time slept.
Truth, Modesty, and Faith together fled,
As banished from the earth: into whose sted
Came Craft, Deceit, Fraud, Iniurre, and Force;
And that (than which there is nothing can be worse)
Base Avarice: for not the Earth could breed
Out of her plenteous crop, enough to feed
Insatiate Mankind, but that they must dare
To rip her reverend bowels up; nor spare
To tear her breast, and, in the Stigian shade
What she had long hid, boldly to invade
And dig up wealth, the root of all things bad:
By this means wounding Iron at first was had,
Made to destroy: they then discovered Gold,
More hurtful far, though of a purer mold.
Then War, strengthened by both, does armed stand,
Shaking a weapon in each bloody hand:
All live on spoil; the guest is not secure
In his Hosts house; nor is the Father fure,
Protected by the Son; even Brothers ^arre,
True love and friendship is amongst them rare:
The husband does insidiate the wife,
And she again seeks to supplant his life.
The rough brow'd Step-dame her young Step-son hugs,
Temp'ring for him, mean time, mortiferous drugs.
The Son after his Fathers years enquires,
And long before the Day, his death desires.
Goodness lies vanquished, Piety betrayed;
Virtue is trod on; and the heavenly Maid
i. Justice.
Astraea now a better place has found,
And left the Earth in blood and slaughter drowned.


Of the Age of Man.
So much for the Ages of the World. It will be no great deuiation, to speak a
word or two concerning the Age of Man. Servius Tullius King of the Romans
called those Pueri, i. Laddes or Youths, who were under seventeen years; and
from thence to forty six, Iuni^res, as those that were fit to be exercised in
war: and from the six and fortieth year they were called Seniores, and then
exempted from Arms.

Varro divided Man's Age into Infancy, Adolescencie, the strength of Youth, and
Old Age; and them retracted into their parts: the first, Viridis, i. Green:
the second, Adulta, i. Grown: the third, Praecepti, i. Stooping. It was also
divided into five Sections, and every one contained fifteen years: the first
were called Pueri, ex Puritate; Children, by reason of their purity and
innocence of life: the second to thirty, Adolescentes, from their growth and
increase: the third Section gave them the title of Iuviues, ab adiumenta,
because they were able then to assist in the wars, until the forty fifth
year. At threescore years they were styled Seniores, i. Elder men. And in the
fifth and last Section, all their life time after, they were called Senes.
Hippocrates (as Censorinus, Lib. de Die Natal. affirms) makes seven degrees
of the Age of man: the first ends in the seventh year; the second in the
fourteenth; the third in the one and twentieth; the fourth in the five and
thirtieth; the fifth in the two and fortieth; the sixth in sixty; and the
seventh to the end of his life, etc. Galen in his book De De^^nit. Medic. will
allow but four; Iuvenum, Vigentium, Mediorum, Senum. And these are not unaptly
compared with the seasons of the year: Met. lib. 1^.
as Ovid with great elegancie does thus set it down: Quod non in species
secedere quatuor Annum
Aspicis? AEtatis per agentem imit amina nostrae?
The Year thou see into four seasons cast^
Suting our Age, which is to come, or past.
Infancy and Childehood is represented in the Spring; Youth in Summer; the
middle or intermediate betwixt Strength and Weakness, to Autumn; and Old Age,
to cold and feeble Winter. Concerning which we thus read the before-named
Author: Nam tener and lacteus, Puerique similimus aev^, etc.
The new Spring comes, to which we may compare Ver, Pueritia.

Children that feed on milk, and tender are:
The young and springing grass the season tells,
For weak and without strength it grows and swells,
Sweetning the Farmers hopes, all things are green,
The fields look pleasant, flowers are each where seen,
And deck the Meads in a discolored suit;
The branches only bud, but bear no fruit.
Spring into Summer passes; now the year AEstas, Iuvent.

(More strong and potent) does like Youth appear:
No Season of more vigor and ability,
More ardent, or abounding with fertility.
Virilis AEtas A^tum^^s.
Youths feruor being somewhat now allay'de,
Ripe Autumn in his course begins to'inuade,
And mildely does 'twixt Youth and Age bear sway;
His head, part black, but somewhat mixed with gray.
Hi^^^ senectus
Then comes old Winter with a palsied pace,
His hair or white, or none, his head to grace.


You may also trace him thus, Met. lib. 2. Verque novum stabat cinctum florente
corona. etc.
Now Spring stood there, a fresh wreath girt his brain;
And Summer, naked, in a crown of grain:
Autumn, from treading grapes, in torn attire;
And rugged Winter, new come from the fire.


I will conclude this with Pliny, lib. 10. cap. 23. As no man (says he)
knows when the Storkes come, till they be come; and no man can tell when they
remove and depart, till they be utterly gone (because they come and go
privately in the dead of night, when no man can take notice or be aware of
either) so no man can perceive his age to come till it be upon him; nor his
youth going, till it be quite gone. And as he that has sung much is not to be
approved, but he that has sung skilfully: so he is not to be commended that
has lived long; but he only that lived well.

Annus, or the years.
I conclude the premises with Plato's Year: The year is called Annus, which
Festus would derive from the Greek word Enos. But others would have it a mere
Latin word; as Atteius Capito, (so Macrobius, lib. 1. Saturn. witnesses of
him) who thinks it so called of the circle or compass of Time; of An, which
is Circum, and Nonus, which signifies the Nones. The Nones.
Which word may, for the understanding of some, need a little explanation: They
are called Nones, of Novenus, (as Denus, quasi decimus) of the number nine.
Rutilius writes, That thereupon the Romans called their Faires Nondinae,
because that for eight days together the Husbandmen were employed in
ploughing, tilling, sowing, or reaping; but every ninth day was a day of
intermission, Of the number of Nine.
either for converse in the City, or hearing of their Laws read and expounded.
They are called the Nones of every month, because from that day, nine are
counted to the Ides, and they are the first day after the Calends, that is to
say, after the first day of the month. In March, May, June, and October, there
be six; but in all the other months but four.

Others would derive Annus, ab Annulo, An. ab Annulo.
a Ring; because like a Ring it runs round, and returns into it self. As
Virgil: Atque in se suaper vestigiavolvitur annus.


Annus Lunaris is a month, An. Lunaris
because the Moon spends little less than a month in the compassing of the
Zodiac. Annus Solaris contains 365 days and a quadrant, Solaris An.
in which time the Sun surueyes round the Zodiac. So that in every fourth
year a day is interlaced and wouen in; and this called Annus Magnus, or the
greater, compared with the Lunaris, or monthly year. Of which Virgil: Interea
magnum Sol circumvolvitur annum. Annus Magn.



But the Annus Magnus with which Plato seems to hold (according to Cicero)
consists of twelve thousand five hundred fifty four Solarie years. Annus
Climat.
The Scalary or Climatericall year consists of seven years nine times told,
or nine years seven times multiplied; the number in the whole, sixty three. Of
this year Aulus Gellius speaks after this manner: It is observed and
generally experimented, That in all old men the sixty third year of their
lives seldom or never passes them without danger, either by some
extraordinary disease of the body, sickness, or some calamity which for the
most part fore-runne the period of life. Alleging a part of that Epistle which
Augustus Caesar writ unto his Nephew Caius: the words be these; I hope that
gladly and with great good will thou have celebrated my last birth day, which
was in the sixty third year of mine age; Levia Lem^. cap. 32. lib de occuli.
naturae miracul.
for as thou see, we have escaped the common Clymactera, dangerous unto old
men.

But the great year of the world, of which Plato and diverse other Philosophers
so dreamed, some hold to be expleted in thirty six thousand Solarie years; some
in thirty nine thousand; and some otherwise; differing in number according to
their own fancies. But let us not study too much the length of time, and
multiplicitie of years, and in the interim forget the shortness and fewness
of our own days. This the Ethnycke Poet considered no doubt, when he left
these words to succession: Cuncta fluunt, omnisque vagus formatur imago, Ovid.
lib. Met.

Ipsaquoque assiduo labuntur, tempora motu, etc.
All things pass on; those creatures which are made,
Fail, and by Times assiduate motion lade;
Much like the running stream which cannot stay,
No more can the light hours that post away.
But as one billow hastening to the shore,
Impells another, and still that before
Is by the following driven: so we conclude
Of Time; It so flies, and is so pursu'de;
The hours are always new, and what has been,
Is never more to be perceived or seen.
That daily grows, which had before no ground;
And moments past once, never more are found.


The same Poet in another place: Lib. E^eg. 1.
Labitur occulte, fallitque volubilis aetas, etc.
The fleeting Age deceiues, and stealing glides;
And the swift year on loose-rein'd horses rides.


Says Martial: Quid non long a dies, quid non consumitis anni.


A further illustration concerning the Signs Celestial.
The better to illustrate what has before been spoken concerning the Signs
Celestial, and other Men and Creatures which are said to have place in the
Firmament; it shall not be amiss to insert some extractions from the Greek
Poet Aratus his Phainomenon, interpreted by that excellent Prince (adopted by
Augustus Caesar to the Roman Empire) Caesar Germanicus. The division of the
heaven called Culum.
The Heaven (says he) is distinguished into five Circles; of which the two
extreme are exceeding cold; the Austral, which is the lowest; and the Boreal,
the highest. The nearest unto them are the Paralels, as equally distant: the
one is the Tropicke Solstitial, the other Hibernal, or Hiemal, by which the
Sun passing and keeping the eighth part of Capricorn, make the Winter
Solstice; the other AEstiue, or the Summers, by which the Sun passes and
keeps the eighth part of Libra, and called the AEstiue Solstice. The middle
Circle is the AEquinoctial, which keeping the eighth part of Aries, makes the
Vernal or Springs AEquinoctial. And passing through the eighth part of Libra,
the AEquinoctial Autumnal.

As they are called Circles in the Heavens, so they are tituled Zones on the
earth: The cold Circles are held to be altogether inhabitable, By reason that
the Sun is furthest from them
by reason of their extreme frigiditie; but under the Torrid some are of
opinion, the AEthiopians live, inhabiting diverse Islands by the Red Sea, and
other tops and eminent places of the earth adjacent, and those are held to be
very spacious. Our AEstiue Solstice is very high and hard. Those which are
called Antichthones are divided from us by the AEquinoctial circle, seeming to
be low and depressed, as being the Antipodes to us: the Inhabitants of which
places are called Antichthones, Antistochae, and Antisceptae; and therefore
Antipodes, Antipodes.
by reason of the bending and obliquitie of the earth. The Zodiac is called
Signifer, because it bears the twelve Celestial Signs: it begins not at
the one end of the Circle, neither is it extended to the other; but from the
depth of the Tropicke Austral and Brumal, the same reaching by the
AEquinoctial, to the height of the Solstice, and (in it is longitude and
latitude) by the middle of the AEstiue. The oblique parts of the Circle
Zodiac 365. The twelve several Signs have thirty distinct parts; of which,
some are called Minora, Less; others Ampliora, Greater, and are vulgarly
styled Canophora: but the compensation is supposed to be contained in five
parts, to make the several portions of the Zodiac 365. The beginning of
those from Aries, some are tituled Masculine, others Foeminine. Of the Tropicke
Signs two are AEquinoctial, Aries, and Libra; two Solstitial, Capricornus and
Cancer, etc.

Of the Stars this is the order; Stellarum ordo.
Of both the Circles, the double Septentriones are turned toward the South, in
figure with their tails auerse, or back to back; betwixt which the Dragon
seems obliquely to slide: under one foot is the Serpentarie, and his feet
seem to touch the face of the Scorpion: at the side of whom backward, stands
the Custos: and beneath his feet the Virgin, holding a fiery branch in her
hand. With retrograde steps next lies the Lion: and in the middle AEstiue
Solstice, Cancer and Gemini. The knees of the Charioter touch the heads of the
Gemini; but his feet are joined to the horns of the Bull. Above, the The Goat
and the Kid.
Hoeduli occupy place in the Septentriones. Much on the right hand near unto
the Crown have abode the Serpent, in the hands of the Serpentarius, and he
that rests himself upon his Hercules.
knee, and with his left foot kicketh the crest of the Septentrionall Dragon,
Or Libra.
reaching one arm toward the Balance, the other to the Crown. Corona.
The hinder foot of Cepheus is fixed in the lesser Septentrione, with his right
hand catching hold of the Swanne: Cignus.
above whose wings, the Horse extenderh his hoof; and above the Horse,
Aquarius is listed: and near unto him Capricornus. Under the feet of Aquarius
lies the great Austriue Fish. Pistri^.
Before Cephaeus, Cassiopeia: and Perseus extends his foot unto the back of
the Charioter. Bo^tes.
Over the head of Perseus, Cassiopeia is seen to walk. Cignus.
Betwixt the Swanne, and him that rests upon his Hercules.
knee, the Harp is placed: in midst of whom, above from the East the
Dolphine is seen: under whose tail is discovered the AEgle, Aquila.
and the next unto her is the Serpentarie. Having spoke of the Boreal Circle,
we come now unto the Austral.

Under the sting of the Scorpion is the Altar placed; The Australl Circle.
and under his body the fore-parts of the Sagittarie are seen, Ara.
Sagittarius.
so far as he is Beast; his hinder foot is eminent in another part of the
Australl Circle. Near to the Centaures privy parts, the tail of Hydra and the
Crow. Chyron.
At the knees of the Virgin is placed the Vrne, upon the left hand of Orion,
Virgo.
which is also called Incola. Fluvius (which some style Padus, Lepus.
others Eridamus) lies under the feet of Orion. The Hare is next seen to
shine with great refulgence: and just at his heels Laelaps, or the Dog, with
extraordinary brightness: behind whose tail, Argoe or the Ship has
station. Orion stretches his hand toward the foot of the Bull, Taurus.
and with his feet comes very near to the Gemini. The back part of the Dog is
above the head of the Ram; Trinus.
and the Deltoton or Triangle not far from the feet of Andromeda. The Whale is
beneath Aries and Pisces; Aries.
and the connection of the two Fishes have one common star, Coetus.
etc.

Of the twelve Celestial Signs I have spoken sufficiently already: but of
the other Stars in which I have been very brief, it shall not be amiss to
give some of them a more large expression. Of Draco, or the Dragon, we read
Caesar Germanicus thus: Immanis Serpens sinuosa volumina torquet.
Hinc atque, hinc superatque illas, mirabile monstrum, etc.


Draco.
This Dragon, of immense magnitude, was appointed by Juno to be the sleeplesse
keeper of the Orchard wherein the Hesperian Apples grew: whom Hercules in his
adventure to fetch thence the golden Apples (as Pannaces Heracleus relates)
slew, and bore them thence. To the perpetual memory of which facinerous act,
Jupiter translated both him and the Dragon into the Stars, both, in the same
postures according to the success of the fight; the Dragon with his head cut
off; and he leaning upon one knee, his arms extended upwards, and his right
foot stretched toward the Monster. And therefore he is said to hold the skin
of the Nemaean Lion in his left hand, for a perpetual memory, that naked and
unarmed he slew him singly in the forest Inde Helicen sequitur senior
baculoque minatur,
Artophilax.
Se velle Artophilax, -- etc.


Bo^tes (called also Auriga and Artophilax) is said to be the Keeper or driuer
of the Chariot, which is the Septentriones. Some report him to be Archas the
son of Jupiter, from whom the Province of Arcadia had after it is
denomination. Him, Lycaon the son of Pelasgus (entertaining Jupiter at a
banquet) caused to be cut in pieces, and his limbs being cooked after sundry
fashions, to be served in to the table, of purpose to prove whether he were a
god or no. At which barbarous inhumanitie Jupiter justly incensed, burnt up his
palace with lightning from heaven, and after built there a city, which was
called Trapezos. Lycaon he transhaped into a Wolf, and caused the dismembered
limbs of Archas to be gathered together; which having reunited, he breathed
in them new life, and after committed him to a certain Goat-heard, to be
educated and brought up. Who after, meeting his mother in the Forest (not
knowing her) would have ravished; for which the inhabitants of the Lycaean
mount, would have slain him. But Jupiter to free them both, transferred them to
the Stars, where they are known by the name of the great and lesser Bear. Him
Homer calls Boots.

Clara Ariadneae propius stant signa Coronae Corona.

Hunc illi Bacchus thalami memor addit honorem.
It is said to be Ariadnes Crown, which Liber Pater or Bacchus caused to have
place amongst the stars; which he presented unto her at their espousals in the
Isle of Creet. But he who writes the Cretan history, says, That when Bacchus
came to King Minor to demand his daughter in marriage, he presented unto her
that Crown, made by Vulcan in Lemnos, the materials whereof were only gold
and precious fulgent gems, of such marvelous splendour, that it lighted and
guided Theseus through the intricate and dark Labyrinth. Which was not
translated into the Heavens til after their being in Naxos Isle. It is still
seen to shine with many splendant stars, under the tail of the Lion.

Tempora laeva premit parti subiecta Draconis,
Summa genu subversa tenet, qua se Lyra volvit. Lyra.

The Harp is said to have place amongst the Stars, for the honor of Mercury;
who made the first after the figure of a Tortois, with seven strings, according
to the number of the Pleiades, daughters to Atlas: Atlantiades.
which after he presented to Apollo. Some attribute the invention thereof to
Orpheus, by reason that he was son to Calliope one of the Muses; and composed
it of nine strings, suting with their number. The music thereof was said to
be of such sweetness, that it attracted the ears of beasts and birds, nay of
trees and stones. Moreover, it so prevailed over the Infernal Powers, that by
it he recovered his wife Euridice from hell. He adoring Apollo more than any
other of the gods, and neglecting Liber Pater, who honored him; the god being
grievously incenst against him, whilst he was one day sitting on the mountain
Pangoeus, waiting for the Sunrising, The death of Orpheus.
Bacchus stirred up the Bacchanalian women against him: who with barbarous
violence falling upon him, plucked him asunder limb from limb (for so
Eschilus writes:) the pieces of his body being after collected, were buried in
the Lesbian mountains; and his Harp after his death bestowed upon Musaeus: at
whose entreatie Jupiter placed it amongst the Stars.

O^r or Cignus.
Cygnus de thalamis candeus, qui lapsus adulter,
Furta Iovis falsa volucer sub imagine texit.
The Swanne was therefore said to have place in the Firmament, because Jupiter
transfiguring himself into that shape, flew into a part of the Atticke region,
and there comprest Nemesis, who was also called Laeda, (for so says Crates the
Tragic Poet.) She was delivered of an egg, which being hatched brought forth
Helena: but because Jupiter after the act was done, flew back again into
heaven in the same shape, he left the figure thereof amongst the Stars, etc.

Cepheus extremam tangit Cynosurida Caudam.
Cepheus, according to Euripides and others, was King of AEthiopia, who exposed
his daughter to be tied to a rock, Cepheus.
and to be devoured of an huge Sea Monster: whom Perseus the son of Jupiter
rescued. At whose request to Minerva she obtained, that his head might appear
in the Septentrional Circle; and from his breast to his feet, to be visible in
Arcturus the AEstiue Tropicke Circle.

Qua latus afflexum, si^^osi respicit Anguis,
Cassiopeia.
Cassiopeia virum residet, sublimis ad ipsum.
Sophocles relates, That Cassiopeia the wife to King Cepheus, and mother to
Andromeda, compared with the Nymphs Nereiedes the daughters to Nereus;
boasting, that she excelled them all in beauty. Coetus.
At which Neptune enraged, sent a mighty Whale, which did much damage to that
part of the Country which lay next to the sea side: neither would he be
appeased, till her daughter Andromeda was exposed to be made a prey for the sea
Monster.

Andromeda.
Nec procul Andromeda totam quam cernere nondum,
Obscura sub nocte licet, -- etc.
The figures and postures of the mother and daughter are much different; for
the mother is descried sitting in a chair, and bound unto it: but the daughter
standing upright, and chained unto a rock. Which Andromeda was said to be
beloved of Cupid: notwithstanding she was fettered betwixt two hills, Higinus.
and so left to be a prey to Neptunes Monster: but she was delivered thence by
Perseus, and from him took the denomination of Persea; and by the favor of
Minerva was received amongst the Stars. Who after she was freed by Perseus,
would neither stay with father or mother, but voluntarily associated him in all
his travels.

Sublimis fulget, pedibus properare videtur,
Et velle aligeris, Perseus.
purum AEthera, tangere palmis.
Perseus was the son of Jupiter and Danae: who descending in a golden shore,
as she spread her lap to receive it, he not slipping the opportunity, comprest
her, and begot Perseus. Her father Acrisius King of the Argiues, finding that
she was vitiated by Jupiter, he caused her to be put into a Mastlesse-Boat,
exposing her to the fury of the merciless Seas. But after arriving in Italy,
she was found by a Fisherman, and presented unto the King of that Country,
with her young son Perseus, of whom she was delivered at sea. The King
graciously entertaining her, after made her his Queen, and accepted of Perseus
as of his own natural son. Of whose Embassy to Poledectas King of the Island
Seriphus; the receiving of his wings from Mercury, and his sword Harpee from
Vulcan; his killing of three Gorgons the daughters of Phorcas, etc. were too
long hereto relate, being frequently to be found in sun dry known Authors.

Est etiam Aurigae facies, Aurig^.
sieve inclita forma,
Natus Erithinius, qui circa sub juga duxit
Quadrupedis. --
The Charioter is said to be the son of Vulcan and Minerva, who was the first
that yoked the untamed Steeds, and constrained them to draw in the Chariot;
taking his example from the wagon and horses of the Sun. He first devised the
Panathaemea, and gave order for the building of Towers and Temples, and for
that cause was listed among the Stars, where he bears upon his shoulders
Otherwise c^lled Amalthea.
Capra, the Goat, which nourished with her milk Jupiter in his infancy. In his
arms he caris the two Hedae.
Kids, the issue of the said Amalthaea, which are thought by the Astrologians
to portend rain and showers; for so Musaeus, de Capra, witnesses. Others take
him to be Myrtilus the son of Mercury, and Wagoner to Oenomaus the father of
Hippodamia.

Hic Ophiuchus erit, long caput ante nitendo,
Et vastos humeros, tum caetera membra sequuntur.
Serpentarius.
This is the Serpentarie, who stands above the Scorpion, holding in either
hand a Serpent. Some of our Astrologians take him to be AEsculapius the son
of Apollo, who was so expert in the art of Physic, that he is reported, By
the virtue of Herbs and Simples to have raised the dead to life: for which
Jupiter enraged, slew him with a thunderbolt; but at the earnest suit of his
father Apollo, he not only restored him to the Living, but after his natural
expiration, gave him that place amongst the rest of the Stars. He was therefore
called AEsculapius, because the inclination tending to death, Phor^^tus de not.
de or. spec.
is by physic repelled and kept back. And for that cause he is figured with
a Dragon or Serpent; who by casting their skins are thought to recover their
youth, as Physicians by their medicines curing diseases, restore their weak
Patients to their former vivacitie and strength. Moreover, the Dragon is a
Hierogliphycke of attention and hearing; which is likewise requisite in such as
profess that art. He is also said to have been instructed by Chiron the
Centaure, and to have received the name of Hepeones; not vainly conferred upon
him, In regard that powerful medicines are the qualifying and curing of such
violent diseases as trouble and molest the health of the body.

Vnguibus innocuis Phrigium rapuit Ganimedem.
Aquila and Sagitta.
Et Coelo appositus lustos quo Jupiter arsit,
In puero luit excidio quem Troia furorem.
The AEgle is said to be numbered amongst the Stars, because he stole from
Ida, Ganmied, and carried him up to heaven, where he remains Jupiters
Cup Bearer. He is called also the Ensign of Jove; for when the rest of the
gods divided the Birds amongst them, he fell to the Thunderers lot; either
because he soareth higher than any other Foul, and has a kind of dominion
over them; or else in regard that he only is of such sharp sight, that his
eyes are not dazzled with the bright splendant beams of the Sun: for so he
is placed, with his wings spread, and his head looking toward the East.
Aglaosthenes relates, That Jupiter transfiguring himself into an AEgle, flew
into the Isle Naxos, where he was nursed, and there possessed the Kingdom:
from whence he made an expedition against the Titanois. The sons of Tytan.
And sacrificing before the battle, an AEgle, as a good and prosperous omen,
appeared unto him and brought him thunderbolts, which he used in that conflict.
The Arrow which the AEgle holds in her claws, is said to be that which Apollo
slew the Cyclops with, who forged that thunderbolt with which Jupiter killed
AEsculapius, and for that cause was put amongst the rest of the Stars.

-- Hinc alius decliuis ducitur ordo,
Sentit and insanos, obscuris flatibus Austras.
The Dolphine, Delphinus.
(as Artemidorus reports) when Neptune was inamoured of Amphitrite, and
demanded her in marriage (who to preserve her virginity was fled to Atlas) was
by him sent amongst many others, to solicit her about his former suit: who
after much enquiry, found her where she had concealed her self in one of the
Atlantic Islands. Which making known to Neptune, he by his great importunity
at length persuaded her unto his own wishes. Which having obtained, he not
only for his faith and industry did confer great honor upon the Dolphine in
the sea, but caused him also to have a place in the firmament. He is called,
for his love to Music, the Musical Sign; and is beautified with nine bright
stars, according to the number of the Muses.

Andromedae vero radiat quae stella sub ipsa
Albo fulget AEquus, tres Hormo, sed latera AEquus Pegasus, or Equus demidius.

Distingunt spatijs. --
The Horse is called Equus dimidius, because his fore-parts are only seen,
and the rest concealed. Aratus says that he was made a Star, Because that in
the top of the Heliconian mountain, striking a rock with his right hoof, he
brought forth water, which after grew to a Well, dedicated to the Muses; and
the liquor thereof called Hypocrene. But Euripides would confer this honor
upon Menalippe the daughter of Chiron; who according to the Centaure her
fathers shape, was half Mare, half Maid. She being stuprated, and growing
great, as ready to be delivered, fled into the Mount Pelion, to secure her
self from the displeasure of her father: and being pitied by the gods, was
lifted up amongst the Signs, bearing an Equinall shape; but her hinder parts
for modesties sake are altogether obscured and concealed.

Est etiam propriore deum cognoscere signo
Deltoton, si quis donum hoc spectabile Nili Deltoton.

Divitibus veneratum vndis in sede notarit.
Above the head of the Ram, not far from the feet of Andromeda, bordereth that
Sign which the Greeks, for the resemblance that it has to the letter Delta,
call Deltoton: but the Latins in regard of the propernesse of the form, name
it Triangulum, a Triangle. Some say it is the figure of Egypt proportioned out
in Stars, in Trigono, Trigonum.
or three angles. The channel also of Nilus, as some say, disposes it self
after the same form. It was placed where it now shines, by Mercury, at the
command of Jupiter.

Pistrix, or the Whale.
Diverso posita and Boreae vicina legenti,
Auster Pistrix agit --
Under Aries and Pisces, and above the Flood Padus, or Eridanus, is Pistrix (or
the Whale) placed in the region of the starry Heaven. This is said to be the
Sea Monster sent to Cepheus by the envy of the Nereides, because Cassiopeia and
Andromeda preferred their own beauties before theirs; who was slain by
Perseus.

The Flood Eridanus, or Padus.
Planxere, ignotes Asiae Phaetondides vndis
Eridanus medius liquidis interjacet Astris.
The Flood, placed beneath the Whale in the region of the heaven (to which the
right foot of Orion is extended) of Aratus and Pherecides, is called Eridanus
Padus, and therefore there seated, because it directs his channel and course
toward the parts Meridionall. But Hesiod gives his reason and says, It was
so honored for Phaeton the son of Phoebus and Climene; who ascending the
Chariot of his father, and being lifted so exceeding high from the earth,
through fear fell from his seat (being also struck with a bolt by Jupiter)
into the flood Padus or Eridanus: and when by that means all things were set
on fire, and began to burn, all the springs and rivers of the earth were let
loose to extinguish the same. Which made such a deluge, that it ouerflowed the
whole face of the earth: by which means all mankind was said to perish, saving
Deucalion and Pyrrha. The sisters of Phaeton, after extreme weeping and
lamenting for their brother, were changed into Poplar trees, The Sisters of
Phaeton.
and their tears hardened into Amber. They were called Heliades; and their
names, Merope, Helie, AEgle, AEgiale, Petre, Phoebe, Cherie, Diosippe. Cignus
also K. of Liguria, a near kinsman of theirs, in his depth of lamentation for
Phaeton, was metamorphised into a Swan; from whom al Swans borrow their sad and
mournful notes. Some think this flood to be Nilus, which is also Gyon; and
therefore stellified, because it directs his course from the Meridian. It
consists of many stars, and lies just beneath the star called Canopus, or
Ptolomaea, and touches some part of the Argoe or Ship. It appears very low,
insomuch that it seems almost to touch the earth: Stella Terrestr.
for which cause it is styled Stella terrestris, etc.

Sic vtrumque oritur, sic occidit in freta sidus,
Lepus, sieve Dasippus.
Tu parvum Leporem perpende sub Orione.
Lepus, the Hare, has place beneath the feet of Orion and his Dog: for those
that feigned him to be an Huntsman, so fashioned it, that the Hare lies
beneath his feet. Some deny, that so great and noble a Hunter as Orion, should
spend his time in the chase of so fearful and wretched a beast as the Hare.
Callimachus in speaking of the praise of Diana, accuses him for taking too
much delight in killing Hares. Some affirm she was translated into the Heavens
by Mercury (as Aratus in his Phenom. Higinus.
) for her extraordinary velocitie and swiftness, or else for her
fruitfulness, bringing forth some young, and having others still immature in
her belly: for so Aristotle reports of her. It is said also, That in the
ancient times, in the Island called Hiera there were no Hares at all: The City
called after the Island.
but that a young man of that City got a young Liueret from a foreign country,
and brought it up being a female, till it was delivered of young ones. By whose
example others making him their president, fell into the like care of breeding
them: who in short time increased into a great multitude: but the city being
distressed by a narrow and straight siege, they were enforced to devour them
all, whom before they had so indulgently cherished. Yet was the figure of the
Hare after placed in the Firmament, Why the Hare was translated into a Sta^re.
to put men in mind, That no man ought to take too much pleasure in any thing,
least the loss of it after might breed their greater sorrow.

Tela caput magnisque humeris sic baltheus ardet. Orion.

Sic vagina ensis pernici sic pede fulget.
Orion, who is also called Incola, shines before the Bull, and deriueth his
name ab Vrina, or the inundation of waters. He rises in the Winter season,
disturbing both earth and sea with shoures and tempests. The Romans call him
Iugula, because he is armed with a sword, and shows bright and terrible in
the splendour of his stars: who if he appear, portendeth fair weather; What
Orion portendeth.
if he be obscured, storms and tempest. Hesiod makes him the son of
Neptune and Euriale; to whom his father gave that virtue, to walk as steadfastly
upon the sea, as the land. Who coming to Chios, comprest Merope the daughter
of Oenopion: for which injury, Oenopion surprised him and put out his eyes,
The history of Orion.
banishing him from his confines. He after coming to Lemnos, by Apollo was
restored to his sight: and returning to Chios, to avenge himself upon his
enemy the father of Merope (who by the people of his City was hid in the
earth;) him Orion not finding, traveled over into Creet; where hunting and
making havoc of the Game, was reprehended by Diana. To whom he made answer,
That ere he departed from that Island, he would not leave one beast living upon
the mountains. For which arrogant language, Tellus, or the Earth, being much
displeased, sent a Scorpion of an unmeasurable greatness, which stung him to
death. Jupiter for his virtue and valor translated him to the stars: and at
the entreaty of Diana did as much for the Scorpion, who had avenged her of her
enemy. Aristom. informs us, That one Ca^brisa a citisen of Thebes being
issulesse, desired the gods to foelicitate him with a son, and to that
purpose made unto them many Divine sacrifices. To whom Jupiter, Mercury, and
Neptune came and guested: for whose entertainment he slew an Ox, humbly
petitioning to them for a male issue: whom they commiserating, at the motion of
Mercury, the three gods pissed in the hide of the Ox, and commanded him to
bury it in the earth. Which after the space of forty weeks being opened, there
was found a male Infant, whom they called Vrion, ab Vrina. Others think him to
be Arion the Methimnaean, so excellent upon the Harp; who being affrighted by
Pirates, cast himself into the sea, and by the virtue of his Music was borne
safe to the shore, on the back of a Dolphin. But their opinions by the best
Authors are altogether exploded.

Canis Laelap^, or Procion.
Cum tetigit solis radios accenditur asta^.
Discernitque, ortu long fata vivida firmat:
At quibus artatae frondes an languida radix
Examinat nullo ga^det mai^sve minusve.
Agricola, and sidus primo speculatur ab orta.
The chief Star of Canis major, or Laelaps, is called Alhav^r; and that of
Canis minor, or Procion, Algomeisa: so says Higinus. But Aratus speaks only
of that which he calls Syrius Stella, Syrius stella.
the Syrian star, which is placed in the middle center of the Heavens; into
which when the Sun has access, the heat thereof is doubled: by which men's
bodies are afflicted with languishment and weakness. It is called Syrius, for
the brightness of the flame. The Latins call it Canicula, Canicula^
whence they term the Dog-dayes, Dies Caniculares: for so long as the Sun
has power in it, that time is thought to be pestiferous, and obnoxious to many
diseases and infirmities. Some think it to be the same Dog which with the
Dragon was given as a Keeper to Europa: Palephalus.
which was after bestowed upon Procris, and by her presented to her husband
Cephalus: who carried him to Thebes, to the hunting of that Fox which had done
so much hurt to the inhabitants thereof. A like fate belonging both to the Dog
and the Fox; Ovid. in Me^.
for neither of them could be slain. Therefore Jupiter turned the Fox into a
stone; and placed the Dog in the center of the Firmament. Amphianus a writer of
Tragedies relates, That the Dog was sent upon a message to Dolora; of whom, so
soon as he beheld her, he grew greatly enamoured, and still was more and more
ardently inflamed toward her: insomuch that he was enforced to invoke the gods
to qualify his extraordinary feruor. Who sent the North wind Boreas, by his
cold breath to give some mitigation to his scorching flames. Which he
accordingly did, and those gusts are called Etesiae; which are bleake
North-East winds, which blow only at one time of the year. Others will have
him to be Mera, the Dog belonging to Icarus and his daughter Erigone^ of whom I
have before sufficiently spoken.

Haec micat in Coelo lateri non amplior, actus
Qua surgit malus, qua debet reddere proram. Na^is Arg^, or the ship.

Intercepta perit, nullae sub imagine formae
Puppis demisso tantum stat lucida Coelo.
The chief star of note in the Ship is called Canopos; and it is seated in the
first oar, and it has place just by the tail of the greater Dog. Which it
obtained at the request of Minerva, who (as they say) was the first deviser
thereof, making the Sea navigable to man, which practice till then was unknown:
but in it is site it is only visible from the rudder or stearne, to the mast.
Some say that Danaus the son of Belus, These are the fancies of the Poets.
who by many wives had fifty daughters; and his brother AEgyptus as many
sons. Who had plotted to murder Danaus and all his foeminine issue, that he
might solely be possessed of his fathers Empire; and therefore demanded his
daughters, Aratus.
to make them wives unto his sons. But his malice and mischievous purpose being
discovered to his brother Danaus, he invoked Minerva to his aid, who built him
this Ship called Argo; Of Danaus, AEgiptus.
in which Danaus escaped out of Africa into Argos. AEgyptus sent his sons to
pursue their Uncle and his daughters: who arriving in Argos, began to make
war upon him. Whom seeing he was not able to withstand, he gave his
daughters unto them; but with this command, That the first night of their
marriage they should murder them in their beds. Which was accordingly done;
saving that the youngest, Hipermnestra, preserved the life of her husband Linus:
for which she had after a Temple reared to her perpetual honor. The other
Sisters are said to be tormented in Hell, by filling a bottomless tub with
leaking vessels.

But most are of opinion, That was the Argo, in which the greatest part of the
prime Princes of Greece (by the name of the Argonauts) accompanied Jason to
Colchos, So called by sailing or rouing in the Argo.
in the quest of the golden Fleece. Of which, Tiphis (the son of Phorbantes and
Hymane) was said to be the Pilot; who was of Boetia: and Argus, (the son of
Polibus and Argia, or as some will have it, the son of Danaus, half brother
to Perseus) the Ship-Carpenter or builder, who was by birth an Argiue. After
whose death, Anca^^ the son of Neptune governed the Deck or fore-Castle.
Lynceus the son of Aphareus (famous for his quickenesse of sight) was the
prime Navigator. The Boat-swaines were Zetes and Calais, sons to Boreas and
Orith^a, who were said to have feathers growing out of their heads and feet. In
the first rank of the rowers were seated (on the one bank) Peleus and
Telamon: on the other, Hercules and Hylas. He that gave the charge to the
Rowers and Steersman, was Orpheus the son of Oegrus: but Hercules forsaking
his seat, in his room came Peleus the son of AEacus, etc.

Ara, the Altar, which is also called Thuribulum, the Censer.
Oceanum occasu tangit, tanto and magis art,
Thuribulo motae vim Coelo suscipit, and iam
Praecipiti tactu, vastis dimittitur vndis.
Ara is called Sacrarius and Pharum^ a Sign always opposite to Navigations;
and it follows the tail of the Scorpion, and therefore is thought to be
honored with a site in the Firmament, because the gods thereon made a solemn
conjuration, when Jupiter made war against his father Saturn: and after left
remarkable unto men, because in their Agonalia, which were certain Feasts in
which were celebrated sundry sorts of actiuitie; and so called because they
were first practiced in the mountain Agon: and in their sports Qinquennalia,
so called because celebrated every fifth year, in which they used Crowns, as
witnesses of diverse covenants. Their Priests and Prophets also skilled in
Diuinations, gave their answers in their Symposia or banqueting houses, etc.

Centaurus.
Inde per Ingentes costas, per Crura, per Harmos.
Nascitur intacta soni pes, sub Virgin dextra,
Se^ praedam e silvis portat, seu dona propinqua, etc.
Centaurus is thought to be the son of Saturn and Phillira: for when Saturn
sought his son Jupiter in Thrace, he was said to have congresse with
Phillira daughter of Oceanus, being changed into an Equinall shape; and of her
begot Chiron the Centaure, the first deviser of Physic; and after translated
her into a Linden or Teile tree, called Tilia. Chiron is said to inhabit the
mountain Pelion, and to have been the iustest amongst men: by whom AEsculapius
in Physic, Achilles in Music, and Hercules in Astrology, were instructed.
And as Antisthines relates; When Hercules came to sojourne with him for a
season, one of his Arrows dipped in the venomous blood of Nessus, The death of
Chiron the Centaure.
dropping from his quiver, fell upon the foot of Chiron; of which he in few
hours expired; and by Jupiter was transferred into the stars, having his
station in the aspect of the Sacrary or Altar; unto which he appears as if
he were still sacrificing there to the gods. Of him, and the manner of his
death, you may be further satisfied, if you read Ovid, Lib. de Fast. etc.

Hic primos artus, Hydr^.
Crater premit vlterioris,
Vocabis rostro Corvi, super Hydraque lucet.
Upon the Hydra's tail sits the Crow: in the middle of her body is a bowl
or goblet standing. She has her mansion in the Australl parts, having her head
bowing toward Cancer, and her mid part bending down toward the Lion; her
tail extends to the Centaure, upon which the Crow has place, How the Crow
came to be stellifi'de^
and there seated because she was said to be under the protection of Apollo:
by whom she was sent to a Fountain, from thence to bring water for the gods to
drink; but by the way spying a tree full of green Figs which were not fully
ripe, and desirous to taste of them, neglected her errand, and sat in the tree
till they were more mature. After some days, when the feast of the gods was
past, and she had sated her self with the ripe fruit; she began to consider
with her self, how much she had offended those celestial Powers by her
neglect: and therefore to make them some part of satisfaction, she repaired to
the fountain to fill her bottle; but being frighted thence by the Hydra, who
came at that time to drink of the Well, she carried it back empty; telling
her Lord Apollo, That the water failed, for the Fountain was quite dried up.
But he knowing both her neglect, as also her lie to excuse it, forbad her
after, from drinking water, or any other liquor whatsoever. From which both she
and all the rest of her Feather are bound unto this day. Which Aristotle the
great Philosopher confirms in his book of the Nature of Beasts: as also
Isiodorus, in Naturalibus: for the bowl stands in the middle of the Serpent,
brimme full of water; at which the Crow sitting upon his tail, aims at with
her bill; but by reason of the distance, cannot come near it, and so suffers a
Tantalian thirst.

Sidera communem ostendunt in omnibus ignem. Pleiades^

Septem traduntur numero, sed carpiter vno.
Deficiente oculo, distinguere corpora parva, etc.
They are called Pleiades, of their plurality, by the Grecians. But the
Latins term them Virgiliae, The Vergiliae.
quod eorum ortu ver finem facit, vel quod vere, exoriunt^r; i. Either because
their rising is when the Spring goes out, or that they rise in the season of
the spring. Pherecides Athenaeus affirms them to be the seven daughters of
Lycurgus, borne in the Isle called Naxos; and because they there brought up
Liber Pater, and nourished him, were by Jupiter his father (who begat him of
Cadmeian Semele) transposed among the Celestial Signs. Their names are,
Electra, Alcinoe, Celeno, Asterope, Merope, Tagete, Maia. The seventh of which
(as Aratus reports) is difficultly seen or found: which some think,
concealeth her self for fear, not daring to look upon the dreadful figure
of Orion. Others imagine her to fly from the Sun, who is much inamoured of her
beauty; and that she is called Electra, and therefore she is said to wear her
hair dis-shiuelled, falling loose about her shoulders, being a sign of her
fear or sorrow: and of her hair called Coma, some give her the appellation of
Cometa, Cometa.
which implies a Comet. Others conceit her to be Merope, who being married,
was by her husband called Hippodamia. But the Greek Poet Musaeus informs us,
That these Pleiades were the seven daughters of Atlas; six of which s^ine
clearly, and are visible to all; but the seventh is obscured and darkened. The
six that present themselves to our view, were paramours to the gods: three of
which were comprest by Jupiter; who by Electra had Dardanus; by Maia,
Mercurius; by Taigete, Lacedemon. Two were vitiated by Neptune, who begat
Herc^s of Alcinoe; and Lycus of Celane. Mars corrupted Asterope, by whom he had
Oenomaus. Only Merope associated her self with Sisiphus a mortal man; of
which ashamed, some think that to be the reason why she obscureth her self and
will not be seen. Et sic de cateris.

Of the Sun.
The motion of the Sun.
THe Sun (says Aratus) is moved in it self, and is not whirled or turned
about with the world; but perfecteth his course in the obliquitie of the
Zodiac Circle; who in three hundred sixty five days, and the fourth part of
a day, having surueyed the Zodiac and every part thereof in thirty days ten
hours and an half, by the joining the half hours together, in every fourth
year makes up a complete day, which is called Bisextus. The Bisext or
Leape-yeare.
Which day is made up of quadrants; for when 12 halfs make six whole, that is a
Quadrant; this Quadrant four times told, makes 24 hours, which is a complete
day and night: and in the fourth a Bisext.

The Sun being fiery of it self (according to the Poets) by reason of his
extraordinary quick motion, grows more hot. Which fire, some Philosophers
say, is nourished and increased by Water, and by the virtue of the contrary
Element to receive both it is light and heat; by reason of which it often
appears to be moist and dewie: The Eclipse.
and then suffers an Eclipse (which the Latins call Defectio) as often as
the Moon enters into the same Line through which the Sun is hurried; to
which obiecting it self, the Sun is thereby obscured, and therefore it is
said to be deficient, when the orb of the Moon is opposed against it. To know
the signs of calmes or tempests, of fair weather or foul, the ancient
Astrologers have left these rules to be observed. Rules to know fair weather
or foul by the Sun.
Virgil says, Si Sol in ortu suo maculosus sit, atque sub nube latet, aut si
demidia pars eius apparuerit, imbres futures: i. If the Sun in it is rising
seem to be spotted or hid beneath a cloud, or if the one half thereof solely
appear, it portendeth rain. Varro tells us, That if rising it appear
hollow, so that he sends his beams from the Center or middle part thereof,
part to the North, part to the South, it portendeth weather moist and windy.
Besides, if it blush or look red in the set or fall, it presageth a fair day.
But if it look pale, a tempest. Nigidius writes, That if the Sun shine pale,
and fall into black clouds in his set, it signifies the wind is shifting
into the North quarter.

The Greeks call him Apollo: Apollo.
and make him the god of Divination or Prophecy, Why, a god.
either because all dark and obscure things he discovers by his light and
splendour; or else for that in his diurnall course and set, he ministers so
many occasions of sooth-saying or conjectures: Sol dicitur aut ex eo quod solus
sit, aut quod solus sit aut quod solito per dies surg at aut occidat: he is
called Sol, either because he is still alone, or that he usually day by day
rises and sets. He is figured without a beard, either for that in his rise
or fall he seems to be still as youthful as at the first; or else because he
never fails in his strength, speed, or power; as the Moon, who is sometimes
in the full, sometimes in the waine, always increasing or decreasing. They
also allot him a Chariot drawn with four horses, either because he finisheth
the course of the year within the four seasons, Spring, Summer, Autumn, and
Winter; The names of the Horses of the Sun.
or else by measuring the day, and distinguishing it into four parts:
agreeable to which, they to his horses have appropriated proper and fit names;
they are called Erythraeus, Actaeon, Lampros, and Philogaeus: Erithraeus in the
Greek tongue is Ruber, Red; because the Sun in his mornings vprise looks
red and blushing. Actaeon, i. Lucidus; by reason that after the third hour he
appears more clear and fulgent. Lampros, i. Lucens, vel Ardens, as shining in
his greatest heat and splendour just in the Meridian, climing against the
Articke Circle. Philogaeus, i. Terram amans, Loving the Earth; because toward
the ninth hour he declineth or seems to precipitate himself toward the
earth.

Of the Moon.
THe Moon is lower than the Sun or any other of the errant Planets, Luna.
and therefore in a much shorter time finisheth her course: for that journey
which the Sun is traveling three hundred sixty five days and six hours, the
Moon runs in seven and twenty days and eight hours; the Sun passing all
the Signs in thirty days ten hours and an half. Hence it comes, that so
much way as the Moon makes in the Zodiac, the Sun fulfilleth in the space
of thirty days. Some of the Philosophers are of opinion, The Philosophers
concerning the Moon.
That the Moon uses not her own proper light; and that one part of her Globe
or circumference retains some splendour; but that the other is altogether
obscure and dark, who by little and little turning her self, is expressed
unto us in diverse figures. Others on the contrary affirm, That she has her
own perfect globe, but receives her light from the Sun; and as far as she is
stricken by the Sun, so far she is inflamed; and by how much she is distant
from the Sun, by so much her splendour is increased: and then she is in her
defect or eclipse, when the shadow of the earth is interposed betwixt her and
the Sun. For in her increase all breeding things sprout and shoot out; but in
her decrease or waine are extenuated and weakened. Moreover, in her growing,
every Humor and Spirit is augmented; the Ocean rises and swells; and the
earth is as it were animated with a generatiue heat, etc.

The Poets call Luna, Diana, and term her to be the Sister of the Sun, The
Poets, of the Moon.
whose appellation is Apollo also. Of whom they affirm, and would maintain,
That as he has his spirit from the Sun; so he has his body from the
Moon, whom they hold to be a Virgin. They are both said to wear arrows,
because they shoot their beams and rays from the heavens, down upon the
earth; and therefore to bear torches; because the Moon lights, the Sun
both lights and scorcheth. She is said to ride or be drawn in a Chariot
with two horses, either for her velocitie and swiftness, or else by reason
that she is visible both by night and day: and therefore one of her horses is
said to be white, and the other black; shining to us more apparently in the
Winter and Summer seasons, than in the Spring and Autumn.

The senerall denominations of the Moon.
She is called Diana, of Diane, in regard she appears as well by day as by
night; and Luna, of Luceo, because she shines; as also Trivia, for that she
is pourtrayed in three several figures. Of whom Virgil says, Tria virginis
ora Dianae: for one and the same Planet is called Luna, Diana, and Proserpina;
That is, Celestial, Terrestrial, and Infernal: when she is sub lustris, or
bearing light, she is called Luna: when she is with her garments tuckt up, and
with bow and arrows, Diana, or the Latonian Virgin. They will also have the
Moon amongst the Inferi, to be Proserpina; either for that she shines by
night, or else for that she is of all the other Planets the nearest to the
earth. Some say that her Car is drawn by two Oxen or Heifers; because the
earth and stones, metals and creatures, are sensible of her Full, and Wain: for
even dung, which manureth the earth, if it be thrown upon the fields in her
increase, breeds and casts ou^ worms. She is said to frequent the groves
and forests (as Diana) by reason of the great delight she takes in hunting
and the chase.

She is also said to be enamoured of Endimion, Why she is said to love
Endimion.
for two causes; the one, In regard he was the first that was ever known to
observe and find out the course of the Moon. And therefore he is said to have
slept thirty years, because he spent so much time in the acquiring out so rare
a secret: For so Monasaeus, lib. de Europa, has delivered unto us. The second
cause is, That the humor of the nightly dew, which droppeth also from the
stars and planets, is sucked in and commixed with the juice and moisture of
Herbs and Plants, to their better animating and cherishing; as also being
profitable to the flocks of shepherds, in the number of whom Endimion was
ranked.

Ancient Writers have recorded, Conjectur^ of weather by the Moon.
That in her aspect may be found infallible rules concerning either serenitie
or tempest. Nigidius says, That if in the upper part of the Moons Circle
there be discovered any black spots or stains, it signifies much wet and
many showers to fall in the first part of that month. But if they be visible
in the midst of her orb, at such time as she is in her plenitude, they then
betoken fair and clear weather: but if she look yellow, or of the color of
gold, it prognosticateth wind; for the winds grow by the densitie or
grossness of the air, by which the Sun or Moon being shadowed, it begets
in either of them a redness. Moreover, if her horns show lowering or cloudy
toward the earth, it portendeth tempest. Aratus says also, If the Boreall
horn of the Moon seem any thing straightened, it promises a North wind: or
if the Australl horn be any thing erected, it signifies a South wind
forthwith to ensue. But the quartile of the Moon is the most certain Index of
wind and weather. According to that of Virgil: Sin ortu quarto namque is
^ertissimus author.


An Emblem.
IT presents an Idiot, who having a straw sticking out of either shoe, Of
Folly.
is persuaded by some waggish boys, That they are no other than gyues and
fetters: which he conceiving to be such, casts himself upon the ground in
great grief and vexation, as one, by reason of these bonds not able to remove
out of the place. The Motto, Stultitia, ligamur non compedibus: which seems
to be borrowed from Ecclesiastes 10.2. The heart of the Wiseman is in his right
hand; but the heart of the Fool is in his left hand. And also, When the Fool
goes by the way, his heart fails, and he tells to all that he is a Fool.
H^rac. lib. 1. Epistol. ad Mecen. writes thus: Virtus est vitium fugere, and
sapientia prima.
Stultitia carnisse. --
It is a virtue to fly vice; and we
Count him most wise, that is from folly free.


Diversities of Fools.
There are diverse sorts of folly. Saint Augustine says, There is none greater
in the world, than to esteem the World, which esteems no man; and to make so
little account of God, who so greatly regards all men. And Saint Gregory
tells us, That there can be no greater folly, than for a man by much travel to
increase riches, and by vain pleasure to lose his soul. It is folly to
attempt any wicked beginning, in hope of a good and prosperous ending. Or for a
man to shorten his life by riot and disorder, which by temperance and
abstinence might be better prolonged. Folly is a mere poverty of the mind.
The heart of a Fool (says Syrach) is in his mouth; but the mouth of a Wise
man is in his heart. Gregory says, Sicut nec auris escas; nec guttur verba
cognoscit; ita nec stultus sapientiam sapientis intelligit: The effects of
Folly.
i. As the ear relisheth not meat, nor the throat can distinguish the sound of
words; so neither can the Fool understand the wisdom of the Wi^e. And Seneca
the Philosopher tells us, Inter c^tera mala hoc quaque habet stultitia, quod
semper incipit vivere: i. Amongst many other evils, this also has Folly, That
it always begins to live. But says S. Augustine, Amongst all Fools, he is
the most Fool, that knows little, and would seem to understand much.

But I come now to the Emblema^ist, who thus declares himself: Spiritus
excelso se tollit in Astra volatu,
At Caro, compedibus deprimor, inquit, humi
Tu, quid vincla voces; age, nunc videamus inepta
Morio, vel stramen compedis instar habet.
Vile Lucrum, popularis Honos, fugitiva voluptas.
Haeccine, sint pedibus pondera iusta tuis?
Pro viles Animas; devotaque Crura Catenis
Vincimur, nervus nec tamen villus adest.


Thus paraphrased: The Soul, with swift wings to the Stars would fly:
The Flesh says, Fettered on the ground I lie.
What call'st thou bands; look on that Fool, he will say,
The straw that is in my shoe hinders my way:
Base Gain, Vulgar Applause, each fading Sweet,
Are those the Shackles that should give thy feet?
O wretched Souls; o Legs, to Fetters dear;
We think our selves bound, when no bonds are near.


The moral Allusion gathered from hence bears this Motto; O demens; Excuse
for sins.
ita servus homo est? Grounded from that of Seneca; Epistol. 51. Non ego
ambitiosus sum; sed nemo aliter Romae potest vinere, non ego sumptuosus, sed
vrbs ipsa magnas impensas exigit, etc. I am not ambitious; but no man otherwise
can live in Rome. I am not prodigal; but without great expenses, in the city
there is no living. It is not my fault, that I am angry or luxurious, for I
have not yet settled the course of my life: These things are to be attributed
unto my Youth, not me. But why do we so deceive our selves? Likewise the same
Philosopher, Epist. 58. in the conclusion thereof; Inter causas malorum
nostrorum, est quod vivimus ad exempla, nec ratione componimur, sed
consuetudine abducimur, etc. Amongst the causes of those evils which happen
unto us, one is, That we live by Example, not governed by Reason, but carried
away by Custom. That which we see few do, we will not imitate; but that
which many practice: as if that were most honest, which is most frequent.
According with that of the Poet Iuvenal, Satyr. 14.

-- Dociles imitandis
Turpibus and pravis omnes sumus. --
But to leave further enforcing the Argument, and come to the Author, whom we
read thus: Multa quidem totam putrantur inepta per vrbum,
Customs not commendable, are not to be kept.
Cumque petis causam, Mos jubet ista ferunt
Anne igitur stolidi nos string at opinio vulgi?
Regulanum vita factio plebis erit?
Stamine sic fragili vel stramine Morio vinctus
Vah, sibi compedibus crura sonare putat.
Serviles, vilesque sumus pro vincomur immo,
Vincimur miseri, causaque nulla subest.


Thus paraphrased: Follies, through all the City frequent be:
If ask the cause? Custom, it is laid on thee.
Shall the vain humors of the vulgar Sect
Prescribe us rules our lives how to direct?
The Idiot, with a straw or weak thread bound,
Thinks, weighty fetters at his heels to sound.
Servile we are, (so made by our own Laws)
To think our selves gyv'd, when indeed's no cause.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
TRue God, true Life, From, By, In whom all things
That truly live, have Life, (from Thee it springs:)
God, Good, and Fair, From, By, In whom, what breeds
Goodness, or Beauty; all from Thee proceeds.
From whom to Turn, is to fall Miserably:
In whom to Trust, is to stand Constantly:
By whom to Hold, is to rise Instantly.
Whose Faith, unto good Actions us accites;
Whose Hope, to Prayer, and Thanksgiving inuites:
Whose Charity, Us unto Him unites.
Who to all wretched sinners has thus spoken:
Ask? have, Seek? find: but Knock, and I will open.
Whom none can Lose, that to the Right does lean:
None Seek, but Called; none Find, but he that is Clean.
To Know whom, is to Live: Serve whom, to Reign:
Praise whom, the Souls eternal Bliss to gain:
Thou art the God all potent, Keeper alone,
Of all that hope in Thee; without whom none
Can safety find, or be from danger free.
"O! Thou art God, and there is none save Thee,
In Heaven above, or in the Earth below.
Inscrutable things, and wonders great, we know,
Thou work'st, of which no number can be made.
Praise, Honor, Glory, (More than can be said,)
Belong to thee. Thou in thy Counsels dark,
First made the World, and after Moses Arc,
To pattern it: that man in It might see
The former glorious Structure framed by Thee.
The Sun, the Moon, the Stars, the Planets seven,
Pleiades, Arcturus, all the Host of Heaven,
Thy mighty hand created: Times and Seasons
Thou have for us appointed; of which, Reasons
Cannot by man be given: (who has presumed
Of Worlds before, and after this consumed,
More to succeed.) Thy Wisdom all things knowing,
Finds these to be but fancies, merely growing
From Curiosity; and can affourd
No shape of truth from thy most sacred Word:
From which, let no vain boaster be so mad,
As the least jot, to take, or ought to add.
Make it to us the only Rule and Square
By which to guide our actions, and prepare
Our meditations solely to incline;
But from that Center to derive no Line.
So shall those Souls thou have so dearly bought,
Be perfect, and we praise thee as we ought.
As far as The East is distant from the West,
Remove our sins from us: In every breast
Plant (in their stead) all Goodness. God Immense,
(Whose smallest Attr'ibute, passes humane sense;
From whom, In whom, By whom, All things subsist,
Visible, and unseen: who as thou list,
Thy Work About do compass; Within, fill;
Cover Above; Below, supportest still.)
Keep us, the work of Thine own hands, and free
(Whilst we put Hope, and Confidence in Thee.)
Us from all evil, guard us we Thee pray,
Here, Every where, at this Time, and for Aye,
Behind, Before, Within doors, and Without,
Above, Below, and guirt us, Round about.
So we with lips and hearts vnfeign'd, (o King)
To Thee (for all thy benefits) will sing
This Hymn. O Holy, Holy, Holy; Thee
We do Inuoke, o Bessed Trinity,
To enter Us thy Temple; mak't a Place
Worthy thy Iuning there, by Divine Grace.
This, By the Father, Of the Son we crave:
This, By the Son, good Father, let us have.
O Holy Spirit, that this may be done,
We Entreat Thee, By the Father, and the Son.
Quid noscis, si teipsum nescis?
Bucer in Psalm.
The Dominations
E^^ (...): Ioannis (...) Gener:



THE ARGUMENT of the fourth Tractate.
WHat Ternions and Classes be
In the Celestial Hierarchee.
In what degrees they are instated;
How amongst themselves concatinated.
Angels and Demons made apparent,
By Ethnicks, and the Scriptures warrant.
Of Visions and strange Dreams, that prove
Spirits each where, at all times mo^e:
Against their infidelity
That will allow none such to be.
Discourse of Favor, Love, and Hate;
Of Poetry, of Deaths estate.
The Essence of Spirits; how far they know:
Their power in Heaven and Earth below.
The second Argument.
THere is no Power, (...) Domination,
But from the Lord of our Salvation.
The Dominations.
A Little further let my Muse aspire,
To take mine eyes from Earth, to look up higher,
Unto the glorious Hierarchy above;
The blessed degrees in which the Angels move.
In this, the best Theologists assent,
That they are Substances Intelligent,
Immortal, Incorporeall, Moving still;
Assisting Man, obseruant to Gods will.
Angeli in quot Choros diuiduntur.
In three most blessed Hierarchies they are guided,
And each into three Companies divided:
The first Chorus.
The first is that in which the Seraphims be,
Cherubims, Thrones; distinct in their degree.
The Seraphim and his office.
The Seraphim does in the word imply,
A Fervent Love and Zeal to the Most-High.
And these are they, incessantly each hour
In contemplation are of Gods great Power.
The Cherubim.
The Cherubim denotes to us the Fullness
Of absolute Knowledge, free from Humane dullness;
Or else Wisdoms infusion. These desire
Nothing, but Gods great Goodness to admire.
The Thrones.
The name of Thrones, his glorious Seat displaies;
His Equity and Justice these still praise.
The second Ternion, as the School relates,
Are Dominations, Virtues, Potestates.
Dominions.
Dominions, the Angels Offices dispose;
Virtues.
The Virtues (in the second place) are those
That execute his high and holy Will:
Potestates.
The? Potestates, they are assistant still,
The malice of the Devil to withstand:
For God has given it to their powerful hand.
In the third order Principates are placed;
Next them, Archangels; Angels are the last.
Principates.
The Principates, of Princes take the charge,
Their power on earth to curb, or to enlarge;
Archangels.
And these work Miracles. The Archangels are
Ambassadors, great matters to declare.
Angels.
The Angels Commission has not that extent,
They only have us Men in government.
"God's in the first of these, a Prince of Might:
"He in the second does reveal, as Light:
"Is in the last, his Graces still inspiring.
To know what is to their Offices requiring;
The Offices of the three Ternions.
The foremost Ternion has a reference
To contemplate Gods Divine Providence:
Prescribing what by others should be don.
The office of the second Ternion
Does his concurring Influence disperse
Unto the guidance of the Universe;
And sometimes has a working. Now we know,
The third descends to'haue care of things below;
Assisting good men, and withstanding those
That shall the rules of Divine Laws oppose.
These several Companies before related, Quomod. Angel. Chori sunt Concatinati.

May with good sense be thus concatinated:
First, because Love, of all things that have being,
With Divine Nature is the best agreeing,
As having influence and birth from Him;
Therefore the first place has the Seraphim.
Because from Love, all Knowledge does arise,
(For who that loves not God, can be held wise?)
And therefore in it is proper Mansion sits.
The second place the Cherubim best sits:
Because from Love and Wisdom nothing must
Or can proceed, but what is Good, and Just.
Therefore the Thrones have the third place assigned.
So that to Love, the Seraphim's inclined,
Even love unto the Great and Holy-One:
Cherubim, to Wisdom: Judgment, to the Throne.
Now because Empire (for so often it falls)
Must needs submit to Judgment when it calls;
And that to Empire there of force must be
A Virtue to maintain that Empiree;
And that this virtue cannot exsist long
Without a Power that is sufficient strong,
Able their molestation to redouble,
That shall this Empire, or this Virtue trouble:
"The second Ternion in these heavenly Bowers,
"Are the Dominions, Virtues, and the Powers.
Further, since Power or Might nothing preuailes,
Whereas a Light illuminating fails;
And this Instruction but two ways can grow,
By Word or Action: therefore they bestow
The next place on the Principates, as those
Who the most eminent actions still dispose.
Then to the Archangels, who from the blessed Trinity,
The chiefest Principles of our Divinity
Unto our dear salvation necessary,
'Twixt heaven and earth immediately carry.
To the Angels, last; whose industry extends
To Creatures, Men; and so their Power ends
In things inferior: this is the Economy
Of the most blessed and sacred Hierarchy.
Yet notwithstanding some there are, Of such as hold there are no Angels or
Spirits.
and those
Pretending no small judgment, that oppose
Not only this fair Order and Degree,
But hold, No Spirits at all, or Angels be.
The Sadduces thus argue; If such were?
We doubtless should of their Creation hear,
From Moses, who his first Book does begin
Both with the World, and all things made therein;
But makes of them no mention. And again,
If they be named in Text? it is to restrain
Man within moderate bounds, and keep in awe
The Irregular, that would transgress the Law:
Else, to our dull capacities convey
(By naming such) things, that our weakness may
The better understand. Therefore they blame
Plato, who Spirits does so often name:
And Socrates, with all the Stoicke Crew,
Who to fool men, and make them think they knew
Things hid from others; in ambitious pride
Devised such ^oyes, never exemplify'de.
The opinion of the Peripateticks.
Besides, if there be Spirits? it implies,
They must be either Friends or Enemies.
If Friends? they would continue us in health,
Bestow upon us Wisdom, Empire, Wealth:
But these, we see, are otherwise obtained;
Knowledge and Arts by Industry are gained;
Empire, by Virtue; Riches purchac'd are
By Labor; Health, by keeping temperate F^^e.
If Enemies? they hourly would extend
Their Powers malevolent, Mankind to'offend;
Especially those that themselves assure
There are none such; and that is the Epicure
And Sadduce; yet these they hate in vain:
None are from Rocks precipitate, few slain;
But they with others in like safety stand,
As well secured by water, as by land.
But in opinion contrary to these,
Plato, Plotinus, Proclus, Socrates,
Iamblicus, Porphirius, Biton, were;
The first of whom think you thus speaking hear:
Natura Intelligilis.
The Nature that is Intelligible, grows
To nine distinct degrees; which he thus shows:
The first is God; Idea's have next place;
Souls of Celestial Bodies have the grace
To be third named, ( Intelligences they
Are styled;) Archangels in the fourth bear sway;
The fifth, the Angels; the sixth, Demons claim;
Heroes the seventh; the Principates have name
In the eighth form; to Princes does belong
The ninth and last^ Men's Souls are not among
This Catalogue; for these, as they incline
To Virtue or to Vice, he does confine
Either unto those Angels that be good,
Or the bad Demons, (so he is understood;)
Being accordingly in that regard
Subject to sense of torment, or reward.
I'insist on these too long, and now proceed
To proofs more pregnant, such as we shall need.
As God's eternal, Their opinions confuted.
void of all dimension,
Not subject unto humane apprehension;
And as of all things the Universal Cause,
Them governing: not governed by the Laws
Of ought which is above him. And we find,
Men, Beasts, and Plants, each Creature in his kind
Is governed; but it self does bear no sway.
Reason to Truth thus points us out the way,
That in so distant and remote a state,
Needs must be Creatures intermediate. And these Creatures, the Angels.

And as we see in Nature, bodies be
(As Metals, Stones, and of like quality)
Which have no life; others again there are,
As Men and Brutes, that have in either share.
So betwixt these must be by consequence;
Unbodied things that have both life and sense,
And these the Spirits, Dreams will teach us plain, Angels and Spirits proved
from dreams.

By their events, that such about us rain,
To warn us of the future. Thus we read;
Simonides finding a body dead, The Dream of Simonides.

Gave it due rights of burial; with intent,
Next day to take leave of the Continent,
And to be shipped to sea. But the same night,
This body, without terror or affright,
Appeared to him, and warned him to refrain
His purposed voyage; for if he the Maine
Proved the next day, in that Bark he did hire,
He should by Shipwreck perish and expire.
Forewarned, he left his passage; and 'twas found,
The Ship was that day sunk, the people drowned.
Now whence can any guess this Vision came,
Vnlesse't were from a Spirit? for what name
Sylla a noble man in Rome.
Can they else give it? Sylla in a dream
Was told, his death was near: in fear extreme
He wakes, he rises, calls his friends, his state
In order sets; yet all this while no Fate
Did seem to threat him: neither sense of pain
Had he that time either in breast or brain.
Which his Friends seeing, did his dream deride:
Yet he that day was apoplext, and died.
Sabellicus.
Brutus and Cassius in a battle set,
With great Augustus at Philippi met:
The night before the conflict, Caesar, cras'd,
Kept both his tent and bed; which much amas'd
The general Host. Marcus A^torius, then
His chief Physician, (of all other men
Most chary of his person) in his sleep
Was by Minerva warned, The Prince should keep
His bed no longer, but in any case
Be in the battles front, the Foe t'outface:
For of this (done or not done) was ensuing
His future safety, or his present ruin.
Augustus was persuaded, left his tent,
And mounted on his steed. Observe the event:
The toil and labor that he took that day,
Did not alone his Fever drive away,
Restoring him to health; but as it hap'd,
Was cause that he a greater danger escaped.
For Brutus soldiers thinking him still weak,
Did with maine force into the Battle break;
Seizing his Tent, his Bed away they bear,
Presuming still they had Augustus there.
Calphurnia the wife of Julius Caesar.
It Is noted, how Calphurnia did complain
The very night before her Lord was slain,
Beseeching him, with sighs and many a tear,
That he the next days Senate would forbear;
Because of her sad dream, which told his fate.
But he in his ambition obstinate,
Holding such vain predictions of no force,
With poniards stabbed, was made a liuelesse Corse.
Caesar's dream.
Nay he himself not many days before,
Dreamed, He was snatched away from earth, and bore
Above the Clouds; where, with Majesticke look,
To welcome him, Jove by the hand him took.
Amilcars dream.
Amilcar, who the Carthaginians led;
Besieging Syracusa, in his bed
Him thought, That in his depth of sleep he saw
A soldier armed, inuiting him to draw
His Army nearer; for (his fame to crown)
He the next night should sup within the Town.
Encouraged thus, he early rose next day,
His Carthaginian Ensigns to display;
And gave a brave assault: and yet he found
But a false Omen, being took and bound,
Was to the City led, Fate to fulfill,
Where he both supped and lodged against his will.
Wise Socrates, the night which did precode Pa^sanias, of Socrates.

The day that Plato came to hear him read,
Dreamed, That he saw into his bosom fly
A milke-white Swan, that sung sweet melody.
This at the instant though he did neglect,
Yet on the morrow, pleased with his aspect,
He took him in his arms, and with extreme
Rapture of joy, he called to mind his dream.
And though the child was then of tender age,
The Event did aptly fi^ with his presage.
Nor do I these from profane Authors cull,
As if the sacred Scriptures were not full Examples from the Old Testament.

Of like examples; Stories manifold
Are in the Testaments both New and Old.
Joseph, from his own Visions did divine;
And so from Pharaoh's, of the Ears and Kine.
The Baker and the Butler dreamd; it fell
To both of them as Joseph did foretell.
Nabuchadnezzars Image and his Tree,
Were of such things predictions, as should be.
God called to Samuel in his sleep, and told
What should betide to Ely, being old.
Like Visions too have been conferred upon
Good David, and his son King Solomon.
And in the Gospel, Joseph in his rest, Examples from the New Testament

Was bid to take to wife the euer-blest
and holy Virgin. After, To forsake
That Country; and his Spouse and Infant take,
And with them into Egypt make all speed,
Till the Kings death, which shortly did succeed.
We likewise read, The Wise men of the East
Were in a dream forewarned, to see that If the later Herod were called a Fox;
the former who slew the young Infants may carry a worse title.
Beast
Herod no more; nor turn the way they came.
How many of this nature might I name?
As that of Shimeon, and of Pilats wife:
Examples in the holy Text are ri^e,
And each where frequent. Then there is no doubt
Angels.
But there are such to lead us in and out.
Angels visible.
In visible form they likewise have appeared,
Been seen to walk, to eat, to drink and heard
To speak more often. Two Abraham did receive
Into his Tent; and having (by their leave)
First washed their feet, they drank with him, and eat;
At least unto his seeming, tasted meat.
An Angel to young T^by was a friend,
And trauel'd with him to his journies end.
An Angel 'twas, of the Celestial Crew,
That in one night all AEgypt^ First borne slew.
When Daniel was with hunger almost dead,
Him in the Lions den an Angel fed.
An Angel came to Lot. An Angel 'twas
Met Balaam, and put speech into his Ass.
Like stories from the Gospel we may gleane,
Both of good Angels, and of Spirits unclean.
The Angel Gabriel in full form and fashion
Brought to the Virgin her Annuntiation.
He that before our blessed Savior stood,
To bring him comfort when his sweat was blood.
He that from prison did Saint Peter free,
And made that night a Gaole-deliuerie:
He that took Philip up, and to the place
Brought him where then C^ndaces Eunuchwas;
Those that unto the women did appear,
(When Christ was rose from death) in Vesture clear;
Evil Spirits.
All these were blessed Angels. Of the Bad
We likewise many presidents have had:
As those with which men's bodies were possessed,
Some dumb, and others speaking; who confessed
Our Savior to be God. Some deaf; and when
One did torment the wretched Gadaren,
With many other of that hellish Rout,
Whom Christ himself extermin'd and cast out.
Digression:
But now, with leave, a little to digress,
To find some Learned, (or esteemed no less)
What they of Spirits thought. It does exist
Upon Record, The Jewish Cabalist
The opinion of Rhabbi Achiba concerning Spirits.
Rabbi Achiba was of constant mind,
(And wrote) We Spirits should in all things find;
In Earth, in every River, Brook, and Fountain;
In Flood, in Well, in Valley, Hill, and Mountain;
In Plant, Herb, Grass, in Shrubs, in every Tree:
And when these Spirits amongst themselves agree,
Earth yields abundance, and affords increase,
Trees swell with fruits, Fields flourish by this peace:
The Seas are calm, the Rivers wholesome, and
Yield Fish in plenty, floating on the sand:
The Air is tempe'rate. But when they contend,
The Earth grows barren, fruitfulness has end;
Mildewes and Rots destroy both Grass and Grain,
And then the laboring ploughman toiles in vain.
Fruits wither on the trees, Rivers rebel,
Leave bare their channels, or in torrents swell:
The Fountains grow unhealthful, and distaste;
And in this mutiny all runs to waste.
The mustring Clouds obscure from us the Sun;
The Heavens themselves into disorder run;
By Shoures tempestuous, and rough storms of Hail,
Then Inundations on the earth prevail.
The Lightnings flash, and loud-voyc'd Thunders rore,
As if Time, tired, his journey had given over.
Now, as th'agreeing Spirits cause our health,
Pleasure, strength, gladness, with increase of wealth:
So those that are dissentious breed disease,
Want, sorrow, dearth, with all things that displease.
Learned Abram Avenz^^a the Magition,
And Rabbi Azariel (making inquisition
By careful study) in their Works relate The opinion of two learned Rabbis,
concerning Amor and Odium.

The cause to us, of extreme Love or Hate:
Why that a man, his Kindred and Alliance,
Even his own natural Blood, sets at defiance;
And yet his strange love should so far extend,
One that is mere foreign to select his friend.
Again, as we by proof find, there should be
'Twixt man and man such an antipathee,
That though he can show no just reason why,
For any wrong or former injury;
Can neither find a blemish in his fame,
Nor ought in face or feature justly blame;
Can challenge or accuse him of no evil:
Yet notwithstanding hates him as a Devil.
They give this reason; The good Angels, they Their reason of this Antipathie.

So far to peace and unity obey,
That in the first they labor to atone,
And (could it be) to make even Opposites one;
Bee'ng still at hand, a friendship to persuade
'Twixt such as seek each other to invade.
When the malignant Spirits sole intention
Is to set men at discord and dissension;
To kindle malice, and the spleen inflame,
To hate, yet show no reason whence it came;
Ready to make him fly in that man's face,
Whose friendship others gladly would embrace.
The Effect of these expressed in King Ferdinand.
King Ferdinand of Spain (their Annals say)
In his Procession on a solemn day,
Attended by his Train; in Barcelon
Was by a Traitorous Spaniard set upon
With a short dagger, and had then been slain,
Had he not worn that time a golden chain,
Which stayed the fatal blow. The Traitor took,
And put to the Rack; with an undaunted look
And constant suffering, could no other reason
Give to the King, of his unnatural treason,
But, That the cause which to that act compeld him,
Was, He never loved him since he first beheld him:
Nor could he brook him then, or reason why
Show of this deep and strong Antipathy;
But in the midst of all his tortures vowed,
If instantly he freedom were allowed,
And that the King would him again restore
To his first state, he would kill him ten times over.
The Effect proved in Judges.
Hence comes it, that some Judges are not clear.
When Malefactors at the Bar appear.
Of this they are made conscious, when there is brought
This is alleged by Doctor Strozza, lib. de Nature. Mag. of some particular
men whom he had observed in Italy in his time.
Evidence against one, be it for a thing of naught,
His Crime he aggrauates; and in his fury,
If they Not guilty bring, sends back the Jury;
Stretches each quiddit of the Law, to find
Him culpable, only to please his mind.
Again; If for some capital offense
Another's brought: though Law has no pretense,
Nor Conscience, color, how to make his peace;
Yet he shall strive th'offendor to release;
Cite Statutes in his favor; what appears
Most gross, seek to extenuate; and with tears,
If so the Iuries Verdict against him run,
Pronounce the Sentence as against his Son:
Neither by him perhaps before-time seen.
Whence is the cause then of this Love or Spleen?
Even Princes are not from this passion free: The Effect proved in Princes.

In some Kings Courts how many raised we see?
One even as high as Hamon lifts his head,
And yet for all that, no desert can plead:
When as poor Mordechai, envied, out-brav'd,
Who notwithstanding the Kings life he saved,
Obscurely lives, his service not regarded,
Nor with a single Sheckle once rewarded.
Nor does the Prince in this, his Power abuse;
Which by a story I can thus excuse.
Two Beggars, as an Emperor once past by,
Says one, O, would this Great man cast an eye A true story.

Upon our wants, how happy were we than?
Says the other; How much happier were that man,
On whom the providence of Heaven would daine
A gracious look? These words were spoke so plain,
The Prince o're-heard them; and commanded both
To come to Court. The silly men were loath,
Fearing they'had spoke some treason. Brought they were
Into a stately room, and placed there
In two rich chaires; and just before them spread
A table with two baked meats furnished;
Both without difference, seeming alike fair,
One crammed with Gold, other naught save Air.
For these, they two cast lots: To him that said,
He that trusts Heaven, that man is only made,
Happened the Gold. To the other, (that said, Well
Shall he thrive that trusts man) the empty fell.
The Emperor made this use on it: Lords you see
What a great Train hourly depends on me:
I look on all, but cannot all prefer
That in my service merit. Nor do I err;
It Is their fate, not my fault: such only rise
By me, on whom Heaven bids me cast mine eyes.
How comes it, that a Poet shall contriue Of Poets and Poetry.

A most elaborate Work, to make survive
Forgotten Dust? when no King shall expire,
But he brings fuel to his funeral fire:
No Optimate falls from the Noble throng,
But he records his Elegeicke Song
In mourning papers: and when all decays,
Hearse, Shows, and Pomp; yet That resounds his praise.
Of every Match and Royal Combination,
His Pen is ready to make publication:
When all prove aged, forgotten, and blown over,
"His Verse is still as youthful as before;
"And sounds as sweetly (though it now seem dead)
"To Aftertimes it shall be ever read.
What Is Gentry then? Or Noblesse? Greatness what?
The Civil Purple? or the Clergy Hat?
The Coronet or Mitre? Nay, the Crown
Imperial? What Is Potencie? Renown?
Ovations, Triumphs, with victorious Bays?
Wisdom or Wealth? Can these add to thy days?
Inquire of Roman Brutus, (syrnam'd Just)
Or Solomon the Wise, they both are Dust.
Learned Aristotle, Plato the Divine;
From Earth they came, and Earth, they now are thine.
Where are the Worthies? where the Rich, or Fair?
"All in one common bed involved are.
A Meditation of Death.
Man's Life's a Goal, and Death end of the race;
And thousand sundry ways point to the place:
From East, the West, the North, the South, all come;
Some slow, some swift-pac'd, to this general Doom.
Some by the Wars fall, some the Seas devour;
Certain is Death, uncertain though the Hour.
Some die of Love; others through Grief expire;
Beneath cold Arctos these; they by the Fire,
The Torrid Zone casts forth; forced to endure
The scorching and contagious Calenture.
Some the Spring takes away; and some the Fall;
Winter and Summer, others; and Death, All.
Consider well the misery of Man,
And weigh it truly; since there is none but can
Take from his own and others, thousand ways;
But yet not add one minute to their days.
For now the Conqueror with the Captiue's spread
On one bare Earth, as on the common Bed:
The all-commanding General has no span
Of ground allowed, more than the Private man.
Folly with Wisdom has an equal share;
The Foul and Fair to like Dust changed are:
This is of all Mortality the end.
Thersites deformed, and Nereus the fair Greek, whom Homer loved.
Thersites now with Nereus dares contend;
And with Achilles, He has equal place,
Who living, durst not look him in the face.
The Servant with the Master; and the Maid
Stretched by her Mistress: both their heads are laid
Upon an equal pillow. Subjects keep
Courts with Kings equal; and as soft they sleep,
Lodging their heads upon a turfe of grass,
As they on Marble, or on figured Brass.
Blind Homer in the grave lies doubly dark,
Against him now base Zoylus dares not bark.
To him what attributes may we then give? The honor due unto Poets

And other Poets, by whom all these live?
Who as their putrid flesh is long since rotten,
So in their Sepulchers had lay'n forgotten,
Like common men; had not their Muse high-flying,
Kept both these Worthies and themselves from dying.
How in these days is such a man regarded?
"No, not so much as Oil or Ink rewarded.
Yet shall a Sycophant or ballading Knave,
If he but impudence and gay clothes have;
Can harp upon some scurrilous Jest or Tale,
(Though fifteen times told, and in the City stale;)
Command a Great man's ear; perhaps be able
To prefer Suits, and elbow at his table;
Wear speaking pockets; boast, Whom he does serve:
When meriting men may either beg or starve.
Past Ages did the ancient Poets grace, The honor done to Poets of old

And to their swelling styles, the very place
Where they were borne, denomination leant.
Publius Ovidius Naso had the ostent
Of Sulmonensis added, and did give
The Dorpe a name, by which it still does live.
Publius Virgilius likewise had the addition
Of Maro, to express his full condition.
Marcus Annaeus, Lucanus Seneca,
Bore title from his city Corduba.
Caius Pedo was styled Albinovanus:
Aurelius Olympius, Nemesianus.
Some from the nature of their Poems: Thus,
Caius Lucilius was called Satyrus: A Satyricall poet.

So Livius Andronicus, Epicus: An Epick poet

And Lucius Accius syrnamed Tragicus. etc. A Tragic poet.

Some, from their several Countries, because they
Were foreign borne: Terens, from Africa,
Is Publius Terentius Afer read.
Titus Calphurnius, Siculus, as bred
In Sicily. So many others had
(And that for sundry causes) means to add
Unto their first: for with their worth encreast
Their styles; the most graced with three names at least^
Our modern Poets to that pass are driven,
Those names are curtal'd which they first had given;
And, as we wished to have their memories drowned,
We scarcely can afford them half their sound.
Rob. Green.
Green, who had in both Academies taken
Degree of Master, yet could never gain
To be called more than Robin: who had he
Professed ought save the Muse, Served, and been Free
After a seven years Prentiseship; might have
(With credit too) gone Robert to his grave.
Christ. Marlo.
Marlo, renowned for his rare art and wit,
Could never attain beyond the name of Kit;
Although his Hero and Leander did
Thomas Kid.
Merit addition rather. Famous Kid
Thom. Watson.
Was called but Tom. Tom. Watson, though he wrote
Able to make Apollo's self to dote
Upon his Muse; for all that he could strive,
Yet never could to his full name arrive.
Thomas Nash.
Tom. Nash (in his time of no small esteem)
Could not a second syllable redeem.
Francis Bewmont.
Excellent Bewmont, in the foremost rank
Of the rar'st Wits, was never more than Franck.
William Shake-speare.
Mellifluous Shake-speare, whose enchanting Quill
Commanded Mirth or Passion, was but Will.
Beniam. Johnson.
And famous Johnson, though his learned Pen
Be dipped in Castaly, is still but Ben.
John Fletcher. John Webster, etc.
Fletcher and Webster, of that learned pack
None of the mean, yet neither was but Jack.
Deckers but Tom, nor May, nor Middleton.
And he is now but Jack Foord, that once were John.
Nor speak I this, that any here expressed,
Should think themselves less worthy than the rest,
Whose names have their full syllable and sound;
Or that Franck, Kit, or Jack, are the least wound
Unto their fame and merit. I for my part
(Think others what they please) accept that heart
Which courts my love in most familiar phrase;
And that it takes not from my pains or praise.
If any one to me so bluntly com,
I hold he loves me best that calls me Tom.
Hear but the learned Buchanan complain,
In a most passionate Elegiacke strain; In his Elegy entitled: quam misera sit
conditio docentiu^ literas humaniores. etc.

And what emphaticall phrases he does use
To wail the wants that wait upon the Muse.
The Poverty (says he) add unto these,
Which still attends on the Aonides,
As if that Poenia were their Queen and Guide, Poenia is Paupertas: or of
poverty. Read Aristophanes in his Lenady. called Platus.

And vowed, amongst them ever to reside.
Whether thou do of Turkish battles sing,
Or tunc thy low Muse to a softer string:
Or whether thou the gentle Socke do wear,
Tickling with pleasure the Spectators ear:
Whether thou in the lofty Buskin rage:
When the long Tragic Robe does brush the Stage,
Thou, Poverty along with thee shall bring,
Whether thou Poems write, or Poems sing.
Seven Cities warred for Homer being dead;
Who living, had no roof to Shroud his head.
Poor Tityrus deplores his fathers fields;
Rome, to the hungry Statius scarce bread yields.
Naso, who many in that kind surpast,
Beyond the Hyperborean Pole was cast:
Nor could show cause for being thither cha^'d,
But, That he loved the Sisters; They, him graced.
Nor has the Poets Patron's self been free
From the strict laws of dire necessity; Apollo who kept Admetus his Cattle.

But forced, through want, amidst the fields and groves,
To keep and feed the AEmonian Herds and Droues.
Wherefore Calliope (who sung so well)
Did live so long a Maid; Can any tell?
She had not been a Virgin to this hour,
But that (to marry her) she wanted dower.
Mean time we spend our fruitless hours in vain,
And Age, of Want and Hunger does complain;
It grieves us now, although too late, at last,
Our Youth in idle Studies to have past;
And what a folly it is, we now have found,
To cast our Seed in an unfaithful Ground:
That in our Youth we have laid up no store,
Which might maintain us when our heads be hoar;
And that our shaken Vessel, torn and thin,
Can find no easy Port to harbor in.
Then Barren Muses, seek some other Friend,
For I henceforth a Thriuing Course intend.
Epigram. eiusdem. inscrip. ad amicos. Nemomeos ci^eres violis fragralibus
ornet. etc.
None with fresh Violets my Ashes grace,
Or strew sweet fragrant Roses in the place.
If any loves me, and intends to give?
I wish to taste his bounty whilst I live.
What care I, when the Fates my Thread have spun,
Though Briers and Thorns my Grave shall ouer-run.
Thou Tragic Buskin, and thou Comicke Socke,
Prime Muses of the Novenary stock;
At length awake from your long bedded sloth,
And give me but one answer from you both:
Whence grows this Innovation? How comes it,
Some dare to measure mouths for every bit
The Muse shall taste? And those, Approved Tongues call,
Which have pleased Court and City, indeed All;
An untuned Kennell: When the populous Throng
Of Auditors have thought the Muses sung,
When they but spoke? How comes it (ere he know it)
A Puny shall assume the name of Poet;
And in a Tympa'nous and Thrasonicke style,
(Words at which the Ignorant laugh, but the Learned smile,
Because Adulterate) and Vndenizen'd, he
Should task such Artists as have took Degree
Before he was a Fresh-man? and because
No good Practitioner in the Stage Laws,
He missed the applause he aimed at; he will devise
Another course, his fame to'immortalise:
Imploring diverse Pens, (failing in's own)
To support that which others have cried down.
It was not so of old: Virgil, the best
Of Epicke Poets, never did contest
Against Homer. Ovid was so far from hate,
That he did rather strive to imitate,
Than malign others: for of him we read,
That he did honor all who did precede:
To love those that came after, present, all,
Indeed the Muses friends in general.
I spare to speak of those that live; I'embrace
Their loves, and make them Vmpires in this case;
Who would, to curb such insolence (I know)
Bid such young boys to stay in Jericho
Until their Beards were grown, their wits more staid;
And not to censure others, till they'aue made
Works to exceed theirs; to abide the test
Of rough censorious Brows; Better the Best:
To attract the ears and eyes of Princes. When
They have done this, (as some they envy) then
They may be admitted Freemen, and so strive
By Industry, how in that way to thrive.
These at the Bench aim; but mistaken far,
For they must first be brought unto the Bar.
Perhaps too, there is some other matter in it,
These so ambitious are to be in print;
And fearing their own Weakness, therefore rail,
Hoping to get their Books the better sale.
But it is a foolish pride to'awake those Muses
(Which otherwise had slept) at their abuses.
Of this neglect, or rather gross despite, A reason given of the premises.

Will you the reason? As these Rabbis write;
In Learned men (or Moral, or Divine)
There govern Spirits they call Saturnine,
That only dote on poverty, and which
Will not endure that such men should be rich:
But still against those Ioviall Spirits, that ar' Spirits Saturnine and Jovial.

About Great men, they be at mortal war.
Who (though these Magnates be of generous mind,
And in themselves to Bounty well inclined,
With every other Goodness) thus invade
The Noble Patriot, (the Author to vpbrade;)
This Pamphlet borrowed is perhaps, or stolen;
Either the style too pinching, or too swollen:
Else, by the mouths of others they complain,
'Twas done in flattery, or hope of gain;
And so divert them from their good opinion.
"I hope such Spirits have not still dominion.
Now those whom they Mercuriall Spirits call, Mercuriall Spiri^^.

Possessing Them of no desert at all,
(Of whom I speak) aptly their humors bend,
To sooth up such as Great men still attend;
And (as by a conspiracy) so apply
Their mutual pains and common industry,
That (by the Saturnines not bee'ng offended)
What er'e they do is favored and commended.
I write not this in a persuasiue way
To give faith to; but tell you what such say
As were great Jewish Doctors: make expression
Of what they writ. Excuse then my digression.
Yet all this while we have not gone so far, Of the essence of Angels.

As to define to you what Angels ar'.
It is a question difficult and hard,
And has been in the holy Text much spared.
Much more perspicuous it is, to signify
The nature of the eternal Deity,
Than The Angels Essence: because that relation
Is much more nearer unto our salvation.
Yet notwithstanding, Man's industrious reach
(As far as probability can stretch,)
Has sought to plumbe that Depth with Reasons Line.
Arist Ethi^. cap 9.
Much better it is (says One) of things Divine,
Celestial, and Superior, to enquire
Something, (although but little) and admire;
Than of the things Inferior, and Below,
Be able to demonstrate much, and know.
Now the word Angelus does not imply
His proper essence, but does signify
His Place and Office, as Gods Messenger.
It is a name, to no Philosopher
Was known of old: Spirits and Minds they knew,
But not the Angels; they to them were new.
The Platonists difference betwixt gods and Demons.
All that above the Moon have their aboads
And residence, the Platonists call gods.
All those sublunary, they Demons styled;
As Apuleius, in his book compyl'd
De deo Socratis, makes ample mention,
According to his humane apprehension.
We know their Places, and their Offices,
But of their Natures and their Substances,
Only so far (no farther) we dare skan,
Than that they are more excellent than man.
Thus by the Psalmist warranted, who says,
(When our Nobility he semees to praise,
And what Man was before he did transgress)
Psalm. 8. Minuisti eum paulo minus ab Angelis.
Thou made him than the Angels little less.
Some would allow them Bodies: and of them,
Tertullian one; another, Origin.
Tertullian, lib. de carn. Christ. Orig. periarc. cap. 2.3.
From Genesis: The Sons of God ('it is there)
Seeing Men's Daughters, and how fair they were,
Took them to be their Wives. Now both agree,
Genesis 6.
That these no other could than Angels be.
Who if they married, must have Bodies; those
Composed of Form and Matter, to dispose,
Else how should they have Issue? And again;
How are bad Sprites sensible of pain,
In Hells eternal torments, if there fail
That Substance on the which Fire may prevail.
So diverse of the Fathers were of mind: Psellus, Apul. Philoponus, Meru^a,
Olimpiodor Gaudentius. etc.

For in Saint Austines Comment you may find,
The subtle essence of the Angels (pure
At first, that they more fully might endure
The sense of Fire) was grossed in their Fall,
Of courser temper than the Original.
Moreover, Damascenus is thus heard;
Each thing created, if with God compared,
(Who only incorruptible is) shall find
Them Gross, and all material in their kind.
For He alone it is, we may truly call
Unbodied, and Immateriall.
Ambrose, Lactantius, and Basilius,
Rupertus, Atlas, Athanasius,
With Firmianus, did believe no less,
As more at large their public Works express.
To these, opposed in censure others are, The Fathers who opposed the former in
this point.

Who in their best of judgments, not once dare
Allow them Bodies, but mere Spirits to be,
Void of all matter: and in this agree
Nazianzen, Gregory, Thomas Aquine,
Saint Chrysostom, and Thomas Argentine,
Alexander Alexandri, and Marselius,
Bonaventura, Augustinus Niphus,
Hugo de S. Victore, Scotus; men
Gen'erally approved, and with these Damascen:
Who says, That in respect of God on hye,
(His Pewer and most inserutable Quality)
They may be said to have Bodies; yet he would
Not have it be so simply understood,
But that they are not all so exquisite,
As mutable, confined to place finite.
When as his Nature, more Divine by far,
Is subject to no Change, as Angels ar';
An Infinite, a Majesty so Immence,
No place can circumscribe his Eminence.
To leave Authorities, yet make this plain,
Let Us see what grounds from Reason we can gain: Reasons to prove Angels
incorporeat.

If they have bodies? they must needs be linkt
Of members, as Man's is; Organs distinct,
And like composure; else they must be framed
Confused, and without those which we have named.
If Limbs and Organs? consequently then
They must have Sense: if Sense? Passions, as men;
And therefore capable of Perturbation,
So of Corruption, and of Alteration;
As bee'ng composed of Contraries? If we say,
They Are from Corruption free? t'infer that they
Their bodies never can put off, and so
Into a gross absurdity they grow,
To make them in worse state than Man: for he
Puts off all Cares with his Mortality.
But on their perpetuity does depend
Trouble and Toiles sense, which can never end.
Again, if Bodies? they must either be
Hard, to be felt, and of soliditie;
Or else Liquid and soft. If stand upon
The last, they are signs of imperfection,
Subject to be divided, and to take
Strange shapes upon them, and the first forsake:
As, to be changed to Water or to Air.
Which does not stand with sense: for if we dare
Allow them hard and sollid, we'are deluded;
Since such, from other Bodies are excluded,
(As in dimention limited, and space;)
"Because two Bodies cannot have one place.
Nor can they with that quick celeritie
Move in one Sphere, then in another be.
'T must likewise follow, That such as are sent
Down to the Earth, cannot incontinent,
But with much difficulty or'ecome the way;
First in one Heaven, then in another stay;
Have time to penetrate (as needs it is)
Now that Celestial Body, and then this.
Two Arabian writers.
When as (if Alphraganius we may trust,
Or Thebit, Arabs both) of force it must
Be a great distance. For these Authors write,
If that an Angel in his swiftest flight,
Should from the eighth Heaven, to the Earth descend,
A thousand miles in threescore minutes to spend,
(So far remote they are, if truly told)
Six years six months his journey would him hold.
The solution of the former doubts.
But now, what difficult to some may'appeare,
To reconcile, and all those doubts to clear:
Even as Man's wisdom being lustly way'd
With Gods, to be mere Foolishness is said;
Not that it is in its own nature so,
And that, than Brutes, he does no further know;
But in respect of God's, so pure and holy,
It in that sense may be reputed Folly.
So th'vncorporeall Spirits, Bodies claim,
Which if we with the Almighties Essence name,
In that regard, it is palpable and gross,
No better to be styled than Dung and Dross.
Now by the Sons of God, who beheld then,
The Daughters which were said to be of Men,
Is meant the Sons of Seth, (to make it plain;)
Seeing those Daughters which were come of Cain,
Of them took wives, each where he liked best.
Hear in a Lateran Council, This Council was held under Pope Innocent the
third.
what is expressed
Touching Spiritual and Corporeal Creatures;
Distinguished thus: The great God, of all Features
The sole Creator, Visible and Unseen,
Spiritual, and those which Bodied been;
Who from Times first beginning has both framed,
Spiritual, and those Corporeal named;
By which we understand Angelical,
And Mundane here below. He after all,
Did then create Man in his blessed estate,
Both Soul and Body to participate.
The Phrase of Scripture does confirm as much,
As often as it does on the Spirit touch:
A Substance without Body it approoues.
The Spirit is God (says John) and it behooues John Cap 4.

All such as will in worship fall before him,
Merely in Spirit and in Truth t'addore him.
Besides, Saint Luke does witness, One man's breast,
At once of a whole Legion was possessed
Of unclean Spirits. Which had they Bodies, How
Could it sufficient place to them allow
To'inhabit? when each Legion does by List,
Of six thousand six hundred sixty six consist. The number of a Legion.

If there be any of Saint Gregory's mind,
To think that Angels are to Place designed? S. Gregory expounded.

All such must understand, it is not meant
According to the limited extent
Of their Angel-like Substances, but rather
(Which from their great employments we may gather)
Of their own virtues the determination,
In the determined place of operation.
Nor is it of force, That Angels by their Fall
Should gain a Substance more material,
On which the infernal Fire it self might feed:
Of such a spissed Substance there is no need,
Since of their lasting torments, without pause,
The Fire is not the sole and principal cause;
But as an Instrument, a power it has
From Gods own hand and just incensed wrath.
A return to the first position.
To the three Ternions I return again,
Linkt fast together in a nine-fold Chain;
Amongst whom there is difference in Intelligence,
As there is in degrees of Excellence:
For the more Noble, to the Lesser still
Infuseth Knowledge, by the Almighties will.
The Second to the Third is like industrous,
And, as degreed, it is more and more illustrous.
This Knowledge more perspicuous is and clear
In the first Chorus, than it does appear
In The Second, Third, or Fourth, so to the Last,
Of those that are over things Terrestrial placed.
Zach. 1.2.
This in the Prophet Zacharie's made plain:
When God his People would redeem again
From their Captivity in Babylon;
He in his Vision saw the Holy-One
Reveal it unto one of the Superiors,
Which he communicates to his Inferiors;
They to the Prophet. Unto this coheres
S. Aug. de Cognitione veritatis. cap. 8.
What in Saint Austines Book as plain appears;
As we perceive the Moon, the Stars t'out-shine,
And the Suns light more splendrous and Divine,
Than the Moone's shows; so'tis in the degrees
Of those forenam'd Celestial Hierarchees.
Four Angels, as four Vice-royes, are expressed,
To sway the four Winds, placed above the rest;
All Princes, and with mighty power endu'd,
Remarkable for that their Celsitude.
Dr. Strozza, Lib. de Nature. magia.
The East, whence Eurus blows, swayes Michael:
The West, whence Zephyre breathes, guides Raphael:
The North, whence Boreas blusters, Gabriel:
The South, whence Auster comes, rules Vriel.
Which from the Evangelist some Doctors ground,
Apocal. 7.
Because it is in the Apocalips thus found:
On the four Angles of the Earth I saw
Standing four Angels, those that kept in awe
The four great Winds, restraining them from blowing
On Earth, on Sea, or any Tree then growing.
Some write, That over every Heaven or Sphere,
A several Angell's placed, and gouernes there.
The Sophists, Arist. Intellig. planet.
those Intelligences call:
The Hebrews, Cherubims: whose lots thus fall;
Metraon does the Primam Mobile guide:
Ophaniel, in the Starry Heaven reside:
The Suns Sphere, Varcan: the Moons lower rays
Arcan disposes: Mars (his) Lamach swayes;
Mercuries, Madan: Jove's, Guth: Venus Star,
Iurabatres: and Saturne's seen from far,
Maion: And all these in the height they'enioy,
Have power, Inferior Spirits to employ.
Seven Angels (as the Scriptures witness) stand Tobit, 6.12:

Before the Almighty, pressed at his command; Apoc. 8.

And these by his Divine infusion, know
How to dispose of all things here below,
As those Celestial: who does institute
Those Seven, his Divine Will to execute.
Years, Days, and Hours, amongst them they divide;
The Planets and the Stars they likewise guide.
The President of Sol is Raphael;
The Guardian of the Moon, called Gabriel:
Chamuel the third, Mars his bright Star protects;
Michael, the Sphere of Mercury directs:
Adahiel, over Jove has domination;
And Haniel, of Venus gubernation:
Zaphiel is Saturnes Prince. And of Spirits seven
Saint John makes mention, with their place in Heaven:
I saw seven Angels stand before the Throne
Of the Almighty; and to every one
A several Trumpet given. [etc.] The Rabbis, they,
And Cabalists, further proceed and say,
(How warranted I know not) That there be
Twelve Potents of this Divine Faculty;
Three Oriental, and three Occidentall;
Three Septentrionall, These they call the An^^^^ of the Zodiac.
and three Meridionall.
Chaoz the first great Eastern Power they call,
Whose Prince Malthidielis, and he swayes all
That does belong to Aries: The first Quaternion.
the next place
Corona has; and Varchiel has the grace
Of that to be chief Regent: Leo he
Has subject in his second Empyree:
Hermaus the third; Adnachiel does carry
That potencie, and rules the Sagittary.
The second Quatern.
The first Power Austral they Panthaeon style;
Asmodes Prince, in that does reconcile
The Sign called Taurus: and the second, Tim,
Hamabiel is the Prince that gouernes him.
In the Sign Virgo, Haim is the third borne,
Hannuel the Prince, and gouerns Capricorn.
The third Quatern.
The first Septentrionall, Bethzan, Manuel Prince,
And he the Sign of Cancer does convince.
The next, Zonocharel by name they know,
Barchiel the chief, and rules over Scorpio.
Over the third, Elisan, Varchiel reigns;
He Pisces in his Principate contains.
The fourth Quatern.
The first of the Occidentall, Gelphor, and
Ambriel the Prince; the Gemini they stand
Beneath his sway. Bleor the next; his Lord,
Zaniel, who guides the Scepter and the Sword.
Caphet the last; Cabriel the President,
And over Aquarius has the government.
Others there be that do not doubt to say,
Four Angels over the four Elements.
That the four Elements are forced to obey
Four several Angels: Seraph reigns over Fire;
Cherub the Air; and Tharsis does aspire
Over the Water: and the Earths great Lord,
Ariel. The Hebrew Rabbis thus accord.
But since of these the Scriptures make no mention,
Far be it that the least of mine intention
Should be to create Angels. Hence it came,
That at a Roman Council, in the name.
Of Zachary then Pope, one Aldebert,
Another Clement, seeking to subvert
The Church by Schisms; were to the Consistory
Summoned, and there convict of Heresy.
For thus they prayed; O Angel Vriel,
Angel Adimus, Angel Raguel,
Angel Sabaothe, Angel Michael,
Angel Tubuas, Angel Semibel, etc.
This in the Synod was no sooner read,
But they thus instantly were censured.
The very words of that Decree these are:
The sentence of the Council against the Schismatics.
Of all those names, most of them new and rare,
Of whom they invocate, Michael alone,
An Angel we acknowledge; the rest none.
By that, and elsewhere it is manifest,
That other names than are to us expressed
In sacred Scriptures, none ought to devise;
Since from such Curiosities arise
Schisms, Heresies, Opinions execrable,
(Erring from Truth) devilish and damnable.
Nor are these dark words, by these Rabbis used,
Other than Phancies, not to be excused;
Wherein some things signifi'cant are expressed,
Borrowed from Natural causes at the best.
For instance; Seraph, if we but retire
To the words force, imports naught save Fire:
Cherub, Air; Tharsus, Water; Ariel, Earth:
And these at first had from those Doctors birth,
Even by their own confession. If you please,
Think of the rest as has been said of these.
Creaturae quaedam aeterna sunt a posteriore; a priore solus Deus est aeternus.


Explicit Metrum Tractatus quarti.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogriphicall and Emblematicall Obseruations^ touching the further
illustration of the former Tractat.
AS Fire cannot be long smothered, but it will find vent; nor the Sun be so
eclipsed and clouded^ but it will soon work it self into it is own native
glory and splendour: so the Omnipotency of the great Creator cannot be so
darkened, either by the stupidity of the Ignorant, or the malicious obstinacy
of the seeming-Wise, but even out of their voluntary Blindness it will
extract it is own Brightness. Profane Lucian, who so generally taxed all the
gods, as that he was held scarcely to believe that there were any, and
therefore purchased to himself the Character of Blasphemus Maledicus, etc. yet
he in one of his Celestial Dialogues (so styled because they merely consist
of conference held amongst the upper Deities) in a discourse betwixt Ma^s and
Mercury, Atheism confesses a sole Deity.
introduces Mars speaking of Jupiter to this purpose: -- I will, (says he)
If my inherent Power I'assume to me,
Even when I please, drop from the Heavens a Chain,
To which lay all your hands, and you in vain
Shall strive to pull me thence: and yet with ease
(And join to you the vast Earth and the Seas,
With all their pondrous weight) one minutes space
Shall draw you up to my sublimer place. etc.
In which Power ascribed unto Jupiter, as acknowledging one superior Deity;
what does he less, than slight and vilify the weakness and deficiencie of
all such Idols on whom Divine honors are superstitiously conferred?

I began the former Tractate with the Hierarchy of Angels, their three
Classes or Ternions, their order and concatination; in which I have proceeded
with that plainness, that I hope they need no further demonstration. As also
of the opinion of the Sadduces and others, who will allow no Spirits or Angels
at all; their weak and vnmomentary Tenants being with much facility removed. I
now proceed to this irresistable conclusion, That the object and end of Gods
divine Will in the creation of all things, The object of Gods will in the
Creation.
was no other, than his Grace and Goodness, in which he continued from all
eternity, and so he might have done, without the help, service, or ministry
of any Angel or Creature whatsoever, which neither to the ornament,
conservation, or augmentation of his Divine Nature, can add or detract. And
that his Almightinesse was pleased to undergo this great Work of the Creation,
it was his Free Will, and no Necessity, that obliged him unto it. And he that
in his Divine Wisdom and Goodness had Will to make things, has the same Power
to dispose them, by which he created them; and as much do we owe unto him, for
the Dangers from which he delivers us, as for the Health, Wealth, and
Dignities with which he blesses us. For as Saint Hierome says. The treasures
of Vices in us, are the abundance of Goodness in God, etc.

Angels were the first Creatures God made, created pure as the Light, ordained
with the Light to serve God, who is the Lord of Light: They have charge to
conduct us, wisdom to instruct us, and grace to preserve us: They are the
Saints Tutors, Heavens Heralds, and the Bodies and Souls Guardians.
Furthermore as Origin says, Every ones Angel that has guided him in this
life, shall at the last day produce and bring his Charge forth whom he has
governed. They at all times and in all places behold the majesty of the
Heavenly Father. And according to Saint Augustine, they were created Immortal,
Beautiful, Innocent, Good, Free, and Subtle, resembling a far off the Essence
of God himself.

Saint Basil says, Homil sup. Psalm. 44.
The Angels suffer no mutation or change, for amongst them there is neither
Child, Youth, nor Old man; but in the same state they were created in the
beginning, they still persist, and so unchangeably shall to all eternity. And
Saint Augustine in his Book De vera Religione, uses these words: Let not the
worship of men that be dead be any Religion unto us; who if they lived piously,
and died good men, desire no such honor to be conferred upon them: but they
desire that He only should be adored by us, by whose illumination, they
rejoice, that we shall become partakers of their blessedness. Therefore they
are to be honored for imitation, but not worshipped for Religion. And after,
speaking of the Augels, he adds this: We honor them in our Charity, but not
in any Seruilitie; neither do we build any Temples unto them. For they would
not be so honored of us, knowing that we our selves, if we be good men, are
the Temples of the ever living God. For our instruction therefore it was
written, That the Angel forbad man to bow to him, but to give all worship and
reverence to that Great God, to whom he with him was a fellow servant.

God uses their ministry and service not only to the celebrating of his own
glory, The Employment of the Angels.
(as Psalm. 103. verse. 20, 21. Praise the Lord ye his Angels that excel in
strength, that do his commandment in obeying the voice of his Word. Praise the
Lord all ye his Hosts, ye his Servants that do his pleasure.) But also when
he employeth them to deliver any message unto man; as Numb. 22. verse. 32. And
the Angel of the Lord said unto him, Why have thou stricken thin^ Ass now
thrice? etc. As also, Genes. 19. and 13. For we will destroy this place,
because the Cry of them is great before the Lord; and the Lord has sent us to
destroy it. Coloss. 1.16.
He employeth them likewise in the government of the world: For by him were all
things cre^ted, which are in heaven, or which are in earth; things visible and
invisible, whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers;
all things were created by him, and for him, etc. He uses them in the
deliverance and protection of the Faithful. Meaning Saint Peter.
Acts 5.19. But the Angel of the Lord by night opened the prison doors, and
brought him forth, etc. By their care and employment some are instructed in the
Law of the Lord, and to have the Gospel propagated; Acts 16.9. Where a Vision
appeared to Paul in the night: There stood a man of Macedonia, and prayed him,
saying, Come into Macedonia and help us, etc. They comfort the Saints in
afflictions, as well in things that belong to this bodily, as spiritual life;
they strengthen them when they faint; sometimes cherish, and at other times
chastise them. Reg. 2.1.3. Then the Angel of the Lord said to Elijah the
Tishbyte, Arise, and go up to meet the Messengers of the King of Samaria, and
say unto them, Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that you go to
enquire of Baalzebub the god of Eckron, etc. Acts 27.23, 24. Paul says, For
there stood by me this night the Angel of God, whose I am, and whom I serve,
saying, Fear not, Paul, for thou must be brought before Caesar, and Lo, God
has given unto thee freely, all that sail with thee. They are Gods Avengers
of the reprobat and such as oppose his Church and people: Esaias 37.36. Then the
Angel of the Lord went out, and smote in the Camp of Assure an hundred
fourestore and five thousand. So when they arose early in the morning, behold
they were all dead Corpse.

Of their several apparitions and sundry employments much more might be said,
but these few may serve to illustrate the rest. Yet notwithstanding, that great
is their power and excellence, and that God uses their ministry in
preserving and protecting us, and bestowing many benefits and blessings upon
us; yet as well by their own saying, as the sentence of the Apostles, it is
manifest, no Divine Worship is to be conferred upon them, but upon God only.

Before I come by several histories to enlarge that argument handled in the
premises; namely, That even by Dreams it may be concluded that there be
Spirits. I will speak something of Dreams in general. Aristotle defines them
thus: Somnium est phantasmain somno factum: i. Lib de Somn. and Vigil.
A Dream is a fantasy begotten in the sleep. Chrisippus the Philosopher
after this manner; It is a discerning or explaining force, The Definition of
Dreams.
signified by the gods unto men in their sleeps: for so says Cicero, Lib. de
Divinat. Erasmus, Lib. 3. Apotheg. thus derideth such men's superstitions as are
inquisitiue after the expositions of their Dreams: Those things (says he)
which you do waking, you regard not; but after your dreams you solicitously
enquire. But to the felicity or infelicitie of Man it is not so much
available, what you suffer in your sleep, as that which you do being awake:
for what evil you then commit, you are to fear the wrath and anger of the
gods, and some sad punishment ensuing; but for the other not.

Thales being asked, Laert. lib. 6.
How far a Lie differed from a Truth? made answer, Just so far as the eye
differs from the ear: Intimating, That all those were of an undoubted faith
which we see with our eyes; but many things fabulous reported, heard with our
ears, come short of credit. Something alluding to that Homericall fiction of
Dreams: Of which (says he) those which fly in at the Horny port are true; but
those which enter at the Ivorie gate are false. By the Horny port meaning the
eyes, by reason of the resemblance of their color with horn: by the Ivory
way, the mouth; alluding to the whiteness of the teeth.

Seneca, in Hercul. Furent. calls Sleep, The better part of man's life: -- Tu o
Domitor
Sum, malorum requies animi,
Pars humanae melior vitae, etc.
Of Evils, thou the chief and best
Releaser; of the mind the rest;
The better part of humane life;
Asswaging grief, compounding strife.


Aristotle says, Lib. 19. de Animalibus.
That Sleep is the Medium betwixt life and death. And in his Book de Some. and
Vigil. If Dreams come from the gods, wise men should find the event of them in
the day: neither can they come Divinitus, or from above, because Dreams are as
frequent with other Creatures as with Men. Eccles. cap. 34. As he that would
take hold of a shadow, or pursues the wind; so he, that is intentive after
Dreams. There are some define them the sleepie agitations of the waking mind.
According to Seneca, in Octav.

Quaecunque mentis agitat infestus vigor, etc.
Such things as trouble and disturb the mind,
Are, when we be to drowsy sleep inclined:
Then tossed and canvast this way; that again,
Within the private chamber of the brain.
Ovid, lib. 2. Eligiar. thus speaks of them: Tu levis es multoque tuis
ventosior alis,
Gaudiaque ambigua dasque negasque fide.
Thou'art light, and much more windy than thy wings,
Joys, with ambiguous Faith, thou take and brings.


And Tibull. lib. 3. Eleg. 4.

Somnia fallaci ludunt temeraria nocte;
Et pavidas mentes falsa timere facit.
Rash Dreams deride us in the doubtful night;
And timorous minds perplex with false affright.
But these are more perspicuously set down by the excellent Poet Claudian, in
Praefat. lib. 6. de Consol. Honor.

Omnia quae sensu volvuntur vota diurno,
Tempore nocturno reddit amica quies.
All things we muse on in the day, to keep,
The friendly rest returns us in our sleep.
The Huntsman, when his weary limbs he throws
Upon his bed, his mind a hunting goes
Unto the Chase, he shouts and hollowes there,
As if the present Game before him were.
The Judge is troubled, Discord to compound:
The Charioter, to measure out the ground,
In which to try his Coach-Steeds. Lovers dream
Of their stolen pleasures. And with thirst extreme,
The dry-sicke man, the imaginary cup
Lifts to his head, and thinks to quaffe all up.
And me, the Muses Study does accite
To a new trouble in the silent night;
Even in the middle of Jove's starry Tower,
Before his feet my Numbers forth to power.
I cannot forget (for the excellency thereof) here to insert one of Sr Thomas
Mores Epigrams thus expressed: Non es, dum in somno es, dum nec te vivere sentis,
etc.
Thou art not, whilst thou art asleep; thou then
Do not perceive thy self alive; but when
Thou art awake. Dream thou art rich, or wise,
Yet thou a poor man, or a fool, may rise.
He then that thinks himself most happy, and
Proud of his fortunes, does on tip-toes stand;
So often as night comes, cease to be blessed,
Is so often wretched as he lies to rest.


From Poetry, Eudemus his Dream.
I come to History. Aristotle writes of one Eudemus of Cyprus, his familiar
friend; who traveling to Macedonia, came to the noble City Phaecas in
Thessaly, then groaning under the immanitie of the barbarous Tyrant Alexander.
In which place falling sick, and being forsaken of all the Physicians, as one
desperate of recovery, a young man appeared unto him in a vision; who told him.
That in a short space he should be restored to his former health. Next, That
within a few days the Tyrant should be removed by death. And lastly, That at
the end of five years he himself should return home into his country. The
two first predictions happened accordingly; he being restored to his former
strength, and Alexander the Tyrant perishing, being slain by the brothers of
his wife. But in the fifth year, when (encouraged by his vision) he had hope
to return from Sicilie into Cyprus, he was engaged by the way in a battle
fought against the Syracusians, and slain. His Vision therefore was thus
interpreted; That when the Soul of Eudemus was departed from his body, it was
said to return again into it is own Country, or into his hands again who
first leant it.

The father of Galen the excellent Physician, Galen.
was in a Dream admonished, to educate and tutor his son, being then a
Child, in the study and practice of Physic: which he accordingly did. In
which, to what eminence and admiration his industry brought him, his learned
Works even to this day testify of him.

Quintus Catulus a noble Roman, Quint. Catulus
saw (as he thought) in his depth of rest, Jupiter delivering into the hand of
a Child the Ensign of the Roman People: and the next night after, he saw the
same child hugged in the bosom of the god. Whom Catulus offering to pull
thence, Jupiter charged him to lay no violent hands on him, who was borne for
the weal and preservation of the Roman Empire. The very next morning, when Q.
Catulus espied by chance in the street, Octavianus Augustus, (then a child)
and perceiving him to be the same, he suddenly ran unto him, and with a loud
acclamation said, Yes, this is he whom the last night I beheld hugged in the
bosom of Jupiter.

Sophocles.
A rich Vessel of Gold being stolen out of the Temple of Hercules, Sophocles
by his Genius was showed the Thief in his sleep: which for the first and
second apparition he neglected; but being troubled the third night, he went to
the Areopagus or hill of Mars, which is a village near unto Athens; and there
causing the Areopagitae, ( i. the Optimates of the City) to be assembled, he
told them the whole circumstance before related. Who upon no other evidence,
summoned the party to make his appearance: who after strict examination,
confessed the fact, and made restitution of the Vessel. For which discovery,
the Temple was ever after called Templum Herculis Indicis.

Alexander the Philosopher.
Alexander the Philosopher (a man known to be free from all superstition)
reports of himself, That sleeping one night, he saw his mothers funerals
solemnised, being then a days journey distant thence: and waking, in great
sorrow and many tears, he told this apparition to diverse of his Familiars and
Friends. The time being punctually observed, certain word was brought him the
next day after, That at the same hour of his Dream his mother expired.

Sfortia.
Iovius reports, That Sfortia, Anno 1525, in a mornings slumber dreamed, That
falling into a River, he was in great danger of drowning: and calling for
succor to a man of extraordinary stature and presence, (such as Saint
Christopher is pourtrayed) who was on the farther shore, he was by him
slighted and neglected. This Dream he told to his wife and servants, but no
farther regarded it. The same day, spying a child fall into the water near
unto the Castle Pescara, thinking to save the child, leaped into the River;
but ouer-burthened with the weight of his Armor, he was choked in the mud, and
so perished.

M Antonius Torellus.
The like Fulgentius, lib. 1. cap. 5. reports of Marcus Antonius Torellus
Earl of Cynastall: who, admonished of the like danger in his sleep, but
contemning it, the next day swimming (in which exercise he much delighted)
though many were near him, yet he sunk in the midst of them and was drowned,
not any one being at that time able to help him.

Alcibiades Probus; Alcibiades.
Iustine and Plutarch relate of him, That a little before his death, (which
happened by the immanitie of Tismenius and Bag^as, sent from Critia) dreamed,
That he was clothed in his mistresses Petticoat or Kirtle. Whose body, after
his murder, being thrown out of the city naked, and denied both burial and
couerture; his Mistress in the silence of the night stole out of the gates,
and covered him with her garment as well as she was able, to shadow his dead
Corpse from the derision and scorn of his barbarous enemy.

No less strange was the Dream of Croesus, Croesus.
remembered by Herodotus and Valerius Max. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. Who of Atis (the
eldest and most excellent of his two sons) dreamed, That he saw him wounded
and trans-pierced with steel: And therefore with a fatherly indulgence sought
to prevent all things that might have the least reflection upon so bad a
disaster. And thereupon, where the youthful Prince was before employed in the
wars, he is now altogether detained at home in peace. He had of his own a
rich and fair Arcenall or Armorie furnished with all manner of weapons, (in
which he much delighted) which is shut up, and he quite debarred both the
pleasure and use thereof. His Servants and Attendants are admitted into his
presence, but they are first unarmed. Yet could not all this care prevent
Destiny; for when a Bore of extraordinary stature and fierceness, had made
great spoil and slaughter in the adjacent Region, (insomuch that the king was
petitioned, to take some order how he might be destroyed) the noble Prince by
much importunity and intercession obtained leave of his father, to have the
honor of this adventure: but with a strict imposition, that he should expose
his person unto no seeming danger. But whilst all the Gallantry that day
assembled, were intentive on the pursuit of the Beast; one Adrastus aiming his
Bore-speare at him, by an unfortunate glance it turned upon the Prince and slew
him.

Valerius Maximus tells us of one Aterius Ruffus a Knight of Rome; Aterius
Ruffus.
who when a great Sword-play was to be performed by the Gladiators of Syracusa,
dreamed the night before, That one of those kind of Fencers called Rhetiarij
(which used to bring Nets into the Theater, and by cunning cast them so to
entangle their adversaries, to disable them either for offense or defense) gave
him a mortal wound. Which dream he told to such of his friends as fate next
him. It happened presently after, That one of those Rhetiarij was brought by a
certain Gladiator (being then Challenger) into a Gallery next unto the place
where Aterius and his friends were seated as spectator: Whose face he no
sooner beheld, but he started; and told his Friends, that he was the man from
whose hands he dreamed he had received his deadly wound. When suddenly rising
with his Friends to depart thence, as not willing to tempt that Omen; in
thrusting hastily to get out of the throng, there grew a sudden quarrel: in
which tumult Aterius was transpierced by the same man's sword, and was taken up
dead in the place, being by no evasion able to prevent his fate.

Cambyses his Dream.
Cambyses King of Persia, saw in a Vision his brother Smerdis sitting upon an
Imperial Throne, and his head touching the clouds. And taking this as a
forewarning, that his brother had an aspiring purpose to supplant him, and
usurp the Crown; he wrought so far with Praxaspes, a Nobleman, and then the
most potent in the Kingdom, that by his practice he was murdered. Yet did not
all this avert the fate before threatened: for another Smerdis, a Magition and
base fellow, pretending to be the former Smerdis, and the son of Cyrus, after
enjoyed the Kingdom: and Cambyses mounting his Steed, was wounded with a knife
in his hip or thigh, of which hurt he miserably died.

Many Histories to the like purpose I could cite from Aristotle, Plato,
Hippocrates, Galen, Pliny, Socrates, Diogines, Laertius, Themistocles,
Alexander Aphrodiensis, Livy, AElianus, and others. As of Ptolomeus besieging
Alexandria. Of Galen himself, Lib. de venae Sectione. Of two Arcadians
traveling to Megara. Aspasia.
Of Aspatia the daughter of Hermilinus Phocensis, who after was the Wife of two
mighty Kings; Cyrus of Persia, and Artaxes: whose history, Elianus, de Varia
Historia, Titus Atimius.
lib. 12. writes at large. As also that of Titus Atimius remembered by Cicero,
Lib. de Divinat. 1. By Valor. Maxim. Lib. 1. Cap. 7. By Livy, lib. 2. By
Macr^b. Saturn. 1. with infinite others.

Histories concerning predictions.
To the further confirmation that there are Spirits, I hold it not amiss to
introduce some few Histories concerning Predictions. The Emperor Nero asking
counsel of the Devil, Nero.
How long his empire and dominion should last? Answer was returned him from
that crafty and equivocating Pannurgist, To beware of 64. Nero being then in
youth and strength, was wondrous joyful in his heart, to hear so desired a
solution of his doubt and demand; presuming that his principality should
undoubtedly continue to that prefixed year, if not longer. But soon after,
^alba, who was threescore and four years of age, being chosen to the
Imperial Purple, deposed and deprived him both of his Crown and life.

Philip K. of Macedon.
The like we read of Philip King of Macedon, and Father to Alexander the Great.
Who sending to the Oracle of Delphos, to know what should futurely betide him.
Answer was returned, that his life should continue for a long season, if it
were not endangered by a Chariot. Whereupon the King gave strict and express
commandment, That all the Chariots within his kingdom should be plucked in
pieces, and no further use to be made of them, and that no new ones should be
after made: neither would he come near unto places that had any reference or
relation to such a name. Notwithstanding all his prevention, he was soon
after slain by Pausonias, who wore at that time a sword which had a Chariot
graven upon the pommell.

Dioclesian, The Emperor Dioclesian.
a man of a base and obscure parentage in Dalmatia, served as a common soldier
in France and elsewhere, under diverse and sundry Emperors. Upon a time,
reckoning with his Hostess of the house wherein he was billited, (who was one
of the sooth-saying Druides) she told him, that he was too penurious, and did
not bear the noble mind of a Soldier. To whom he made answer, That he then
reckoned with her according to his poor means and allowance: and merrily
added, That if ever he came to be made Emperor of Rome, he would then show
himself much more bountiful. To whom (first looking steadfastly in his face)
she replied, Soldier, thou have spoken truer than thou art aware of; for after
thou have killed one Aper, [which signifies a Boare] thou shall be made
Caesar, semper Augustus, and wear the Imperial Purple. Dioclesian smiled, and
received it from her as a deli^ement or scoff, because he had before bated
her of her reckoning. Yet after that time he took great delight in the
hunting and killing of Boares. But diverse Emperors succeeding one another, and
he finding little alteration in his fortune; he was frequently wont to say, I
still kill the Boares, but there be others that eat the flesh. Yet in process
of time it happened, that a potent man called Aper, having married the sister
of the Emperor Numerianus, laid violent hands upon his brother in law, and
most traitorously slew him. For which facinerous act being apprehended by the
soldiers, and brought into that part of the Army where Dioclesian was (who by
reason of his long service was had in reputation with the prime Commanders;)
the soldiers now demanding what should be done with the Traitor? it was
concluded amongst them, that he should be at Dioclesians dispose: who presently
demanding of him his name? and he answering, Aper; without further pause he
drew his sword, and uttering these words, And this Aper or Boar shall be added
to the rest; presently ran him through the body and slew him. Which done, the
soldiers commending it for an act of justice, without further deliberation,
saluted him by the name of Emperor.

I have read in the Chronicle of France, concerning one of the French Henry's,
Henry King of France.
That Gonvarus an Italian Astrologer having calculated his Nativity, wrote
unto him about five years before the strange disaster of his death happened,
That the Stars and Planets threatened him in the one and fortieth year of his
age, with a dangerous wound in the head, by which he should be struck either
blind or dead: and therefore advised him to beware of tilts, tourneys, or any
the like violent exercises for the space of that year. Notwithstanding which,
in the predicted year, at the solemn and pompous celebration of his Sisters
marriage with the young King of Spain; after he had three days together with
great success and general applause demeaned himself in those Chiualrous
exercises of Tilt and Barriers: though he was much persuaded by the Queen,
and entreated by the Lords, after the breaking of many staves, to give over,
yet nothing could prevail with him: insomuch that in the very later end of the
day, when most of the Spectators were risen and departed out of the Tiltyard,
he called to the Count Montgomerie, Captain of his Guard, earnestly importuning
that he would run one course more with him. Which when he sought by all
means possible to excuse, pretending many unwilling delays; he took a spear
and thrust it into his hand, compelling him to another encounter: in which he
was most unfortunately slain by a splinter of the staff, that entering at the
sight of his beauer, pierced his brain, and so concluded the great solemnity
with his own lamentable Tragedy. Before this accident happened, in the
beginning of the triumph, one Nostrodanus told unto diverse of the Kings
servants in secret, that the King would be in great danger of death before the
Tournament was fully finished. And (which is most remarkable) a Merchants son
of Paris, a child of about six years old, not fully seven, being brought
thither that day by his father and mother to see the Tilting; at every course
the King ran, he was heard to cry out aloud, They will kill the King, o they
will kill the King.

Plato's opinion concerning Spirits.
Plato was of opinion, That children are no sooner born, but they have one of
those Spirits to attend them, which does first copulate and conioyne the soul
unto the body: and after being grown unto some maturitie, teach, instruct, and
govern them. The Academiques held, The Academiques.
That Spirits behold all men's actions, and assist them; that they know all our
apprehensions and cogitations; and when the Soul is delivered from the Body,
they bring it before the high Judge. That they are questioned about our good or
bad actions, their testimony being much preualent either to excuse or
aggrauate. That also they are vigilant over us, either sick or in health,
waking or sleeping, and especially in the very article and point of death,
oftentimes inspiring the parting Soul with a divination surpassing all humane
knowledge. For instance:

Pheceredes Cyrus being upon his death bed, Pherecid. Cyrus
predicted victory against the Magnesians; which fell out accordingly. And
Possidonius tells us, That a Rhodian dying, A Rhodian.
nominated six men, and told who should die first, who second, who third, and
so in order till he came to the last. Neither did he any way fail in his
prediction.

Porphirius was of opinion, Porphirius.
That not one only, but many Spirits or Genij had the charge of one and every
man: one having care over his health, another indulgent over his beauty and
feature; another to infuse into him courage and constancy, etc. But Iamblicus
was of a contrary assertion, affirming, That many needed not, when one being
of so pure and refined a nature was sufficient.

Some have affirmed Spirits to be of diverse qualities, and therefore to work
in men, according to their own dispositions, diverse effects. Affirming, That
those AEthereall or Fiery, stir up men to contemplation: the Airy, to the
business and common affairs of this life: the Waterie, to pleasure: the
Earthy, to base and gripple avarice. So likewise the Martial Spirits incite us
to fortitude; the Ioviall, to prudence; the Venereall, to lust; the Mercuriall,
to policy and wisdom; the Lunarie, to fertility and plenty of issue; the
Saturnine, to dissuade from all things that be evil. Such was that Socraticum
Daemonium, Socraticu^ Demonium.
or Genius of Socrates, which still continued and encouraged him in the study
an practice of Virtue. whose condition was to dissuade him from many things,
but to persuade him to nothing. Of this Daemonium strange things are reported
in History; as that it was ever at his elbow to divert him from doing evil,
and to advise him to shun and avoid danger; to remember him of things past, to
explain unto him things present, and reveal unto him things future. Socrates
himself confessed that he saw it sometimes, but seldom, yet heard it often.

He dissuaded Charmiades the son of Glaucus, Charmiades.
from going to the Groves of Nemaea, and to excuse himself from that journey:
who despising his counsel, perished in the adventure. Upon a time sitting at
the table of Timarchus, where a great banquet was served in; Timarchus offered
twice to rise from the board, but was held by Socrates. Yet watching his
opportunity while the other was in serious discourse, he stole away
privately; and met with Nyceus, whom he slew. For which fact being condemned
and led to death, he confessed unto his brother Clitimachus, That if he had
been swayed by the double advertisement of Socrates, he had not undergone so
sad a disaster.

The same Socrates in a great defeat which the Athenians had, flying from the
victorious Enemy with Lachetes the Praetor, and coming to a place where three
ways met, he chose one path to himself, contrary to the advice and counsel
of all the rest: And being demanded the reason wherefore he did so? he made
answer, That his Genius so persuaded him. Which they deriding, took a
contrary course, and left him abandoned to himself. Now when the Horsemen of
the Enemy made hot pursuit after them, they took that path which Lachetes and
all his people had taken; who were all put to the sword, and only those few
which followed Socrates, escaped. He presaged the great strage and messacre
which after happened in Sicilia. As also of the deaths of Neon and Thrasillus, in
their Expedition against those of Ionia and Ephesus.

Saint Augustine in his book De Cognitione verae vitae, is persuaded, That
Spirits by Gods permission can raise storms and tempests, and command rain,
hail, snow, thunder, and lightning at their pleasures. As also, That by the
instigation of Spirits, wild Beasts become either rebellious or serviceable to
man's use. In another place he ascribes the operation of all things,
seasonable or unseasonable, unto them, but not as Authors and Makers, but
Ministers and Servants to the Divine Will and command. According with that in
Ecclesiasticus, Cap. 39. verse. 28. There be Spirits that are created for
vengeance, which in their rigor lay on sure strokes: in the time of
destruction they show forth their power, and accomplish the wrath of him that
made them. Fire, Hail, Famine, and Death, all these are created for vengeance;
the teeth of the wild Beasts and the Scorpions, and the Serpents, and the
Sword, execute vengeance for the destruction of the Wicked. They shall be glad
to do his commandments; and when need is they shall be ready upon earth; and
when their hour is come, they shall not ouerpasse the commandments, etc.

To this strict rule of Gods commandment both the good and bad Spirits are
limited, and beyond that they have power or ability to do nothing. Otherwise,
those that are malignant and evil, would in their rabies and fury destroy all
Gods creatures in a moment. Moreover, as the same Author affirms, the Devil
has power to tempt and entice man to sin and wickedness; but he cannot
compel him. These be his words; Sermon. de Temp. Potest Diabolus ad malum
invitare, non potest trahere: Delectationem infert non potestatem, etc.

Strange opinions concerning Spirits.
Rabbi Avot Nathan a learned Jew, affirms, That Spirits have three things
common with men, namely, Procreation, Food, and Death. Porphirius (as Proclus
witnesses of him) held all Spirits to be mortal; and that he amongst them who
was the longest lived, did not exceed the number of a thousand years. Plutarch
in his book De Oraculorum defectu, recites a story, That about the Islands
called Echinades, news was brought to one Thamus, being then a ship board,
that god Pan was dead: and this happened just at the birth of our Savior
Christ. But because I have made use of this History heretofore, in a book
commonly entitled, The History of Women; to insert the same here likewise,
might be tasted as Cibus bis coctus.

But to answer that learned Rabbi, and Porphyrius, like him opinionated: Not
possible it is, That Spirits, created by God immortal and incorporeall, should
be any way obnoxious to extinction or death. More credible it is, that these
were mere fantasies and illusions of the Devil; by such prestigious
sorceries persuading us that Spirits are mortal; to make man distrust the
immorralitie of the Soul, and so possess him with an heresy gross, impious,
and damnable.

Here likewise a most necessary consideration may be inserted, The Sadduces
answered.
to give answer to the Sadduces and others, who obstinately affirm, That Moses
in his Book of the Creation made no mention at all of Spirits or Angels. When
as Saint Augustine (contrary to them in belief) says, That under the words
of Heaven, and Light (though not by their proper and peculiar names) they were
specified and intended. And that Moses, writing to a People whose obstinacy
and stupidity was such, that they were not capable of their incorporeall
Essence; he was the more chary to give them plain and manifest expression.
Moreover, it may be supposed, That if the discreet Lawgiver had told them of
their Divine nature, it might have opened a wide gap to their idolatry, to
which he knew they were too prone of themselves. For if they were so easily
induced to worship a golden Calfe and a brazen Serpent, both of them molten and
made with hands; how could so excellent and divine a Nature have escaped their
adoration. Yet do the words of Moses allow of Spirits, (though covertly) where
it is said, Genes. 3.1. Now the Serpent was more subtle than any Beast of the
field which the Lord God had made, etc. By whom was meant the Devil; as
appears, Wisd. 2.24. As Satan can change himself into an Angel of light, so
did he use the wisdom of the Serpent to abuse Man, etc. I had occasion to
speak in my discourse of Dreams, of the one brother, Sleep: something shall
not be amiss to be discoursed of the other, Death; and to amplify that in the
Prose, which in the Verse was only mentioned.

Cicero calls Death, Of Death.
the younger brother of Sleep; which being a thing that cannot be avoided, it
ought therefore the less to be feated. One demanding of a noble Sea Captain,
Why, having means sufficient to live on land, he would endanger his person to
the perils and frequent casualties of the Ocean? He answered, That he had a
natural inclination to it, and therefore no persuasion could divert him from
it. The other replied upon him, I pray where died your Father? he answered, At
Sea. Again he asked him, Where his Grandfather died? Who told him, At sea. And
are not you then (said he) sor that cause afraid to go to sea? The Captain
made answer; Before I resolve you fully of your demand, let me also be
satisfied in one thing from you? I pray you where died your father? He
answered, In his bed. And where (says he) died your Grandfather? He likewise
answered, In his bed. He then replied, Why are you not then for that cause
only, afraid to go to bed?

It is a true saying, No man dies more willingly, than such as have lived most
honestly. And wherefore should we be afraid to meet with that, which we know
it is not possible for us to shun? Heraclitus calls it the Law of Nature, the
Tribute of the Flesh, the Remedy of Evils, and the Path either to heavenly
Felicity, or eternal Misery.

Claudian, lib. 2. de Raptu Proserp. speaking of Death, writes after this
manner: Sub tua purpurei venient vestigiareges
Deposito luxu: turbaque cum paupere mixti
Omniamors equat, etc.
Purple-rob'd Kings, their glory laid aside,
And pompous state, beneath thy steps shall fall;
Mixed with the poorer throng, that is void of pride
And vain excess. It Is Death which equals all.


And Ovid speaking of the vnpartialitie of the fatal Sisters, Metam. lib. 10.
says, Omnia debentur vobis paulumque morati
Serius aut citius, etc.
All things to you are due: after small stay,
Sooner or later, we must walk one way.
There Is but one common path to us assigned;
To that all tend, as there to be confined.


It is a great and weighty thing, (says the Philosopher) and not soon
learned, When that inevitable hour shall come, to entertain it with patience:
Thou can not fly the necessity thereof, overcome it thou may; namely, if
thou do not first yield unto it; if quietly thou expectest it; if unmoved
thou receiuest it; if thou do persist certain against incertaintie; and
fearelesse, against that which most men fear: then may thou be said truly to
conquer and overcome it. There is nothing so bitter, but an equal and constant
spirit can easily digest; for many in their patient sufferings seem to despise
the most exquisite torments: Mutius, the Fire; Regulus, the Cross; Anaxarchus,
the contusion of all his members; Theramenes and Socrates, Poison: and when
sentence of death was delivered to Canius, from the Tyrant, he then playing at
Chesse, seemed so little daunted at the message, that without change of
countenance he played out his game. And so of others. Now whence grew this
magnanimity, but from a sound and clear conscience; assiduate practice of
Virtue; and a courage armed against all disasters? Nothing is more calamitous,
than a mind doubtful of what is to come: To be always troubled, is to be
miserable before misery happen; for there is nothing more foolishly wretched,
than to be still in fear, especially of death; which (if nothing else) the
very necessity thereof, and the common equality with all Mankind, ought to
make tolerable.

First diligently think with thy self, That before thou die, all thy vices
die in thee. And next, That thou make a consummation of thy life, before thy
death. O! when thou shall see that time in which thou shall perceive no time to
belong unto thee! in which thou shall be temperate and calm, and in thy
sa^ietie careless of the morrow! Then that day which now thou fear as thy
last, shall appear to thee thy birth day to eternity. Do thou weep and
lament; These things belong to those which are newborn. Do thou think
those things to be lost, which thou leauest? Why should thou dote upon that
which was not thine own, but leant? Who is it that would set a price upon Time,
or at a dear rate estimate the Day, who truly understands that he is every
hour dying? In this we much deceive our selves, That we see not Death afar
off, nor apprehend it near. That part of our age which is past, is free; that
which is behind, is in the power of Death: neither do we fall upon Death
suddenly, but step by step we meet it by degrees: we daily die, for every day a
part of our life is taken from us; and even at that time when we increase, our
life decreaseth: we lose our Infancy first, our Childehood next, then our
Youth, and every one of these when it arriueth to the full period, perishes;
for yesterdayes life is this day wanting, and tomorrow, this days being has
ceased to be: nay even this day which we breath, we divide with Death; for it
is the very moment and point of time in which we can be said to live; yea
less, if less can be imagined: neither of that little or less space can we
assure our selves. Saint Chrysostom super Math. calls Death The necessary
gift of corrupt Nature, which ought not fearfully to be avoided, but rather
chearefully embraced; for by making that voluntary which is compulsiue, that
which is to God a due debt, we offer unto him as a free gift. Moreover, a
foolish and ridiculous thing it is for men to delight in sleep, and fear
death, when sleep is nothing else but the imitation of Death.

Saint Augustine, lib. de Natura and Gracia, uses these words; If thou
boastest thy self of Nobility, Riches, or Honor? of thy Country, or the
applause given unto thee by the People? look into thy self and consider, That
thou came from the earth, and into it again thou must return. Look about,
and behold all those which in times past have flourished in the like
splendours; Where be the insuperable Emperors? Where be those that frequented
Meetings, Music, and Feasts; and delighted in the brave breed of Horses?
Where be their Robes of state? their rich and gorgeous Vesture? Where their
troops of Followers, and large train of Attendants? Where their sportings and
Reuellings? Where be the Captains of Armies? Champions, Judges, Tyrants? are
not all Earth, Dust, and Ashes? and their magnificence and memory in a small
Tomb and short Epitaph contained? Look into their gorgeous and glittering
Sepulchers, and see how much the Lord differs from the Servant; Tell me which
is the Rich man, and which the Poor; Distinguish if thou can, the Captive
from the Conqueror; the Valiant from the Timorous; or the Fair from the
Deformed. Therefore remember thy self, o Man, of thy frail and weak nature;
least thou be any way tumor'd with Pride, Arrogance, or Vainglory.

Bernard in one of his Sermons says, Novissima sunt quatuor, etc. The four
last things are, Death, Judgment, Hell, and Glory: Than Death, what more
horrible? Than Judgment, what more terrible? Than Hell, what more
intolerable? Than Glory, what more delectable?

It will not, I hope, appear much impertinent, to introduce one of Lucians
Dialogues, because the Argument is not much foreign to this purpose. The
Interloquutors or Speakers are, Charon, Mercury: The Dead, Menippus,
Charmeleus, Lampichus, Damasias a Philosopher, and a Rhetorician. The effect
thereof is comprised in these few lines: Nothing there is after this frail
life left us,
With which one Friend may do another pleasure;
All earthly blessings are at once bereft us,
Wisdom, Strength, Valor, Beauty, Power, and Treasure:
Nothing remains on which Man chiefly doteth:
So much to us the subsequence denotes.
The Dialogue.
WHy ho there? List, that I may let you know Charon.

How your affairs stand; that you may bestow
Your selves with safety. See, my boat's but small,
Rotten and crazed, nay leaking too withal:
Besides, if not even poised, 't may ouerwhelme,
And drown, with you, me too, that guides the Helm.
See, see, in what thick multitudes you throng,
And every one brings fardels too along;
These needless weights will lade us to the brim,
Dangerous 't may prove to those which cannot swim.
What shall we do then, Charon, that we may Mercury.

Have safe transportage?
Marry thus I say; Charon.

You must all enter naked, and what is more
(As mere superfluous) leave upon the shore:
Nay, when you are dis-rob'd too, 't will (I fear)
Scarcely hold all. Then Mercury stand near,
Close to the Ladder, and take strict account
Of all that pass thee, and desire to mount
Into my Bark; but force them all to'appeare
Naked, or else they get no passage here.
It shall be done: What Is he comes first? Merc.

It Is I.
Menippus; see, my Scrip I have laid by, Menippus.

My Cloak and Staff too I have cast aside,
And keep no rag my nakedness to hide.
Menippus? good man enter; whom to grace Merc.

The better, next the Pilot take thy place,
There in the seat most eminent, to take view
Of all that come. The next of all the crew?
What Is he so fair?
Charmeleus, I, and borne Charmeleus.

In rich Megara, where my time's out-worne
A Lover; who in Dalliance fixed my bliss,
And gave at once two Talents for a kiss.
Thou must put off that beauty, cast aside Merc.

Those ruby lips, thy kissing, and thy pride;
Those Roses in thy cheeks must now be lost,
And that white skin of which thou late did boast.
So, well done, enter now. But stay, what is he
Roab'd in rich Purple, and would wafted be?
Upon his head a Diadem so brave?
And with a look (besides) austere and grave?
Lampichus.
I Am Lampichus the Tyrant.
Merc.
Why'at thy back
Have thou so many bundles, which may crack
Our crazy Bottom?
Lamp:
Is 't not fit, a King,
Where er'e he travels should such portage bring,
As to his state belongs?
Merc.
Vncrowne thy head;
Such Ornaments belong not to the Dead.
Lamp.
Behold, my Riches I aside have cast.
Merc.
But Lampichus, thou still about thee have
Thy Haughtiness and Pride; hurl them away:
For if with those, thou in this Bark should stay,
Their very weight would sink us.
Lamp.
I request
Only my Crown, and Couch whereon to rest.
Merc.
It no way can be granted.
Lamp.
Be It so then:
What now remains?
Merc.
Thy cruelty toward men;
Thy madness, wrath, direptions: These, and all
Like unto these.
Lamp.
Behold I have let fall,
And now am naked.
Merc.
Enter. What art thou,
So fat and corpulent?
Damasius.
Hermes, allow
Me place with them: I am Damasius, he
Most famed for Wrestling.
Merc.
Even the same I see,
Whom I have often viewed with no common grace,
Return a Victor from the Wrestling place.
Damas.
It Is true, o Mercury, behold me bare,
And quite dis-roab'd.
Merc.
And yet for us no Fare.
How can thou be termed naked, when thou have
Such a huge mass of flesh about thy wast:
Dismiss it all; for if thou but one step
Should make into the Barge with that huge heap,
'Twill drown us all. Nay more than that, lay by
Those Crowns and Bays.
I shall do it instantly: Damas.

And now am like the rest.
I see it is right: Merc.

It Is fit none enters here but that comes light.
And thou, o Crato, needs aside must cast
Those Riches and Effoeminacies thou have;
Nor must thou bring those Epitaphs along,
Nor pride of Ancestrie; for those may wrong
Our leaking Vessel. Thou must leave behind,
Thy Kindred, Glory, with the timpanous wind
Of men's applause, and the inscriptions vain
Writ on thy Statues; or return again.
Give order, That no glorious Tomb be reared
Over thy bones, because it may be feared,
So ponderously upon thy Coarse to ly,
To damage us.
Lo, though unwilling, I Crato.

Dis-robe them all.
Stay; ere you waft together, Merc.

Armed? and a Trophy? Why are these brought hither?
Because in deeds of Arms I did excel, Crato.

Have been a Martialist, and fought so well,
That for my noble acts and service past,
The City, me with all these honors graced.
But that brave Trophy must on earth remain: Merc.

Besides, amongst the Dead, Arms are held vain,
For here is all peace. What Is he whose habit shows
Such gravity? Who looks like one that knows
More than his Fellows? his eyes upward placed,
Brows knit, and beard falling below his waste.
It Is a Philosopher, o Hermes, full Menip.

Of juggling and vain trifles: do but pull
His upper garments off, throw them aside,
Then see what strange ridiculous toys they hide.
Take off his cloak, and what is concealed lay by: Merc.

O Jupiter! what arrogance I spy?
What a huge deal of ignorance, contention,
Vainglory, questions too of new invention,
Doubtful and intricate? thorny Disputations,
Troubled and perplexed thoughts, idle narrations?
Of which his habit made me not misdoubt him,
Yet see how many do we find about him.
Nay, what vain labors, ^opperies, and toys,
Strange curiosities scarce fitting boys?
By Jove, he has gold too in ample measure;
Wrath, impudence, effoeminacie, pleasure,
Soft delicacies, in his life time dear,
Which, though he would conceal, now plain appear.
What multitudes of lies? What hoords of pride
And self-conceit? which he must cast aside.
Next to all these, thy strong opinions, then
Which prompt thee to be wisest amongst men:
Ore-burthen'd with all these, what can thou gain thee,
When twice this Bo^toms size cannot contain thee?
Philosopher.
All these I have cast off, since I have heard
Your severe imposition.
Menip.
But that Beard
Hairy and rough, which makes him still seem grave
(Of three pound weight) we from his chin must shave.
Merc.
Well spoke; see it done.
Philos.
Who must my Barber be?
Merc.
Who but Menippus? And now take to thee
This Shipwrights Axe; lay 't on a planke, and draw
His chinne to the full length.
Menip.
Me thinks this Saw
Were better far, 't will make him look precise
And Formal.
Merc.
No, that Hatchet let suffice.
Menip.
Wondrous! These Goatish excrements away,
He looks more like a man. But Hermes, stay;
What if some few superfluous hairs I took
From 's beetle brows?
Merc.
By any means; he will look
Better by much: when these removed are,
He will not seem to be so wild, and sta^e.
What Is now the business? weepst thou, wicked man,
As fearing to be tortured? enter than.
Menip:
Stay, Stay, beneath his arme-pits lies obscured
What in the barge will never be endured.
Merc.
Menippus, what?
Smooth oily Flattery, such
Menip.
As in his life time did avail him much.
Philos.
It Is fit then thou, Menippus, should lay by
Freeness of speech, and too much liberty,
Thy boldness, mirth, and laughter^ for is it fit,
To mock us thus, thou in that place should sit?
Merc.
All that he is possessed of, let him still
About him keep; for they are light, and will
(Rather than hinder) help our navigation,
As burdenlesse, and fit for transportation.
And thou, o Rhetorician, cast away
Thy contradicting Phrases, (there is no stay)
Similitudes, Anti-positions too,
Periods and Barbarismes: This thou must do;
All thy light-seeming words must be thrown by,
For in the Hold most heavy they will ly.
I throw them off. Rhetorician.

The fastened cords unbind; Merc.

Pluck up the Ladder, 'bout the Cap-stone wind
The Cable, and weigh Anchor; hoise up Sail;
And thou, o Steeres-man, prithee do not fail
To look well to the Helm, and that with care:
Let Us now be merry, having all our fa^e.
But wherefore weep these sad Ghosts? but most thou
That of thy huge beard wast dispoyl'd but now?
Because I held the Soul immortal. Philos.

Fie, Menip.

Believe him not, o Hermes, it is a lie;
It Is somewhat else he grieves at.
What? Can tell? Merc:

Because after full Feasts he cannot smell; Menip.

Nor walking late (whilst others were at rest)
Close muffled in his Cloak, be made the guest
To dissolute Strumpets; sneake into his School
Betimes, and with his supposed wisdom fool
Young Scholars, cheating them of coin and time.
Thou, that pretendest to be free from crime, Philos.

Is not to thee Death tedious?
Can it be? Menip.

I hastening to 't when nothing summoned me?
But stay, What clamor's that a shore, so hye,
We scarce can hear our selves speak, Mercury?
It Is loud indeed, but comes from sundry places: Merc^

There is a Crew, that armed with loud disgraces,
Brand the dead Lampichus. Another strife
Grows from the women that reproach his wife:
And yonder his young children, but late borne,
Are stoned by children, and in pieces torn.
Some with loud accents Diaphantus praise,
The Orator, for his elaborate Phrase,
And funeral Oration, well expressed.
In Sycian, for this Crato, late deceast,
The Matrons, with Damasia's mother, there
Howl and lament his loss. But not a tear
Is shed for thee Menippus; thou 'rt more blessed,
Novlulations shall disturb thy rest.
Menip.
Not so: for thou within few hours shall hear
Dogs lamentably barking at my Beer;
The Crows and Ravens croaking at my grave,
In hope some good share of my flesh to have.
Mere.
Menippus thou art valiant, and now land,
Pass on fore-right, incline to neither hand;
That path will lead you to the Judgment Hall,
Whilst we transport the rest that yonder call.
Menip.
Sail prosp'rously, o Mercury, we will on,
As best befits, unto the Judgment Throne.
What shall of us become now? here, they say,
Are sundry torments that endure foray;
Stones, AEgles, Wheels, in number that surmount:
Now each must of his life yield just account.


Bias, to one who by reason of the great sorrow he took for the loss of his
children, called upon Death, as desiring to depart out of the world; Max. sermon.
36.
said unto him, Why, fond man, do thou call upon that, which though uncalled
for, will come upon thee?

Of Constancy in death.
Musonius being demanded, Who died best? made answer, Those that make account
of every present day at their last. Theramines was no sooner departed out of an
house, but it presently fell to the earth. When his Friends came about him to
gratulate his unexpected safety; he said unto them, (beyond their expectation)
Know you, o men, unto what greater dangers, or a more unfortunate death, the
gods have reserved me? Intimating, That the escape from one disaster was no
security from falling into another. Which happened accordingly; for not long
after he fell into the hands of the thirty Tyrants, Alian. de var. hist.
and was compelled to end his life by poison.

Seneca, Epist. 78. uses these words; Is any man so ignorant, but knows, that
at one time or other he must die? yet when the time comes many weep and
lament. Why do thou mourn, o Wretch? why fear and tremble? since all men
are tied to that strict necessity, and thou art but to go whither all things
before thee are gone. To this law thou art borne: the same thing happened to
thy father, thy mother, and to all thy predecessors; to all before thee, and
shall to all that must succeed thee, etc.

Spartanus being in^idiated by Iphicrates the General of the Athenians, and
surprised by an ambush: and demanded of his Soldiers, What in that exigent
was to be done? made answer, What else, but that whilst you fly basely, I die
fighting honorably.

Such was the spirit of Cato Vticensis, who persuaded others to the safety of
their lives, whilst he prepared himself to a voluntary death. Plutar. in
Laconic. Apo.
Rubrius Flavius, condemned unto death by Nero, and being brought to the
block; when the Executioner spoke unto him, that he would boldly stretch forth
his neck: Yes, (quoth he) and I wish thou with as much resolution, and as
little fear, may strike off my head. Seneca.
I will conclude with this Similitude: As all those Stars which rise from the
East, though they be of great celeritie and virtue; yet tend to their setting,
and according to their diverse Circles, some sooner, some later, hide themselves
from our aspect: So all the Generation of Mankind, from the East, that is, by
their Nativity, enter into the world; and though here for a season they shine,
and according to their qualities and degrees give less or greater luster; yet
of necessity they must all arrive, some early, some late, at the fall or set of
Death, according unto the continuance of that Course which God in his wisdom
has appointed them; and by degrees withdraw and hide themselves from the eyes
of the World.

Now having sufficiently discoursed of Death, I will point you to a contented
life, out of one of Martials Epigrams, not without great elegancie thus
delivered unto us: Vitam quae faciunt beatiorem, etc.
Blithe Martial, will thou undertake Content of Life.

Things which the life more blessed make?
They Are these; A Fortune competent,
Not got by labor, but descent:
No thanklesse Field, a Fare convenient;
No strife at all; a Gown expedient,
For warmth, not trouble; a mind quiet;
Strength purchased by a moderate diet;
A healthful body; Prudence grounded
On Simpleness; Friendship compounded
On Paritie: then, so to call,
That no one man may pay for all:
A Table without Art or Cost;
A Night so spent it be not lost
In Drunkenness, yet that thou dare
(And boldly) call it, Free from Care.
A Bed not sad, but chaste in sport;
Sleep that shall make the night seem short:
To wish to be that which thou art,
And nothing more, in whole or part.
And then thy last day shall appear,
It, thou may neither wish, nor fear.


Of Poetry.
I cannot pass Poetry without some Character, though never so brief. Now what
Poets are, or at least ought to be, Horrace, lib. de stat. Poet. thus
contractedly delivers unto us: Ille bonis faveat, and concilietur Amice, etc.
The Good he favors, as to them a Friend:
The Angry swayes; loves those that fear to offend:
He only praises, and desires to taste
Those Viands on a thrifty table placed.
Justice he loves, and fears the higher Powers;
Nor cares who looks on his retired hours.
Counsel he honors; and dares pray aloud,
Fortune may court the Wretch, and curb the Proud.


Honor conferred on Poets from Antiquity.
Of the great respect and honor conferred upon them in ancient times; and how
those Dignities vnmeritedly are since taken from them, and they in succeeding
Ages vilified; Ovid, lib. 3. de Art Amand. not without great cause, thus
ingeniously complains: Quid petitur sacris, nisi tantum fama Poetis? etc.
What more do sacred Poets seek, than Fame?
Of all our Labors it is the sovereign aim.
Poets, of Dukes and Kings were once the care,
And great rewards proposed for what was rare:
A Holy-state, and Venerable Style
Was then conferred on him who did compile
Any brave Work; a name he did inherit,
And mighty wealth was thrown upon his merit.
In the Calabrian mountains Ennius had
His pleasant Gardens: Then was Scipio glad
To have but such a Neighbor; and to choose
Selected hours to spend upon his Muse.
But now the Bays are without honor worn;
For what is a Poet but a name of scorn?
Yet let us not sleep our Fame; since Homer dead
Should this day be, were not his Iliads read.


Of Poets.
Antonius Mancinellus speaking in the praise of Poets, writes to this purpose:
By Nature they are strengthened, by the power of the Mind inflamed, and by
Divine Rapture inspired. Rightly therefore did old Ennius call them Holy, as
those commended unto us by the gift and bounty of the gods. The Coliphonians
claim Homer to be their Citisen; the Chij challenge him; the Salamines would
usurp him; the Smyrnaeans ingrosse him; and three more of the most potent
Cities of Greece erected Monuments after his death, Scipio.
to eternise him. So dear was Ennius to Africanus, that he afforded him a
Grave amongst the ancient and ennobled Family of the Scipio's. Theophanes
Mylitides received a whole City as a Gift, which was then held too small a
reward for one Poem. Alexander the Great held the richest Casket taken among
the spoils of Darius, scarce worthy to preserve the Works of Homer in. The
same Alexander surprising Thebes, preserved a great part of the City only for
Pindarus the Poets sake. Those Murderers who privately slew Archilichus, Apollo
himself revealed, and caused his death to be revenged. Sophocles, the Prince
of the Cothurnate Tragedy, being dead at such time when Lysander beguirt the
walls of Lacedemon; the King was warned in a dream by Liber Pater, to afford
his Delight (for so the god called him) an honored sepulcher.

Poetry is a Study which instructs Youth, delights Old Age, graceth
Prosperity, solaceth Adversity; pleases at home, delights abroad;
shortneth the night, comfort the day; trauelleth with us, dwells with us,
etc. The greatest Orators made use of Poems, both for the strengthening of their
Causes, and ornament of their eloquence; as we may read in Cicero, Asinius,
Hortensius, and others; who frequently quoted the ingenious Phrases and grave
sentences of Ennius, Pacuvius, Lucillius, Terentius, Caecilius, etc.

Euripides the son of Muesarchides and Clito, The Greek Poets.
his father was no better than a Victualler, and his mother got the other part
of their living by selling of sallads, Euripides.
an Herbe-wife as we call them: yet he proved to be the greatest Fauorit that
King Archelaus had. And Sophocles the Tragic Poet was graced and honored by
all the Learned of his time, Sophocles.
and bore the prime office of Magistracy in the city where he lived. Aratus.
The Poet Aratus (in Grammar the scholar of Menecrates; and in Philosophy, of
Timon and Menedemus) flourished in the 124 Olympiad, in the time that Antigonus
the son of Poliarcetes reigned in Macedonia: with whom, even to his last
expiration, he lived in great estimation and honor. Aulus Licinius Archias,
Archias.
a Poet borne in Antiochia, was indeered to the best and greatest Orators in
Rome, and more particularly graced by the Family of the Luculli. He was honored
of many Greek Heroes, and had rich Presents sent from their prime Cities: but
he was especially endeered to Cicero, Aristonius a Comicke Poet lived under
Philadelphus, and was Master of the kings Library after Apollonius. Arrianus
was a Poet in whom the Emperor Tiberius Caesar was much delighted, (for so
Tranquillus reports.) Cyrus Panopolita was greatly honored by the Empress
Eudoxia. Cherilus Samius.
Cherilus Samius lived about the 63 Olympiad, and was no more than Servant unto
Herodotus the Historiographer; who writing the Expedition of the Greeks
against Xerxes, was for every verse in his Poem rewarded with a piece of gold
to the value of 16 shillings four pence sterling. Gorgius, Gorgius.
borne amongst the Leontini in Sicily, was endeared to Critias and Alcibiades
in their height of Fortune; and to Pericles and Thucidides, in the extremity
of his age. Caius Manilius was the first that wrote any Astrologicall Poem in
Latin; Manilius.
which he dedicated to Augustus Caesar, and by him was greatly respected and
rewarded. Lenaeus.
Lenaeus a freed-man of Pompeys, (but after his friend and companion in all his
expeditions) surviving his Lord; because Salust the historiographer had spoken
bitterly against him after his death, he inueighed against him in a most
sharp Satyr, calling him Lastaurus Lurchon, Nebul^ popinarius, and Monstrous
both in life and history; and moreover, a manifest Thief, from Cato and
diverse other ancient Writers. Menander, Menander.
a Comicke Poet of Athens, who writ fourscore in number, had great honors
done unto him by the Kings of Egypt and Macedon. Homerus Junior.
Homerus Junior lived about the time of Hesiod, the son of Andromachus, and
borne in Byzantium: he writ 57 Tragedies; and as Zezes in his Commentaries upon
Lycophron affirms, for one of them called Pleiades, and dedicated to King
Ptolomaeus, he was greatly favored, and royally rewarded. Oppianus was of
Silicia, Oppianus.
and borne in a City called Anazarbum: The Roman Emperor Severus being
invested before the City, and after pa^le, being congratulated both by the
Optimates and Plebe; he was only neglected and not thought worthy a salutation
by this Oppianus. He therefore commanded him to be banished into an Island
called Melita, situate near unto the Adriaticke sea. In which place he wrote a
noble Poem, de Piscibus^ which after the death of the emperor Severus, he
dedicated to his son Antoninus^ for which Work he was recalled from exile,
and to recompense his injury, for every verse in his Poem he guerdoned him
with a piece of gold. But soon after, returning with his father into his
Country, he died in the thirtieth year of his age. In honor of whom, the City
in which he was borne, erected his statue in Brass, and writ upon his
Monument these Verses following: Oppianus sum, suasi loquens Vates
Quem crudelis, atque inhumani i^^idia fati
Ante diem ^ripuit.
I Oppianus am: when I did speak,
Poets in place, did think their wits too weak.
Me, cruel and inhumane Fate enuy'd,
Which was the cause, before my time I died.


Homer in his eighth Odyss. speaks to this purpose: Among all other men, Poets
are most worthy to participate honor and reverence, because the Muses
themselves teach them their songs, and are enamoured both of their profession
and them. But I had almost forgot my self: for in proceeding further, I might
have forestalled a Work, which hereafter (I hope) by Gods assistance, to
commit to the public view; namely, the Lives of all the Poets, Foreign and
Modern, from the first before Homer, to the Novissimi and last, of what Nation
or Language soever; so far as any History or Chronology will give me
warrant. Therefore here in good time I break off: yet cannot choose but
remember you' what Ovid speaks in his last Elegy: Ergo cum silices, -- etc.
When Flints shall fail, and I^'on by age decay,
The Muse shall live, confined to Time nor day.
Kings, and Kings glorious Triumphs must give way;
And Tagus blessed sands unto them obey.


Thus much to show you in what honor Poets have been. But now (and hence Illae
Lachrimae) to show you in what respect they are; and not only in the Times
present, but what an heavy Fate has heretofore (as now) been impending over
the Muses. De dura and misera sort Poetarum, thus far hear me: Heu miseram
sortem, duramque a sidere vitam,
Quam dat docti loquis vatibus ipse Deus!
'Lasse for the poor and wretched state Poetr. miseria:

That either Phoebus, or sad Fate
Inflicts on learned Poets! whether
They, or their wills with them, together
Conspire; all these we wretched find,
Who ever by their Wits have shyn'd.
Homer, to whom Apollo gave Homer.

The Palm, scarce (dying) found a Grave:
And he that was the Muses Grace,
Begged with his Harp from place to place.
Poor injured Virgil was bereft Virgil.

Of those fair fields his Father left;
And in the flourishing state of Rome,
In Caesar's Stable served as Groom.
Ovid.
Though Ovid next Augustus dwelt,
Yet he as great disaster felt;
And died exiled amongst the Geats:
(No better, Fate the Muse entreats.)
Horace.
Though all men Horace did commend,
In populous Rome he found no Friend,
Hesiod.
Save one, Mecaenas. Hesiod, borne
In wealthy Cuma; having worn
These were Antiphon and Chlimenus.
A tedious age out, was betrayed
By his two Brothers, who invade
Him sleeping, cut his throat asunder,
Who, breathing, was the worlds sole Wonder.
Lynus.
Lynus, who for his Books compiled,
Virgil, The Son of Phoebus styled;
And whom the Muses long had cherisht;
Apollo sagip.
By much incenst Sagipta perished.
Antipater Sydon.
Antipater Sidonius, well
Known for extempo'rall wit to'excell,
(By Cicero and Crassus) never
Upon his birth day escaped a Fever:
Of which, in his best days, and strength
Of Nature, he expyr'd at length.
Bassus Cesius.
Bassus Cesius, a man
Well known unto Quintilian,
A Lyricke Poet; when the Town
In which he sojourned was burnt down
By Thieves and Robbers; the fierce flame
Left of him nothing but his Name.
Lysimachus.
Lisimachus such want did feel,
That he was forced to turn a Wheel
For Rope-makers. The like we reed
Plautus.
Of famous Plautus; who to feed
His empty stomach, left his Quill,
To toil and labor at the Mill.
Calisthenes.
Calisthenes, a Kinsman near
To Aristotle, and much dear
To Alexander; yet because
The King against him found some clause,
The Muse which had so late him pleased,
Was quite forgot, and his life seas'd.
Nay worse (if worse may be) than thus,
Quintus Lactantius Catulus.
Quintus Lactantius Catulus
Romes Consul (yet a Poet) fared;
Who notwithstanding he out-dar'd
The Cimbri'ans, and in battle slew
Their General: his Troops withdrew,
And quite forgetting his bold action,
Exposed him to a muti'nous faction
Of Rebels, who not only rifled
His Treasure, but with wet brands stifled
Him in his chamber: whose sad fate
Sylla revenged. Nor had their hate
Extended to such deep despite,
But that the Muse was his delight.
Poor Ibichus was robbed and slain; Ibichus.

Yet did before his death complain,
And prophesied, The very Crows
That saw his blood shed, would disclose
The barba'rous act: and so it fell.
But though they suffered for 't in Hell,
Th'amends to him could seem but poor,
Since all, his life could not restore.
Old AEscilus (whom all Greece knew) AEscilus.

By whom the Tragic Buskin grew,
First known on Stage; whilst he alone
Vncouer'd sat, so like a stone
His bare scalpe showed, that from on hye,
And AEgle who did over him fly,
Dropped down a Shellfish on his head,
And with the sad blow struck him dead.
Anacreon, for the Lyricke strain Anacreon.

In Greece illustrous, may complain
Of the like Fate; who in his pride,
Choakt with a Grape by drinking, died.
O, that the Wine, which cheares the Muse,
On him such tyranny should use!
Petronius Arbiter, a Wit Petronius Arbiter.

To sing unto the gods more fit,
Than humor Nero; yet such power
Fate has, the Tyrant did but lower,
And then the Muse which Rome admired,
By cutting of his Veins expired.
Even Sapho, the Fair Poetesse, Sapho.

Who did the Lyricke strain profess;
Use all the skill and art she can,
Yet, Loving a poor Ferriman,
Distracts her with such deep despair,
That, as her Muse, her death is rare:
For from a Promontories top
She down into the sea does drop;
To quench the hot fire in her breast.
Thus Fate the best Wits has oppressed. etc.


I am loath to proceed further in this argument, to reckon up all in that kind,
who as they lived eminently, so have died miserably; for it would ask too long
a circumstance. Yet I cannot escape Johannes Campanius, without commemorating
unto you some few of his Saphickes, De Poetarum Miseria, in these words: Nemo
tam claro genitus parente;
Nemo tam clara probitate fulsit.
Mox edax quem non peremit vetustas,
Vate remoto, etc.
None that of ancient Birth can boast,
Or in their Virtue glory most,
But that their memory is lost,
Without a Poet:
And yet whilst others strut in gold,
He wears a garment thin and cold,
So torn, so threadbare, and so old,
He shames to owe it.
The Painter, by his Pensill eats;
Musitions feed out of their frets;
Nay even the Laboring man that sweats,
Not one amongst twenty,
But is with needful things supply'de:
Yet (as if Fate did them deride)
They poor and wretched still abide
In midst of plenty.
Now, dried up are the Muses Springs,
And where the Swans once washed their wings,
Pies chatter, and the Scritch-Owle sings,
Their wrongs pursuing.
Therefore, you Dukes of proud ostent,
And Princes to whom power is lent,
Even for your own Name-sakes lament
The Muses ruin.
Exiguo reliquis quae dantur tempore restant,
Quae data sunt vatis munera, semper habes.
What thou on others do bestow,
Does a small time persevere:
What thou to Poets giv'st, thou have,
And shall possess for ever.


That foreign Authors have not only complained of the great scorn and
contempt cast upon the Euthusiasmes and Raptures; as also that no due respect
or honor has been conferred upon the Professors thereof: whosoever shall call
to mind the all praiseworthy and euer-to-be-remembred Spencer, shall find
that he much bewailed this inherent and too common a disease of neglect, which
pursues the Witty, and inseparably cleaves to the most Worthy. Witness, his
Tears of the Muses, his Collen Clouts, Come home again, and diverse other of
his Works: but more particularly in the tenth Eclogue of his Shepherds
Calender, in the month entitled October, you may read him thus: Pierce, I
have piped erst so long with pain, Cuddy the Sheepeheard speaks.

That all mine Oaten Reeds are rent and wore,
And my poor Muse has spent her spared store,
Yet little good has got, and much less gain,
Such pleasance makes the Grasshopper so poor,
And ligge so laid, when Winter does her strain.
The dapper Ditties that I wont devise
To feed Youths fancy, and the flocking Fry
Delighten much: What I the bett, for thy?
They hau the pleasure; I, a slender Prise;
I beat the Bush, the Birds to them do fly:
What good thereof to Cuddy can arise.
And after in the same Eclogue Cuddy thus proceeds: Indeed the Romish Tyterus,
I hear,
Through his Mecaenas left his oaten Reed,
Whereon he erst had taught his Flocks to feed;
And labored lands to yield the timely ear,
And eft did sing of wars and deadly dreed,
So, as the Heavens did quake his Verse to hear.
But o, Mecanas is y^ladd in clay,
And great Augustus long ygo is dead,
And all the Worthies lyggen wrapped in lead,
That matter made for Poets on to play:
For, ever who in daring do were dead,
The lofty Verse of hem was loved aye.
But after Virtue 'gan for age to stoop,
And mighty Manhood brought a bed of ease,
The vaunting Poets found naught worth a pease,
To put in preace among the learned Troop.
Then 'gan the streams of flowing Wit to cease,
And Soon-bright honor pent in shameful Coupe.
And if that any buds of Poesy
Yet of the old stock 'gan to shoot again;
Or it men's follies mote to force, to feign,
And roll with rest in Rymes of Ribaldry,
Or as it sprung, it wither must again.
Tom Piper makes us better melody. etc.


Hear Faustus Andrelinus an excellent Poet, to another purpose: Nomina
doctiloqui non sunt spernenda Poetae,
Nomina non viles inter habenda viros:
Rebus in humanis nil est pretiosius, illo
Qui sua Gorgoneis or a rigavit aquis:
Cui tantum Natura favet, cui spiritus ingens,
Cui furor aetherea missus ab arce venit, etc.


Thus paraphrased: The names of learned Poets should not be
Contemned or scorned by men of base degree.
Amongst humane things there is nothing held more dear,
Than he who does his mouth rinse in the clear
Gorgonian Waters: Nature, him alone
Favors, and seems to grace, as being one
Of a great spirit; on whom from their high Tower,
The gods Celestial, Divine raptures power.
His fame (by Vertue'acquir'd) shall never die,
Before whom (bee'ng offended) his Foes fly.
His substance is not great, I must confess,
Yet is his glory to be pris'd no less
Than are those glistring shores (as we be told)
Whose pebles are bright Pearls, whose sand is Gold.
Little he has; for all his generous ways
(Aiming at others profits, his own praise)
He holds Coin in contempt, bee'ng of condition,
To vilify the Vulgars swollen ambition:
Their grosser humors having well discerned,
He holds them no way to beseem the Learned.
The Wood, the Den, the Countries devious path,
The River, Grove, and Well his presence has:
A sought-for silence, and remote from men,
Is best agreeing with his thought and pen;
Whilst confluence and noise delights the rude.
From the gross manners of the Multitude
He Is separate, he knows no idle hour,
To redeem Time is solely in his power.
He searches out the original of things,
And hidden Truths from dark oblivion brings.
Grosse-mettal'd Arts his Chymicke wit refines:
He Phoebus can direct, how through the Signs
To guide his Chariot Coursers: And again,
Teach dull Boots, with his loitering Waine,
What tract to keep: who (indulgent of his ease)
His tired lades never waters in the Seas.
The Giants wars against the gods he sings,
And high facinerous acts of Dukes and Kings.
You Worthies then, who by true honor strive
To keep your Virtues and your Names alive,
And what an after-Life's would understand,
Support the Poet with a liberal hand.
What Is elsewhere given is thrown into the grave;
But what is so spent you still in future have.


I cannot here omit a Spanish Proverb, with which I purpose to conclude this
argument now in speech: which is, Canta la Rana,
Y no tiene pelo ni lana^
The Frog will still be singing, though she
Have neither hair nor wool upon her back.


The French come near it, in another, frequent amongst them.

A fant de Chapon,
Pain and oignon.
For want of a Capon, Bread and Onions.
Qui cum pauperte convenit, dives est: He may truly be called a rich man, that
is content with poverty.

-- vivitur exigno melius,
Pauper enim non est, cui rerum suppetit vsus.
Peu de bien, peu de soncy.
That is; Small Ware, little Care.
Deis proximus, qui eget paucissimis.
With the gods he is held most blessed,
Who having little, needs least.
Is satis est dives, cuisatis est quod habet.
He has enough, that thinks he has sufficient.


To which Quintilian seems to comply, where he says, Satis devitiarum nihil
amplius velle.


But of the former Proverb, Cant a la Rana, etc. I make this, and most sure I
am no improper application.

Unto the Frogs we Poets may compare,
Who sing, though having neither wool nor hair.
And so much of Poets and Poetry.

That Spirits have power to transport men or beasts.
Pertinent it is to this discourse, to enquire, Whether Spirits, as with all
quick velocitie they can move themselves, so have the ability and power to
remove others, and transport the bodies of men, beasts, and the like. Which is
not to be questioned, but that both the good and bad Angels can without
difficulty perform. Neither are their faculties bounded within any limit, as
to bear only this weight, or carry such a burden; but they have an vncurbed
strength according to their own will and purpose: insomuch that one Spirit (by
Gods permission) is able to shake, remove, or demolish a Mountain, a City, or
a Province, as shall hereafter be more plainly illustrated. It is also
observed, That the nearer any spiritual Substance is unto the Creator in
place, it is so much the more swift and strong; and those that are farther
remote, are less able and preualent. The Water is known to be of more
swiftness and validity than the Earth; the Air, than the Water; and the
Moon, than either: and of all the other Planets, as they exceed in height, so
they excel in virtue, even until you come to the Primum Mobile, whose strength
and puissance is such, that it circumrotes and turns about all the Spheres
below it, and in it is incredible celeritie, every minute ouercomes more than a
thousand miles, as astronomers report.

Yet, notwithstanding the incogitable force and dexterity of Spirits, The
great power of Spirits.
the Theologists are of opinion, That they are not of power to destroy any one
Element, or to pervert that constant order by which the fabric of the World
is guided and governed. Yet of their incredible celeritie and strength,
histories are very frequent both in the sacred Scriptures, and elsewhere. We
read, That the Devil took our blessed Savior, and by the permission of this
Godhood, placed him on the top of the pinnacle of the Temple; and in a moment
took him from thence, and bare him into an exceeding high mountain, from
whence he showed him all the Kingdoms of the earth, and the glory thereof.
We read likewise, Daniel. 14.
That the Angel of the Lord took the Prophet Habbacuck (as he was carrying
meat unto the Reapers) by the hair of the head, and in the strength of spirit,
in an instant transported him from Iudaea to Babylon: And as soon as the
Prophet Daniel had took his repast, left him in the twinkling of an eye, in
the self same place where he first found him. The like we read in the
Gospel, of Philip the Apostle, who was snatched up by the Angel, and brought
where the Eunuch of Candaces was reading in Esaias the Prophet: which after he
had expounded unto him, and then baptized him in the river, he was suddenly
taken from his sight. Other histories to this purpose there be many.

Pythagoras (if we may believe Apollonius) was seen in one day both in Croton
and Metapontus. Histories of strange transportations. Apoll. Tyan.
And Apollonias Tyanaeus the notable Magitian, being at Rome in the presence of
the Emperor Domitian, and commanded to be bound hand and foot before him, yet
he suddenly vanished out of his sight, and was the self same hour hurried as
far as Puteoli, to keep a former appointment which he had made, to make
merry with some of his acquaintance and friends.

Iamblicus a notorious Inchanter having sacrificed unto the Devil, Iamblicus.
was raised up ten cubits from the earth, seeming (to the wonder and amasement
of all there present) to walk in the air. And as Evanippus testifies of him,
his garments were strangely altered, appearing as if they had been newly dipped
in a thousand sundry glorious colors. Johannes Teutonicus.
Johannes Teutonicus a Cannon of Halbersted in Germany, having by art Magic
performed many strange prestigious feats, almost incredible; in one day (which
was the birth day of our Savior) was transported by the Devil in the shape of
a black horse, and seen and heard to say Mass the same day, in Halbersted,
in Mentz, and in Cullein.

Plutarch tells us, Euchides Platensis.
That the Grecians having overthrown the Persians in the great battle of
Marathon, they purposed a great and solemn sacrifice to the gods, in
thankful remembrance of so miraculous and unexpected a victory: who for their
better instruction, how the more reuerendly to manage it, sent to ask
counsel of the Oracle in Delphos. Who returned them answer, That they should
first build a new Altar, and consecrate it to Jupiter the Deliverer; and not to
make their Offering till all the fire throughout whole Greece was quite
extinguished, and not one spark remaining, as being polluted by the
Barbarians, and therefore by the gods of Greece held execrable. Which done,
they should with all speed send to Delphos, and from thence fetch pure and
unpolluted fire to kindle the Sacrifice. According to this imposition of the
Oracle, by a strict order made by the Princes and chief Magistrates, all the
fire was extinct; and then one Euchides of Plataea, a man of an vnbeleeuable
swiftness (after he had been first washed, and after that crowned with Laurel)
was sent to Delphos, distant from that city more than a thousand furlongs, who
went and returned within the compass of one day; and having brought the sacred
Fire, he had no sooner delivered it up to the Priest (who was then chief in
the Sacrifice) but he instantly fell down dead. Yet the ceremonies went on;
and after, by the command of the Princes, his body was taken up, and by their
appointment had the honor to be buried in the great and famous Temple of
Diana: with this inscription upon his Tomb; Euchides Delphos cucurrit;
Et die reversus est vna.
Euchides, to Delphos sent,
Who in one day both came and went.


A strange History.
I have read of a noble Centurion in the lower part of Germany, of great
opinion and estimation with the people, for his approved goodness and known
honesty; who reported this Discourse following: That walking one evening
through a Thicket or Grove not far distant from the place in which he lived,
with only one man and a boy in his company to attend him; he saw approaching
toward him a fair and goodly company of Knights and Gentlemen; all seeming
persons of great eminence, for they were mounted on great and brave horses, and
well accommodated at all points; all which, without any salutation, in great
silence past by him: In the lag of which troup he fixed his eye with some
astonishment on one, who to his present imagination had served him and bin his
Cook; who was dead and buried some few days before this apparition. This
Fellow was as well mounted as the rest, and lead an empty or spare horse by the
bridle. The Centurion being a man of an undaunted spirit, went up close to him,
and demanded what he was? and whether he were the same Cook who had lately
served him, and whom he had seen coffined and laid in the earth? Who answered
him again, That without any doubt or scruple, he was the self same man. His
master then asked him, what Gentlemen, or rather Noblemen (as appeared by their
habit) were those that rid before? Whether he himself was then traveling? And
to what purpose he led that empty horse in his hand? To all which he replied in
order; That all those horsemen were men of note and quality (naming to him
diverse whom he knew were deceased) and that they were now upon a voyage to the
Holy Land, whether he himself was likewise bound, and that spare horse was
provided of purpose to do him service, if it so pleased him, and that he had
any desire to see Jerusalem. The Centurion made answer, That with great
willingness he could find in his heart to see the City, and visit the holy
Sepulcher, whether (had means and leisure served to his purpose) he had long
since intended a pilgrimage. The other told him, Now was the time, his horse
ready, no necessaries wanting; or if he intended that voyage, he could not go
in better company. At which words, the bold Centurion leapt into the empty
saddle, and was presently hurried away from the sight of his servants in a
moment: and the next evening, at the same hour, and in the same place, he was
found by his servants and friends, who were there seeking and enquiring after
him. To whom he related his journey, and what he had seen in the Holy City;
describing punctually every Monument and place of remarke: which agreed with
the relations of such Travelers and Pilgrims as had been there and brought
Certificate and assured testimony from thence. He showed unto them likewise,
an hand-kerchiefe which that Cook his servant (or rather Devil in his
likeness) had given him, stained with blood; but told him, if at any time it
were foul or durtie, he should cast it into the fire, for that was the only
way to make it clean. He showed them likewise a knife and sheath which he
bestowed upon him, which he said was the gift of a grateful remembrance; but
gave him a great charge thereof, for (said he) the metal is poisoned, and
every blow given therewith is present and immediate death.

Alexander Alexandri relates a story of a poor Captive shut up in a dark
dungeon; but by a Spirit taken from thence, and transported into diverse
Infernal places: where having spent three entyre days and nights (being mist
all that time by the Jailer) he was after brought back into the same, and
lodged in his irons, though the place was double barred, locked, and bolted.
Who made relation of many strange sights seen in Hell, and with what several
insufferable torments the Souls of the Damned were inflicted; persuading all
them that came to visit him, to have more care how they lead lives dissolute
and wicked, least after death they should be made partakers of such infatigable
Torments.

A noble man of Insubria.
Boccatius writes the history of a Nobleman of Insubria, who undertaking a
journey, or rather Pilgrimage, to Jerusalem, to accomplish a Vow before made;
at the parting with his wife, left her a Ring, with a constant condition and
couenanted vows betwixt them, That if he returned not to claim it before the
expiration of three years, she should have free leave and liberty to bestow
her self in marriage to her own liking; but until the last prefixed day to
keep her first nuptial Faith inviolate. After his departure it so happened,
that in the way he was set upon by Outlawes and Robbers, rifled, taken
prisoner, and after carried into Egypt; where in process of time being
brought before the Emperor and examined, he told him (and truly too) that he
was son to a Nobleman of such a Country; who when he himself in person
(disguised) traveled to discover some parts of Christendom, at his own house
gave him courteous and honorable entertainment. Which the Sultan remembering,
gratefully acknowledged his fathers great generositie and bounty, and not only
restored him to present liberty, but soon after created him Vizier Bassa, and
made him the second person in the kingdom. In which honor and greatness he
continued till the date of three years were almost fully expired; when
remembering the last contract made betwixt his wife and him, he grew into a
sudden and deep melancholy: which the Sultan perceiving, earnestly importuned
him to know the reason of his so strange distemperature. Who (to shorten
circumstance) disclosed unto him all the former passage betwixt himself and
his best affected wife. Which passionately apprehended by the Sultan, he
presently caused a skillful Magitian to be called, and solicited him, with the
utmost of his skill to further the desires of his Friend^ The Necromancer
caused instantly a rich bed to be provided, and laid him thereon; which the
Emperor caused to be furnished with an inestimable treasure both of coin and
jewels. The Insubrian was no sooner at rest, but by the help of Spirits, he
was immediately transported unto Fycina his own city, and there left in the
Cathedral Church near to the high Altar: This was in the night. Now early in
the morning when the Sexton entered to prepare the Church for Divine service, he
cast his eye upon the glorious bed which shined with stones and gems, and
withal espied him laid thereon, and as yet not fully awake. At which
unexpected sight being extremely terrified, he ran out of the Church, and to
all that he met proclaimed the prodigy. By this time the Nobleman began to
awake and recollect himself; and then rising up and walking forth of the
Temple (for the Sexton had left the door open) he met with those who made
toward the place to partake the wonderment: Some of which, notwithstanding his
long absence and strange habit, knew him, and saluted him with a friendly
welcome. From thence he went home, longing to know how the affairs stood with
his wife and Family; but the time of their former vows being now expired, he
found her newly contracted, and the next day to have been married to another
husband, which his seasonable arrival most fortunately prevented.

Now touching the transportation of Witches by the assistance of the Devil,
The transportation of Witches.
though I might select and cull out many histories both from Bodinus and
Wyerius: yet because they have passed through the hands of many; I will rather
make choice of some few, gathered out of Authors less read, and not altogether
so vulgarly known.

Bartholomaeus Spinaeus Master of the holy Palace, A strange History of a maid
of Bergamus.
records this History: There was (says he) a yong^Maid, who lived with her
mother in Bergamus, and was found in one and the same night in bed with a
cousin german of hers in Venice: who being found there in the morning naked,
without linen, or so much as a rag to cover her; yet being nearly allied to
them, they gently demanded of her how she came thither? where her clothes
were? and the cause of her coming? The poor Guirle being much ashamed, and
mixing her blushes with many tears, made answer to this purpose; This very
night (said she) when I lay betwixt sleep and awake in bed, I perceived my
mother to steal softly from my side, thinking I had not seen her; and
stripping her self from all her linen, she took from her closet a box of
ointment, which opening, she anointed her self therewith under the armpits
and some other parts of her body: which done, she took a staf which stood
ready in a corner; which she had no sooner bestrid, but in the instant she rid
(or rather flew) out of the window, and I saw her no more. At which being much
amassed, and the candle still burning by me, I thought in my self to try a
childish conclusion, and rising from my bed took down the said box, and
anointing my self as I had before observed her, and making use of a bedstaffe
in the like manner, I was suddenly brought hither in a moment; where I was no
sooner entered, but I espied my mother in the chamber with a knife in her hand,
and coming toward the bed, with purpose (as I thought) to kill this my young
Nephew, (pointing to a child in the cradle;) but she was hindered by finding
me here. Who no sooner saw me, but she began grievously to threat me, and
came near to strike me: In which fear I began to call upon God to help me;
whose name I had no sooner uttered, but she vanished instantly, and I am left
here even as you found me. Whereupon her kinseman the Master of the house writ
down, and keeping the Maid still with him, sent to the Father Inquisitor of
the place, where the mother of the Guirle his Kinswoman lived in good
reputation, and no way suspected; before whom she was called and questioned,
and as the manner of that Country is upon the like probability and suspicion,
put to the mercy of the Tormentor, and at length she confessed every
particular before mentioned: To which she added, That she had no less than
fifty sundry times been transported by the Devil, only with a malicious intent
to kill that young child; but she found him always at her arrival so protected
by the blessings and prayers of his devout and religious Parents, that she had
no power at all over him, etc.

Antonius Leo:
To this story the Author adds a second of one Antonius Leo, a Collier by
profession, and dwelling in the city of Ferrara; who greatly suspecting his
wife to be a Witch, by reason that diverse of his Neighbors informed him, That
she was reputed to be one of those who had nightly conuentions with the Devil:
he therefore kept all to himself, and one night above the rest, snorting and
counterfeiting a deep and profound sleep; with which his wife being deluded,
rose softly from the bed, and as in the former discourse, daubing her self
with an unguent, leapt out at the easement, which was some three stories high,
and he could set no more sight of her. At which he grew first strangely amassed,
as fearing she had desperately done it to break her neck; but hearing no
cry, nor apprehending any noise by her fall, he then began to confirm his
former suspicion; and in a foolish curiosity took the same box, and did to
himself in all respects as he had seen her to practice before him, and was
immediately in the same manner hurried out at the window, and in an instant
found himself in a Noble Counts Wine-sellar, where he saw his wife with
diverse others of that Devilish sister hood, merrily gossipping and carousing
deep healths one to another; who no sooner beheld so unexpected a guest, but
they all suddenly vanished, and the poor Collier was left alone with the
cellar door fast locked upon him; and early in the morning being found there by
the Butler, he called other his fellow servants, who apprehended him as an
House-breaker and Felon, and brought him before their Lord. Who at length by
great importunity obtaining liberty to speak for himself, he opened unto the
Count all the manner of the particular circumstances before related: which
though at first they appeared incredible, yet upon more mature consideration
he was dismissed, but conditionally, That he call his wife in public
question, with the rest of her Associats. Which he accordingly did, and brought
them before the Inquisitor; to whom, after examination, they confessed not
only that, but many other more notorious and diabolical acts, the least of
them sufficient to bring them to the stake and faggot.

Barthol. Ronfaus tells a strange story of a Witch in Osburch: Antonius
Torquinada delivers the like, who was by Nation a Spaniard: and Paulus
Grillandus in his Book, De Sortilegis, remembers diverse to the same purpose;
one of which I thought good to transfer from him, and expose to your free
view and censure. In the year of Grace (says he) 1524, when I was chief
Inquisitor, many of these Inchantresses and Witches were brought before me.
Amongst whom, a certain woman Dioecis Sabensis, was a practiser of that
diabolical art: of which her husband had been long suspicious, and watched her
so narrowly, that he took her in the manner when she was busy about her
infernal exercise. Notwithstanding which she impudently denied it, and
out-faced him that she was no such woman. But he as obstinat on the contrary,
and resolved withal not to be so deluded, with a good sound cudgel fell upon
her, and so be labored her sides and shoulders, till with incessant beating
he forced the truth from her, and brought her upon her knees most submissiuely
to entreat his pardon: which after some entreaty he seemed willingly to grant,
but upon condition, That she would b^ing him to be present and an eyewitness
of their abominable ceremonies used in their nightly Conuentions; which she
faithfully promised, and so they were reconciled. At the next night of their
meeting, he having engaged his word for secrecy, she brought him to the place
appointed, where he freely beheld the manner of their adoration done to the
Devil, their sports and their dances, full of many beastly postures and
figures, with many other strange pastimes and merriments there practiced. All
which being ended, there was a long Table covered, and furnished with sundry
dishes, and he seated amongst them; and as he saw the rest do, he began to fall
heartily to his victuals, which somewhat distasted him, as not being well
seasoned: therefore looking about him for salt, but spying none upon the table,
he called to one that attended, to fetch him a little salt. But he not seeming
to regard him, he began to grow importunate and somewhat loud: at length he
brought him a small quantity upon the corner of a trencher; which he seeing,
and seeming glad thereof. Mary God be thanked (said he) for I have now got some
salt. Which words were no sooner uttered, but the Table, Meat, Dishes, Devils,
Witches, and Lights all vanished, and he was left there naked and alone in a
desolate place. But in the morning spying certain Shepherds, and demanding of
them what country he was in, they told him, In the province of Beneventanus,
belonging to the kingdom of Naples; which was more than an hundred miles
distant from his own house. The man, though he was of a fair revenue, yet was
forced to beg all the way homeward. But after his tedious and difficult
journey, arriving at his own village, he summoned his wife before the
Magistrate, with others whom he had espied and known at the Feast. Who upon
his testimony were convicted, and suffered according to the extremity of the
Law provided for offenses of that execrable nature. I have read of another
guilty of the like curiosity, who was hurried so far in one night, that it
cost him three years tedious travel, before he could come to see the smoke
of his own Chimney.

To show that these Magical sorceries have been from great antiquity, and
not lately crept into the world by the proditious insinuation of the Devil; me
thinks I hear Medaea thus speaking, Ovid Metam. lib. 7.

Tuque triceps Hecate quae Caeptis conscia nostris,
Adnutrixque, -- etc.
Thou three-shap'd Hecate with me take part,
Who guilty of my undertakings art,
Teaching what spells we Witches ought to use,
And what rare Herbs out of the earth to choose:
Thou Air, you Winds, Hills, Lakes, and Rivers clear,
Gods of the Winds, gods of the night, appear:
By whose strong aid I (when I please) can make
The fearful and astonished banks to quake,
To see the streams back to their heads retire.
If on the seas a tempest I desire,
The troubled waves in mighty mountains rise,
Threatening to spit their brine-drops in the eyes
Of the bright Stars; and when they are most in rage,
I with a word their fury can assuage.
Black threatening clouds, if I but speak, appear;
And with a beck I make the Welkin clear.
The Winds I from their brazen dens can call,
To blow down hills, or not to breathe at all.
The Vipers jaws I with my spells can break,
The steadfast rocks remove when I but speak.
The grounded Oaks I by the roots up rend;
Woods I can shift, and mountains that transcend,
My Charms can shake. The groaning Earth help craves
From me, whilst Ghosts I summon from their graves.
And thee o Moon, my Incantations can
Draw this or that way, make thee pale and wan
Through fear, or red with rage. Aurora knows,
I from her blushing cheek can tear the Rose, etc.
Here I might introduce many to the like purpose: but I return where I left,
and thus proceed; That this swift transportation of Bodies, though it seem
strange, is not altogether impossible. Which will the better appear, if either
we advisedly consider the velocitie of Spirits, or the admirable celerity of
the Spheres: from whence it comes that Magitions have such speedy intelligence
(almost in an instant) of things done in the farthest and remotest places of
the world. To approve which, if we shall but examine History, there be many
examples extant.

When Antonius the great Captain made an insurrection in Germany against the
Emperor Domitian, Captain Antonius.
and was slain in the battle, the death of that Revolter was confidently
reported the same day in Rome, with the manner of his Armies overthrow; though
the places were distant (as some account it) little less than fifteen hundred
miles.

And Cedrenus writes, Adrianus Patricius.
That when Adrianus Patricius was sent by the Emperor Basilius to war against
the Carthaginians; before he had overcome half his way, and whilst he yet
stayed in Peloponnesus with the greatest part of his Navy; by the help of such
Spirits (as it seemed) he was certainly informed, That Syracusa was taken and
destroyed by fire, the very self same day and hour that the disaster happened.

Panlus Diaconus and Nicephorus have left to memory, Calligraphus.
That one Calligraphus of Alexandria, walking late in the night by certain
Statues erected without the city, they called unto him aloud and told him, That
the Emperor Martianus, with his Queen and princely Issue, were all at that
very instant murdered in Constantinople. Which when he came to his house, he
told to some of his Familiars and Friends, who seemed to deride his report, as
a thing not possible, but beyond Nature. But nine days after came a Post with
certain news of that barbarous and inhumane act: which by true computation
happened the very same hour that it was delivered to Calligraphus.

Platina in Dono tells us, Prince Partharus.
That Partharus son to the King of the Longobards, being expelled from his
Country by the usurpation of Grinnaldas, shipped himself for England, to be
secured from the sword of the Tyrant: and having been a few days at sea, he
was sensible of a loud voice, which admonished him to change the course of his
intended journey, and instantly to return back into his own Country; for the
Tyrant having been troubled with the Plurisie, and advised by his Physicians to
have a Vein opened in the left arm, the flux of blood could not by any art be
stopped, but that he bled to death. Upon this warning the Prince Partharus
returned, and finding it to be true, within three months after his arrival, he
was inaugurated and freely instated in his proper inheritance.

Zonarus and Cedrenius affirm, That the same day in which the arch-Traitor and
Regicide Andraea slew the Emperor Constantine, The Emperor Constantine.
bathing himself in Syracusa; his death by voices in the air (which could be
no other than Spirits) was not only noised, but proclaimed openly in Rome the
same day.

Zephilinus in Domiti. and Fulg^t. lib. 1. cap. 6. have left remembered unto us,
Apoll. Tianaeus.
That Apollonius Tianaeus being in a public School in the city of Ephesus,
and disputing at that time with diverse Philosophers; in the midst of his
serious discourse, was on the sudden mute, and fixing his eyes steadfastly upon
the ground, remained for a space in a still silence: but at length erecting his
head, and casting up his eyes, he suddenly broke forth into this loud
acclamation; Stephanus has slain an unjust man. And after having better
recollected himself, he told unto those which were there present, That at that
instant the Emperor Domitian fell by the hand of one Stephanus. The
circumstance being after examined, it proved true according to his relation.

Olaus Magnus, lib. 3. cap. 16. of his Gothicke History, writes, That Govarus
King of Norway being resident in his own Court, Govarus.
knew in the same hour, of all the machinations and plots intended against him
in Normandy, though he was distant by land and sea many hundred miles.

Fulgotius relates, That in the wars betwixt the Locrenses and the
Crotoniatae, two spirits appeared like two young men in white vesture, who when
the Locrenses had won the battle, left the field and vanished; and in the
self same hour were seen both in Athens and Corinth, in both which places
they proclaimed the news of that great victory, though these places were
distant many leagues one from another.

And so much for the Velocitie of Spirits.

The Emblem.
IT figureth an Hedgehog, who insidiates the silly field-Mice playing about
her den, and fearelesse of any present danger; who the better to compass her
prey, wrappeth her self into a round globe-like compass, appearing only a
ball of pricks, contracting her head within her skin, where nothing is seen
save a small hole, for such a little creature to shroud her self in; and thus
she lies confusedly upon the ground without any seeming motion. Caueats againg
Temptation.
The apprehension thereof is borrowed from Greg. lib. 13. Moralium; from whence
this Motto is derived, Abiecta movent. The words of the reverend Father be
these: Objects are main motives.
Prius complexionem, vnius cuiusque Adversarius perspicit, and tunc tentationis
laqueos exponit: alius namque laetis, alius tristibus, alius timidis, alius
elat is moribus existit, etc. (i.) Our Adversary the Devil first looks into
the complexion and disposition of every man, and then he lays the snares of
tentation; for one is of a merry and pleasant constitution, another sad and
melancholy, another timorous and fearful, another proud and haughty.
Therefore that he may the more secretly and cunningly entrap them, he frames
his deceptions suitable with their conditions; and because pleasure has
proximitie with mirth, to him that is given to mirth he proposes riot and
luxury; and because sadness is prone to anger, to such he offers the cup of
dissension and discord: and because the Timorous are fearful of pain and
punishment, to them he suggesteth terrors and horrors: and because the haughty
and ambitious love to be magnified and extolled, to them he offers popular
suffrage and vain applause, etc. We also read Saint Paul thus, 2 Corinthians.
11.3. But I fear lest as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so
your minds should be corrupt from the simplicity which is in Christ. And 1
Pet. 5.8. Be sober and watch; for the Devil as a roaring Lion walks about
seeking whom he may devour.

The illustration of the Emblem follows: Pelliculam veterem retines, and
front politus;
Abstraso rapidam gestas sub pectore vulpem.
Pers. Satyr. 5. Fit globas, insidias Muri dum tendit Echinus;
Et jacet immoto corpore fusus humi:
O^ late^ in media quod dum patet esse cavernam,
Musculus ad socios non rediturus init.
Cum vitium quod quisque colit, Rex caelliat orci,
Illius objectis pectora nostra trahit;
Larco sibi capitur, vinosus imagine Bacchi;
Virginis aspectu, nota libido furit.


Thus paraphrased: To'entrap the Mouse, the Hedgehog in a round
Is cast, and lies as senseless on the ground,
His face drawn in; the hole she thinks a cave,
Where, being frighted, she her self may save.
When Satan knows unto what vice we'are bent,
To each man's sense that object he will present:
Meat to the Glutton, to the Drunkard Wine,
And to such, beauty, as to lust incline.


Livy says, Fraus in parvis fidem sibi praestruit, vt cum opere praetium est,
Of Deceit.
cum mercede magna fallat: (Id est) Deceit lays the snare in small things and
of no moment; that in greater things it may deceive with profit.

Noble in his mind was Alexander the Great, who when Parmenio counseled him
to seek the subversion of his enemies by fraud and subtlety; made this
answer, That being Alexander, his Majesty and Royalty would not suffer him to
do so; but if he were a private man, as Parmenio, he might perhaps be
thereunto persuaded. But contrary unto him, the Emperor Pertinax was syrnamed
Christologus, which is as much to say as, Well speaking, and Evil doing. It
was the saying of Demosthenes the excellent Orator; Wonder not that thou art
deceived by a wicked man, but rather wonder that thou art not deceived. The
fraudulent and deceitful are likened to a Chameleon, apt to take all objects,
capable of all colors, cloaking Hate, with Holiness; ambitious Gain, with
show of good Government; Flattery, with Eloquence: but whatsoever is pretended
is merely deceit and dishonestie. Sic iterum, sic caepe cadunt, vbi vincere
aperte;
Non datur, insidias, armaque tecta parant:
Fraud perit virtus.
Ovid. Fast. lib. 2.

The Serpent hid in the grass stingeth the foot; and the deceitful man under
pretense of honesty beguileth the Simple: Parva patitur vt Magnis potiatur.
From whence Catsius deriues this conceit: Fit globus, nique globi medio caput
abdit echinus,
Et vafer ni parvum, contrabit or aspecum:
Tegmina mas spinosa (peti se nescius) ambit,
Et vagus impunem, fertque refertque gradum.
At coecas ineat latebras, and non sua lustra,
Tum demum in praedam promptus echinus erit,
Vt fallat tunc cum praetium putat esse laboris,
Praestruit in parvis fraus sibi magna fidem.


Thus paraphrased: Like a round ball The Hedgehogge.
he lies; of head or face
Naught seen, save only a straight entering place.
The Mouse does near his thorny covering graze,
And fearelesse of deceit, about it plays:
But is no sooner entered the blind cave,
Than caught; he having what he sought to have.
Small trains at first are by the Crafty laid,
That the full Prize they better may invade.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
TO Thee, the Saints that in thee trust;
To Thee, the Souls of all the Just;
And wretched I,
To Thee new cry,
That am indeed no more than Earth and Dust.
II.
The Heavenly Hierarchies above,
That are to Thee conjoined in Love,
In Hymns and Lays
To Thee give praise,
And to the innocent Lamb and spotless Dove.
III.
The Angels and Archangels all,
Virtues and Powers Celestial,
Who stand before Thee,
And still adore Thee,
As Messengers still ready at thy Call:
IV.
All magnify Thee without cease,
Not fainting, rather with increase
Of Will and Voice,
Laud and rejoice
In Thee, that art the God of Power and Peace.
V.
And I, frail Man, that am not least
Of thy Creation, would thy Heast,
Far as I may,
Serve and obey,
And beg in thy great Mercies, Interest.
VI.
Light therefore in my Heart infuse;
Instruct my Tongue, Thy Name to use:
That I may find
Both Heart and Mind,
Hourly on Thee, and only Thee, to muse.
VII.
Cleanse, to that end, and make me clean,
That am polluted and obsceane:
My sinful Soul,
Spotted and foul,
Dares not for that cause on thy Mercies lean.
VIII.
From Outward things, to what is Interior;
To what is Above, from Things Inferior;
My Thoughts transcend
To apprehend
Thee solely, that over all things art Superior.
IX.
O blessed Spirits, bright and pure,
You that the Sacred Throne immure!
That Place Sublime,
In first of Time,
Was made for you always therein to'endure.
X.
Your Makers Face you there behold,
In numerous Bands and Hosts untold,
You, to Him solely
Sing, Holy, Holy,
Holy; Whose Brightness no Tongue can unfold.
XI.
You, in your sweet and musical Quire,
See what to Love, and to Admire,
(That Joy and Bliss
Which endless is)
And to attain unto, we all desire.
XII.
For from that Place Celestial,
From henceforth there can be no Fall:
In that Congruity
Is Perpetuity,
Which, as Before it has bin, Ever shall.
XIII.
No refractorie Spirits there,
Since Lucifer dared to appear,
In Battle fell
By Michael,
All these rebellious Angels captived were.
XIV.
He, the old Dragon gyv'd and bound,
Who, Mankind labors to confound;
Still day by day,
Us to betray;
And to that end the World does compass round.
XV.
With Him, the Sp'rites of Air and Fire,
The Water, and the Earth, conspire,
Early and late,
To'insidiate
All such as after Heavenly things acquire.
XVI.
But Thou, the blessed Angels of Light
Against them have made opposite,
Both to direct us,
And to protect us
From their known Malice both by day and night.
XVII.
Therefore to Thee ( o God) alone,
In Persons Three, in Substance One;
The Trinity
In Unity,
To search in whose Identity, there is None
XVIII.
So bold as dare, so wise as can.
The Father, God; Son, God and Man;
The Spirit Divine,
Third in the Trine;
All Three, One God, before the World began.
XIX.
Father Unborn, the Son Begot,
Spirit Proceeding; let us not
Through their procurements,
And sly allurements,
Be stained with Sin, but keep us without spot.
XX.
O Thou, the glorious Trinitee,
Whose powerful Works inscp'rable be;
Support and aid
What Thou have made,
And keep our Souls from their Temptations free.
XXI.
Thou President, of an vnequal'd Parity;
Thou, Plural Number, in thy Singularity;
Those Devilish Foes.
Still to oppose,
Grant us firm Faith, strong Hope, and constant Charity.
XXII.
Whom ( Father) thou have Made, do not forsake;
Of whom thou have redeemed, ( Son) pity take:
Good Spirit guide
Those sanctified,
And keep us from the euer-burning Lake.
XXIII.
That We, with Saints and Angels, may
Thy Honor, Power, and Praise display;
Thy Glory bright,
Mercy and Might,
Within Thy New Jerusalem for ay.
Deus est indivise vnus in Trinitate, and inconfuse
Trinus in Vnitate.
Leo Pap.
:THE: VERTVES:
Ex Sumptib: Gulielmi: Beescom Generos



THE ARGUMENT of the fifth Tractate.
THe Consonance and Sympathy
Betwixt the Angels Hierarchy.
The Planets and Celestial Spheres;
And what similitude appears
'Twixt One and Other. Of the three
Religions that most frequent be,
Jew, Christian, and Mahumetist:
Upon what Grounds they most insist.
Ridiculous Tenants stood upon
In Mahomets blind Alcaron;
Where he discourses the creation
Of Heavens and Angels. A relation,
What strange notorious Heresies
By ^the Prescillians and Manechies
Were held: The truth made most apparent,
By Text and holy Scriptures warrant.
The second Argument.
WE aim at the Celestial Glory.
Below the Moon all is Transitory.
The Virtues.
THree things has God showed in this Worlds Creation,
Worthy man's wonder and great admiration:
In making it, his Power most exquisit; Gods Power, Wisdom, and Goodness.

In ord'ring it, his Wisdom infinite;
And in conseruing it, his Goodness such,
As never can by man be'extold too much.
The Angels in the next place we confer
Wi'th' second part of this Worlds Theater:
Namely, what reference the Seraphim
Has with the Primum Mobile. Then, what kin
The Cherub from the Starry Heaven does claim;
Or Thrones with Saturn: in what consonant frame
With Jupiter, the Dominations trade:
What 'twixt the Virtues can and Mars be made:
The near similitudes that hourly run
In league, betwixt the Potestates and Sun:
With Venus, how the Principates agree:
And with the great Archangels, Mercury:
Last, how the holy Angels are accited
To be in friendship with the Moon united.
Diouys. Areopag. de Celest. Hierarch.
First, as the Seraphims in Loves pure heat,
Next God himself in his supernall seat,
Still exercise their faculties, and turn
(By that inflaming zeal by which they burn)
The Concordance betwixt the Seraph and the Primum Mobile.
Toward His Essence; so in a swift motion,
The Primum Mobile shows his devotion
To the First Mouer, from whence it does take
1 Primus Motor.
Those Virtues which the Heavens inferior make.
Go round with it: the Seraph's feruor's great;
So i. Pri. Mobile.
That, has lasting and perpetual heat:
By benefit of whose swift agitation,
The Heavens are wheeled about it wondrous fashion,
Maugre of that huge Machine, the great force
And magnitude, that still resists his course.
The Seraphims are sharp, so needs must be
The needle-pointed Primum Mobile;
Which by transfusing influence (we know)
Does penetrate inferior Orbs below.
And as the Seraphims most fervent are;
To them, in that, we fitly may compare
The Primum Mobile, whose feruor's such,
And so incessant, that where it does tuch,
And is in hourly motion, it (no doubt)
The other Heavens does whirle with it about.
Inflexible the Seraphims motion is,
So likewise is the turning round of This;
Which though it be as swift as thought can think,
Yet in it is course does neither quail nor shrink.
As at a beck (by power that God them gave)
The Seraphims all other Angels have:
So by the motion of that Primum, all
The motions of the Heaven in general
Are governed and united: Seraphs be
Active Exemplars called: This Mobile
Bears the same style, because it not alone
Incites the Heavens to motion, one by one;
But as a Guide, least they should take the wrong.
Still goes before, and hurries them along.
And as the Seraph's with Loves fire inflamed,
(A zeal so hot that never can be named)
Even so this fiery globe, still without cease
Gyring about, does grow to that increase
Of sultry heat, the feruor, by reuerses,
A warmth into all other things disperses.
But with this difference, that as they their might
Immediately take from the God of Light;
From the twelve Revolutions it receives
What power and virtue to the rest it leaves;
And purged by labor, winding in a frame,
Returns still to the place from whence it came.
The Seraphs have no creature that can vaunt
To be above them as predominant.
Even so this Orb is next the Imperial Throne,
Gods proper Mansion, and above it none.
The Seraphims, for their vicinity
To God, are full of Divine purity;
And such a fulgence through their Essence runs,
That they are brighter than ten thousand Suns:
So this Orb to the Imperial Heavens, so near,
Shines by the light of that incredi'bly clear.
And as these Spirits with flaming ardor burn,
And at no time from their Creator turn;
So this high Orb, by the celeritie
And inextinguishable claritie,
Prodigal of it is Virtues, does bestow them
To purge and to make perfect things below them;
So that all dregs and dross consumed and wasted,
They, new refyn'd, are in swift motion hasted
Unto their first beginning, where in sweet
And most mellodious harmony they meet.
As Those from God immediately are,
Without the interpose of Minister;
Even so from the first Mo^er it does take
Immediate force, which does it is motion make.
Herein the Divine Wisdom does appear,
That so the Angels with the Heavens cohere,
Heavens with the Elements conour, and then,
These Spirits are in such a league with men,
And all so conjoined and concatinate.
A Picture every way immaculate,
The Concordance betwixt the Cherub and the starry Heaven.
Cherub does in the Chaldaean tongue imply:
What picture fairer, or more pure, has eye
Beheld, than the Celestial Firmament?
Imbelished and stuck with the ornament
Of so'many bright Stars, luminous and clear,
Incorruptibly decking every Sphere,
All full of influent virtue in their places.
So the Cherubicke Spirits are stuck with Graces
And Divine gifts, so many, that indeed,
In countlesse number they the Stars exceed.
And as this Orb is circumgyr'd and wheeled,
As to the Primum Mobile forced to yield;
So does the Cherubs second order move
From the first Seraph, next to God in Love.
The Concordance betwixt The Thrones and Saturn.
'Twixt Saturnes Sphere and the Thrones eminence;
Is the like semblance and conuenience:
By Thrones, the Seats of Monarchs are expressed:
On Saturnes seventh day God himself did rest
From his great Work. Now Saturn is a word
Which in the Original, nothing does afford
(If we together shall compare them both)
Save, Cease from Labor, or a Sabbath.
The Thrones on Love and Verity consist;
And so the Planet Saturn (who so list
Give credit unto Firmicus) endues
Man both with Love and Truth, prompts him to choose
Virtue, good Manners, Divine Contemplation,
Judgment mature, in a true conformation;
And with a ^ollid industry desire
Things that are hidden and abstruse to enquire.
And as the Thrones, each in his office knows,
How of all sacred Wisdom to dispose,
(As Dei forms called;) so Saturn he,
Ianus Bifrons, from all antiquity,
Is styled, and Wisdoms Father held to be.
The Golden World beneath his Scepter was, The Goulden World.

(Before the Silver; or the third, of Brass;
Or this Iron Age) in which th'vnlabor'd ground,
Not forced by man, with plenty did abound:
The Earth of her free will gave all increase;
Springs flowed with milk; the Wolf and Lamb had peace:
And therefore we by congruent reason find,
That the seventh day to Saturn was assigned,
As the seventh Planet, and agreeing best
With the Celestial Thrones, which imply Rest.
Besides, in Saturn there is one thing rare,
As sole unto him peculiar;
Which he may justly above others claim:
(For none of all the Planets we can name,
But are in mixture and conjunction;) He
Ioyns, nor is joined with any, but still free;
And as a Prince vnrival'd, keeps his state,
In which none can with him participate.
So Moses Law, since it was first recited,
Was with no other coupled or united;
But does immediately on God depend,
Yet many other Laws from that descend,
As borrowed thence. And in like mystery,
The Chorases of the whole Hierarchy,
Reflect with all the service on the Throne;
But He his Power communicates to none.
The Seraph's Love, to Judgment does adhere;
The Cherubs Wisdom places it self near:
The Dominations (which some have defined
To be, Th'vnyoked liberty of mind)
Assist the Judgment Seat: They Virtues, they
Upon the high Tribunal wait and stay:
And so the rest, with all their several Graces;
But them the Thrones assist not in their places.
The Dominations we must next confer, The Concord betwixt the Dominations, and
Jupiter.

And fashion to the Star of Jupiter;
And by comparing them together, see
How in their semblant Virtues they agree.
First, at Celestial things they solely aim,
Them, no tyrannicke servitude can tame;
A free Lord they must serve, and bear a mind
Unchecked, to nothing base or vile inclined:
All difficulties ready to disclose,
That shall their faithful service interpose.
On none save their Creator they rely,
To his sole pleasure they themselves apply;
Others to their obedience they persuade,
Their contemplations being fixed and stayed
On the Divine Light: which rare pulchritude,
To'enioy in a more ample plenitude,
They still conform themselves unto the Throne,
If possibly, to be with it all one.
All these (if Astrologians we may trust)
Fall on Jove's Star, in number even and just.
In Noble blood this Planet takes delight,
To'illustrous thoughts it does the mind accite,
Prudence to govern, science how to know,
His libe'rall influence does on man bestow;
Placed in his Horoscope, he does inspire
Our elevated souls with a desire
To attain to Fame, to Empire, and High things:
Th'vncurbed and irregular mind it brings,
Not only to devise, but keep good Laws.
And Jupiter is for that only cause,
In Hebrew, Zedek called, which imports Just.
In Goodness and in Justice such as trust,
Them he spurs on to spend their hours and time,
To aim at things superior and sublime:
By the reflex of Justice and true Piety,
It draws to contemplation of a Diety:
It does not only Man himself impell
To charitable acts, and do things well;
But to stir others to good works: And styled
Jove, for his Faith and Trust; having exyl'd
All Incredulity Last, by the hand
He leads others with him, till they stand
In the like state of Goodness, Knowledge, Faith.
Pythagoras.
Pythagoras more of this Planet says,
That he is the Minds Virtue, Temperament,
Health, and Disposer of all Ornament
That does belong to Man. Now let us find
The Concordance, of the Virtues with Mars.
How those called Virtues, are to Mars inclined:
And that too may be done with much facility,
If we consider but what true Virilitie
And Fortitude in this Star does consist.
S. Matthew.
In one place we thus read the Evangelist:
The Virtues of the Heavens are moved, or ar'
Armed on their side, who in Gods cause shall war.
These, their Celestial operations take
Immediately from Him, and for His sake
Disperse them to His Glory and great Praise.
Note what the Psalmist of the Planets says;
Praise Him you Sun and Moon, praise Him the Light;
Praise him ye Stars [etc.] The Virtues by foresight,
As Captains over the Church Militant,
Know which amongst them is best Combattant;
Guide and direct him to the Place above,
To receive there the Crown for which he strove.
Even so this Mars, by the influence of his Star,
Styled by th'antient Poets, God of War,
Makes men of generous Spirits, elate and hye,
Ambitious after Palm and Victory.
The Virtues in their Power find no defect;
Nor is this Planet any way deiect,
Wearied or faint. Ptolomaeus. Hermetes. Firmicus. Alcabilius:
Those of authentic skill,
Write, His Fires force is indeficient still.
The Divine Virtues study to enlarge
Their courage, who are given to them in charge;
To make them like spiritual Soldiers stand,
Against Lucifer and his revolted Band;
Then bring them off to safety and security,
Making them like themselves in God-like purity.
So this Stars Fire, to show their true proximitie,
Burns upward, as still aiming at sublimitie;
And in his fervor catching at things near,
To turn each Substance to a Nature clear,
As it self is, in luster like to shine.
Yet to this Planet, many learned assign The malevolent Aspects of Mars.

Malevolent aspects, Wars prouocations,
Homebred Seditions, Discord amongst Nations,
Broiles, Garboiles, Tumults, and combustious Rage,
Depopulation, Murders, Slaughter, Strage;
Call it, The worst of Planets: whose reflect
Contaminates and poisons with the aspect.
But Tresmegistus was not of that mind;
Says he, The several Planets in their kind
(Their virtues being truly understood)
Are unto men beneficent and good.
This great Philosopher would have us know,
Of bad Effects the Cause is here below:
Stars influences in themselves are pure,
No putrid stuff their natures can endure:
And if from their aspects ought chance amiss,
They are not to be blamed, for the fault is
In our frail weakness: for who but has read,
That nothing bad above the Moon is bred?
The Concord of the Potestates with the Sun.
Now as the Potestates to work are said
Both by the Virtues strength, and the co-aid
of the Dominions Justice: so the Sun,
When he his beams transfusiuely shall run
Through Mars his Sphere, or Jove's benigner Star,
All his effects, Power, Strength, and Honor ar'.
Legions of Fiends the Potestates expel;
And with them, all blind errors drive to hell.
So when the Sun does his bright beams display,
The tenebrous Night flies, and gives place to day.
And as those Minds and Essences Divine,
By nature with miraculous fulgor shine:
So the bright Sun instated all alone,
Amidst the Planets, in his Regal Throne,
Casts an incredible luster, and to all
Does honor, in his seat Majesticall;
Distributing abroad in large extent,
Unto the Stars, both Light and Ornament:
By whom they are governed, and their motions swayed,
Their splendour at his will dark't or displayed.
Stars receive names from the Sun.
From whom they receive names; as Day-Stars, some;
Nocturnal, others; but the most part come,
Styled by his course: Oriental, those we call
That move from his Vp-rise; they from his Fall,
Are Occidental. Other Stars put on
Names from the South and the Septentrion.
The Potestates, their power over things Inferior,
To manage and dispose from the Superior,
Of all aboue's, immediately receive.
Even so the Sun shines only by his leave;
The light it gives is but a shadow mere,
Of His that is so 'vnspeakeably clear
In Glory, that all Glory does transcend,
Which Humane Eye can no way comprehend:
And so his borrowed luster does disperse
To Men, to Beasts, and the whole Universe.
The Potestates, with things below dispense,
Without all tyranny or violence:
The Sun does shine with amity and love
On all alike; and with the Star of Jove
Bee'ng in conjunction, Man's mind it inflames
With honor, and to purchase glorious names, So Ptolomaeus and Firmicus write.

Inspires with magnitude and claritie,
And these without all force or tyranny.
By speculation in the Sun, we see
The glorious Trinity in Unity. The Trinity in Unity figured in the Son.

We from the Body or the Substance gather
The Divine Essence of The Almighty Father.
In his bright Splendour we the Son include,
Who is the sole and only Pulchritude.
The third proceeding persons (God as great)
We see it plainly figured in his Heat.
Our Savior, when he would exemplify
To us his Fathers Power and Majesty,
Did it by this bright Planet; Perfect be
As is your Father that is in Heaven, (says he)
Who causes that his Son alike does rise
Upon the Good and Bad. We must devise
In the next place, how we may mak't appear, The Concord betwixt the
Principates and Venus.

The Principates with Venus Star cohere.
As she from all antiquity has been
Styled by th'imagin'd name of Beauties Queen,
Because by observation, every creature
Borne under her, she does endow with feature;
Fair shape, Good-grace, and Amabilitie,
All which to her disposures best agree.
Even so the Principates strive to bring near
To God himself (whose Image they do bear)
All Souls beneath their charge, make them to be
Partakers of his Divine Claritie:
"For, Orpheus in Testamento.
than Gods Image, nothing is more bright,
"Or more to ougly darkness opposite.
As the Platonicks under Venus name
Including Love, Am^r creaui^t Mundum.
make him the cause, this Frame
Was first by God built; which from Chaos rude,
Was brought by him to this rare pulchritude,
Than which, nothing more lovely can be thought,
Whose gouernment's as rare, as comely wrought.
And that there is nothing can more ougly be,
Than is Confusion and Deformity;
So by the Principates (as many hold)
Empires and States are governed and controlled,
Kingdoms well managed: They are like a border,
To guard without, and what is within to order;
Dionysius. Hocretheus. Iamblicus.
Lest Fire or Sword, or any mutinous storm,
(Where they preserve) should study to deforme:
It Is to their office pertinent by right,
To keep all things in Beauty and good plight.
These Principates are Dukes and Captains styl'd^
Yet are they not alone listed and fyl'd
Under these Titles: The Dominion claims,
And Potestates, the honor of these names;
The Principate, for his rare Pulchritude;
The Domination, for his Magnitude;
And for his Claritie, the Potestate,
Antesignani writers nominate.
And unto them (these great names having shared)
Jupiter, Sol, and Venus are compared:
Jove, because his infusion does assure
The most complete and perfect temperature.
Venus, because from her celestial place,
She does dispose of beauty and good grace.
The Sun set against the Potestates so bright,
Because he is the Lord that gouernes Light.
The Concord betwixt the Archangels, and Mercury.
The concordance that the Archangels have
With Mercury, does now by order crave
The place succeeding: Intermediate
They Are 'twixt the Angel and the Principate;
From the superior Classes these receive
Their Divine Mandates: which beeng done, they leave
The execution of his sacred will
Unto the Angels, their Attendants still.
Moreover, as the Archangels (eminent
In place) are seldom in Embassage sent,
Unless some weighty matter to declare;
But by their ordination, the Angels are
More frequently employed 'twixt God and Man:
Even so, who Mercury shall truly skan,
Will find, That Them he in that kind comes near:
For to what Star or Planet whatsoever
He does apply himself, their strength, their state,
Their force, he does so lively imitate,
As if he altered nature, to the end
That his own influence might on theirs depend.
Therefore the Poets did on him confer
The name of Hermes, or Interpreter
Ptolomaeus.
Unto the gods. Of him one Author writes,
Bee'ng in conjunction with the Sun, he'accites
To heat and drowth: he in the Moon breeds cold;
With Saturn, he makes wise; with Mars, Men bold;
And when he does to Venus rise or set,
They, 'twixt them two, Hermophrodites beget.
Besides, Firmicus.
this Star (as wisely one relates)
Seldom to Man, himself communicates;
As by the eyes of Mortals rarely seen.
The Poets tell us, That he often has been
Sent to the gods on embassy; Ovid. Me^.
as when
To Somnus, in his dark Cimerian den,
To call thence Morpheus: and to Maia' his mother;
And often betwixt one god and another:
But to Man seldom. Now we must devise,
To know what apt coherences may rise The Concordance betwixt the Angels and
the Moon.

'Twixt Angels and the Moon: They Are lowe'st and least,
And in their later rank conclude the rest.
Next, they the true propriety retain
Belonging to all Spirits. And again,
That sacred name is fitly to them given,
Because they are more often sent from heaven,
Than others of more eminent degree,
Having conuerst with men familiarly:
Besides, all mundane business and affairs
Committed are unto their charge and cares.
All these conditions, plainly't does appear,
Miraculously unto the Moon adhere;
For she of all the Planets is the last,
(In a degree below the others placed)
As bringing up the Number. She is then
An errant Star, next Planet to us Men.
Thirdly, the nearer that she has her station,
The more her influence and operation
Has power on earth; and the more various she
Is in her change, the more effects there be
Proceeding from her: Nauigators steer
Their course by her, as she, or fills her Spheere,
Or empties it. The various Influences of the Moon.
Astrologers enqueere
From her in their conjectures sick and crazed
Are, as she works, either cast down or raised:
By her the spacious Ocean ebbs and flows;
By her the skillful Gardener plants and fowes:
So of the rest; and in this sympathee,
The Moon thus with the Angels does agree,
That when from the superior Stars she'hath taken
Her influ'ence, she delivers it again
Into Man's several parts: there reigns as Queen.
Such a fair correspondence have the prime
And chief of Angels, with the Heavens sublime,
Or those which we call highest. Like condition
The middle Ternion has, and disposition
With the mid Heavens; (for so at first 'twas cast)
And the third Chorus with the third and last.
For as the first and supreme Heavens are swayed
By one sole motion; so it may be said,
The supreme Angels of the highest Throne
Have their Commissions signed from God alone.
And as the middle Heavens are, without doubt,
By the same agitation wheeled about,
With that which Primum Mobile we call;
So, by their own Intelligences, all
Are by particular motion hurried round
A way contrary (as by proof is found.)
Likewise the intermediate Ternion, tho
They be by God illumined, and much know;
Yet in the executing of their places,
And do'ing His Will, there are such diffrent spaces,
They from the Highest Chorus take their charge:
So, 'twixt the last Division (to enlarge
This point more fully) what is most Divine,
And in it is Greatness nearest to the Trine,
In Number is much less, as Doctors write;
But greater far in Potencie and Might.
Again; What farthest we from God divide,
Of That the Number is most multiply'de;
Averroes.
But is of much less Virtue. Thus says one:
Always, the Best thing from it Self alone
Has his Perfection: That which in degree
Is next to It, guided and swayed must be
By one sole Motive: What is far removed,
Is subject unto Many, we find proved.
The former illustrated by a familiar example.
To give more luster to this Argument;
The like's in every Kingdoms mannagement.
We see a King in power most absolute,
With whose prerogative none dare dispute;
Who with a Breath can mighty Armies raise,
Has a huge Navy pressed at all essays,
By Land to forage, and by Sea to'inuade,
(And these too, without foreign Princes aid;)
Who can give life, and take it when he please:
In his own Person does not do all these,
But by his Ministers, his Lords, and Peers;
And they, by their inferior Officers:
His awful word, as by transmission, still
Passing degrees, even from the first, until
It cease in the last. So ('t may be guest,
It Is in the Ternions of the Angels blessed.
God is an absolute Monarch; and next Him,
Daniel does place the holy Cherubim,
As knowing best His Counsels and Intent;
And such are seldom on his message sent.
The inferior Angels, with their Charge or'e-joy'd,
'Twixt God and Man have often been employed:
And as the intermediate Spirits be
More often commanded than the first Degree,
(Yet not so frequently as those below;)
This therefore I would have you learn to know:
The Primum Mobile does first begin
To chime unto the holy Seraphim.
The Cherubim does make concordance even
With the eighth Sphere, namely, The Starry Heaven.
The Thrones, with Saturn. The like modulations
Has Jupiter with the high Dominations.
The Virtues have with Mars a consonance sweet:
The Potestates, with Sol in symptores meet.
The Principates with Venus best agree:
The Archangels, with the Planet Mercury.
The Angels with the Moon, which melody
Hosanna sings to Him that sits on high.
Besides the Sects, The three Religions at this day professed.
the Schisms, and Heresies,
Vain Adorations, and Idolatries;
There have been three Religions, above the rest
More frequent in the World, and most professed:
And those even to these later Times exist,
The Jew, the Christian, and Mahumetist.
Now, which of all these three should be invested
In highest honor, has been long contested,
As well by Arms, as Arguments. To assure
Our selves, of these, which is the only pure,
And without error; 'twill not be in vain,
To separate the Cockle from the Grain:
Comparing them, it may be easi'ly guest,
Whether Jew, Turk, or Christian believes best.
How the Jews approve their Religion.
The Jews thus quarrel with our Faith: We draw
(Say they) what we profess, from Moses Law;
And even the Christians our chief Tenants hold.
We likewise in this one thing may be bold
Above all other Nations, That by none
God's truly worshipped, but by Us alone.
Let all th'authentique Chronicles be sought,
Never have such great Miracles been wrought,
As amongst us. What people can there be,
That dares in Noblesse or Antiquity
With our blessed Hebrew Nation to contend?
For, who is so dull that knows not, we descend
From Prophets, Kings, and Patriarchs, who pretend,
That this our Offspring lineally came
From our great Predecessor, Abraham.
And though our Monarchy be quite transverst,
And we as slaves through the wide world dispersed;
It Is not because we put to heavy doom
The great Messiah, who is yet to come:
But that so many Prophets of our Nation,
Who preached to them Repentance and Salvation,
Were by them slain and butchered. Thus they can
Plead for themselves. Now the Mahumetan
He cavills with the Christian, and thus says;
Wherein the Mahumetan opposes the Christian Religion.
None like to us the great Creator praise:
We only unto One make adoration;
When as the Christian Sect build their salvation
Upon a Son, (this God should have) and He
Equal to Him from all eternity.
Proceeding further: Should there be two gods,
They of necessity should fall at odds;
Since supreme Powers, Equality abhor,
And are impatient of Competitor:
Nor can that Kingdom without discord be,
Where Two (or more) have joint supremacy.
Meaning the second Person in the Trinity.
Besides, God bee'ng omnipotent, and thrice-great,
For us to'aduance a Rival to his Seat,
Were sacrilege: one like Him to adjoine,
Were but his Divine Honors to purloine.
They say, We Christians more on Him confer
Than He would willing have, and therefore err.
Enforcing too, The Roman Church does ill,
When they adore within their Churches still,
Saints, Images, and Pictures, much unfitting,
As thereby great idolatry committing.
They likewise boast of great atchieuements done,
And mighty conquests from us Christians won
In sundry conflicts. Whereupon they'infer,
(Because they are in Zeal so singular)
That for their just obedience and true Faith,
Their enterprising such successes has.
Fast, Their Abstemiousnesse.
Prayers, and Pureness of Divine ado'ration,
They wondrously extol through all their Nation;
Their zeal unto their Prophet and his Shrine,
Their Temperance, and Abstinence from Wine.
And as for Miracles, they further say,
That such are wrought amongst them every day:
For some they have that many weeks abstain
From meat: some wound their flesh, senseless of pain:
Handle hot coals, Imposturous miracles.
some without scorching can:
And Maids bear Children without help of Man.
They have their Saints too; Mahom^it Saints.
Sedichasis, he
Is called upon in War, for Victory.
Ascicus has of Wedlock free dispose.
Mirtscinus has of Cattle charge. And those
That travel unto Mecha, by the way,
To a new Saint called Chiderille pray.
They have a Relic held amongst them dear, This Relic is a pair of old
stin^king shoes.

Which in his life one of their Saints did wear;
Who (as they feign) so clear was without spot,
That, thrown into a Furnace seven times hot,
He walked vnscorch'd amidst the flames; even so
As Sedrach, Misack, and Abednego.
But unto all these brain-sicke superstitions,
As likewise to the Hebrews vain Traditions,
Th'infallid testimony we oppose
Of the most sacred Scriptures; and even those
(Howeuer craft'ly he his engines frame)
Afford not Mahomet so much as name,
Or give him a known Character. Again,
It might be held most impiously profane,
Christ's Miracles should we compare in the least,
With the most damned impostures of that Beast.
Of whose delirements further I proceed;
Not doubting but the Grave and Wise may read
Scholars ad^mitted to read controversies.
And search through all Religions, of what kind
And nature how soever, thereby to find
Their depths and aims: and afterward conferring
The Word of Truth, with Falsehood vainly erring;
The ones^leprously may to the World appear;
The other, truly perfect and sincere.
The Creation of things according to Mahomet.
Thus in the devilish Alcaron it is said,
God in the beginning only four things made,
And those with his own hands: the first a Pen,
Which all things from the first to the last (both when
And how they were created) writers at large.
The second thing he took into his charge
Was the Man Adam, and the selfsame day
He fashon'd him of parti-colored clay:
And that is the reason (neither think it strange)
That in men's faces there is still such change
And contrariety in look and hair,
Some black, some brown, some tawny, and some fair.
The third a Throne, his Majesty to grace.
The fourth, for Souls a blessed resting place
Called Paradise. And unto these does add
Such toys, as in themselves proclaim him mad,
Or merely sottish, fabulous invention
All, no way worthy a wise Writers mention.
These are all Principles in Mahomets Alcaron: That the Earth was inhabited by
Devils 7000 years; by Angels 1000 years.
As yet for instance; Before man's Creation,
The earth had sollid and a firm foundation,
And was inhabited in times forepast,
By Devils first, then Angels, Adam last.
That Paradise (by him so often named)
Of Smaragds and clear Hyacinths is framed:
That there grow pleasing Fruits of strange variety,
To give the blessed Souls their full sacietie:
Rivers of Milk and Honey each where wander,
And some of Wine, in many a crook'd Meander.
Every Inhabitant there apparel'd is
In costly robes of sundry colored Bisse;
Black only there is not seen: That all appear
Of the same stature Adam and Eve were;
But of like form with Christ in shape and fashion.
Of Bodies there is no growth or augmentation;
No heat to scortch, no cold but to endure;
The Air has a most constant temperature.
Mahomets Paradise.
No sooner entered, but before them's put
The Liver of a Fish called Albehut,
That yields an exc'ellent savor; and then placed
Upon a table, Fruits of exquisit taste.
Next after that, they to the view present
All choice delights to give the Soul content,
And when they have deliciously been fed,
No excrement at all thereby is bred:
But when these Cates they have disgested well,
There flows from them a most delightful smell.
But to taste Swines flesh there, is worse than Treason:
Why that 's forbid? pray hear the Prophet's reason.
The time when Noah's Arc was built (says he) Mahomets reason why Sows flesh
is not eaten in Paradise.

All flesh as well in heaven as earth was free
Then to be eaten. Now when Christ was come
To live on earth, and being asked by some
Of the Disciples, 'bout the preservation
Of Mankind, in the general Inundation;
After some pause, he did command them stay
'Till he had molded out a Man from Clay:
To whom he said, Rise in my Fathers name,
And answer me directly to the same
That I shall now demand. He soon up start
A living man complete in every part;
But hair and beard all white. To whom he said,
Speak who thou art? This answer he soon made,
Iaphet the son of Noe. Then Christ replied;
Wast thou so old in seeming, when thou died?
He answered, No; but he was so appal'd
With sudden terror, doubting he was called
Unto the last great Doom to make repair,
The very fear thereof so changed his hair.
He then commanded him, freely to tell
All that in the Arkes history befell.
Which punctu'ally he from the first related,
So far, till that the Arc, much aggrauated
With weight of excrement, leaned upon one side;
At which the Pilot Noe much terrifi'de,
Asked counsel of his God, to know what best
Was to be done, (he being so distressed)
Who bad him make the elephant appear
In the same place which he so much did fear.
Where he not many minutes made abode,
'Till he his guts disburd'ned of a lode,
In noisome ordure, The first Sow according to Mahomet.
with the rest agreeing;
And from that Dung the first Sow had her being.
Who was no sooner fashon'd and alive,
But instantly she fared as she would strive
To eat up the whole dunghill; her nose shooting
Into the midst thereof, turning and rooting
To find out what she greedily might champe:
Till in the Arc she raised so foul a dampe,
Able to poison those within; and she
So swelled withal, as if she seemed to be
With pigs already. Gronting long, at last
She eased her o're-charg'd belly of a blast,
The first Mouse.
And with it a live Mouse: which Noah saw
No sooner bred, but it began to gnaw
His Notes and Tables, and offend him much:
Kill her he would not notwithstanding, (such
His goodness was) but once again demands
Counsel to rid that Creature from his hands.
He then was bid to strike the Lions brow:
Which done no sooner, (but I know not how)
The first Cat.
Than instantly a Cat bounc'd from his face,
And in a trice had the poor Mouse in chase.
The Joys in heaven according to Mahomet.
You hear his trifling. But observe the toys
Devised by him touching Celestial joys;
All which in his black Schedule he inrolles,
Rather becoming Beasts, than blessed Souls.
As, That there is no pleasure or delight
That may content a lustful appetite:
But there is in plenty, both as often, and when
Alcoron. lib. 3. cap. 19.
They please to taste them. And that all such men
As in this world had Wives constant and true,
Shall in the other, not enjoy so few,
But Concubines abundance, with eyes clear,
And great as eggs; these still to them are near,
Of admirable feature and choice graces,
Who never look but in their husbands faces.
Alcaron. lib. 3. cap. 6.276.34.
Elsewhere he says, The good Souls are attyr'd
In golden Vesture; naught can be desired,
That wanting is: of Damsels they have store
In that fair Garden; and to please them more,
The white of their clear eyes, of white has fullness;
The apples, blackness, pure black without dullness.
They eat such fruits as please the pallat best,
Drink Milk and Honey, and for ever rest
In Paradise. From these and thousand such,
(Of which, though sparingly, I speak too much)
These two things may be gathered, worthy note,
In which he most prodigiously did dote, A necessary observation.

(Thinking his damned Errors to advance)
Their beastly Lives; His brutish Ignorance:
Whose Doctrine, neither of Theology
Has the least taste, nor of Philosophy;
But mainly from both these in all points sweruing,
As neither Number, Order, nor observing
The Qualities of the Heavens. He neither caught Mahomets Lapable and absurd
Ignorance.

At ought the Arabs or the Chaldees taught,
The Hebrews, Greeks, or Latins: there is no mention
In all his Works, of the least apprehension
Of Physics or of Metaphysics: there
No rules, but all things meerly'irreguler.
No disputation of the Liberal Arts,
Or of the World, and it is distinguished parts,
No argument at all: no true quotation
Of the learned Authors sprung from his own Nation;
As Avempax, Mercurius Tresmegistus,
Adelandus, Ali-Arabs, Moses AEgyptus,
Or Avicen: whose Works had he but read,
He had not sure, so grossly been misled.
In his whole Book he seems to be at war
With common Sense, which makes him err so far.
Further to speak of his impost'rous Lies, Mahomet of the Angels.

Hear next what this grand Prophet does devise
Touching the Angels: First, (says he) the Devil
Was made of Fire pestiferous and evil.
The glorious Spirits, Attendants on the Throne,
And faithful Ministers to God alone;
For ever seated in that blessed Bower,
Have Wings, some two, some three, and others four.
Making of this, as confident relation,
As had he present been at the Creation.
And of these, Two attending on the Throne
Of the great God Almighty, Maroth one; One of Mahomets Ridiculous Fables.

Haroth another, were from Heaven down sent,
With full Commission to have government
Over all Mankind; not only to conduct them,
In their affairs, but tutor and instruct them:
With these prouiso's, never to incline
Either to Kill, Judge rashly, or Drink Wine.
All which of long time having strictly kept
In the plainerode, and to no by-path stepped;
It chanced in process, an offending Wife
Did with her perverse husband fall at strife:
A day of hearing bee'ng appointed, she
Inuites unto a banquet cunningly,
These two impartial Judges; 'sore them placed
Right costly Cates, made both for show and taste,
But sauc'd with wine, (which was unknown to them;)
And by this close and crafty stratagem,
Spurring them on with courteous welcome still:
Their pallats being pleased, they bad her fill
In plenteous cups to them, till both in fine
Were much distempered and or'come with Wine.
And in this heat, lust breaking into fire,
They then to'adulterate her bed desire.
To which she yields, upon condition they
Will teach her Characters, by which she may
Be lifted to those heavens above the Sun,
And without let behold what is therein done:
And after that, she may have free transmission
Down to the earth, and that with expedition.
They grant to her, and she to them applies;
The words no sooner spoke, but up she flies:
Where seen, and questioned how she thither came,
She opens the whole matter (just the same
As was before related;) but for fear
She should disclose on earth the Glories there,
She soon was changed into a fulgent Star,
In light excelling others even as far,
As when in life below she did remain,
Her luster did inferior Beauties stain.
Now after this, the Angels were conuented;
Who waking from their drowsinesse, repented
Of their vain folly, and with terror great
Were brought to answer at the Judgment Seat.
The fault confessed, the process, and the ground,
With every circumstance, this grace they found;
To have (after discussion) in the close,
What punishment they would themselves impose,
Betwixt this World and the other to endure:
Who made choice, in iron chains to be bound sure,
And have both heads and bodies drowned in mud^
In a most putrid Lake called Bebel flood.
One gross thing more to these I Will add, and than
To his perdition leave this brain-sicke Man.
Further he saith^ In the last dreadful day,
Th'Angell of Death, that is Adriel called, shall slay
All Souls then living. And that slaughter past, Adriel Mahomet, Angel of
Death.

Fall on his own sword, and so die the last.
And when all living creatures are destroyed,
The world shall forty yeares^ stand after, void.
Infinite are his most blasphemous Fictions,
And eachwhere interlac't with contradictions:
As in feigned Miracles, the general Doom,
The dissolution that is yet to come.
Concerning these, a question may arise,
Whether these sottish and most fabulous Lies
More fondly by this Iugler were conceated,
Or by Mad-folke believed, and thereby cheated.
Now something touching the arch-Heresies
Of the Priscillians and the Manechies; The Heresies of the Priscillians, and
Maniche^^.

Of whom, thus briefly: They nor blush, nor fear,
To write and teach, That two Beginnings were
Of universal Nature, Good, and Bad;
The one, of cherefull Light; the other, sad
Darkness the Author. Of which they retain
The essence within themselves, and from these fa^gne
A God and Devil: And that all things made,
From these Materials their condition had,
Of Good and Evil. Both the Sects agreeing,
That from the better Good the World had Being.
Yet they say further, That the mixture knit
Of Good and Bad insep'rable in it,
From these two opposite Natures does arise;
And therefore in their fancies they devise,
Five Elements to either: There Is assigned
Smoke, Darkness, Fire, the Water, and the Wind Five Elements according to
the Manichees.

To the Bad Nature: out of Smoke they bring
All two legged Creatures, and thence, Man to spring.
They further fable, and from Darkness breed
Dragons and Serpents, with all Reptile seed.
Foure-footed Beasts from Fire they procreate:
From Water, Fish: Fowls, from Wind generate.
The number of the Elements are five,
Which from the Better Nature they derive,
Opposed to these: Air, from the Smoke they draw;
Light out of Darkness; by the self same law,
Fire needful, from Fire hurtful: Water thus;
Useful, from what is Disaduantagious:
From Winds contagious, Winds of healthful use;
And betwixt these there can be made no Truce.
Wherein Blessedness consists according to the Manichees.
They likewise trifle, That all difficulty
To'attaine unto the true Felicity,
Consists in separating the Ills contagion
From the Goods purer nature. Which persuasion
Yet leads them further; That since these two first
Powerful Beginnings, termed the Best and Worst,
Are at perpetual discord; hence should breed
Of War, that native and intestine seed
Betwixt the Flesh and Spirit: in which Strife
None's capable of everlasting life,
But such as the Good Nature can divide
From that contagion which the Bad does guide.
They say, That to the Light, pur'd and refined,
Two shapes from Gods pure nature are assigned,
Namely the Sun and Moon; and these convey
That perfect splendour which enlights for aye
The heavenly Kingdom and most glorious Seat
Of High Jehovah, who is the only Great
And Powerful, having the sole domination;
His Mansion being their blessed habitation.
They feign, Our Grandfire and great-Grandame Eve
(Which none of common Reading can believe)
Of Sacla Prince of Smoke were formed and made.
That by the Serpent, (he who first betrayed
Those our first Parents) Christ himself was meant,
Who bad them taste the Apple, to the intent
That they the Good from what was Ill might know.
And that his body merely was in show
Fantastical, not Real. That the Trine
Sent him to save the Soul that was Divine;
But not the Flesh and Body, because they
Were made of impure stuff, Dust, Earth, and Clay.
Of which Absurds I Will make no more narration,
Unworthy mention, much more confutation.
Tribus modis in veritate peccatur; 1. Veritatem prae timore tacendo: 2.
Veritatem in mendatium comutando. 3. Veritatem non defendendo.

Chrisost.
Explicit Metrum Tractatus quinti.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogliphicall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractat.
TThe Consimilitudes and Concordances between the several degrees of Angels,
and the Heavens and Planets, I doubt not but is sufficiently manifested.
Whosoever desires to be further and more fully instructed in the Motions and
courses of the Spheres I refer him to peruse Iun. Higinus Libertus his Poeticon
Astronomicon, where he discourses learnedly of the World, the Spheres, the
Center, the Axis, the Zodiac, Circle, Earth, Sea, etc. of Ar^tos Mayor and
Minor, the Serpent Arctophilax, Corona, Eugonasia, Lyra, Olor, Cepheus,
Cassiopeia, Andromeda, Perseus, Heniochus, Ophiuchus, etc. Or else let them
peruse his book De Signis Coelestibus. Or read Aratus the Greek Poet his
Phaeonomena, excellently interpreted in Roman Verse by Caesar Germanicus. Or
learned Proclus, De Sphaera, Axi, Polo, Horozonte, and such other.

I pass from that, to enquire of those three Religions before-named; and to
sift the examine them, to find out and make it apparent, which must of
necessity be the truest and best. To the which before I enter, it shall not be
amiss to speak something of Truth her self.

Pierius Valerius tells us, Of Truth. Li. 44 page 430.
That there is but one Truth, whereof the Hierogliphycke is the Sun, being
but one only: for all duplicities or multiplicities are opposite to Truth,
there being but one Truth simple of it self, which wheresoever or whenever
it appears, is of extraordinary splendour. The Egyptians figured her in a
Persique Apple leaning upon one leaf; the form thereof representing the Tongue
and the Heart. Intimating, That as they were so annexed, the heart should not
conceive one thing, and the tongue utter another.

Cornelius Nepos remembers us of one Tytus Pomponius Titus Pomp.
(for his excellency in the Greek tongue syrnamed Atticus) a Roman Knight,
and the familiar friend of Marc. Cicero, who was never known to speak an
untruth; neither (but with great impatience) hear any related: his
uprightness being so apparent, that not only private men made suit to commit
their whole estates to his trust; but even the Senate themselves besought, that
he would take the mannagement of diverse offices unto his charge.

Idor-Abies.
Heraclides in his History speaks of the Abbot Idor, who so much affected
Truth, that of three things he was never known to be guilty: the first, That
he never told lie: the second, That he never spoke ill of any man: and the
third, That he spoke not at all but when necessity required. And the Theban
Epaminondas, Lib. 9. Cap. 19. Epaminondas.
as Alex. ab Alex. delivers unto us, was so true a Sectarie thereof, that he
was careful left his tongue should any way digress from truth, even when he
most sported.

Papias.
Papias in a great Disputation held about Religion, hearing the Truth to be
mangled, and thereby called into some suspicion; cried out aloud, We must not
give care unto those which labor to speak much, but unto such as strive to
speak unto purpose; not to them that question Truth, but that sincerely
deliver it. For so Eusebius reports of him, lib. 6. cap. 10. in Histor.
Ecclesiast. And King Agesilaus hearing a Rhetorician much commended, King
Aglesiaus
because from a small seeming ground he could derive many arguments, by
amplifications and unnecessary circumstances; I (says he) for my part
approve not him for an expert Shoo-maker, that will fit large Shoes to little
feet. Implying, That it is not the flourish and ostentation of much speaking,
but the sincere object of Truth, which is plain and simple in it self, which
ought chiefly to be respected.

Thales.
Thales being asked how much a Truth differed from a Lie? answered, As far as
the Eye differs from the Ear. Inferring thereby, That those things only we
may boldly affirm for truth, of which we are eye witnesses and see done; but
not every vain and idle novelty which we hear reported. Maxim. Sermon. 39.

AEschines.
AEschines affirmed Truth to be of that incomparable strength, that it did
easily convince all other humane cogitations. And Demosthenes being demanded,
Demosthenes.
What Man was endowed with, by which he might be likened to the gods? replied,
To do well, and to love the Truth. Stobae. Sermon. 11. It was a saying of
Democritus, Democratus.
That our religious piety ought publicly to be declared, and the sincerity
of Truth by us constantly defended. Anton. Sermon. de Veritate. To lie or swear
(says Saint Ambrose, Ambrose.
Ad Caelsum) let not the tongue be acquainted with; but let so great a love of
Truth possess thee, that whatsoever thou vtterest may be believed as an Oath.
And Bernard, Bernard.
De Great. Human. There be three degrees or stairs of Truth: to the first we
ascend by the labor of Humility; to the second, by the tenderness of
Compassion; to the third, by the practice of Contemplation. In the first she is
Severe; in the second, Holy; in the third, Pure. To the first, Reason leads
us, by which we may examine our selves: To the second, Affection guides us, by
which we commiserate others: To the third, Purity draws us, by which we are
elevated to contemplate things Mystical and invisible. Simplex est sermo
Veritatis, says Euripides. And Plautus in Mistellaria, Nolite assentire mihi,
etc.
Ego vero amo verum; volo dici mihi
Mendacium odi.
Delude me not by flattering me; for I
Love Truth, to hear it spoke: I hate a Ly.


And one of the Greek Comicke Poets is thus interpreted: Est tempore omni vera
proloqui optimum,
Hoc facere adhortor, etc.
To speak the truth at all times does become:
To this I counsel thee. Better be dumb,
Than utter ought that is false: Truth has great strength,
And shall thy line of life draw to the length.


Another thus: Haud Art tantam Pictor vllus assequi,
Statuariusque, etc.
No Painter by his Art shall e're attain,
(Albeit his colors be of purest stain)
Or Caruer of that cunning, to compose
A statue of that exc'lence to enclose
(Though therein only they consume their years)
Half the perfection that in Truth appears.


You may read Martial thus, lib. 8.75.

Oras Gallice, merogasque semper;
Durum est me tibi quod petis negare, etc.
O Gallicus, thou do entreat and ask;
And for me to deny, 'twere an hard task:
Attend thou what does true as Truth appear;
Truth, Gallicus, thou willing would not hear.
Lib. de Virtut. and vitijs, ca. 8.
Concerning Truth, you may read Cardinal Pascalis thus: Culturae nostrae, id
est, Virtutis primum instrumentum est Veritas, etc. Of our culture or ornament,
that is, of Virtue, the first instrument is Truth: neither can any virtue be
attained unto but by her only, who is of that sacred Society the most choice
and perfect; whom the wisest and best understanding men have so highly
magnified, that they have styled her the Mother of all Virtues, the most
certain, the most perfect amongst them, and therefore the Summum Bonum: than
which there is nothing more manifest, in respect of those things which in our
humane condition, are uncertain, doubtful, and fading. In the earth there is
nothing permanent; those things which now are, in a small space have no being;
and what is future, is concealed from us: which no sooner happens, than
vanishes. Truth alone stands upon her own strength, remains in the same
state, stable in her self, subject neither to increase nor decrease; repair
she needs not, impair she suffers not: her Knowledge is the gift and
secret of the Almighty. Truth is the absolute habit of the Mind, unwearied,
kindled by Divine Light, all-knowing: She expresses her self in Words,
Gestures, and Actions, always and every where; her voice in all honest ears is
the most excellent harmony: She is the Guide and Conduct through the Labyrinth
of humane affairs, to bring the Mind the right and straight way to the
Mansion of the other Virtues. It is her sole Character, To advance man unto
Dignity: and so granted to him from God, That he is borne unto one Truth; She
is the only food of the Mind, the sole repast of the Soul. Apparent it is,
That all humane actions, not only by Boasting or Ostentation, but by Simulation
or Dissimulation, are as with furious and tempestuous winds troubled and
tossed. But both these are no better than Liers; the one by adding too much,
the other offering too little. But Truth triumphs over both; she is liable to
no prescriptions, neither to space of time, the Patronage of persons, nor the
Privilege of Countries: the dulled Senses she restores, the Deceived she
directs, the Erroneous she reconcileth; her Strength all Vain things treads
under foot; all Lies convinces, all Errors confounds. Even her Enemies
acknowledge Her, as often as they are brought within her Sentence: She is the
sole rule by which all Knowledge is guided; for nothing can be truly known but
Truth only: for Falsehood being excluded, and She admitted, the way lies open
unto true felicity.

In Her all the dignity of humane life is contained; and he that is possessed
of her, no Force can deiect him, no Deceit circumvent him, no Trouble of mind
afflict him, no Heresy entrap him: She is the strength of Resolution, and
soliditie of Purpose; in whose presence no Vanity can stand, no Insolence
dares appear; unto whom Humane condition is more indebted than to all the
other Virtues. Who could distinguish Fortitude from Rashness; Constancy from
Perverseness; Liberality from Profuseness; Friendship from Flattery;
Sanctity from Hypocrisy; but by inspection to her Mirrhor, in which, Virtue
is clearly discerned, and Vice palpably discovered. Who is so bold, that
without her light or guidance dares to conclude or determine any thing? since
she is only conversant in perspection, exactly to find out what is sollid, what
sincere, and punctually to discover the causes, the beginnings, and the
progress and proceedings of all things. As all those things which fall within
dimension are not comprehended but within measure; so whatsoever by Gods
permission does illuminate, ^each, or instruct the mind, is by Truth defined
and circumscribed. That which in things bought and sold in our common commerce,
we call Number, Weight, and Measure; the same in all things is Truth: she
distinguishes betwixt the delirements and enormities of Vices, and those
effects which are proper and peculiar to Virtues. False Opinions she
refelleth, things doubtful she resolves; as obscure things she inlightneth,
so that which is luminous she declares. Hence arises that old Adage, Solest
Veritas, and e converso Veritas est Sol; (i.) The Sun is Truth, and by
conversion, Truth is the Sun: that is, which hidden things reuealeth, and
things manifest makes more perspicuous, etc. You see the constancy and
stabilitie of Truth, when all things else under the Sun are obnoxious to
Vicissitude and Change.

Says Horrace, lib. 4. Ode 7.

Diffugere nives redeunt iam gramina Campis,
Arboribusque Comae.
Mutat terrae vices, etc.
The Snow is melted, and the fields, late bare,
Are clothed in Grass; the bald Trees gain their hair:
The Earth does change her course; the Channels, dry,
Fill up their empty banks, the Flood swell high;
The gentle South wind does the cold allay:
Summer succeeds the Spring; nor there does stay,
But is by Apple-bearing Autumn 'noyd;
And Autumn next by Winter is destroyed.
The like is extant in Ovid, ad Pisonem, Ipsa natura vices subit, variat aque
curs^^:
Ordinat inversis, etc.
Even Natures self this change does undergo,
Which the inverst order of the Year does show:
Not always does (with dropping shewres) the Air
Obscure the Stars, but sometimes it is fair;
The Winter cease, and the timely Spring
Dries those moist locks which you before might wring:
It then gives place to Summer; on whose heel
Autumn does tread: and then soon after feel
The hoary Winters uncontrolled power,
In many'a cold blast and tempestuous shower.


Propertius, lib. 2. Eleg. 9.

Omnia vertuntur, cerie vertuntur amores;
Vinceris aut vincis hac in amore rota est:
Magni saepe duces, etc.
All things are wheeled and turned about,
And so it is in Love, no doubt:
Thou, Victor or else vanquished art;
No Love but in this change has part.
Great Dukes have fallen, great Tyrants been put down;
Rich Thebes once stood, brave Troy was overthrown.
To the like purpose, as intimating the mutabilitie incident unto all humane
actions, Plantus in his Amphict. does seem to allude: Nam in hominum aetate
multa eveniunt huiusmodi,
Capiunt voluptates, mox rursum miserias, etc.
In the age of Man, often many such things fall,
First we taste fugred pleasures, and then gall:
In bitter miseries, Rage does constrain
Spleenefull and harsh words; and we then again
Grow to a friendly peace: then our Spleen, over
Our Amity grows stronger than before.


Having in some sort searched what Truth is; it next follows, not only to
find out Religion, Religion and the Truth thereof.
but also to examine the truth thereof. Saint Augustine, lib. de Civitate Dei
2. Cap. 7. says, Religio nihil aliud est quam Divinus cultus: i. Religion is
nothing else but Divine Worship. And in his Book De Vera Relig. Religio est
Studium Sapientiae; Religion is the study of Wisdom. And Isidor. lib. de
Etymolog. 18. defines it in these words; It is therefore called Religion,
because by it we bind our selves to obey one only God, and to serve him in
our minds with Divine Worship. Abundans est pauperi Religio, etc. (says Hugo,
De Cla^st. Anim. lib. 3.) Religion is to the poor man abundant, to the mean
estated sufficient, to the rich man tolerable, to the Weak liberal, to the
Delicate compatient, to the Strong mother at, to the Poenitent merciful, to the
Perverse correctiue.

Against those that make Religion but a mere veil or cloak for their abuses
and vanities, we read Hierome in his Epistle to Nepotianus thus: Thou
buildest Monasteries, and erectest Religious houses, and by thee many poor men
are relieved through the Isles of Dalmatia; but better were it for thy Souls
health, if thou thy self among holy men did lead an holy life. And in
another sent to Eustochium (says he) There be some men of our Order, who for
no other cause make suit to be admitted into the Deaconship and Priesthood,
than that thereby they might have the greater privilege, and incur the less
suspicion, to enter into the familiarity and acquaintance of fair women: The
chiefest study such employ themselves in, is, that their shoes sit neat and
close, their garments smell of perfume, their hair be queintly kembed and
crisped, and that their fingers shine with gold and gemmes. But when thou shall
look upon any such vain person, hold him not for a Priest, but rather a
Bridegroom. And in a third Epistle to Heliodore he uses these words: They
are richer being Monks, than when they were secular men: They possess wealth
under Christ, who was always poor; which they enjoyed not under the Devil,
who was ever rich. The Church supporteth them in wealth, whom the World
confined to beggerie. Therefore (says Lactantius Firmianus) Heavenly Religion
consists not of earthy or corrupt things, but of the virtues of the Mind,
which are solely aimed at Divine Contemplations. For that only may be called
True Worship, when the heart and mind meet together to offer unto God an
immaculate offering: for whosoever confineth himself to be a true Sectarie of
the Celestial Precept, may attain unto the name of a true and sincere
Worshipper; being such an one, whose Sacrifices are the humbleness of mind,
the innocence of life, and the goodness of action. And that man so often
offers up unto God an acceptable Sacrifice, as he does any good and pious
work.

Diogenes feasting in a Temple, when stale and moldy bread was brought before
him, he not only rejected it, but in great anger rose from the table and cast
it out of doors: saying, That nothing which was base and for did should be
brought into any place where ought sacred was offered unto the gods. We
likewise read of Alexander the Great, when in a solemn Sacrifice to Jupiter,
he offered Incense with both hands at once, he was thus reprehended by Leonides
for so doing: O King, when thou have conquered and subdued those Countries and
Kingdoms whence these sacred Fumes and Odors are brought, then it will become
thee to use such prodigality and waste; but till then it shall not be amiss
if thou show thy self more sparing. In process, Alexander being victorious
over Saba, and calling to mind what had before passed betwixt him and
Leonides; he writ unto him in these words: We have sent unto thee Myrrh and
Frankincense in abundance, to the intent, o Leonides, that hereafter thou be
no more so sparing toward the gods. Christians need not be ashamed to make use
of these examples from the Ethnicks. And as concerning all such Hipocrites, who
only sloathfully and coldly tender their religious service, you may read in
Anthol. sacr. Jacob. Billij as follows: Munera dant gemini fratres, at munus
Abelis
Excipitur, munus spernitur alterius.
Two gifts are to God offered by two Brothers,
The one's accepted, and despised the others:
Cain with an evil heart, that which was vile
Tendered to his Creator; and the while,
Kept to himself the best of all his store.
Him such resemble, who give God no more
Than needs they must do by some others motion,
Worshipping more for fashion than devotion.
These men (as in their actions you may note)
Seem to love God, whilst on the World they dote.


What the Religion of the Jews is, who has not read? And what that of the
Mahometans is, who but with great terror and detestation can almost endure to
hear? First therefore concerning our Christian Religion, I shall quote you
some passages and places cited by diverse Ethnyck Authors, and those learned and
approved. After the Birth, Life, Doctrine, and Passion of the Savior of the
World, Three opinions concerning Christ.
there were three opinions of him (I omit the Evangelists and Apostles, whose
Scriptures and Miracles are unquestionable, and proceed to others:) Of the
first were those that sincerely and unfeignedly professed Christ and his
Gospel; many of which gave apparent testimony of the Truth: some by their
blessed Martyrdom, The first, Holy beginners.
others by their Writings; and among these were Dionysius Areopagita,
Tertullian, Lactantius, Firmianus, Eusebius, Paulus Orosius, etc. Others there
were which violently opposed the former; The second, Wicked Contemners.
of which number were Porphyrius, Julian Apostata, Vincentius Celsus, Africanus
Lucian, etc. Against whom wrote very learnedly, Cyprian, Origin, Saint
Augustine, and others. The third were such, as either for servile fear, or
worldly preferment, durst not, The third, Fearful Time-seruers.
or would not openly profess themselves to be Christians; or howsoever, they
were such in their hearts: yet to temporise with their Superiors and Governors;
if at any time discourse was had of those whom they called the New Sect, they
would mangle Christ's Miracles, cavil at his Doctrine, and mis-interpret the
Scriptures to their own fancies. Notwithstanding which, and that they labored
to abolish and exterminate the Profession, yet which way soever they aimed
their words or their works, something still might be gathered from them, by
which their malice was easily discovered, and the luster of the Truth more
apparently discerned. Such Power has the Word of God.

For example; Iosophus Ben Gorion, Josephus de Antiq. lib 2.
not only a Jew by Lineage, but in his Religion, uses these words; At the same
time (says he) lived Jesus, a wise man, if it be lawful to term him a man;
because indeed he did wonderful things, and was a Master and Doctor unto all
such as made inquiry after the Truth. He was followed by great troops and
multitudes both of Jews and Gentiles; and he was Christ: and although he was
afterward accused by the principal men of our Faith, and crucified, yet he
was not abandoned of those who formerly followed him; but three days after his
death he appeared alive unto them, according as the holy Scriptures had
foretold and prophesied concerning him. Which was 40 years after his Passion.
And even in these our days, the doctrine of Christ and the name of Christian
is dispersed through the World. And this was that Josephus who was present at
the destruction of Jerusalem, and wrote the whole History thereof.

Pontius Pilat, Pilat a witness of Christ.
who gave sentence against the Savior of the World, reported so largely of his
innocuous Life, Doctrine, and Miracles, to the Emperor Tiberius, that he
consulted with the Senate, to know whether they would admit of this Jesus Christ
to be their God: and though they did not assent unto the motion, yet he gave
express commandment, that none of that Profession should suffer persecution
or injury.

To this let me add the excellent Epistle of Publius Lentulus, the Roman
Proconsul; in which the person of our Savior is most accurately described. The
very words being faithfully interpreted, which he sent to the Senate and people
of Rome, during his abode in Jerusalem, according to Eutropius.

There appeared in these our times (and he is yet to be seen) a Man of great
virtue, by the name of Jesus Christ; who is called by the Nations; A Prophet of
the Truth; by his Disciples styled The Son of God: who raises the Dead, and
heals all Infirmities and Diseases. A Man of a middle stature, upright, and
begetting admiration; of a venerable aspect, whom his beholders may easily both
love and fear: his hairs of a Chestnut color full ripe, plain and smooth to
his ears, and from thence neat, somewhat crisped and shining in their flowing
from his shoulders, dividing themselves above in the middle, according to the
manner of the Nazarites; having a most clear forehead, a face without wrinckle
or spot, a beard somewhat thick, and never shorn, of the same color with the
hair of his head; not long, but parted in the middle, of a plain and mature
aspect: his eyes somewhat green and clear; his nose and mouth no way to be
reprehended; whom a moderate blush does sweeten: in rebuking, terrible; in
admonishing, gentle and gracious; his look pleasant, with a referued gravity;
who was never known to laugh, but sometimes to weep; of stature spread and
straight, his arms and hands delectable to behold; in discourse grave,
excellent, and modest; beautiful above the Sons of Men.

Plin. lib. 1.
Pliny writes thus: In the time of the Emperor Tiberius, the quaking of the
earth was much greater than ever before. By which (says another) twelve Cities
in Asia, with infinite other famous and goodly Buildings were subverted and
ruined. De Antiq. li. 2.
Of the rending the Veil of the Temple, Josephus (before named) gives
faithful testimony. Of the cruel and bloody massacre performed by Herod on
the harmless Innocents, mention is made by Philo a Jew, (an Historian of
great authority) in his Abridgement of Times; where he says, Herod commanded
many Children to be slain, and among them his own Son, because he had
heard, That the Christ (a King promised unto the Hebrews) was about that time
borne. This Philo lived in the time of the other Herod, called the Tetrarch.
The history of those slaughtered Innocents is more amply discoursed by
Macrobius a Latin Historiographer. Dion likewise, in the life of Octavian
Caesar, has these words; The Emperor Augustus having heard of Herod's barbarous
inhumanitie against his own Child and others; said openly, I had rather be an
Hog in Herod's family, than a Son.

Plinius Secundus being Proconsull of Asia, in an elegant epistle writ unto
Traian the Emperor, demanded of him, How he would have the Christians
punished? For (says he) they arise at certain hours in the night, and
assemble themselves to sing Hymns and Songs of praise and thanksgiving to
Jesus Christ, whom they honor as their God. They make solemn Vows, to do no
evil or harm to other men: They steal not, they are no Adulterers, they will
neither falsify their oath nor promise, they deny nothing that is left in
their charge, etc. And this testimony he gave of them, who was an Infidel
and an Idolater, and lived sixty years after the Passion of our Savior. Unto
whose Letter the Emperor Traian returned this answer:

For as much as they be accused for none other evil doing or abuse, let them in
no case be punished or afflicted with any severity or rigor; neither make any
further inquisition against them. Nevertheless, when they shall be brought
before thee, do thy utmost endeavor with all humanity, to persuade and draw
them from their. Religion but if they constantly persist therein, and will in
no wise forsake it, yet see that thou off^rest them not the least injury.

His Nephew Adrian succeeded him in the Imperial Purple; who (as AElius
Lampridius reports) at his first inauguration permitted them freely to
exercise their Religion; and he himself with diverse of his Nobility
worshipped Christ: unto whose honor they caused Temples to be erected. Yet
afterward he fell from that Religion, proving a cruel and merciless
Persecutor: for he was persuaded, That if he should seem to favor or any way
conniue at their Sect, the whole World would be converted to the Faith, and so
the superstition and idolatry of the Gentiles be utterly overthrown. Yet
Petrus Crinitus writes (in the life of Saturninus) that an Epistle was sent
from Severinus the Consul, unto the same Adrian; wherein he declared unto him,
That there were many Christians in Egypt, among whom some called themselves
Bishops, and others Deacons and Priests; of which not any was found idle, but
all devoutly employed in some religious Exercise; as in visiting and relieuing
the Sick, Lame, and Blind. That all of them lived by their labors, were of
courteous and gentle behavior, and worshipped one only, who (as they said)
had been crucified by the Jews.

It is also delivered unto us by the histories of those times, That Seranus
Eranius Ambassador to the same Emperor, wrote unto him from the Province where
he was then employed; informing him, That the great cruelty in persecuting the
Christians (being accused of nothing else save their Constancy in the Religion
which they professed, and could not justly be charged with any other crimes or
misdemeanors) deserved mitigation. Upon which information, the Emperor
inhibited Minutius Tondanus, then Pro-Consull in Asia, from condemning any
Christian for the profession of his Faith, unless he were otherwise convicted
of some criminal or capital offense.

It is a thing worthy remarke in Alexander Seuerus; who, after many bloody
Persecutors, succeeding in the Empire, began much to favor them, and suffered
them to have sundry Oratories and Temples in the City: who notwithstanding he
was a mere Ethnyck, and vntutered in the Christian Faith; yet (as AElius
Lampridius reports of him) when diverse Cooks and Tauerners had petitioned
unto him, complaining of the Christians, saying, That they had taken their
lodgings and houses from them, in which they made exercise of diverse
superstitions and hypocrisies; and that they observed a Religion quite
contrary from that which was then in use with the Romans. The Emperor to
their complaint made this following answer; ^^hinke (says he) it is more
convenient and necessary that God should be in those places devoutly honored,
than your affairs and profane vocations be vainly followed.

As worthy an observation is that of Maximinus, successor to Severus, and
companion with Dioclesian in the Empire, about two hundred years after our
Redemption; part of the copy of one of his Letters I will acquaint you with,
being to this effect:

Caesar Maximinus; Invincible, Great High Priest, of Germany, Egypt, Thebes,
Sarmatia, Persia, Armenia, Carpia, and victorious besides over the Medes; and
for his Conquests named, Nine times Emperor, Eight times Consul, Father of
his Country, etc. At the beginning of our Empire, we commanded all things to
be done according to the conformity of our Laws, (the public discipline of
Rome still conserved:) In which we gave express commandment, utterly to
abolish and extinguish the Christian Religion; allotting death with torture to
the Professors thereof: enioyning them to observe those ancient Customs and
Laws established by our Predecessors. But since they voluntarily rather expose
their bodies to all manner of tortures, than to renounce that faith which they
profess, without any will or intent to honor and adore any of our Roman gods:
We therefore now mindful of our wonted grace and clemency, purpose to
express the same toward these Christians; freely permitting them to have
places for their Assemblies, and to erect Temples, in which to offer up their
Sacrifices and Prayers. Which license and faculty we grant unto them, under
condition, That they shall attempt nothing against our Publique-weale and
Religion; and that in all other things they shall keep and observe our Laws
and Ordinances. Moreover, That in grateful acknowledgement of this their free
permssion, they shall stand obliged to pray unto their God Jesus for our life
and safety, as likewise for the prosperity of the Roman Commonwealth, and our
Cities continuance in peace and flourishing estate.

Of Cublay Emperor of Tartarie.
To these I add what I find recorded in the Tartarian History, of the great
Emperor Cublay, who was a mere Infidel, honoring and acknowledging no other
God than the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars. This King was of incomparable
greatness and wisdom, not to be paralelled by any Prince of that Age in the
which he lived: Who having dispatched his puissant Captain Ba^aim, to conquer
the almost invincible Province of Maugy, (which included the rich and
inestimable Country and City of Cinquemay) it happened that in the absence of
this mighty Captain (who had taken with him in that service the prime soldiers
in all his Dominions) two of his Nephews, the one called Naim, the other Cadue,
Princes of great power and command under him, revolted and grew into open
rebellion, and affronted him in battle. But this magnanimous Emperor, as
politic in war, as prudent in peace, (commanding from the great Armenia,
unto the borders of Calicut a kingdom in the East India) gave them battle,
surprised the Rebels, and put their Army to flight. But that which I
especially observe in this history is, That the people reuolting after this
manner, were for the greater part Christians, his Tributaries and servants;
howsoever tainted with diverse heresies, for some were Nestorians, some
Armenians, some Abessines, etc. Hereupon the Jews and Mahumetans, being
victorious under the pay of Cublay, surprised of them to the number of fifteen
thousand, and having first disarmed, and then with many bitter scoffs and
taunts ^erided them, they presenred them before the Emperor, expecting when he
would command them to be cut in pieces, and they attending ready to play the
Executioners. But he (quite contrary to their expectation) being at that time
mounted on a strong Elephant, upon whom he sat in his seat Royal; their
insolences and mockeries being appeased, and silence commanded, he caused the
Christian Prisoners to troop about him, to whom he delivered an Oration to
this purpose:

Though I confess my great Victory this day gotten, The Oratian of Cubley to
the Christians.
was by the power and favor of my gods, the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars,
abiding in the glorious Firmament of Heaven; yet because the Prisoners, being
all or most of them Christians, appear before me not only despoyled of their
Arms, but mocked and taunted of the Jews, Mahumetans, and others, vpbraiding
them with their god Jesus, who was sometimes fastened unto a Cross by the
forefathers of these Jews: notwithstanding they have opposed me in battle,
and that so many of their Ensigns lie here prostrate at my feet; yet that all
the Nations and Languages that live under our Principality and Dominion, may
know, that We and our Grace can find as soon Will to pardon, as Power to
punish; from this day forward, we forbid, and strictly charge all Nations under
us, of what Quality or Religion soever, That they neither deride, iniure, or
oppress any of these captive Christians, upon penalty to be deprived of their
Arms, and disgracefully scourged with rods. The maine reason inducing us to
see this exactly performed, being no other, but that their God Jesus is highly
esteemed and honored by Us, as being one of the greatest among the Celestial
Deities, full of all equity and justice: for he knowing those Christians
injuriously to raise themselves against Us, as being our sworn Subjects, and
we their Protector and Sovereign; he therefore in his great justice has
permitted me to win the honor of this day, which otherwise I had not power to
do, because I have heard him styled the God of Battles, etc.

I give you further to understand, That if any in this my victorious Army has
kept back any Christian Prisoner not here presented before me, he shall not
dare to offer him the least affront or violence whatsoever, but immediately set
him at liberty, delivering him up into their Quarter armed, and with all
equipages to him belonging: and this to be performed upon pain to pass
through the danger of the Armies. Now our Imperial Charge imposed on these
Christians for their delinquencie, is, That they pray unto their God for our
prosperity and preservation, and do us nine months service in our intended
war against the King of Nixiamora, who denies to pay us Tribute, and strives
to equal himself with our Greatness; receiving for the same equal wages
with the rest of the Soldiers in our Army.

This great honor done unto the name of Christ, and unto Christians for his
sake, by the Heathen and Infidels, pu^^eth me in mind of that which the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 8. ver. 8.
Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, because
of thine Enemies, that thou migtest confound the Enemy and the Auenger, etc.

We shall enquire further of the Messiah, in whom we build our Faith, and in
whom the hope of our salvation consists, and find him out by his Miracles.
The word Miraculum imports a thing moving stupor and admiration: for those
which behold a Miracle, stand amassed, Valor. Maxim.
as confounded at the effects, when they cannot apprehend the causes. Or else
it is a thing, which from whence it comes, or by what means, passes
apprehension: for whatsoever happens beyond the course of Nature begets
admiration. Saint Augustine says, Lib de Civit. Dei. 21.
As it was possible for God to appoint a certain course for all Natures,
according to his Divine will and pleasure; so it is not impossible unto him to
alter that course, and change those Natures as him best likes. Lib. 11. de
Civ. Dei.
And elsewhere: We know that God is able to do all things, though we cannot
conceive the means by which he works them. And in Miracles, all the reason
that can be given of the thing done, is only the power of the Doer. And in his
book, De Confess. We wonder at the breadth and height of the Mountains, the
ebbing and flowing of the Ocean, the windings and turnings of Rivers, the
motions of the Spheres and Planets; yet never wonder at our self, when Man in
himself is a greater miracle than all the miracles that can be wrought by Man.

Greg. in Homil. says, That all Divine Miracles ought to be meditated on by
Study, not examined by Reason: for to enquire into the secret purpose of the
Almighty, is to be too arrogant and saucy in his Counsels.

Lipsius, ex Greg. M. uses these words; Divine Miracles are to be considered,
not disputed. And again, True Miracles witness one true God; but false
Impostures acknowledge many, and those evil.

Ca. 11. Hom. 29.
Chrysostom upon Math. says, As the Morning precedeth the Sun, and Darkness
goes before the Night: so at the coming of Christ, the Prophets before him,
and the Apostles with him and after him (by the help of the Holy Ghost) did
great things; and in the coming of Antichrist, the Pseudo-Christiani (i.
false-Christians) before him, with him, and after him, by the aid of the wicked
Spirit did marvelous things.

And in another place commenting upon the same Evangelist; As when a man
tells thee a Tale which thou art not willing to hear, the more he speaks,
the less thou bear away. Or traveling in haste, when thy mind is
otherwise occupied, though in thy speed thou meetest many, yet thou take not
notice of any that pass thee: so the Jews dealt with our Savior; for though
they saw many signs and marvelous things done by him, yet notwithstanding
they demanded a sign from him, because they heard such things as they marked
not, and saw such things as they took no pleasure to behold.

Hugo, De Operib. 3. Dierum speaks thus: Res multis modis apparent mirabiles,
etc. Many ways things appear marvelous, sometimes for their greatness,
sometimes for their smalnesse; some for their rarietie, others for their
beauty. First according to their greatness, as where any creature does exceed
the proportion of it is own Kind; so we admire a Giant amongst Men, a Leviathan
or Whale amongst Fishes, Wonders in Nature.
a Gryphon amongst Birds, an Elephant amongst foure-footed Beasts, a Dragon
amongst Serpents, etc. The second for their smalnesse; as when certain
creatures are scanted of that dimension proper unto their Kind, as in Dwarfes,
small Beagles, and the like: or in Moths, small Worms in the hand or finger,
etc. which how little soever, yet they participate life and motion with those
of larger dimension and size; neither are they any way disproportionate in
their Kinds, but the one as well declares the power and wisdom of the
Creator, as the other. Consider therefore whether thou should more wonder at
the tuskes of the Boar, than the teeth of a Worm; at the legs of a Gryphon,
or a Gnat; at the head of an Horse, or a Locust; at the thighs of an Estrich,
or a Fly. If in the one thou admirest the greatness and strength, in the other
thou have cause to wonder at the smalnesse and dexterity; as in the one thou
may behold eyes so great that they are able to daunt thee, in the other thou
may see eyes so small, than thine are searce able to discern them: and even
in these little creatures thou shall find such adiuments and helps of nature,
that there is nothing needful or defective in the smallest, which thou shall
find superfluous in the greatest, etc. We wonder why the Crocodile when he
feeds, moves not his lower chaw; how the Salamander lives vnscorched in the
fire; how the Hedgehog is taught, with his sharp quills to wallow and tumble
beneath the Fruit trees, and return home laden with Apples to his resting
place; who instructed the Ant to be careful in Summer to provide her self of
food for Winter; or the Spider to draw small threads from it is own bowels, to
insidiate and lay nets for the Flies? All these are infallid testimonies of the
wisdom and power of the Almighty.

Of Miracles.
These are only wonders in nature, but no Miracles. Chrisostom supr. Math. says
thus: Quatuor sunt mirabiles imitatores, etc. There be four miraculous
Imitators made by Christ: A Fisherman to be the first Shepherd of his Flock;
a Persecutor the first Master and Teacher of the Gentiles; a Publican the first
Evangelist; a Thief that first entered into Paradise. And further: That of
three things the World has great cause to wonder; of Christ's resurrection
after death, of his ascension to heaven in the Flesh; and that by his Apostles,
being no better than Fishermen, the whole world should be converted. But if any
thing strange or prodigious has been heretofore done by Mahomet or his
associates, they have been rather imposterous than miraculous. Or admit they
were worthy to be so called, yet do they not any way justify his blasphemous
Religion. For you may thus read Iustine Martyr, De Respons. ad Quest. 5. fol.
162. As the Sun rising upon the Good and Evil, the Just and Unjust, is no
argument to confirm the evil and injust man in his wickedness and injustice:
so ought it not to confirm heretics in their errors, if at any time
miraculous things be done by them. For if the effect of a miracle be an
absolute sign and demonstration of piety, God would not then reply upon the
Reprobate and Cursed at the last day (when they shall say unto him, Lord, have
we not in thy Name prophesied and cast out devils, and done many Miracles?) I
never knew you, depart from me o ye Cursed, etc.

Christ was miraculous in his Incarnation, his Nativity, his Life, Doctrine,
Death, and Resurrection, as will easily appear: but first it shall not be
amiss to speak a word or two of his blessed Mother.

Ser. 143. of the Blessed Virgin Mary.
Petrus Chrisologus writes thus: Inexpressible is the sacrament of the
Nativity of our Lord the God of Life, which we ought rather to believe, than
to examine. A Virgin conceived and brought forth, which Nature affourded not,
Use knew not, Reason was ignorant of, Understanding conceived not: This, at
which Heaven wondered, Earth admired, the Creature was stupefied, what humane
Language is able to deliver? Therefore the Evangelist, as he opened the
conception and birth in an human phrase, so he shut it up in a Divine secret.
And this he did to show, That it is not lawful for a man to dispute that which
he is commanded to believe.

Sermon. 148.
And again: How can there be the least damage unto modesty, where there is
interessed a Deity? Where an Angel is the Messenger, Faith the Bride-maid,
Chastity the Contract, Virtue the Despouser, Conscience the Priest, God the
Cause, integrity the Conception, Virginity the Birth, a Maid the Mother? Let
no man therefore judge that thing after the manner of Man, which is done by a
divine Sacrament: let no man examine a celestial mystery, by earthly reason;
or a secret nouelty, by that which is frequent and common. Let no man measure
that which is Singular, by Example; nor derive contumely from Piety; nor run
into danger by his rashness, when God has provided salvation by his Goodness.

Origin upon Matthew, Cap. 1. Hom. 1.
moves this Question; What was the necessity that Mary the blessed Virgin
should be espoused unto Joseph? but either because that mystery should be
concealed from the Devil, and so the false Accuser should find no cauil
against her chastity, being asfied unto an husband; or else that after the
Infant was borne, he should be the mothers Conduct into Egypt and back
again. For Mary was the untouched, the unblemished, the immaculate Mother of
the only begotten Son of God, Almighty Father, and Creator of all things: of
that Son, who in Heaven was without a Mother, in Earth without a Father; in
Heaven (according to his Deity) in the bosom of his Father, in Earth
(according to his humanity) in the lap of his Mother.

Gregory the Great says, Lib. 18. Moral. In Job Cap. 35.
Though Christ Jesus be one thing of the Father, another of the Mother; yet he
is not one person of the Father, another of the Virgin, but he is eternal of
the Father, and temporary of the Virgin; the same who created, and was made;
He, the beautifullest amongst men, according to his Divinity; and He, of whom
it is written, He is despised and rejected of Men: He is a Man full of
sorrows, and has experience of infirmities; we hid as it were our faces from
him; He was despised, and we esteemed him not, according to his Humanity. He
that was before all worlds, of a father without a mother; He came toward the
end of the world, of a Mother without a Father. He was the Temple of the
Builder, and the Builder of the Temple: He was the Author of the Work, and
the Work of the Author: remaining one Substance, yet consisting of two
Natures; but neither confused in the commixtion of Natures, nor doubled in the
destruction of Natures.

Chrysostom speaks thus: Homil. de Joan. Bapt.
The holy and blessed Mary, a mother and a Virgin; a Virgin before she was
delivered, a Virgin after. Will thou (says he) know how he was borne of a
Virgin? and how after his birth she remained a Virgin? I answer thee thus; The
doors were shut and Jesus entered.

Christ was miraculous in his Incarnation: for as S. Augustine writing against
the Jews, Aug. de incarnat. Domin.
says, O you Jews, look upon the Harp, and observe what a sweet musical
sound it yields; to make up which there be three necessary instruments or
helps, Art, the Hand, and the String; Art dictates, the Hand touches, the
String sounds: all three work together, but amongst them the String is only
heard, for neither the Art nor the Hand make any audible harmony: So neither
the Father nor the Holy Ghost took humane Flesh upon them, and yet they have
an equal coooperation with the Son: the sound of the String is only heard,
and the Son is only seen in the Flesh; yet the effect and melody
consists of them all: and as it solely belongs to the String to make a
sound, so it belongs to Christ only to take humane Nature upon him. Further
I demand of the incredulous Jew, How Aarons dry Rod sprouted with leaves and
bare Fruit? And when he resolves me that, I will tell him how a Virgin
conceived and brought forth a Son. But indeed, neither can the Jew make
manifest the one, nor I give warrantable reason of the other.

Sermon. 3. in Vigil. Natiuit.
Saint Bernard writes to this purpose: Three Works, three Mixtures has the
Omnipotent Majesty made in the assumption of our Flesh, all miraculously
singular, and singularly miraculous; Three such things, Three Wonders.
as never the like before were, nor shall the like hereafter happen upon the
face of the earth. They are interchangeably God and Man; The first.
a Mother and a Virgin; Faith, and the Heart of Man: for the Word, the Spirit,
and the Flesh met in one person, and these Three are One, and that One is
Three, not in the confusion of Substance, but unity of Person; and this is the
first and super-excellent Commixtion. The second is, The second.
a Virgin, and a Mother, alike admirable and singular: for it was not heard
from the beginning of the world, that a Virgin conceived, and that a Mother
remained a Virgin. The third.
The third is the co-Vnion of Faith with the Heart of Man; and this, though it
seem inferior, yet may it appear every way as powerful, if we truly
consider it: For wonderful it is, that the Heart of Man should give belief to
the former. For how can humane Understanding conceive, That perfect God should
be perfect Man? Or that she should remain an untouched Virgin, who had brought
forth a Son? As Iron and a Tyle-sheard cannot be molded and made into one
body; so the other cannot be commixed, unless the glue and soder of the Spirit
of God incorporat them.

He was miraculous in his Nativity: for as Ambrose says, Contra Heretic. It
is impossible for me to search into the secret of his generation; at the
consideration of which, my fences fail, and my tongue is silent; and not mine
only, but even those of the Angels: It transcendeth the capacities of the
Potestates, the Cherubims, and the Seraphims; it is above conception; for it is
written, The Peace of Christ passes all understanding. Thou therefore lay
thine hand upon thy mouth, since it is not lawful for thee to enquire into
these supernall Mysteries. It is granted thee to know that he is borne, but
how he is borne it is not granted thee to be inquisitiue; for to do so is
fearful, since unspeakable is his generation: according to the words of the
Prophet Esayas, Who can tell his Generation.

Concerning the place of his birth, Sup. Mat. 2.
says Joan. Chrysostom, upon these words, Intrantes Domum, invenerunt puerum,
etc. Did they find a Palace raised on pillars of Marble? Found they a
princely Court furnished with Officers and Attendants? Found they guards of
armed and well accommodated soldiers? or Horses in rich and shining trappings?
or Chariots adorned with gold and ivorie? Or did they find the Mother crowned
with an Imperial Diadem? or the Child swathed in Bisse and Purple? Surely no,
but rather a poor and base Cottage, a vile and contemptible Stable, more fit
for beasts than men; a Child wrapped in sordid swathings; and the Mother in an
ordinary garment, prepared not so much for ornament, as to cover nakedness.
Yet the Nobility of Christ's birth (says Saint Augustine) appeared in the
Virginity of the Mother, Sup. Ioane
and the Nobility of the Mother was manifest in the Divinity of the Son.
Ser. Sup. Epiph.
And in another place; Gold was offered him as to a potent King; Frankincense,
as to a great God; and Myrrh, as to a merciful Redeemer, who came to offer up
his life for the salvation of all Mankind. The Heavens were his Heralds,
Angels his Proclaimers, Wisemen his Worshippers.

Says Gregory upon these words, Homil. Sup. Mat. 10.
Cum natus esset Jesus in Bethlehem, etc. To this King borne we offer Gold,
when we shine in his sight by the claritie of Divine wisdom: We offer
Frankincense, when by holy and devout prayers we burn the cogitations of the
Flesh, upon the altar of our hearts, which ascend a sweet savor by our
heavenly desires: We offer Myrrh, when we mortify all carnal affections
through abstinence.

And Leo Pap. Ser. de Appar.
The Wisemen and Kings of the East adored the Word in the Flesh, Wisdom in
Infancy, Strength in Infirmity, the Lord of Majesty in humane Verity. And
to give infalled testimony of their faith, what they believed with their
hearts, they professed by three gifts, Myrrh to a Man, Gold to a King,
Frankincense to a God.

He was miraculous in his Life, as being without sin; miraculous in his
Doctrine, for never man spoke as he did. And of his Miracles we thus read
Claudian: Angelus alloquitur Mariam, quo praescia verbo, etc.
Th'Angell to Mary speaks, and says that she
Shall bear a Son, and yet a Virgin be.
Three Chald'ae an Kings to him three Presents bring;
Myrrh to a Man, and Gold unto a King;
Incense to'a God. To prove himself Divine,
In Cana he turned Water into Wine.
Five Loaves two Fishes have five thousand fed,
When surplusage remained of meat and bread.
To the borne-Blinde he showed the Suns bright rays,
Who on th'vnknowne light did with wonder gaze.
He caused the light on Lazarus to shine,
After he four days in the grave had ly'ne.
With his right hand he fainting Peter stayed;
But with his word, his faith more constant made.
She that the bloody Issue had endured
For many Winters, by her Faith was cured.
The palsied man, who had been bedrid long,
Took up his bed and walked thence whole and strong.
He cast out Devils by his Word sincere:
He made the Dumb to speak, and Deaf to hear.


He it was of whom some think Virgil prophesied, Eclog 4. in these words:
Vltima Cumaei venit iam Carminis atas.
The last day 's come of the Cumaean Ryme;
A great One's now borne, from the first of Time.
The Virgin is returned with Saturnes Crown,
And now a new Birth is from Heaven let down.


Sup. Cant. Sermon. 15.
He was miraculous in his death. Of whom elegant S. Bernard thus speaks: How
sweetly, Lord Jesus, did thou converse with men? how abundantly did thou
bestow many blessings upon man? how valiantly did thou suffer many bitter,
hard, and intolerable things for man? hard words, hard strokes, more hard
afflictions? O hard hardened and obdure Sons of Adam, whom so great
sufferings, so great benignity, so immense an ardour of love cannot mollify!
Again; God loved us sweetly, wisely, valiantly: sweetly, in assuming our
Flesh; wisely, in avoiding sin; valiantly, in suffering death; but above all,
in that Cup which he vouchsafed to taste, which was the great work of our
Redemption: for that, more than all, challenges our love; it gently insinuates
our devotion, more justly exacts it, more strictly binds it, more vehemently
commands it. And in another place: In the Passion of our Savior, it behooves
us three things more especially to consider; the Work, the Manner, the Cause.
In the Work, his Patience; in the Manner, his Humility; in the Cause, his
Charity. Patience singular, Humility admirable, and Charity unspeakable.
And now methinks I hear the Redeemer and Savior of the World thus speak
from the Cross.

Huc me sidereo discendere fecit Olympo,
His me crudeli vulnere fixit Amor, etc.
Love drew me hither from the starry Round,
And here has pierced me with a cruel wound.
I mourn, yet none has of my grief remorse:
Whom Deaths dire Laws in vain intend to force.
Love brought me to insufferable scorn,
And platted on my head a crown of Thorn:
It was mere love, thy wounded Soul to cure,
Made me these wounds upon my flesh to endure.
It was my Love (which triumphs over all)
That quenched my thirst with Vinegar and Call.
The love which I to Mankind could not hide,
With a sharp Spear launcht blood out of my side.
Over me (Love) only me, of Kings the King,
Does now insult; who hither did me bring
For others gain, to suffer this great loss,
To have my hands and feet nayl'd to the Cross.
Now what do I for all this love implore?
Love me again, and I desire no more.
Think (says Thomas de Kempis) of the dignity of the Person, and greatly
lament, because God in the Flesh was so contumeliously handled. Ecce Altissimus
supra omnes, infra omnes deprimitur. Nobilissmus dehonestatur;
Speciocissimus sputo inquinatur, etc.
Behold how the most-High above all, is depressed below all: The most Noble is
vilified. The most Fair spit upon. The most Wise derided. The most Mighty
bound. The most Innocent scourged. The most Holy crowned with Thorns. The most
Gentle buffetted. The most Rich impouerished. The most Bountiful despoyled.
The most Worthy blasphemed. The most Good despised. The most Loving hated. The
most Knowing reputed foolish. The most True not believed. The most Innocent
condemned. The most skillful Physician wounded. The Son of God crucified. The
Immortal subject to death and slain. The Lord of heaven and earth dying for
the redemption of wretched and ungrateful servants.


Sic de Cruce suo Christus loquitur.

Vide Homo qua pro te patior,
Vide Cla^es quibus conf^di^r.
Vide poenas quibus afficior,
Cum sit tantu^ dolor exterior,
Interior planctus est gravior,
Dum ingratum te sic experior?
See what I for thee endure,
Nailed to the Cross by hands impure.
Behold the pains I suffer here!
Since outward grief does such appear,
How great then is my grief within,
Whilst thou (ingrate) abid'st in sin?
Briefly, The whole Passion of Christ, according to the sentence of Dionysius,
was for imitation, compassion, admiration, contemplation, inflammation, and
thanksgiving. According to that of Thomas a Kempis; It is of divine Love the
Incendiarie, of Patience the Doctrine, in tribulation the Comfort. It is the
solace of dissolution, the substance of holy compunction, the exercise of
internal devotion, the exclusion of desperation, the certain hope of
remission, the support of sharp reprehension, the expulsion of perverse
cogitation, the repression of carnal temptation, the consolation of corporal
imperfections, the contempt of temporal abundance, the abdication of our
proper affections, the restraint of superfluous necessity, the exercise of
honest conversation, the inflammation to amendment of life, the induction to
celestial consolation, the approbation of brotherly compassion, the reparation
of divine contemplation, the argumentation of future blessedness, the
mitigation of pains present, the purgation from the fire future, and the great
satisfaction for all our sins and offenses whatsoever. Briefly, the Passion
of Christ is of a godly and religious Soul the Mirrhor, of our life the
Director, of the way to heaven the Load-starre, of all tempests the shadow and
protector, and of all Souls (in the hour of death) the comfort and supporter.

The Passion of Christ (says Rabanus de laud Crucis) sustaines heaven,
governs the world, pierces hell: in the first the Angels are confirmed, in
the second the people redeemed, in the third the Enemy subdued. Saint
Augustine in his Sermon De Natali Domini, says, That the Maker of man was made
Man; that he which governed the Stars, should suck the breast, that the Bread
should be hungry, the Fountain thirsty, the Light should be darkened, the Way
should be weary, the Truth should suffer by false witness, the Judge of the
living and dead should by a mortal man be judged, that Justice by injust men
should be condemned, that Discipline it self should be scourged, the prime
Branch crowned with thorns; he that made the Tree, be hanged on the Tree,
Strength weakened, Health wounded, and Life made subject unto death.

Saint Bernard in his first sermon De Nativit. Christi, uses these words; Vt
in Paradiso terrestri quatuor fuere fontes, etc. As in the earthly Paradise
there were four Rivers which watered the whole earth; so in Christ, who is our
Paradise, we may find four Fountains: the first is the fountain of Mercy,
to wash away our sins by the waters of Remission: the second is the fountain
of Wisdom, to quench our thirst with the waters of Discretion: the third is
the fountain of Grace, to water the plants of good Works with the springs of
Devotion. etc.

Twelve most grievous and intolerable sufferings of Christ are observed from
the Evangelical history; Twelve grievous sufferings of Christ.
his Agony sad and bloody, than which spectacle, nothing since the Creation of
the World has been more admirable. Secondly, That for so vile a price he
should be sold and delivered up to his wicked and bloodthirsty enemies, by one
of his own Disciples. 3. That with his hands bound, he should be led like a
captive through the public street. 4. That like a slave he should be so
inhumanely scourged. 5. That his brows should be pierced with Thorns. 6. That
he should be affronted with so many contumelies and injuries, as his face spit
upon, his cheeks buffetted, his head struck with a rod, his party-colored
Vesture, and he brought to be arraigned at the Bar for a Malefactor. 7. That
he was held more vile and unworthy than the murderer Barabas. 8. That upon his
weary and bruised shoulders he should be forced to bear that Cross on which
he was to suffer. 9. That he was adjudged to suffer so long and lingering a
death. 10. That when he was nothing but sorrow and anguish, and pain all over,
yet he should be so scornefully derided of his enemies. 11. That he beheld his
most innocent Mother present in all his torments. 12. That when his most holy
body hung in the Air and Suns meridian heat, bloody all over, the
fountains of his veins being emptied, and his bowels dried up; demanding but
a little water, they offered him gall and Vinegar. Who ever heard such things?
Who ever suffered the like things?

Bonaventure in his sixtieth Sermon, De Tempore, observes his sufferings to be
unspeakable, from ten circumstances: First, the Nobility of the Sufferer. 2.
The sensibilitie of the patient Members. 3. The atrocitie of the punishment. 4.
The crudelitie of the Afflicters. 5. The iniquity of the Judges. 6. The
multiplicitie of the torments. 7. The vilitie of the place. 8. His society
forsaking him. 9. The diuturnitie of the pain. 10. The variety of his
contumelies. The multiplicitie and universality of his torments may appear by
that which is spoken, He was afflicted in his whole body, he was bound unto a
pillar, and scourged all over: he suffered in every member by it self; in his
head, by being struck with a Reed, and wearing a crown of Thorns; in his
eyes, by being blinded, and b^ his often weeping; in his cares, by the peoples
acclamations and loud blasphemies; in his face, by buffets and spitting; in his
taste, by drinking vinegar and gall; in his hands and feet, by the nails struck
through them, by which he was fastened to the Cross. The meditation whereof ought
to begin in compassion of his grief and sufferings, to make us the more
inflamed with the love of Him so merciful a Redeemer.

Cap. 27. ver. 41.
At whose death, we read in the Evangelist Saint Matthew, That from the sixth
hour there was darkness over all the land unto the ninth hour. And Verse
21. The Veil of the Temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and
the earth did quake, and the stones were cloven, and the graves did open
themselves, and many bodies of the Saints which slept, arose and came out of
the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy City, and appeared
unto many, etc. Now concerning this great Eclipse and Earthquake, Of the great
Eclipse at the death of our Savior.
there be diverse testimonies out of Ethnyck writers. Phleganius a Greek Author,
(of whom Suidas makes often mention) has these words, In the fourth year of the
two hundred and fourth Olympiad (which was in the eighteenth year of the
reign of Tiberius Caesar, in which our Savior suffered) there was an eclipse
of the Sun, the greatest that had ever before been seen, or found to be
recorded in writing; which continued from the sixth unto the ninth hour: and
during this Eclipse, the trembling of the earth was so great in Asia and
Bithynia, that infinite structures of great magnificence and strength were
utterly demolished.

Concerning this Eclipse, you may read Bellarmine, lib. 2. De Septem verbis,
thus: Saint Matthew says there was darkness over the face of the earth, from
the sixth hour to the ninth. And Saint Luke, cap. 23. And the Sun was
darkened: Three difficulties (says he) are here to be explained; The first
Difficulty.
First, that the Sun uses to be deficient in his light, by reason of the
interposition of the new moon, when she is directly interposed betwixt it and
the earth; which could not happen at the death and passion of our Savior,
because it was not then conjoined with the Sun, which happens in the new
Moon only, but was opposed to the Sun as being in her plenitude or
fullness; for then was the feast of Easter among the Jews, which according to
their Law begins the fourteenth day of the first month. The second
Difficulty.
Again, If in the Passion of Christ the Moon were conjoined with the Sun, yet
the darkness could not continue the space of three hours, that is, from the
sixth hour to the ninth; for the total Eclipse of the Sun cannot endure
long, especially if it be obscured all over, so that it shadoweth the whole
body of the Sun, and that his dimnesse cannot properly be called Darkness:
for the Moon is moved with more swiftness than the Sun in it is own proper
motion, and for that cause cannot obumbrate the Sun but for a short season,
for it quickly gives place, leaving the Sun free to his own proper luster.
The third Difficulty.
Lastly, It can never happen, that by reason of the conjunction with the Moon,
the Sun can leave the world in universal darkness: for the Moon is much
less than the Sun, nay not so great in compass and quantity as the earth,
and therefore by the interposition of it is body the Moon cannot so shadow the
Sun, to leave the whole earth in darkness. Now if any shall object and say,
That the Evangelist spoke only of the universal land of Palestine; that
likewise may be very easily refuted.

First, By the testimony of Dionisius Areopagita, Dionysius Areopag.
who in his Epistle to holy Polycarpus affirms, That he himself beheld that
defection of the Sun, and the horrible darkness then spread over the earth,
being at the same time in the city of Heliopolis, which is situate in Egypt.
Moreover, Phlegon.
Phlegon a Greek Historiographer, and a Gentile, says, That in the fourth
year of the two hundred and fourth Olympiad, a great and remarkable defect of
the Sun was observed, the like never before seen; for the day at the sixth
hour was turned into tenebrous night, insomuch as the Stars were visibly
seen in the Firmament. And this Historian lived in Greece, and far remote from
Iudaea. Origines against Celsus, and Eusebius in his Chronicle, to the thirty
third year of Christ cite this Author.

Lucianus Martyr.
Of the same witnesses Lucianus Martyr, saying, Seek in your Annals and you
shall find, that in the time of Pilat, the Sun being banished the day, gave
place to darkness. These words Ruffinus uses in his translation of his
Ecclesiastical History into the Latin tongue. So likewise Tertullian, in
Apollogeticon: and Paulus Orosius in his history.

But all these doubts may be decided, and these difficulties be easily made
plain: for where it was said, That the defect of the Sun still happens in
the new Moon, and not when it is at the full, most true it is in all natural
Eclipses: but that which happened at the death of our Savior was singular and
prodigious, which could only be done by him who created the Sun, the Moon,
the Heavens, and the Earth. For Dionysius Areopagita, in the place before
cited, affirms, That himself, with one Apollophanes, saw the Moon about
midday, with a most swift and unusual course haste unto the Sun, and
subject it self unto it, and as it were cleave thereunto, until the ninth
hour, and then by the same way return to it is own place in the East.

Concerning that which was added, That no defect in the Sun could possibly
continue for the space of three hours together, so tha^ darkness might
ouershadow the whole earth: it is thus answered, Most true it is, that in an
usual and natural Eclipse it remains infallibly so; but this was not governed
by the Laws of Nature, but by the will of the omnipotent Creator, who as he
could carry the Moon with a swift course from the Orient, to meet with the
Sun in the meridian, and after three hours return it back into it is own
place in the East; so by his power he could bring to pass, that these three
hours he could stay the Moon with the Sun, and command her to move neither
more slowly nor swiftly than the Sun.

Lastly, where it was said, That it was not possible this Eclipse should be
seen over the face of the whole earth, considering that the Moon is lesser
than the earth, and therefore much less than the Sun; there is no question
but true it is, if we reflect but upon the interposition of the Moon alone:
but what the Moon of it self could not do, the Creator of the Sun and Moon
had power to do. For things created can do nothing of themselves, without the
aid and cooperation of the Creator. And whereas some may object and say, That
through the darkness made by the thick and dusky clouds, the light might be
obscured from the universal face of the earth. Neither can that hold current;
for then those foggie and tenebrous clouds had not only covered the Sun and
the Moon, but those very Stars also, which by reason of that darkness were
visible, and manifestly discovered to shine in the Firmament.

Now there are diverse reasons given, why it pleased God Almighty, that at the
passion of our Savior the Lord of life, such darkness should be; Leo. sermon.
10.
and two especially: The first was, To signify the apparent blindness of the
Jews, which was then, and does still continue. According to the Prophecy of
Esaias, Isay. 60. ver. 2.
For behold, Darkness shall cover the earth, and thick darkness the people,
etc. The second cause was, To show the great and apparent sins of the Jews:
which Saint Hierome in his Comment upon Saint Matthew does thus illustrate;
Before, (says he) evil and wicked men did vex and persecute good and just
men: but now impious men have dared to persecute and crucify God himself,
clothed in human flesh. Before, Citisens with Citisens had contention; strife
begot evil language, ill words, and sometimes slaughter: but now, servants and
slaves have made insurrection against the King of Men and Angels, and with
incredible audacitie nailed him unto the Cross. At which the whole World
quaked and trembled, and the Sun it self, as ashamed to look upon so
horrible and execrable an act, withdrew his glorious luster, and covered all
the air with most terrible darkness.

Thus you have heard the Incarnation, Life, Doctrine, Miracles, and Death of
the blessed Redeemer of the World, God and Man; from whom we ground our
Christian Religion. Now because I had occasion to speak of the Turkish
Alcaron, and the apparent absurdities contained therein, it shall not be amiss
to insert something concerning the Author thereof; that comparing his life with
his doctrine, the baseness of the one may make the blasphemies of the other
appear the more odious and abominable.

Platina writes, The life of Mahomet.
That he was descended nobly: but his authority is not approved. Therefore I
rather follow Pomponius Lata, in his Abridgement of the Roman History: who,
agreeing with other authentik Authors, deriues him from an ignoble, vile, and
obscure Lineage. Some say he was an Arab, others a Persian: nor are either of
their opinions to be rejected, because at that time the Persians had the
predominance over Arabia. His Father was a Gentile and an Idolater; his Mother
a Jew, and lineally descended from Ismael the son of Abraham by his bondwoman
Hagar.

He was of a quick and active spirit, left an Orphant, and being young, was
surprised by the Scenites, who were of the Arabs in Africa, and lived as
Thieves and Robbers. Being by them sold unto a rich Merchant named Adimonepli,
because the Lad was well featured and quick witted, he used him not as his
slave, but rather as his son. Who accordingly managed all his masters
affairs with great success, trading daily both with Jews and Christians; by
reason of which he came to be acquainted with both their Laws and Religions.
His master died without issue, leaving his Widow who was about fifty years of
age, named Ladigna, wondrous rich: she after took Mahomet to husband, by
which marriage he suddenly became, of a poor slave, a wealthy master of a
family.

About that time one Sergius a Monk, a debosht fellow, of a spotted life and
base condition, (who for maintaining of sundry dangerous heresies, was fled
out of Constantinople, and for the safeguard of his threatened life, thought to
shelter himself in Arabia) in process of time grew into great acquaintance
and familiarity with Mahomet; who consulted together and began to project
great matters. Now Mahomet having before been entered into the study of Magic
or Necromancie, resolved to persuade the Gentiles that he was a Prophet. To
prepare which, he had practiced diverse iugling tricks, by which his wife and
his own household were first abused. To further which credulity, he was
troubled with the Falling Sickness: at which his wife and the rest of her
Neighbors being amassed, he made of that this devilish use, to persuade them,
That at such time as the fall took him, the Angel of God came to confer with
him, and he being but mortal, and not able to endure, his divine presence,
was forced into those sudden agonies and alterations of spirit.

This being generally reported, and confidently believed, his wife soon after
died, leaving him her universal heir of great possessions and mighty sums
of money: which both emboldened and strengthened him in his diabolical
proceedings; so that by the assistance of Sergius the Monk he now openly
proclaimed himself a Prophet, and sent of God to prescribe new laws unto the
Nations. And having before made himself skillful in all their Laws, the
better to countenance and corroborate this his Innovation, he thought to accord
with the Jews in some points, to continue them his friends; and in some things
with the Christians, lest he should make them his enemies. He likewise complied
with diverse Heretics: with the Macedonians he denied the Holy Ghost to be
God; with the Nicolaitans, he approved the multiplicitie of Wives, etc. On the
other side, he confessed our Savior Christ to be an holy man, and a Prophet;
and that the Virgin Mary was an holy and blessed woman, whom in his Alcaron he
much extolled. With the Jews he held circumcision; with many other of their
ceremonies. Besides, his Religion gave all the abominable vices of the flesh,
free scope and liberty: which drew unto his new Sect much confluence of people
from many Nations and Languages, to be his abettors and followers. His book he
called the Alchoran: and lest his devilish impieties and absurd impostures
should be examined, and by that means discovered, he made it a penalty of
death for any man, To argue or make difficulty of any Tenent contained
therein: making protestation, That they ought to be supported and maintained by
Arms, and not by Arguments. His first attempt was, To set upon the confines of
Arabia; Heraclius being then Emperor, who held his seat at Constantinople, at
the same time Boniface the first was Pope, and Honorius his successor.

The news of this great insurrection coming to the Emperors ear, he prepared
to suppress it with all speed possible; and to that end he entertained into
his Pay the Scenites, a warre-like people of Arabia, who before had in their
hearts much favored Mahomet; by whose aid, in the first bloody Conflict he was
victorious, and dispersed this new Sect, and had he followed his present
fortune, he had quite abandoned it from the face of the earth. But supposing
them by this first defeat sufficiently disabled, and himself secured, he
failed to keep promise with the Scenites, and detained their pay: who in mere
despite, that they had bin deluded and so injuriously dealt with, joined
themselves with Mahomets dis-banded Forces, and by reason of his former
r^putation, elected him their Captain and General, growing in time to that
strength and boldness, that they attempted diverse places in the Roman Empire,
entering Syria, and surprising the great city Damas; inuading Egypt, Iudaea,
with the bordering provinces: persuading the Saracins and people of Arabia,
That the Land of Promise solely appertained unto them, as the legitimate
successors unto their father Abraham and Sarah, from whom they derived their
Name.

Thus animated by the success in these wars, he was suddenly puffed up with a
vain glorious ambition to conquer and subdue the whole world. His next
expedition therefore he aimed against the Persians, a Nation at that time very
potent, and held to be invincible. His first adventure succeeded ill, for his
army was defeated: but after having re-allyed his forces, in his second attempt
fortune so favored him, that he compelled them to embrace his Religion.
Briefly, (and to avoid circumstance) after he had run through many hazards, and
prosperously overcome them, he was poisoned, and dyed (according to Sabellicus)
in the fourtieth year of his age. And because he had told his accomplices and
adherents, That his body after his death should ascend into heaven, they kept
it for some days unburied, expecting the wonderment; so long, till by reason
of the infectious stench thereof none was able to come near it. At length they
put it into a chest of iron, and carried it to Mecha a City of Persia, where it
is still adored, not only of the people of the East, but the greatest part of
the world, even to this day.

And so much concerning the Impostor Mahomet. With which relation the most
approved Authors agree; as Platina in the lives of the Popes, Blond^^ in his
book of the declining of the Roman Empire, Baptista Ignatius, in the
Abridgement of the Emperors, the Annals of Constantinople, Nauclerus
Antoninus, and others.

And now when I truly consider the stubborn Atheist, the misbeleeuing
Mahumetan, and stiff-necked Jew, it puts me in mind of that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 58.
Is it true, o Congregation? Speak ye justly, o sons of men? judge ye
uprightly? yea rather ye imagine mischief in your hearts, your hands execute
cruelty upon the earth. The Wicked are strangers from the womb, even from the
belly have they erred and speak lies: Their poison is even like the poison of a
Serpent, like the deaf Adder that stops his ears, which hears not the
voice of the Inchanter, though he be most expert in charming. Break their
teeth, o God, in their mouths, break the jaws of the young Lions, o Lord; let
them melt like the waters, let them pass away: when he shoots his arrows,
let them be broken; let them consume like a Snaile that melts, and like the
vntimel^ fruit of a woman, that has not seen the Sun, etc.

Amongst Theodore Beza's Epigrams, those which by a more peculiar name he
inscribeth Icona's, I read one of Religion, in the manner of a Dialogue.

Quae nam age tam lacero vestita incedis amictu?
Religio summiver a patris sorholes, etc.
What art thou in that poor and base attire?
Religion. The chief Father is my Sire.
Why in a robe so threadbare, course, and thin?
Frail Riches I despise, which tempt to sin.
Upon what Book do thou so fix thine eyes?
My Fathers reue'rend Law, which I much prise.
Why do thou go thus with thy breasts all bare?
It fits those best that Truths professors are.
Why leaning on a Cross? Because indeed
It is my welcome rest, none else I need.
But wherefore winged? Because I look on high,
And would teach men above the stars to fly.
And wherefore shining? It becomes me well,
Who all gross darkness from the mind expel.
What does that Bridle teach us? To restrain
All the wild fancies of the breast and brain.
But wherefore Death do thou beneath thee tread?
Because by me even Death it self lies dead.
This shows the quality and estate of true Religion and the Professors
thereof, which is builded on the Messi^^, whom the perverse and obstinate Jews
will not even to this day acknowledge. Concerning which I observe an excellent
saying from Gregory, Pap. The Jews (says he) would neither acknowledge
Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, by the words and testimony of his Heralds
and forerunners the Prophets, not by his infinite Miracles; and yet the
Heavens knew him, who leant him a bright star to light him into the world. The
Sea knew him, who against it is own nature made it self passable for his feet.
The Earth knew him, which shook and trembled at his Passion. The Sun knew him,
who hid his face and withdrew his beams from beholding so execrable an object.
The Stones and Buildings knew him, who split and rent themselves asunder. The
Grave and Hell knew him, the one by yielding up the Dead, the other by
witnessing his descension.

Thus according to my weak Talent (Crassa Minerva) I have spoke something
generally of those three Religions still continued in the world. As for the
differences betwixt our Church and the Church of Rome, I must needs confess my
weakness no way able to reconcile them, or determine betwixt them: and
therefore I leave that to those of greater knowledge and judgment. But as
touching Iudaisme and Mahumetisme, I conclude with an Epigram transferred out
of the Greek tongue into the Latin, and by me thus paraphrased: Pinxisti
pulchrae super, Pha^tonta tabella:
Altera Deucalion picta tabella tua est, etc.
A Painter on one table figured had
Young Phaet^^, as he the guidance had
Of the Suns Chariot. In another stood
Dencalion, as having escaped the Flood.
These having done, he called an Artist forth,
And asked him what he thought these two were worth?
Who after he had both considered well,
Answered, What they be worth I cannot tell:
But if what they be worthy, you desire
To know, the one, Water; the other's worthy Fire.


The Emblem.
Catsius. lib. 3. Embl. 2.
IT represents a man amongst rocks and concaue mountains, speaking softly
unto himself when the Woods and Groves are silent; but when he eleuateth his
voice into a loud clamor, the Echo with a re-doubled sound resulteth upon him.
According with that of Saint Bernard, Quando fidelis, and humilis, and fervens
oration fuerit, Coelum hand dubie penetrabit, vnde certum est quod vacua redire
non potest. i. Where thy Prayer is humble, faithful, and fervent, it
doubtless pierces the heaven, from whence most certain it is that it cannot
return empty. As also that in the Apostle Saint James, verse. 16. Acknowledge
your faults one to another, and pray one for another, that you may be healed;
for the prayer of a righteous man avails much, if it be fervent. And Luke
11.9. And I say unto you, Ask and it shall be given unto you, seek and ye
shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto you^ for every one that asks
receives, and he that seeks finds, and to him that knocks it shall be
opened. According to the Psalmist, Psalm. 33.2.3. Praise the Lord with Harp:
sing unto him with Viol and Instrument of ten strings. Sing cheerfully with a
loud voice, etc.
Cl^^^verunt Iusti, and Dominus exandivit eos. The Motto to this Emblem is, Ora
and d^bitur. Upon which the Composer thus writes: Intensis opus est clamoribus,
vt sonet echo,
Dum strep^^ exigno murmr, nympha silet;
Nympha tacet, tacitis: sed surgat ad athera clamor
Mox, responsa tibi, vel geminata dabit
Vota quid effundis, summis innata labellis?
Ad, tepidas Coeli, non patet Aula preces:
Tend lat us clamore, Deus responsa remittet,
Hic pia men's, hic vox fervida pondus habent.


Thus paraphrased Only loud clamors make the Echo speak;
Whisper to her, and silence she will not break.
She Is to the Mute, mute: let thy voice sound hye,
And thou shall hear her doubly make reply.
Why with close muttering lips then do thou pray?
Thy lukewarm words to heaven can make no way.
But stretch thy lungs in clamor, Prope est Dominus omnibus inuocantibus cum in
veritat. Psalm. 144.
and God then
Will answer and re-answer thee again.


An excellent Moral from the same Emblem may be collected to this purpose;
Seneca in Hippol.
Vbi. percontator, ibi est garrulus. Agreeing with that of Seneca, Alium silere
cum volis, prius sile. i. When thou desire that another man should be silent,
hold thou thy peace. And Phocion says, Silence is a gift without peril, and a
treasure without enemies. And Salust, Silence is more safe than speech,
especially when our enemies are our auditors. And of women it is said, They are
much more apt to conceive children, than conceal secrets. But of men
Archimides says, He bears his misery best, who hides it most. Non vnquam
tacuisse nocet, nocet esse loquitum: i. Of silence it has never repented me,
but of speech often. And Lactantius informs us concerning the virtue of
silence, That as the Viper is torn asunder when she produces her young, so
secrets proceeding from their mouths which are not able to conceal them, are
for the most part the utter ruin of those which reveal them. According to that
of the Poet; Quaerit aquas in aquis, and poma fugantia captat
Tantalus, hoc illi garrula lingua dedit.
Tantalus his punishment in hell for his too much loquacity, was, To be thirsty
in the midst of water, and hungry where there was plenty of Fruits. Nature has
afforded us double eyes and ears to behold all objects, and to listen unto all
voices and sounds: but to warn us that we should be sparing in our speech,
she has afforded man but one tongue, and that portall'd with lips, and
percullis'd with teeth; near to which are placed all the five Senses, to
signify unto us, That we ought to speak nothing rashly without their connsell
and advice; with the help of the faculties of the Soul, which are Reason and
Understanding, which have their residence in the brain.

Upon the like occasion you may read Iacobus Catsius speaking thus: Muta sub
obscuris habitaret vallibus echo, Percontatorem fuge, nam garrulus Idem est.

Ni foret alterius garrulitate loquax:
Illa silet, quoties presso silet ore viator.
Discit and a populo praetereunte loqui:
Ora loquax premeret, nisi percontator adesset;
Hoc duce, tentat opus livida lingua suum.
Probra creat qui multa rogat, qui commodat aurem:
Turpia sinistris furta receptor alit.


Thus paraphrased: Dumb would the Echo in dark Valleys lie,
Did not the prating Traveler pass by:
Let him be silent, and she talk forbeares,
For nothing she relates but what she hears.
Did no man ask, no answer she would make;
And never spoke to any but that spoke.
Who lists to bad things may be thought a Chief:
For, Where is no Receiver, there is no Thief.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
IF I into my Self turn not mine Eyes,
Not possible that I my Self should know.
Or if I look within Me, then I show
So foul and monstrous, I my Self despise;
II.
Because I nothing can praiseworthy find,
But rather subject unto reprehension:
There, Vice with Virtue are at loud contention,
And has the conquest both of Heart and Mind.
III.
The more my Conscience I examine, still
The more corrupt it to my Sense appears;
So stained, so spotted, that not all my Tears
Can wash it clean from the least thought of Ill.
IV.
From the first hour that I began to sin,
I have gone on without the least cessation,
Neglecting all the means of my salvation:
Nor ending yet where I did first begin.
V.
How horrid my Offenres be, I know,
And how dis-tastefull in my Maker's sight:
Yet choose the wrong path, and forsake the right,
And willingly unto my ruin go.
VI.
I commit blushing sins, and without shame,
Sins grievous; yet lament them not at all.
Wrath I deserve, yet for no Mercy call:
How then, that which I seek not, can I claim?
VII.
And therefore have deserved torments perdurable:
For I am a dead Limb, senseless of pain;
And where is no feeling, Surgeons art's in vain:
For all that are so gangrened are incurable.
VIII.
I am a dissolute wretch, yet do not I
Seek to correct that which I find amiss.
The aim I have is to attain to Bliss,
And yet the means by which it is gained, I fly.
IX.
Unto those sins of which I late repented,
And quite abiur'd, with greediness I turn:
And when for them I was about to mourn,
My waiward Will to sport and mirth consented.
X.
The pit I late fell in, I cannot shun;
To which my Neighbor I together drew:
I follow only that I ought to'eschew,
And merely into things forbidden run.
XI.
When I should weep, and pray with great devotion,
For pardon of Ills done, and Good neglected;
I find my cogitations interjected,
Ready to banish thence each god^y motion.
XII.
Gods Wisdom, Goodness, and his Power I see,
The World to Make, to Order, and Protect:
But I that great and glorious Work neglect,
Yet knowing it created was for me.
XIII.
A Concordance most permanent and stable,
'Twixt the blessed Angels and the Heavens I find,
In what an Union they are all combined:
Yet I to make mine own peace am not able.
XIV.
I, 'twixt the stubborn Jew, and stupid Turk,
A professed Christian, in the middlerest:
I know their Errors, and their Ills detest,
Yet cannot I my self do one good Work.
XV.
And though I am not (like the other) bold
By Arguments or Arms Thee to oppose,
As one of thy professed and open Foes;
Yet in thy Service I am weak and cold.
XVI.
Though I (like them) do not with might and maine
Make me of thy contempt the common Theme,
And wilfully thy Dietie blaspheme;
O yet, how often take I Thy Name in vain!
XVII.
Which of us then deserves the harder lot?
They, who through ignorance Thy mercy fly,
Or else perchance would honor Thee? or I
That know my Masters will, and do it not?
XVIII.
Strengthen my weakness then, my shrinking stay;
Support me falling, with Thy powerful hand,
So only shall I able be to stand,
To serve Thee truly, and Thy Will obey.
XIX.
So shall no Schism, no Heresy, no Error,
Thy chosen Temple (this my breast) invade:
So I Thy constant Champion shall be made,
Free from all present Fears, and future Terror.
Agnoscit Reus.
Ignoscit Deus.

Ey sumptib: CHRISTOPH: BEESTON. Generos:



THE ARGUMENT of the sixth Tractate.
THe Heart of Man bee'ng so adverse
To Goodness, and so apt to pierce
Things most Retruse; a course expressed,
On what it chiefly ought to rest.
A Scruteny made, where, and when
The Spirits were created. Th^n,
Of Lucifer, the chief and prime
Of Angels, in the first of Time:
His Splendour, Pride, and how he fell
In battle by Prince Michael:
Their Fight, their Arms; the Triumph great
Made in the Heavens for his defeat.
Their Number that revolted, and
How long they in their Grace did stand.
Some other Doubts may plain appear,
Which to this Argument cohere.
The second Argument.
THe mighty Power of God was shown,
When the great Dragon was o'rethrowne.
The Powers.
THan the Heart of man (since made by sin impure) A discourse of the Heart of
Man.

There Is nothing more inconstant and unsure;
Through all incertainties traveling still;
For nothing can it is empty corners fill.
Wandering in Deviations crook'd and blind,
Enquiring after things it cannot find.
As often as any vain thoughts thence arise,
One growing to a second, multiplies;
Till they at length to infinites extend,
And then not one, but does our God offend.
They hourly toil and labor in unrest,
And yet when all are sum'd up, Bad's the Best.
The Inconstancy of man's thoughts.
The Hearts vain thoughts are in continual war,
Dissonant amongst themselves, and hourly jarre:
They think of past things, cast what is to ensue;
Old projects they destroy, and build up new:
What Is ruined, to erect; and then the same
This way and that way diversely to frame.
They will not now, and then again they will;
Altring the purpose, changing counsels still:
A Simile.
First this, then that, now early, and then late;
And never remain constant in one state.
And as the Mill, that circumgyreth fast,
Refuses nothing that therein is cast,
But whatsoever is to it assigned,
Gladly receives, and willing is to grynd;
But if the violence be with nothing fed,
It wastes it self: even so the Heart misled,
Still turning round, unstable as the Ocean,
Never at rest, but in continual motion;
Sleep or awake, is still in agitation
Of some presentment in the imagination.
If to the Millstones you shall cast in sand,
It troubles them, and makes them at a stand?
If Pitch? it chokes them: or if Chafe let fall?
They are employed, but to no use at all.
So, better thoughts molest, unclean thoughts stain
And spot the Heart; when those idle and vain,
Wear it, and to no purpose. For when it is
Drowsy, and careless of the future bliss,
And to implore Heavens aid, it does imply
How far is it remote from the most-High.
How many ways the Heart is Insidiated.
For whilst our Hearts on Ter^hen things we place,
There cannot be least hope of Divine grace.
Now in this wretched state of our Humanity,
We are besieged first by this Mundane Vanity.
Then, Curiosity one way persuades,
Pleasure upon the other side inuades:
Here Lusts assault, there Envy makes his battery:
On this part Pride's intrencht^ and on that, Flattery:
Then Sloth corrupts it, or Ambition swells it;
Wrath burns it, else base Avarice compells it
To dote on Dross; Deceit seeks to disguise it,
And all the deadly Sins at once surprise it.
And why? To retain God it has no will
Of it is sole power, it is empty Round to fill.
And that is the cause it deviates and strayes
By curious searching into unknown ways,
To find what best might sat it; but in vain:
For till it shall return to Him again
By whom it was created, (the Sole-Blest)
It well may seek, but never shall find rest.
Now God, as He commands, so does persuade
To make that only His, which he has made.
But we are (whilst we from his Precepts vary)
Rebellious to our selves, and contrary:
Neither can we our stubborn hearts subdue,
Till we submit us to the only true
And living God. And that is the reason why,
About, our wandering Cogitations fly,
Fashioning more Chimaera's in one hour,
Than we to compass in an Age have power.
For whilst not unto Him united, we
Must in our selves of force divided be:
To Whom we cannot come, toward Whom not move,
But by the steps of Charity and Love.
In Whom no interest we can have, unless
In all things we Humility profess:
Nor can we humble be, so to aspire,
Unless by Industry the Truth t'acquire.
And therefore we must in this sincere Truth How the heart may be reconciled to
the Creator.

Our selves examine, How we spend our Youth,
Manhood, and Age; and then by searching find
How frail wear, how'vnstedfast, and how blind.
And next, when we our miseries have skan'd,
Sifting all actions that we take in hand,
How vain they are; Necessity will leave
That Consequent behind, That we must cleave
Only to that great Power, nor from it shrink,
Without which, we nor move, nor speak, nor think.
And because we have fallen from Him by Sin,
To intimate, There is no way to win
Our peace and reconcilement, or dispense
With our transgression, but true Penitence.
I thus proceed: Great has the Decertation
Bin amongst the Learned men, 'bout the Creation
Of blessed Angels. Some of them have said,
They many Worlds before this World were made,
To'attend the Almighty. Others have again,
So curious a scrutinie held vain,
Sundry opinions concerning the Creation of Angels
And almost irreligious; aiming still
To penetrate into his secret Will
Without his Warrant: and conclude, That they
Had with the Light subsistence the first day;
Were (with it) made of Nothing, had no Being
At all till then. The Fathers disagreeing
About this point, some have opinion held,
(But by the later Writers since refel'd)
As Hierome, Ambrose, Gregory Nazianzen,
Cassianus, Damascenus, Origin,
Hilary, Basil: These with others, were
Resolved, That because nothing does appear
From Moses, in his Book of things created,
Concerning them, That they were fabricated
Long time before. Again, Because Saint Paul
(Writing to Titus) says, God first of all,
Before the World, the Hope of Eternal life
Promised to us, [etc.] Hence they maintain this strife,
Interpreting the Text, Er'e the Creation.
Which words include; If Before God did fashion
All things that Being have in earth or heaven,
There must be some to whom this power is given,
And those the Angels. But on this Assertion
Learned Saint Austin lays a great aspersion:
Affirming them with the Heavens Imperial made,
And that before, they no existence had.
Saint Paul interpreting; The Almighty gave
This Promise and blessed Hope, Mankind to save
From all Eternity, to elevate
Man's Fall, in that pure Lamb Immaculate,
His Son and our dear Savior. And thus
Opinion'd were grave Athanasius,
Gregory, Theodoret, Epiphanius,
With diverse others: Which no sooner moved
Was in the Lateran Council, but approved
Of all the Bishops, as of both the best.
Which in the sacred Scripture is expressed:
For thus it is writ, God ended the seventh day
The Work He made, Genesis 2.2.
(for so does Moses say)
And in the day whch He his Sabbath named,
Rested from All the Work which he had framed.
Which universal word perforce does carry
Spiritual things, as well as Elementary.
Such as before the World think them created,
In many doubts themselves have intricated.
I would (besides) have them resolve me, How
(Unless his Work imperfect they allow)
It can with reason stand, that if they were
In Time before Time was, and with sincere
Faith and Obedience had so long abode,
They only then revolted from their God?
Should this be granted, it must needs infer
Strong argument, a second way to err;
Namely, That no Celestial Hierarchy,
Subjects of that eternal Monarchy,
(Who have remained, as by the World appears,
In blessed estate so many thousand years)
But, notwithstanding the great grace they are in,
May slide like Lucifer, and fall by Sin.
Which the Church holds erroneous. Be it then
Granted, That God did make the Angels when
The Imperial Heavens were fashioned, at first pure
And without sin, for ever to endure;
Had they not fallen through Proud Imagination,
By which they then incurred his Indignation.
For nothing Evil can from Him proceed;
So much the Text implies, where we may read,
God said, when he his rare Work understood,
All things that I have made be greatly good. Genesis 1.

And lest the Church might that way be deluded,
It Is in the Lateran Council thus concluded:
All Spirits were created pure at first;
But by their self-will after made accursed.
To make things clear: Although we must confess,
That Moses does not in plain terms express,
When, how, and in what order Angels were
At first created; yet it will appear,
How that their Essences, and Natures bright
Were signified by names of Heaven and Light. S. Aug. Sup. Genesis

And though they seem forgotten in that Text,
Observe how other Scriptures are connext,
To give them Name and Being. In that Oad
In which the three blessed Children praised their God
Daniel 3. ver. 57.58.59.
In the hot flames; to give to understand,
That Angels were the Work of his great Hand,
O all ye Works of God the Lord (say they)
Bless, praise, and magnify his Name for aye:
Praise him ye Heavens, ye Angels praise the Lord.
Let us to Daniels add the Psalmists word,
Psalm. 48.2.
Praise Him all ye his Angels. Some have said,
That Angels were the last work that God made;
But most absurdly. He in Job thus says;
Job 58.7.
When the Stars of the Morning gave me praise,
Then all the Angels (of my Sons the choice)
Extold my Name with an exalted voice.
Now when the Great and most Divinely Wise,
Did the rare Fabric of the World devise,
And by the virtue of his Word create
The Heaven and Earth in their so goodly state;
He made the Angels in the first of Time,
Of Substances most noble and sublime.
Amongst which Lucifer was chief; and he,
As he might challenge a prioritie
In his Creation, so above the rest
A supereminence, as first and best:
For he was chief of all the Principalities,
And had in him the three stupendous qualities
Of the most holy Trinity, which include
First, Greatness, Wisdom next, then Pulchritude.
The Greatness of the Son and holy Spirit,
The Father is, which they from him inherit.
Now of the Father and the Holy Ghost,
The Wisdom is the Son, (so styled most.)
The Father and Sons Pulchritude is he
That Is the third Person in the Trinity.
And though of Angels the great power be such
As has in Scripture been extolled much,
For their nobility and excellence:
As first of Michael, whose pre-eminence
Daniel 10.
Daniel relates, as naming him for one
Of the prime Angels that attend the Throne.
Tobit. 12.
As Raphael, who told Tobit, Of the seven
That still before the Almighty stand in Heaven,
Himself was one. Or as the Seraphim,
Who (as the holy Prophet speaks of him)
With a cole touched his lips, (from the Altar took.)
Or as of Gabriel, whom the holy Book
Mentions; who to the earth made proclamation,
Of our most blessed-Sauiors Incarnation.
Yet above these was Lucifer instated, Dr. Strozza lib. de Spirit. and Incant.

Honored, exalted, and much celebrated.
And therefore many of the Learned strive,
His greatness from Ezechiel to derive: Ezechiel 28. v^r. 12.

For thus he says, (and what he does infer
Against Tyrus, they convert to Lucifer.)
Thou sealst the Sum up, art in Wisdom clear,
Thy beauty perfect does to all appear:
Thou have in Eden, Gods fair Garden, been;
Each precious stone about thy garment's seen,
The Ruby, Topaz, and the Diamond,
The Chrysolite and Onyx there were found;
The Jasper and the Saphyr, dearly sold,
The Emerald, the Carbuncle with Gold.
The Timbrel and the Pipe were celebrated
For thee in the first day thou were created.
Thou art the anointed Cherub, made to cover,
Thee I have set in honor above other,
Upon Gods holy Mountain placed higher:
Thou walked have amidst the stones of fire.
At first, of thy ways, perfect was the ground,
Until iniquity in thee was found: Ver. 17.

Thy heart was lifted up by thy great beauty,
Therein toward God forgetful of thy duty,
By reason of thy Brightness, (being placed
Above them) thy Wisdom thou corrupted have.
But to the ground I Will cast thee flat and cold,
Lay thee where Kings thy ruin may behold:
In thy selfe-wisedome thou have been beguild,
And by thy multitude of sins, defiled
Thy Holiness: A Spirit still perverse,
Stained by the iniquity of thy commerse.
Therefore from midst of thee a fire I Will bring,
Which shall devour thee: into ashes fling
Thee from thy height, that all the earth may see thee.
This I have spoke; and who is he can free thee?
Their terror, who did know thee heretofore,
(Most Wretched) thou shall be, yet be no more.
In this, the Prophet (as these would allude)
Strives in this firstborn Angel to include
All Wisdom, Power, Gifts, Ornaments, and Graces,
Which all the rest had in their several Places.
God, this precelling Creature having made,
With all the Host of Angels, (some have said)
He then began the Universal Frame,
The Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, and gave them name.
Then, Earth and Sea, his Divine Will ordained,
With all the Creatures in them both contained.
The Creation of Man.
His last great Workmanship, (in high respect,
Of Reason capable, and Intellect,
But to the Angels natures much inferior,
Who with the Almighty dwell in the Heavens superior,
To all Eternity sounding his praise)
Man, (whom from Dust he did so lately raise)
The Soul of Man.
Subsists of Soul and Body: That which still
Does comprehend the Understanding, Will,
And Memory, namely the Soul, (Partaker
Of those great Gifts) is the Image of the Maker.
The Body of Man.
The nature of the Body, though it be
Common with Beasts, yet does it disagree
In shape and figure; for with Eyes erected
It beholds Heaven, whilst Brutes have Looks dejected.
What Man is.
This composed Man is as a ligament,
And folding up in a small continent,
Some part of all things which before were made;
For in this Microcosme are stored and laid
Connexiuely, as things made up and bound,
Corporeal things with incorporeall. Found
There likewise are in his admired quality,
Things frail and mortal, mixed with Immortality.
Between those Creatures that have Reason, and
The Irrational, who cannot understand,
There is a Nature intermediate,
That 'twixt them does of both participate.
For with the blessed Angels, in a kind,
Man does partake of an intelligent Mind;
A Body with the Beasts, with Appetite,
It to preserve, feed, cherish, and delight,
And procreate it is like in shapes and features.
Besides, Man has above all other Creatures,
That whereas they their Appetites pursue,
(As solely sencible of what is in view,
And governed by instinct) Man's eminence
Has power to sway his Will from common Sense;
And (besides Earthly things) himself apply
To contemplate things mystical and hye.
And though his Excellence does not extend
To those miraculous Gifts which did commend
Great Lucifer at first, in his Majoritie,
Yet in one honor he has just prioritie,
Before all Angels to advance his Seed:
Since God from all eternity decreed,
That his own Son, the everlasting Word
(Who to all Creatures Being does afford,
By which they first were made) should Heaven forsake,
And in his Mercy, humane Nature take.
Not that he by so doing should depresse
The Divine Majesty, and make it less;
But Humane frailty to exalt and raise
From corrupt earth, his glorious Name to praise.
Therefore he did insep'rably unite
His Goodhood to our Nature, us to excite
To magnify his Goodness. This Grace shown
Unto Mankind, was to the Angels known; The Incarnation of Christ revealed
unto the Angels. Epist. 1. to Tim.

That such a thing should be they all expected,
Not knowing how or when 't would be effected.
Thus Paul the Apostle testates: Amongst the rest,
Without all opposition, be 't confessed,
Of Godliness the mystery is high;
Namely, That God himself apparently
Is manifest in Flesh, is iustify'd
In Spirit; by the Angels clearely' espied;
Preached to the Gentiles, by the World believed;
Into eternal Glory last received.
With Pride and Envy Lucifer now swelling
Against Mankind, whom from his heavenly Dwelling,
He seems in supernatural Gifts to outshine,
(Man being but Terrene, and himself Divine)
Ambitiously his Hate increasing still,
Dares to oppose the great Creators Will:
As holding it against his Justice done,
That the Almighties sole begotten Son,
Man's nature to assume purposed and meant,
And not the Angels, much more excellent.
Therefore he to that height of madness came,
A stratagem within himself to frame,
To hinder this irrevocable Deed,
Which God from all eternity decreed.
And that which most seemed to inflame his spleen
And arrogance, was, That he had foreseen,
That many Men by God should be created,
And in an higher eminence instated,
Of place and Glory, than himself or those
His Angels, that this great Work 'gant to oppose.
Disdaining and repining, that of Men
One should be God Omnipotent; and then,
That others, his Inferiors in degree,
Should outshine him in his sublimitie.
Lucifers first Rebellion.
In this puffed Insolence and timp'anous Pride,
He many Angels drew unto his side,
(Swelled with the like thoughts.) Jointly these prepare
To raise in Heaven a most seditious War.
He will be the Trines Equal, and maintain,
Over the Hierarchies (at least) to reign.
Isay. 14.13.
It Is thus in Esaias read: I will ascend
Into the Heavens, and there my Power extend;
Exalt my Throne above, and my abode
Shall be made equal with the Stars of God.
Above the Clouds I will my self apply,
Because I will be like to the Most-Hye.
To this great Pride, does the Arch-Angell rise
In boldest opposition, and replies,
(Whose name is Michael) Why what is he,
That like the Lord our God aspires to be?
In vain, o Lucifer, thou striv'st t'assay,
That we thine innovations should obey;
Who know, As God does purpose, be, it must;
He cannot will, but what is good and just:
Therefore, with us, That God and Man adore,
Or in this place thou shall be found no more.
This struck the Prince of Pride into an heat,
In which a Conflict terrible and great
Began in Heaven; the Rebel Spirits give way,
And the victorious Michael winnes the day.
The Battle betwixt Michael and the Devil. Revel. 12.7.
Thus John writes of the Battle: Michael
Fought, and his Angels, with the Dragon fell:
The Dragon and his Angels likewise fought,
But in the Conflict they prevailed naught;
Nor was their Place in Heaven thence-forward found,
But the great Dragon that old Serpent bound,
(They Devil called, and Satan) was cast out;
He that deceives the whole World about:
Even to the lowest earth being tumbled down, The Fall of Angels.

And with him all his Angels headlong thrown.
This victory thus got, and he subverted,
The Arch-Angell with his holy Troops, directed
By Gods blessed Spirit, an Epiniceon sing, Epinic. a Song of praise and
thanksgiving. Revel. 15.3.

Ascribing Glory to the Almighty King:
Miraculous thy Works are, worthy praise,
Lord God Almighty; just and true thy ways,
Thou God of Saints. O Lord, who shall not fear,
And glorify thy Name, who thy Works hear?
Thou only holy art: henceforth adore Thee
All Nations shall, worship, and fall before Thee;
Because thy Judgments are made manifest.
This Song of Vict'rie is again expressed
Thus: Now is Salvation, now is Strength,
Gods Kingdom, and the Power of Christ. At length Revel. 12.10.

The Sland'rer of our Brethren is refused,
Who day and night them before God accused.
By the Lambs blood they overcame him, and
Before Gods Testimony he could not stand;
Because the Victors who the Conquest got,
Unto the death their lives respected not.
Therefore rejoice you Heavens, and those that dwell
In these blessed Mansions. But shall I now tell
The Weapons, Engines, and Artillery
Used in this great Angelomachy.
No Lances, Swords, nor Bombards they had then, The weapons used in this
Battle of the Angels.

Or other Weapons now in use with men;
None of the least material substance made,
Spirits by such give no offense or aid.
Only spiritual Arms to them were lent,
And these were called Affection and Consent.
Now both of these, in Lucifer the Devil
And his Complyes, immoderate were, and evil.
Those that in Michael the Arch-Ange'll reigned,
And his good Spirits, meekely were maintained,
Squared and directed by the Almighties will
(The Rule by which they fight, and conquer still.)
Lucifer, charged with insolence and spleen;
When nothing but Humility was seen,
And Reverence toward God, in Michaels breast,
By which the mighty Dragon he suppressed.
Therefore this dreadful battle fought we find
By the two motions of the Will and Mind;
Which, as in men, so have in Angels sway:
Man's motion in his body lives, but they
Have need of no such Organ. This to be,
Aver. Met. 12.7.4^.
Both Averroes and Aristotle agree.
It follows next, that we enquire how long
Arist. de Anim. 3.48.
This Lucifer had residence among
How long Lucifer remained in glory.
The blessed Angels: for as some explore,
His time of Glory was six days, no more;
(The time of the Creation) in which they
(I mean the Spirits) seeing God display
His glorious Works, with stupor and ama^e
Began at once to contemplate and gase
Upon the Heavens, Earth, Sea, Stars, Moon, and Sun,
Beasts, Birds, and Man, with the whole Fabric done.
In this their wonder at th'inscrutabilitie
Of such great things, new framed with such facility;
To them, just in the end of the Creation,
He did reveal his blessed Sons Incarnation:
But with a strict commandment, That they
Should (with all Creatures) God and Man obey.
Hence grew the great dissension that befell
'Twixt Lucifer and the Prince Michael.
Note.
The time 'twixt his Creation and his Fall,
Ezechiel thus makes authentical:
In midst of fiery stones thou walked have,
Straight in thy ways, even from the time thou wast
First made; (as in that place I before noted.)
To the same purpose Esaias too is quoted;
How fell'st thou, Lucifer, from Heaven hye,
That in the morning rose so cherefully?
As should he say, How happens it that thou,
O Lucifer, who did appear but now,
In that short time of thy blessed state, to rise
Each morning brighter than the morning skies
Illumined by the Sun, so soon to slide
Down from Gods favor, lastingly to abide
A necessary observation.
In Hells insatiate torments? Though he lost
The presence of his Maker, in which most
He gloried once; his natural Powers he keeps,
(Though to bad use) still in the infernal Deepes:
For his Divine Gifts he does not commend
Unto the service of his God, (the end
To which they first were given) but the ruin
Of all Mankind; Us night and day pursuing,
To make us both in his Rebellion share:
And Tortures, which for such prepared are.
Of this malignant Spirits force and might,
Job in his fourtieth Chapter gives us light
And full description, lively expressing both,
In person of the Monster Behemoth.
The Fall of Adam, by frail Eve entic't, The Fall of Adam.

Was his own death, ours, and the death of Christ.
In whose backsliding may be apprehended
Offenders three, three' Offenses, three Offended.
The three Offenders that Mankind still grieve,
Were Satan, Adam, and our Grandam Eve.
The three Offenses, that Sin first advance,
Were Malice, Weakness, and blind Ignorance.
The three Offended, to whom this was done,
The Holy Spirit, the Father, and the Son,
Eve sinned of Ignorance; and so is said,
Against the God of Wisdom to have made
Her forfeit (that is the Son:) Adam he fell
Through Weakness, and against him that does excel
In power (the Father) sinned. With his offense
And that of hers, Divine Grace may dispense.
Malicious Hate, to sin, did Satan move,
Against the Holy Ghost the God of Love;
And his shall not be pardoned. Note with me, Mark 3.23.

How God dealt in the censuring of these three:
He questions Adams Weakness, and does call
Eve to account for the Ignorance in her fall;
Because for them he mercy had in store
Upon their true repentance: and before
He gave their doom, told them he had decreed
A blessed Savior from the Woman's seed.
But Satan he never questioned, 'twas because
Maliciously he had transgrest his Laws.
Which sin against the Spirit he so abhorred,
His Divine Will no mercy for him stored.
Moreover, In the sacred Text it is read, A necessary observation.

The Woman's Seed shall break the Serpents head.
It is observed, The Devil had decreed
To tempt our Savior, the predicted Seed,
In the same sort, though not the same success,
As he did Eve our first Progenitresse.
John 1.2 15.
All sins (says John) we may in three divide,
Lust of the Flesh, Lust of the Eye, and Pride.
She sees the Tree, and thought it good for meat;
The Fleshes lust persuaded her to eat:
She sees it fair and pleasant to the eye,
Then the Eyes lust inciteth her to try;
She apprehends that it will make her wise,
So through the Pride of heart she eats and dies.
And when he Christ into the Desert lead,
Bee'ng hungry, Turn (said he) these Stones to Bread:
There Is Fleshly lusts temptation. Thence he grows
To the Eyes lust, and from the Mountain shows
The World, with all the pomp contained therein;
Say'ng, All this great purchase thou shall win,
But to fall down and worship me. And when
He saw these fail, to tempt him once again,
Using the Pride of heart, when from on hye
He bad him leap down, and make proof to fly.
And as the Woman yielding to temptation,
Made thereby forfeit of all man's salvation,
And so the Diue'll, who did the Serpent use,
Was said by that the Woman's head to bruise;
So Christ the Woman's Seed, making resist
To these seduceme^ts of that Pannurgist,
Pannurg. a deceiuer or subtle person.
Because by neither Pride nor Lust misled,
Was truly said to break the Serpents head.
Angels bee'ng now made Devils, let us find
What place of Torment is to them assigned.
First of the Poets Hell: The dreadful Throne
Tibull. lib. 2. Eleg. 3.
Where all Souls shall be sentenced stands (says one)
At scelerata iacet seeds in nocte profunda, etc.
In a sad place, with obscure darkness hid;
About each room black waters, such as did
Never see day: Tysephone up takes
A scourge, her vnkemb'd locks craule with live Snakes;
Of such aspect, the Immortal eyes abhor her.
She in her rage does drive the Ghosts before her.
Ixion there, turned on his restless Wheel,
Follows and flies himself, does tortures feel
For tempting Juno's Chasti'ty. Titius stretched
Upon the earth, and chained, whose body reached
In length nine acres; has for his aspiring,
A Vulture on his intrals ever tyring.
Starved Tantalus there is punished for his sin,
Ripe Fruits touching his lip, fresh Waves his chin;
But catching the one to eat, the other to drink,
The Fruit flies up, the Waters downward shrink.
There Danaus Daughters, those that dared to kill
Their innocent sleeping husbands, strive to fill
(With waters fetched from Lethe) leaking tons,
Which as they pour out, through the bottom runs.
Another thus: The Ghosts of men deceast Virg. AEneid. 6 Ergo exercentur poeni^
veterumque malorum, supplicia expe^dunt, etc

Are exercised in torments, (hourely'encreast)
Where every punishment's exactly fitted,
According to the offense in life committed.
Some you shall there behold hanged up on hye,
Exposed to the bleake winds, to qualify
Their former hot Lusts. Some are headlong cast
Into deep gulfes, to wash their sins fore-past.
Others are scorcht in flames, to purge by fire,
More cap'itall crimes, that were in nature higher.
They with the less delinquents most dispense;
But mighty plagues pursue the great offense.
For all men suffer there as they have done, Senec. in Herc. Fur. Quod quisque
facit patitur, Authorem scalus repetit, etc.

Without the least hope of evasion:
The sin does call th'offendor to the Bar,
The Judges of the Bench impartial ar';
No Nocent there the Sentence can evade,
But each one is his own example made.
For when the Soul the Body does forsake, Val. Fla^. Argo^ant. 3. Quippe nec
inulio^ nec in vltima soluimur ossa, Ira manet, etc.

It turns not into Air, as there to make
It Is last account. Nor let the Wicked trust,
Their Bodies shall consume in their own dust:
For meet they shall again to hear recited
All that was done since they were first united;
And suffer as they sinned, in wrath, in pains,
Of Frosts, of Fires, of Furies, Whips, and Chains.
Yet contrary to this some Authors write, Lucret. li. 3. de not. deor.

(As to the first opinion opposite) -- Post mortem denique nostra^: numquid ibi
horribile apparet?

Who to that doubt and diffidencie grow,
To question if there be such place or no.
After our deaths (says one) can there appear
Ought dreadful, when we neither see nor hear?
Can ought seem sad by any strange invention,
To him that has nor fence, nor apprehension?
Shall not all things, involved in silence deep,
Appear to us less frightfull than our sleep?
Or are not all these fears conferred upon
The Infernal Rivers, Styx and Acheron,
After our deaths, in this our life made good?
No miserable Ghost plunged in the flood,
Fears any stone impending, full of dread,
Each minute space to fall upon his head:
It Is rather a vain fear that has possessed us,
(Poor Mortals) of the gods power to molest us;
That in this life may, by the help of Fate,
Our fortunes crush, and ruin our estate.
No Vulture does on Titius intrals pray,
It Is a mere Emblem, that we fitly may
Confer on passionat Tyteru^s, and invented
To perso'nate such as are in Love tormented,
Or with like grief perplexed, [etc.] Hear Seneca:
Senec. in Here. Turent, verane est tam inferis, etc.
Is the fame true (says he) that to this day
Holds many in suspense? That in the jaws
Of Hell should be maintained such cruel Laws;
That Malefactors at the Bar bee'ng try'de,
Are doomed such horrid torments to abide?
Who is the Judge, to weigh in equal skale
The Right or Wrong? Who there commands the gaile?
Thus say the Ethnycks: but we now retire,
And from the Scriptures of this place enquire.
Of Hell according to the Scriptures and Fathers. S. Aug.
Hell is the Land of Darkness, desolate,
Ordained for Sin, to plague the Reprobate:
All such as to that dreadful place descend,
Taste death, that cannot die, end without end;
For life begets new death, (the mulct of sin)
And where the end is, it does still begin.
The Original name, we from the Hebrews have,
How Hell is called.
Sceol, which is a Sepulcher or Grave;
Which nothing else but Darkness does include.
To which, in these words, Job seems to allude:
Job 10.21.22.
Before I go, not to return again,
Into the Land where Darkness does remain,
(Deaths dismal shadow:) to that Land I say,
As Darkness dark, where is no sight of Day,
But Deaths black shadow, which no order keeps,
For there the gladsome Light in Darkness sleeps;
The place where everlasting Horror dwells.
Gehenna.
It Is called Gehenna too, (as Scripture tells)
The word it self imports, The Land of Fire,
Not that, of the known nature, to aspire,
And upward flame; this has no visi'ble light,
Burns, but wastes not, and adds to Darkness, Night.
It Is of invisi'ble substance, and has power
Things visible to burn, but not devour.
A Maxim from antiquity 't has been,
There Is nothing that is Immortal can be seen.
Nor is it wonder, that this fire we call
Invisible, yet should torment withal:
For in a burning Fever, Can thou see
The inward flame that so afflicts thee?
In Hell is Grief, Pain, Anguish, and Annoy, The torments of Hell.

All threatening Death, yet nothing can destroy:
There Is Ejulation, Clamor, Weeping, Wailing,
Cries, Yels, Howles, Gnashes, Curses, (never failing)
Sighs and Suspires, Woe, and vnpittied Mones,
Thirst, Hunger, Want, with lacerating Groans.
Of Fire or Light no comfortable beams,
Heat not to be endured, Cold in extremes.
Torments in every Attire, Nerve, and Vain,
In every Joint insufferable pain.
In Head, Breast, Stomach, and in all the Senses, The torments of the Senses.

Each torture suting to the soul offenses,
But with more terror than the heart can think:
The Sight with Darkness, and the Smell with Stink;
The Taste with Gall, in bitterness extreme;
The Hearing, with their Curses that blaspheme:
The Touch, with Snakes and Todes crauling about them,
Afflicted both within them and without them.
Hell's in the Greek called Tartarus, because Tartarus.

The torments are so great, and without pause. Of the particle (...) and (...)
i. not to see.

It Is likewise Ades called, because there be
No objects that the Opticke Sense can see.
Because there is no true temp'rature, Avernus: Avernus.

And because placed below, it is styled Infernus. Infernus.

The Scriptures in some place name it the Abisse, Abiss.

A profound place, that without bottom is. Tophet.

As likewise Tophet, of the cries and houles
That hourly issue from tormented Souls.
There the Souls faculties alike shall be
Tormented (in their kinds) eternally.
The Memory, to think of pleasures past,
Which in their life they hoped would ever last.
The Apprehension, with their present state
In horrid pains, those endless without date.
The Understanding, (which afflicts them most)
To recollect the great joys they have lost.
Poena sensus, Poena Damni.
And these include Hells punishments in gross,
Namely the pains of Torment, and of Loss.
This dialogue is called Necyomantia, viz. a answer from the Dead.
If we enquire of Lucian after these,
Betwixt Menippus and Philonides;
His Dialogue will then expressly tell,
How he and such like Atheists jest at Hell.
The Dialogue.
Menippus.
Hail to the front and threshold of my door,
Which I was once in fear to^haue seen no more.
How gladly I salute thee, having done
My voyage, and again behold the Sun.
Philonides.
Is that the Dog Menippus? Sure the same,
Unless I err both in his face and name.
What means that inso'lent habit he is in?
Having an Harp, Club, and a Lions skin?
I Will venture on him, notwithstanding all.
Hail, good Menippus, it is to thee I call:
Whence came thou now, I pray thee? and how is it?
For in the City thou have long been mist.
Men.
I am returned from having visited
The Cavernes and sad places of the Dead,
Whereas the Ghosts infernal live and move,
But separated far from us above.
Phil.
(O Hercules!) Menippus I perceive,
Died from amongst us, without taking leave,
And is again reduct.
Men.
You judgment lack:
Hell took me living, and returned me back.
Phil.
But what might the chief motive be (I pray)
To this thy new and most incredible way?
Men.
Youth and Audacitie, both these combined,
Inciting me such difficult steps to find.
Phil.
Desist, o blessed man, thy cothurnate style,
And from these forced Iambicks fall a while;
Giving me reason in a phrase more plain,
First, what this habit means? and then again,
The reason of this voyage late attempted?
Since it is a way that cannot be exempted
From fear and danger: in it no delight,
But all astonishment and sad affright.
Men.
Serious and weighty was the cause (o friend)
Which urged me to the lower Vaults descend:
But to resolve thee what did move me most,
'Twas to ask counsel of Tyresia's Ghost.
Of him? Phil.
Thou mock'st me; It Is indeed a thing
To me most strange, thou to thy friend should sing
Thy mind in such patcht Verses.
But be that Men.

No wonder, (man) for I of late had chat
With Homer and Euripides below.
Since when (but by what means I do not know)
I am so stuffed with Verse and raptures rare,
As that they rush out of my lips unware.
But tell me, on the earth how matters run,
And in the city has of late been done.
There Is nothing new, Phil.
Menippus; As before,
They rape, extort, forswear, (with thousands more,)
Oppress, heap Use on Use.
O wretched men, Men.

Most mise'rable! It seems they know not then,
What against such that in those kinds proceed,
Amongst the Infernalls lately was agreed:
The Sentence is denounced, (which Lots did tie)
And they (by Cerberus) can no way fly.
What says Menippus? Phil.
Is there ought that is new
Of late determined, which we never knew?
By Jove, Men.
not one, but many; to betray
Which to the World ( Philonides) none may:
I shall incur the censure of impiety,
To blab the secrets of the lower Diety,
(By Rhadamant.)
Menippus do not spare Phil.

To tell thy Friend, who knows what secrets are,
(Bee'ng in the secrets of the gods instructed)
How these affairs are managed and conducted.
Thou do impose things difficult and hard, Men.

Safe no way, as all utterance debarred;
Yet for thy sake I Will do 't: It Is then decreed,
That all such money-Masters as exceed
In Avarice, and Riches in their power
Abstrusely keep, like Danae in her Tower. etc.
Further of that Decree, Phil.
blessed man forbear,
Till thou relat'st (what gladly I would hear)
The cause of thy descent, and who thy guide,
(Each thing in order) what thou there espy'de,
And likewise heard. Most likely it is that thou
(Whom for approved judgment most allow
Curious in objects) slightly would not pass
All that there worthy thy observance was.
Men.
To thy desire I then thus condescend;
For what is it we can deny a friend?
When bee'ng a child, I gave attentive care
To Homer first, and next did Hesiod hear;
Who of the demigods not only sung,
But of the gods themselves, with Pen and Tongue,
Their Wars, Seditions, with their Loves escapes,
Whoredoms, Oppressions, Violences, Rapes,
Reuenges and Supplantings, where the Son
Expells the Father; and next, Incests done,
Where Sisters to the Brothers are contracted,
And those approved in Poems well compacted:
I thought them rare, they did me much accite,
And I perused them with no small delight.
But when I now began first to grow Man,
And had discretion, I bethought me than,
How quite from these our Civil Laws do vary,
And to the Poets taught quite contrary:
Namely, That mulct and punishment is fit
For the Adult'rous, such as Lust commit:
Of Rapine or Commotion who is cause,
Has a just Fine imposed him by the Laws.
With hesitation here I stood confounded,
As ignorant in what course to be grounded.
I apprehended first, the gods above
Would neither whore, nor base contentions move;
And leave example to be understood
By men on earth, but that they thought it good.
Again, That when the Law-giuers intent
Was to teach us another president,
To the former quite opposed, he would not do
That against the gods, but thinking it good too.
I doubted then, and better to be^instructed,
My speedy apprehension me conducted
To the Philosophers, into whose hands
I gave me freely, to unloose those bands
Which gyv'd me then. I bad them as they pleased
To deal with me, so they my scruples eased,
And show me, without circumstances vain,
The path to good life, simplest, and most plain.
These things advised, I to the Schools proceed,
As was my purpose; ignorant indeed,
I took a course repugning my desire,
As flying smoke, to run into the fire.
For such with my best diligence observing,
I nothing found but Ignorance; they sweruing
From what I sought, and every thing now more
Litigious and uncertain than before:
So much, that I an Idiots life prefer
Before a prating vain Philosopher.
One bids, That I in nothing should keep measure,
But totally addict my self to pleasure;
Because Voluptuousness and Delicacy
Include the sovereign felicity.
Another, he persuades me to all pain,
Travel and labor; says, I must abstain
From all things tastefull, and my self enure
To Hunger, Thirst, late Watching, and endure
All meagrenesse, no contumely fly,
But run into contempt assiduately.
An in mine ear indulgently rehearses
Those accurate and much applauded Verses
Of Hesiod, touching Virtue, which display
A steep Hill, and to that the difficult way,
Attained to by Sweat only. One will teach
To'abandon Wealth, thrust Riches from our reach;
And if already of good Meanes-possest,
To hold it vile, indifferent at best.
Come to another, (contradicting this)
He says the worlds Wealth is the sovereign bliss.
Now for the World, of their opinions, what
Should I dilate at all, when all is flat
Foolerie; of their Idaea's, Instances,
And Bodies, such as have no substances,
Their Atoms and their Vacuum, such a rabble
Of varying names, as that I am not able
In their origi'nall natures to express them,
Though I for fashion sake did once profess them.
Of all Absurds, the most absurd reputed
Was, That of Contraries they still disputed,
And Pro's and Contra's, not to be refuted;
So forcibly and pregnantly, that he
Who maintained Hot in such and such degree:
When in the same another Cold suggested,
Both were so confident, that I protested
I knew not which was which, nor durst be bold
To distinguish Cold from Heat, or Heat from Cold.
And yet I knew it corresponded not,
That the same thing should be both cold and hot.
And therefore the like posture I did keep
In hearing them, that men do that would sleep;
As I distasted, or did relish well,
(Nodding) my head this way or that way fell.
Yet most absurd above these, when their actions
I well observed, it bred in me new factions;
To apprehend how each man's word and deed
Repugnant were, and in no point agreed.
Such as seemed Wealth-contemners, I did mark,
Above others avaritiously to sharke;
Professing Temperance, yet no time affoording
From base extortion and continual hoording:
For servile hi^e some Art or Trade professing,
Contentious, and with might and maine oppressing;
Thinking naught ill that is done to purchase Coin,
Be it to bribe, to cheat, or to purloine.
In those that most seem Glory to despise,
Pride in their hearts does swell and tympanise.
Pleasure, there is no man but does seem t'eschew,
And yet in secret his delights pursue.
My hopes again thus frustrate, I was troubled,
And by that means my coffeehouse doubled:
Yet only cheered my self, that more beside,
In Wisdom, Judgment, and Discretion try'de,
Like Fools and Idiots, stand at the same stay,
Who know the place, but cannot find the way.
Long pausing, after serious contemplation
About a more exact investigation,
I'gan a sudden course to think upon,
And travel even as far as Babylon,
To meet of the Magitians some great Master,
Who had been scholar to learned Zoroaster:
For I had heard, these with enchanting Verse
The very jaws of Hell have power to pierce,
(With myst'ries added) and have free dispense
To bear men thither, and to bring them thence.
Therefore (as my best course) I had intent
To covenant with some such for my descent,
Of grave Tyresius to be counseled;
Who being wise, a Prophet, and well read,
Might tutor me, which of all lives was best,
And by the Virtuous fit to be professed.
To Babylon my swift course I apply,
Where once arrived, I chanced to cast mine eye
On a Chaldaean grave, but in his art
Miraculous, complete in every part;
His hair mixed white, his beard both full and long,
Of vene'rable aspect, (for I Will not wrong
His presence) and to tell thee true, his name
Mythrobarzanes: Unto him I came,
Humbly'entreating, but with much ado,
My earnest suit he would give ear unto;
Though I then promised him sufficient hire
To pathe the way I did so much desire.
At length he yields, then instantly new coins me,
And for full five and twenty days enioynes me,
Just as the Moon (as near as I can guess)
Begins to bathe her self in Euphrates,
To wash with her. Each morning early then
He to a place conducts me, where and when
I must expose me to the Suns vprise;
When, mumbling to himself in a strange guise,
A tedious deal of stuff, (but bad or good
I knew not, for no part I understood.)
As foolish Criers I have known, so he
Spoke at high speed, his volu'ble tongue was free,
Without delibe'rat period, not a word
Certain, or least distinction did afford:
It seems he'invok'd some dead Ghost to the place.
That charm bee'ng done, he spit thrice in my face;
So brought me back again without more let,
Turning his eye upon no man he met.
Our food was only Mast dropped from the Oak,
We had to drink (when thirst did us provoke)
Milk, Wine, with Honey mixed, (a liquor good)
With Water new drawn from Choaspes flood:
Saving the Grass, we had no other Bed.
Our Bottles and our Scrips thus furnished;
And we so victual'd, in the dead of night
To Tygris flood he guided me forthright:
There I was washed again and dry'de. A brand
He kindled then, such as I understand
They use in purging sacrifice; then takes
Up a sea-Onion, and of that he makes
(With like ingredients) a most strange confection,
Mutt'ring again, for our more safe protection,
His former Magic Verse, enchanting round
The circled place in which we then were bound.
And next he compast me with many a charm,
Lest I from fearful Spectors should take harm;
Then brought me back, having made preparation
In the Nights last part, for our Navigation.
An exorcised robe (such as the Medes
Are used to wear) he then puts on, and leads
Me to his Wardrobe, and there furnished me
With this disguised habit that you see,
Namely a Lions skin, a Club, and Lyre;
Charging me, that if any should desire
To know my name, I by no means should say
I was Menippus, and my self betray;
But either the faire-spoken man Ulysses,
Orpheus, or the great Club-man Hercules.
Ph^l.
Resolve me yet more plainly, friend, Whence came
This foreign habit, with thy change of name?
Men.
I Will make it perspicuous. Thus much he intended,
If I like those who living had descended
Before our times, my self could truly shape,
I might perhaps th'Inquisitiue eyes escape
Of AEacus, and so have free admission
In a known habit, without prohibition.
The day appeared, the Lake we having entered,
And through a gloomy vault our selves aduent'red,
For he had all things ready there, the Barge,
The Sacrifice, the mixed Wine, and the charge
Of each concealed mystery that needed;
All these bee'ng safely stowed, we next proceeded,
To place our selves, both full of tears, and sad;
Yet through the flood we gentle passage had;
And in short space to a thick Wood we came,
Much like a Wilderness, and in the same
A Lake, in which deep Euphrates is hid.
That likewise past, as our occasions bid,
We anchored in a Region, where we viewed
Nothing but Trees, Darkness, and Solitude.
Where landing (for my Guide conducted still)
We dig a pit first, then fat Sheep we kill,
And with their lukewarm blood besprinke the place.
Now the Magitian after some small space
Kindles again his brand, whispers no more,
But with a clamorous voice aloud 'gan rore,
And invocates those Demons, such as we
Call Penae, Erinnes, and sad Heccate;
Who in the night has power next Proserpine,
And with their dreadful names does interline
Words many-syllabl'd, of obscure sense,
Barbarous, absurd, derived I know not whence.
These spoke confusedly, crannies appeared,
Through which the hideous yelling throats were heard,
Of Cerberus, even Orcus seemed to shake,
And frighted Plato, in his Throne to quake.
Straight many places to be gazed upon
Lay open to us, as Perephlegeton,
With many spacious Regions. Sinking next
Into that yawning Gulf, we found perplexed,
Stern Rhadamant, with terror almost dead.
Now from his Kennell, where the Dog lay spread,
Cerberus roused himself and barkt: when I
This Harp into mine hand took instantly,
And with my Voice and Strings such measure kept,
The Curre was charmed therewith, sunk down, and slept.
When to the Lake for waftage we were come,
No passage we could get for want of room;
The Barge had her full freight of wretched Souls,
In which was nothing heard save shriekes and houles.
For all these Passengers had wounded bin,
Some in the breast, some in the thigh and shin,
And in some one or other member; all
These in a late-fought battle seemed to fall.
But exc'llent Charon when he saw me clad
In these rich Lions spoils, a great care had
To have me placed unto mine own desire,
Then wafted me without demanding hire,
Mistaking me for Hercules. And when
We touched the shore, he was so kind again,
As point us out the way. Black darkness now
Involved us round, neither discerned I how
To place one foot; but caught hold of my Guide,
And followed as he lead. Us fast beside
(Through which we past) a spacious meadow was,
More full of Daffodillies than of Grass:
Here many thousand shadows of the Dead
With humming noise were circumfus'd and spread,
Still following us. On still we forward trudge,
Until we came where Minos sat as Judge,
In a sublime Tribunal: on one hand
The Pains, the Furies, and the T^rtures stand,
With the evil Genij. On the oppo'sit side
Were many Prisoners brought, in order ty'de
With a long cord; and these were said to be
Accused for Whoredom and Adultery,
Bawds, Cutthroats, Claw-backes, Parasites, and such
As in their life time had offended much,
And of these a huge rabble. Now apart
From these appeared, with sad and heavy heart,
Rich men and Usurers, megre-lookt, and pale,
Swolne-belly'd, Gouty legged, each one his Gaile
About him had, bee'ng fastened to a beam,
Barred and surcharged with the weight extreme
Of two maine ponderous talents of old ^ron.
Now whilst these Prisoners Min^'s Seat inviron,
We standing by, the while (nothing dismayed)
Behold and hear all that is done or said;
And after many curious inquisitions,
How the are accused by most strange Rhetoricians.
Phil.
And what are they, by Jove I'entreat thee tell,
(Dear friend Menippus) that can plead so well?
Men.
Have thou observed such Shadows as appear
To dog our Bodies, when the Sun shines clear?
Phil.
Yes frequently.
Men.
We are no sooner laid
Asleep in our cold graves, but these are made
The witnesses against us, and permitted
To testify each sin by us committed:
Even these, that there reprove us, are the chief;
Nor are they (Friend) unworthy all belief,
As they who night and day about us wait,
Bee'ng from our bodies never separat.
Now Minos after strict examination,
And iustly' informed by their accusation,
Contrudes them all unto the sad society
Of such as are condemned for their impiety;
With them incessant torments to endure,
A just infliction for their deeds impure.
But against such he is incensed most,
Who whilst they lived did of their Riches boast;
Whom Dignity and Style swelled with ostent,
Who in their proud hearts could have been content
To have had Adoration. He hates Pride,
And does such haughty insolence deride,
As short and momentary; because they knowing
Themselves unto their Marbles hourly growing,
As being Mortals: yet in their great glory
Think not their wealth and riches transitory.
But all these splendors they have now laid by,
Wealth, Gentry, Office, Place, and dignity;
Naked, sad-lookt, perplexed with grief extreme,
Thinking what past in lifetime a mere Dream.
To behold which I took exceeding pleasure,
And was indeed delighted above measure.
If any one of them by chance I knew,
As private as I could I near him drew,
Demanded what before was his condition,
And whether, as the rest, swelled with Ambition?
About the door there was a throng of such
By Pluto's Ministers offended much,
Beaten and thrust together all about,
Who, as it seems, would gladly have got out.
To these he scarcely moving, in a gown
Which from his shoulders to his heel flowed down,
Of Scarlet, Gold, and diverse colors mixed,
Casting his head that way, on some he fixed
An austere eye; such counting it a bliss,
To whom he but vouchsaft a hand to kiss:
At which the others murmured. Minos then
Settling himself upon his Throne again,
Some things with favor sentenced. There appeared
The Tyrant Dionysius, ev'lly cheered,
Not knowing what excuses to rely on,
Being of heinous crimes accused by The Historiographer.
Dion:
The Stoics testates were to that conviction.
And he now ready to be doomed to'infliction.
But Aristippus Cyrenaeus now
In the interim comes, whom all the Ghosts allow,
And give him before others the prioritie,
As bearing sway, and of no mean authority.
The Tyrant, sentenced to Chimaera, he
By oratory'acquitted and set free;
As proving, That he Learning did admire,
And gave to the Professors libe'rall hire.
From the Tribunal, we our course extend
Unto the place of Torments, where (o Friend)
Infinite miseries at once appear,
All which we freely might both see and hear,
Together with the sound of stripes and blows;
Loud ejulations, shri^ks, tears, passionate woes
Echoed from those wrapped in invisible flames,
Wheels, Racks, Forks, Gibbets; to tell all their names,
Not possible. Here Cerberus besmeares
His triple chaps in blood, ravens and tears
The wretched Souls: the fell Chimaera takes
Others in her sharp phangs, and amongst them makes
A fearful massacre, limb from limb dividing.
Not far from thence, in a dark place abiding.
Were Captives, Kings and Prefects, (of these store)
And with them mingled both the Rich and Poor;
These all t^gether, and alike tormented,
Who now too late have of their sins repented:
And some of them whom we beheld, we knew,
Who died not long since. Such themselves withdrew,
And as ashamed to be in torments seen,
In dark and obscure noukes their shadows skreene;
Or if they doubtfully cast back their eyes,
Blushes are seen from their pale cheeks to rise:
And only such themselves in darkness shroud,
Who were in life most insolent and proud.
As for the Poor, whom they in life did scoff,
Half of their punishment in Hell 's took off,
As having intermission from their pain,
And after rest tormented are again.
What by the Poets is in Fables told
Of Phrygian Tantalus, I there behold;
Of Sisiphus, Ixion, and the son
Of our great Grandam Earth, bold Tytion:
O ye just gods, (like as I often have read)
How many acres does his body spread!
These Objects having past, at length we come
Unto the Field called Acherusium.
No sooner there, but straight we hapt among
The demigods, the Heroes, and a throng
Of several troops, (it seems in Tribes sequestered)
Some appeared old and feeble, as if pestred
With Cramps and Aches. These (as Homer writes)
Thin vanishing Shadows: Others, Youthful Sprites,
Sollid and sound, upright, and strongly nerv'd,
As if their bones had better been preserved
Beneath Egyptian structures. And now most
Difficult 'twas for us to know one Ghost
From other, for their bones alike were bare;
Distinguish them we cannot, though we stare
With leave and leisure: neither wonder was 't,
They were so'obscurely and ignobly placed,
Shadowed in holes, our better view to escape,
And keeping nothing of their pristine shape.
So many fleshlesse bones at once appear,
Peeping through holes in which their eyes once were,
Who wanting lips, their teeth now naked show.
I 'gan to think, by what mark I might know
Thersites from fair Nereus; as desirous,
From great Corcyra's King to point out Irus.
Or else distinguish Agamemnons look,
From Pirrhia's, the fat and greasy Cook.
Now remains nothing of them to be seen,
By which the eye may judge what they have been;
All of one semblance, Incorporeall,
But not to be distinguished at all.
These things beholding, I consid'red than,
How fitly to compare the life of Man
Unto a lingering Pomp, of which (who knows her)
Fortune is made the Guide and free disposer,
To provide Robes and Habits, and indeed
All properties and toys the Actors need.
On him whom she most favors, she bestows
A Kingly vesture: To his head she throws
A stately Turban, gives him Knights and Squires,
With all such ornaments his pomp requires,
(According to her pleasure) and with them,
Perhaps a rich and stately Diadem.
The habit of a servant poor and bare
She puts upon another: makes him fair,
The next deformed, and to the Stage a scorn,
(A spectacle) in which she does suborne
All kind of People, Sexes, and Degrees,
Many of which their States and Garments leese
In the mid-Scoene, nor suffers them to run
In the same passage that they first begun,
But changing still their garment: Croesus grave
She forces to the habit of a Slave.
Meandrides then, sitting amongst his Grooms,
She brings into the rich and stately rooms
Of Tyrant Polycrates, seems to smile,
And lets him there perchance abide a while,
Clad in those Regal ornaments: but when
The time of his great pomp is over, then
Each Actor must his borrowed suit restore,
As by him, after to be worn no more;
Now being as at first, and in the end
Naught differing from his Neighbor or his Friend.
Yet some through ignorance, loath to lay by
Those painted Robes in which they late looked hy,
Are on the sudden even as pensive grown,
As had they put off nothing but their own
They being of another goods possessed,
In which they had no claim or interest.
I know thou have seen often in a Play,
Amongst the Tragic Actors, how still they
In every passage, as the project's laid,
One in this Dramma is a Craeon made;
A Priam that, an Agamemnon he:
Perhaps the same too (as the chance may be)
Cecrops or Ericthoeus before played,
And of them both a true resemblance made:
Yet he (if so the Poet but assent)
Next day a servile Groom shall represent.
But when the Play is done, and that each one
Resignes the golden Vesture he put on;
With that, the person likewise represented,
His pantofles and all: he is contented,
Bee'ng from the Stage acquitted, to walk forth
A private man, it may be nothing worth.
Nor does he look like Agamemnon now,
The great Atraea's son; neither (I vow)
Resembles Craeon, Menicaeus heir;
Polus he may, a fellow lean and spare,
Of Cariclaeus Samosensis bred;
Of Satyrus, from Theogiton (dead)
Descended. Such as I beheld them then,
Appeared to me the affairs of mortal Men.
Phil.
One thing, Menippus, tell me I entreat;
Those that have Tombs magnificent and great
Here on the earth, with Columns, Pictures, and
Inscriptions large; have these no more command,
Nor honors done them, than to such as ar'
Private, and with the rest familiar?
Thou sport'st with me: Had thou Mansolus seen, Men.

So much affected by the Carian Queen;
Him, over whose rotten bones erected is
So famous and so rich a Pyramid;
Thou would thy very bulk with laughter swell,
To see how in an obscure nooke of Hell
He lies contruded and oppressed sore,
Skulking himself amongst a thousand more.
The greatest benefit that I conceive
His so great Monument to him can leave,
Is, That he there below takes lesser rest,
As with so huge a burden ouer-prest.
For (Friend) when AEacus to each one dead
(As Hells old custom is) chalkes out his bed,
The quantity of ground that he does score
Is but the measure of one foot, no more:
Therefore perforce they must contracted ly,
When to that small space they themselves apply.
But much more thou would long (in mine opinion)
To see those that have had such large dominion,
(I mean the Kings and Great Men) Salt-fish sell,
Oppressed with want, teach igno'rant Ghosts to spell,
And learn their ABC: to all disgraces
Subject, their cares boxt, beaten on the faces,
Like Slaves and Captives. As I looked upon
Philip the mighty King of Macedon,
I could not choose but smile, in a small nooke,
To see how busy, and what pains he took,
Cobling old Shoes, for a poor hire compeld.
Others in highways begging I beheld;
As Xerxes and Darius: besides these,
Many, and amongst them Polycrates.
Thou tell me (o Menippus) of these Kings Phil.

News vnbeleeuable, miraculous things.
Of Socrates and of Diogenes what
Is (with the Wise) become? resolve me that.
For Socrates, he still repeating is Men.

What in Man's life time has bin done amiss.
With him are conversant Nestor, Ulysses,
And Naul^^ son, the wise Palamides;
With all such as were voluble in tongue,
Yet in their Being spoke to no man's wrong.
But by his poisonous draught, which life expelled,
I might behold his legs tumor'd and swelled.
But excellent Diogenes his seat
He has already took up, by the great
Assyrian Monarch: Phrygian Midas there
Has residence, where infinites appear
Of like condition, costly fellows all:
Whom when he hears aloud to shrieke and yall,
(Comparing with the present, their first state,
Before so blessed, now so unfortunate)
He laughs and grinnes, and lying with his face
Upward, chants thousand things to their disgrace.
They willing still some other place to choose
To lament in, whom still the Dog pursues.
Phil.
Of these enough. But touching the Decree
Of which thou spak'st at first, what might that be,
Published against the Rich?
Men.
Thou call'st me well
To my remembrance; what 'twas I shall tell.
But Friend, I fear me I have done thee wrong,
From what I purposed to have stayed so long.
Whilst I converst there, the Officers of State
Called an Assembly, to deliberate
Of things behoofull for the Common good.
A mighty Conflu'ence gathered there, I stood
Thronging among the Dead, to hear what news:
They (after many things debated) choose
That of Rich Men: all other things or'e-past,
They make it the most serious and the last.
For many Crimes against them bee'ng objected,
As those whose vileness was at length detected,
Their Violence, Extortion, Inso'lence, Pride,
Rapine and Theft, with other things beside;
One (as it seems a prime amongst the Dead)
Starts up, and by command this Edict read:
The Decree.
Because (says he) these Rich Men, when of late
They breathed on earth, did great things perpetrate,
Ravening, extorting, having in derision
The Poor, of whose Estates they made division:
Therefore both to the Court and Comminalty,
Who have concluded it unanimously,
It seems expedient, That when such be dead,
Their Bodies be to the sad places lead,
To suffer with the Wicked equal pain,
But that their Souls shall be returned again
Unto the upper world, and each one pass
And shift into the body of an Ass;
Subject unto his Dullness, Toil, and Fears,
Full five and twenty times ten thousand years.
From Asses borne of Asses by succession,
Over whom the basest and most vile profession
Shall have command, with heavy burdens lade them,
And as they please, with whips or staves invade them.
That time expired, they shall again return,
That the dull Souls may with the Bodies burn.
This Sentence through Calvarius lips did pass,
He that the son of Aridellus was,
A Manicensian borne, and of the Tribe
Of learned Alibantiades the Scribe.
This bee'ng denounced by public Proclamation,
Had from the Princes first an approbation:
The Plebe with the motion seemed content,
Proserpine smiled, and Cerb'rus howled consent:
And thus all matters must established be,
Which the Infernals amongst themselves agree.
Such and no other than I have repeated,
The causes were on which the Court entreated.
But now my self I recollect together,
Touching the motion which first brought me thither:
I spy Tyresias, and to him I go,
Tell him my purpose, and entreat him show
What kind of life was best in his opinion?
At which the little blind old man (now Minion
To Rhadamant) at first began to smile;
Then with a low voice (having paused a while)
Bespake me thus: The cause is known to me
Of this thy sad doubt and perplexity,
From the hesitation of the Wise proceeding,
Their vain Disputes nothing save cauils breeding:
Nor do thou well to search these things too far,
Which to divulge, the Dead forbidden ar'.
Not so, my most dear father, I replied;
Only in this, thy judgment do not hide,
But (as I know thou can) instruct me well,
Who walk on earth more blind, than thou in hell.
He took me then aside, and in mine ear
Thus softly whispered, so that none might hear:
The best of lives (if thou dare trust the Dead)
Is that which merely Fools and Idiots lead.
Abjure the madness of all such as teach
To apprehend things high above their reach.
Study no insight into things forbidden,
Nor strive to find what Nature would have hidden:
Enquire no close conceptions or dark ends:
All trifling Syllogismes, on which depends
Nothing of weight, cast off with expedition;
And, with them, all things of that vain condition.
These Precepts in thy more stayed life pursue,
Catch at the present, aim at nothing new:
Shun Curiosity, be at nothing troubled,
Grieve not at all, so shall thy joys be doubled.
This having spoke, he suddenly withdrew
Into the place where Daffodillies grew;
So left me. Night grew on, when I afraid,
Thus to my Guide Mythrobarzanes said;
Why do we longer in these Shades remain,
Not instantly return to life again?
To which he answered, Prithee do not fear,
( Menippus) for a way more short and near
I Will show thee. So conducts me to a Road
Darker than that in which we late abode,
And with his finger pointed me forthright
(But afar off) unto a glimpse of light
Which broke through a small crannie; That (says he)
Is the direct and plain path by which we,
Descending by Boetia, passage find
To where Trophonias Temple is assigned.
Climb up those steps as I direct thine ey,
And then in Greece thou shall be instantly.
Pleased with these words, saluting the Magitian,
Unto that place I made all expedition;
And creeping through that straight and narrow way,
Was at an instant in Lebadia.
Humanum est errare.
Diabolicum perseverare.

Explicit Metrum Tractatus sexti.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogliphicall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractat.
COr, is the Heart of Man, and comes of the Greek word Kardia, as, which is
often taken for the Mind; from whence comes the word Recordor, which is as
much as to say, I recall my self into my Heart or into my mind, that is, I
remember my self. Hence is the word Socors, i. sine Cord, without a heart:
and Socordia, which intimates Sloth; and Concors, which is, Of one Heart or of
one Mind. And so much for the word. Saint Augustine super Joan. says, That
the Gluttonous man has his Heart in his Belly; the Lascivious man, in his
Lust; the Covetous man, in his Lucre or Gain. Of the Heart of Man.
Hugo, lib de Anim. has these words; The Heart is a small thing, yet desires
great matters; it will scarce suffice a Kyte for a breake-fast, yet a spacious
World can scarce suffice the appetite thereof. For amongst all the Creatures
subject to have commerce with mundane vanities, than the Heart of man nothing
more noble, nothing more sublime, nothing more like unto the Creator: And
therefore, o Man, He reciprocally desires from thee nothing so much as thy
Heart. Man examineth the Heart by the words, but God ballanceth the words by
the Heart. What is an hard and obdure Heart? (says Saint Bernard, 5. de
Consider.) It is that which by Compunction is not wounded, by Piety is not
mollified, by Prayers is not moved, by Threats is not changed: by Afflictions
it is hardened, for Benefits received ungrateful, in Counsels committed
Unfaithful, in judgments pitiless, in Immodest things impudent, in Dangers
improuident, in Humane things inhumane, in things Divine rash and profane; of
Past things forgetful, of Present things neglectfull, of Future things
unmindful. It is indeed that thing, of which only it may be said, Of Past
things, all things pass it save injuries; and of things Future there is
nothing expected, but how to revenge them. Hierome, sup. Mat. 5. says, When
God leaves the Heart it is lost, when He fills it, it is found; neither by
depressing of it does he destroy it, but rather by departing from it, leave it
to it is own perdition. I will shut up the Sentences of the Fathers introduced
to this purpose, with that of Saint Bernard, in Sermon. lib. 2. de Injurijs; The
Heart of man is divided into four Affections, What thou love, What thou
fear, What thou reioycest in, and What thou art sorry for. But the purity
of the Heart consists in two things, first in acquiring the glory of God; and
next in seeking the profit of our Neighbor.

I come now to the Poets. Manlius lib. 4. Astronom. has these words: --
Projecta jacent Animalia cuncta
In terra, vel mersa vadis, vel in Era pendent etc:.
All Animals that be, projected lie,
Or in the Earth, the Water, or the Sky;
One Rest, one Sense, one Belly, (like in all)
Which they communicate in general.
But Man subsists of Soul and Body linkt,
The Ambition of the Heart.
Of Counsels capable, of Voice distinct;
He into Natural causes has inspection,
And knows both to advise, and take direction.
Science and Arts into the World he brings,
Able to search into the birth of things.
The stubborn Earth he to his Will subdues,
And all that it brings forth, knows how to use.
The rebel Beasts he at his pleasure binds,
And in the Sea untrodden paths he finds.
He only stands with an erected breast,
As Lord and Victor over all the rest.
His starre-like eyes he in the Stars enquires,
And what is it can satiate his desires?
He seeks out Jove (in his ambitious Pride;)
In vain the gods from him themselves can hide:
Who not content to look them in the faces,
But he will ransacke their most secret places.
Such is the height of his all-daring mind,
He hopes himself amongst the Stars to find.


At such sublimities aims the unlimited Heart of Man; but unto all such as
are proudly bold, or profanely impudent, I propose that of the excellent Poet
Claudian to be weightily considered of, in Lib. 3. de Rapt. Proserp.

Quid mentem traxisse Polo? Quid profuit altum
Erepisse caput? pecudum si more, etc.
What profits thee to say, That from the Sky
Thy minde's derived? or that thou look on hye?
Since that, of all thy glory is the least,
If thou a Man, be sensual like a Beast.
The substance of which Mankind subsists, is nothing but stone: as Ovid
ingeniously insinuates, Lib. 1. Metam. being repaired by Deucalion and his
wife Pyrrha, the sole remainder after the deluge. His words be these:
Discedunt, velantque caput, tunicasque recingunt;
Et jussos Lapides, sua post vestigia mittunt, etc.
They part, their heads veil, then their garments bind
About them close; the stones they cast behind:
These stones (which who would credit, unless we
May for our proof produce Antiquity)
Began to lose their hardness, soft to grow;
And when they had a space remained so,
To gather form: soon as they did increase,
The ruder matter by degrees 'gan cease,
And a more pliant temper they put on,
As sometimes you may see flatues of stone
Half wrought, yet promising the shapes of men;
Such an imperfect Work they appeared then.
What part affoorded any humid juice,
And was of earth, turned to the Bodies use;
And the more sollid substance of the Stones,
Too sollid to be wrought, was changed to Bones.
The Veins still keep their name, and these are they
That through the body do the blood convey.
Thus by the help of power Divine, at last
Those that the man did over his shoulders cast,
Attained Man's figure; and those which she threw
Behind her back, they both, for women knew.
"How hard our natures be, may here be read,
"For in our lives we show whence we were bred.


The instabilitie and corruption of man's Heart is lively disciphered in
Iuvenals 13 Satyr: Mobilis and varia est ferme natura malorum;
Cum scoelus admittunt, superest constantia, etc. --
Moving and various is the nature still
Of corrupt Men: yet when they purpose ill,
In that they are constant; which when they have long
Practiced, they then begin to think what is wrong;
But yet repent it not. Their Natures (stacke
In any goodness) bids them to look back
Upon their damned manners, and (what is strange)
Remains immutable, and free from change.
For who has to himself proposed an end
Of sinning, and the high Powers to offend?
Who of his life does reformation seek,
After the blush be once exiled his cheek?
Show me a man through all the large extent
Of the whole earth, that is with one sin content?


I may conclude with Claud. lib. 2. in Eutrop.

-- Parvae poterunt impellere causae
In scoelus, ad mores facilis natura reverti.
Now concerning the Creation of the Angels, when and where they were made, let
us wade no farther, than to reconcile the Scriptures by the Scriptures; and
conferring the Text of Moses with that of the Prophet David, the Truth will the
more plainly manifest it self. It is thus written in Genesis; Genesis 1.3.
Then God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. To which the Psalmist
alludeth, Psalm. 33. verse: 6. Psalm. 33.6.
By the Word of the Lord the Heavens were made, and all the Host of them by the
breath of his mouth. Now who or what can be more properly styled the Host of
Heaven, than the Angels?

Aug. sup. Genesis lib. 7. cap. 21.
Saint Augustine is of opinion, That the Angels and incorruptible Souls were
created the first day; and that the Soul of Adam was created before his body,
like as the Angels were, and afterward breathed and infused divinely into him.
For the creation of the Angels is understood in the Light, being at the same
time made partakers of the life eternal. Rupert. de operib. sacr. spir. cap. 2.
For so also does Rupertus expound that place, in his book of the Works of
the Holy Ghost; saying, There was then no Light at all seen to be made, saving
the brightness and illustration of the Air. But many worthy and learned
Fathers have better understood the place, viz. That the name of Light signified
the Angelical nature; not for any similitude, but for a certain truth, That
when Light was commanded, then the Angels were created.

And when it is said, That God separated the Light from the Darkness; by that
division is likewise understood the dreadful and terrible judgments of God
against the Devil and his Angels; who were created good in nature, but they
would not continue in that excellent purity: and therefore of Angels of Light,
through their own Rebellion and Pride they were made Devils of Darkness.

We read in Ecclesiasticus, Eccles. 18.1.
Qui vivit in aeternum creavit omniae simul. i. He that lives for ever,
created all things together or at once. To which Saint Basil, Saint Augustine,
Dionys. Ambros. Reverend Bid, and Cassiodor. assent, saying, That God created
and brought forth all things together.

Peter Lombard, Pet. Lumb. li. 2. distinc 2.
(syrnamed Master of the Sentences) by authority derived from Ecclesiasticus,
makes this exposition; The bodily nature and matter of the four Elements was
created with the spiritual Creatures, that is to say, with the Soul and the
Angels, who were created together. To approve which he produces the testimony
of Saint Augustine, Aug. sup. Genesis
saying. That by Heaven and Earth ought to be understood the spiritual and
corporeal Creatures created in the beginning of Time.

In another place of Ecclesiast. it is said, Eccles. 1.4.
Prior omnium ertata est Sapientia: Wisdom has been created before all
things. Yet hereby is not to be understood that God himself is meant, or his
Son Christ, who is the Wisdom of the Father: for God was not created at
all; the Son was begotten, and therefore neither made nor created at all: and
the holy Trinity is but one Wisdom.

Jesus the son of Syrach, in that place, by this Wisdom understands the
Angelical Nature, often termed in the Scriptures, Life, Wisdom, and Light.
For the Angels are called and said to be Understanding: and though they were
created with the Heaven and Time; yet are they said to be first created, by
reason of their Order and Dignity, being the most worthy and excellent
Creatures. Neither were these Angelical Powers (says he) made for any need or
necessity that the Almighty God had of them; but to the intent that he might
be contemplated, praised and magnified, and his liberality and bounty be the
more abundantly known throughout all generations.

And whereas it is written, That God created all things together; being
elsewhere said in Genesis, That he produced all those bodily Substances by
pauses and distinction of days: Dionys. Rihell. lib. de Great. Mundi, ca. 2.
Dionysius Rihellus to that has given a sufficient answer, namely, That the
Substances of things were created together, but not formed and fashioned
together in their several distinct kinds. They were disgested together by
substance of matter, but appeared not together in substantial form, for that
was the work of six days.

Moreover, when Moses in his first Chapter of Genesis says, That things were
created in every one of the six days severally: in the second chapter of the
same Book he speaks but of one day only, by way of Catastrophe or Epilogue.
All which he had before distinctly described, saying, These are the
generations of the Heaven and the Earth when they were created, in the day that
the Lord God made the Earth and the Heavens. Neither is this any contradiction;
for we must not take the days according to the distinction of Times; for God
had no need of Time, as being first made by him: but by reason of the works of
Perfection, which is signified and completed by the number of Six, which is a
most perfect number. Moreover, (as the Psalmist says) A thousand years are
unto him but as one day. Philo lib. de Operib. Dei.
Avenzor the Babylonian says, That he which knows to number well, knows
directly all things. Neither was it spoken in vain, but to the great praise of
Almighty God; Omnia in mensura, Wisdom 11.17:
and Numero and Pondere disposuisti. i. Thou have disposed all things in
Number, in Measure, and in Weight. It is moreover said in Eccles. 1 2. Who can
number the sands of the Sea, and the drops of the rain, and the days of the
world? Who can measure the height of the Heaven, the breadth of the Earth, and
the depth? Who can find the Wisdom of God, Eccles. 1.2.
which has been before all things? etc.

It is worthy remarke, which one ingeniously observes: Two ways (says he) we
come to the apprehension and knowledge of God; by his Works, and by his Word:
by his Works we know that there is a God, and by his Word we come to know what
that God is: his Works teach us to spell; his Word, to read. The first are
his backe-parts, by which we behold him afar off: the later represent him
unto us more visibly, and as it were face to face. For the Word is as a book
consisting of three leaves, and every leaf printed with many letters, and
every letter contains in it self a Lecture. The Leaves are Heaven, the Air,
and the Earth, with the Water: the Letters engraven, are every Angel, Star,
and Planet: the Letters in the Air, every Meteor and Foul; those in the Earth
and Waters, every Man, Beast, Plant, Flower, Mineral, and Fish, etc. All these
set together, spell unto us, That there is a God.

Moses in the very first verse of Genesis refuteth three Ethnycke opinions:
first, Those that were of opinion the World was from eternity, and should
continue for ever; in these words, when he says, In the Beginning. Secondly,
he stops the mouth of stupid and profane Atheists, in this phrase, Elohim
created. Thirdly and lastly he opposes all Idolaters, such as held with many
gods; for the says in the conclusion of the same Verse, Elohim, He created
Heaven and Earth; using the singular number. It is the opinion of some ancient
Divines, That the Creation of the Angels was concealed by Moses, lest any man
should apprehend (like those Heretics spoken of by Epiphanius) that they
aided and assisted God in the Creation. For if the day of their Creation (which
as the best approved Theologists confess, was the first day) had been named
by Moses, wicked and ungodly men might have taken them to have been Agents in
that great and inscrutable Work; which indeed were no other than Spectators.
Therefore as God hid and concealed the Body of Moses after his death, lest the
Israelites (so much addicted to Idolatry) should adore and worship it; so Moses
hid and concealed the Creation of the Angels in the beginning, lest by them
they should be deified, and the honor due to the Creator, be by that means
attributed and conferred on the Creature. Rabbi Salom affirms them to be
created the first day: and some of our later Divines, the fourth day; but their
opinions are not held altogether authentical.

It is likewise observed, That God in the creation of the world begins
above, and works downwards. For in the first three days he laid the
foundation of the world; and in the other three days he furnished and adorned
those parts. The first day he made all the Heavens, the matter of the earth,
and comes down so low as the Light. The second day he descends lower, and
makes the Firmament or Air. The third, lowest of all, making a distinction
betwixt the Earth and Water. Thus in three days the three parts or body of the
World is laid; and in three days more, and in the same order, they were
furnished. For on the fourth day, the Heavens, which were made the first day,
were decked and stuck with stars and lights. The fifth day, the Firmament
(which was made the second day) was filled with Birds and Fowls. The sixth day,
the Earth (which was before made fit and ready the third day) was replenished
with Beasts, and lastly with Man. And thus God Almighty in his great Power and
Wisdom, accomplished and finished the miraculous work of the Creation.

Rabbi Iarchi upon the second of Genesis observes, That God made superior
things one day, and inferior another. His words being to this purpose: In the
first day God created Heaven above, and Earth beneath: on the second day, the
Firmament above: on the third, Let the dry land appear beneath: on the fourth,
Lights above: and the fifth, Let the waters bring forth beneath, etc. On the
sixth day he made things both superior and inferior, lest there should be
confusion without order in his Work. Therefore he made Man consisting of both,
a Soul from above, and a Body from beneath, etc.

An Allegory drawn from these is, That God has taught us by the course he
took in the framing and fashioning of the world, how we must proceed to become
a new Creation, or a new Heaven and Earth, renewed both in soul and body. In
the first day he made the Light; therefore the first thing of the new man ought
to be light of Knowledge: for Saint Paul says, He that comes to God must
know that He Is. Heb. 12.
On the second day he made the Firmament, so called because of it is
steadfastness: so the second step in Man's new Creation must be Firmamentum
Fidei, (i.) the sure foundation of Faith. On the third day, the Seas, and Trees
bearing Fruit: so the third step in the New man, is, That he become Waters of
relenting tears, Mat. 3.
and that he bring forth fruit worthy of Repentance. On the fourth day God
created the Sun, that whereas on the first day there was light without heat,
now on the fourth day there is Light and Heat joined together. So the fourth
step in the new creation of the New man, is, That he join the heat of Zeal
with the light of Knowledge; as in the Sacrifices, Fire and Salt were ever
coupled. The fifth days work was of Fishes to play in the Seas, and the Fowls
to fly and soar toward Heaven. So the fifth step in a New Creature, is, To
live and rejoice in a sea of Troubles, and fly by Prayer and Contemplation
toward Heaven. On the sixth day God made Man: now all those things before
named being performed by him, Man is a new Creature. They are thus like a
golden Chain concatinated into several links by Saint Peter; Add to your
light of Knowledge, the firmament of Faith; to your Faith, seas of repentant
Tears; to your Tears, the fruitful Trees of good Works; to your good
Works, the hot Sunshine of Zeal; to your Zeal, the winged Fowls of Prayer
and Contemplation. And so, Ecce, omnia facta sunt nova, Behold, all things are
made new, etc.

Angels immutable.
Further concerning the Angels. Basil, Hom. sup. Psalm. 44. says, The Angels are
subject to no change; for amongst them there is neither Child, Yong-man nor
old, but in the same state in which they were created in the beginning, in that
they everlastingly remain: the substance of their proper nature being
permanent, in Simplicity and Immutabilitie. Every Soul has his Angel to
attend it.
And again, upon Psalm. 33. There is an Angel of God assistant to every one
that believes in Christ, unless by our impious actions we expel him from us.
For as Smoke drives away Bees, and an evil savor expels Doves; so our
stinking and unsavory sins remove from us the good Angel, who is appointed
to be the Keeper and Guardian of our life.

Hier. sup. Mat. 13. Magna dignitas fidelium Animarum, etc. Great is the
dignity of faithful Souls, which every one from his birth has an Angel
deputed for his Keeper. Bernard in his Sermon super Psalm. 12.19. uses these
words; Woe be unto us, if at any time the Angels by our sins and negligences
be so provoked, that they hold us unworthy their presence and visitation, by
which they might protect us from the old Adversary of Mankind, the Devil. If
therefore we hold their familiarities necessary to our preseruations, we
must beware how we offend them; but rather study to exercise our selves in
such things in which they are most delighted, as Sobriety, Chastity,
Voluntary Poverty, What best pleases the Angels.
Charity, etc. but above all things they expect from us Peace and Verity.
Again he says, How merciful art thou, o Lord! that think us not safe
enough in our weak and slender walls, but thou sendest thine Angels to be our
Keepers and Guardians.

Isidor. de Sum. Bon. Ang^ls governs Nations.
It is supposed that all Nations have Angels set over them to be their Rulers;
but it is approved, That all men have Angels to be their Directors. He says in
another place, By Nature they were created mutable, but by Contemplation they
are made immutable; in Mind passible, in Conception rational, in Stock
eternal, in blessedness perpetual. Greg. in Homil. Novem esse Ordines
Angelorum testante sacro eloquio scimus, etc. i. We know by the witness of the
holy Word, That there are nine degrees of Angels, namely, Angels, Archangels,
Virtues, Potestates, Principates, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubim, and Seraphim.
And proceeds thus; The name of Angel is a word of Office, not of Nature:
Angella name of Office, not of Nature.
For these holy Spirits of the Celestial Country are ever termed Spirits,
but cannot be always called Angels; for they are then only to be styled
Angels, when any message is delivered them to be published abroad. According to
that of the Psalmist, Qui fecit Angelos suos Spiritus. Those therefore that
deliver the least things have the title of Angels; but those that are employed
in the greatest, Archangels: for Angeli in the Greek tongue signifies
Messengers, and Arch-Angeli, Chief Messengers. And therefore they are
charactered by particular names, as Michael, Gabriel, Raphael, etc.

We likewise read Nazianzen thus, Orat. 38. Atque ita secundi Splendores
procreati sunt, primi splendoris Administri, etc. i. So the second Splendors
were procreated, as the Ministers of the first Light; whether of Fire quite
void of matter and incorporeall, or whether of some other nature coming near
unto that matter: yet my mind prompteth me to say thus much, That these
spirits are no way to be impelled unto any evil, but they are still apt and
ready to do any good thing whatsoever, as always shining in that first
splendour wherein they were created, etc.

The same Nazianzen, Carmine de Laud Virginitatis, writes thus: At talis
Triadis naturae est vndique purae,
Ex illo puro certissima lucis origo
Coetibus Angelicis; mortali lumine cerni,
Qui nequeunt, etc.
Such is the nature of the purest Trine,
In whom the original Light began to shine,
From whence the Host of Angels we derive,
Such Lights as can be seen by none alive.
The Seat of God and his most blessed Throne
They always compass, and on him alone
The attend; mere Spirits. If from the Most Hy
Sent, through the pure air they like Lightning fly,
And vndisturb'd, be the wind rough or still,
They in a moment act their Makers Will.
They marry not; in them 's no care expressed,
No grief, no troubled motions of the breast:
Neither are they composed of limbs, as we,
Nor dwell in houses; but they all agree
In a miraculous concord. Every one
Is to himself the same; for there are none
Of diffrent nature; of like soul, like mind,
And equally to Gods great love inclined.
In daughters, sons, or wives, they take no pleasure,
Nor are their hearts bent upon Gold or Treasure.
All earthy Glories they hold vile and vain;
Nor furrow they the spacious Seas for gain:
Nor for the bellies sake plow they, or sow,
Or study when to reap the fruits that grow.
The care of which has unto Mankind brought
All the mortiferous Ills that can be thought.
Their best and only food is, to behold
God in his Light and Graces manifold.


Having discoursed sufficiently of the Creation of Angels; it follows in the
next place to speak something of the forming and fashioning of Man. The sixth
day God created the four-footed Beasts, Of the forming and fashioning of man.
male and female, wild and tame. The same day also he made Man; which day some
are of opinion was the tenth day of the Calends of April. For it was
necessary (says Adam Archbishop of Vienna, in his Chronicle) That the second
Adam, sleeping in a vivifying death, only for the salvation of Mankind,
should sanctify his Spouse the Church, by those Sacraments which were derived
out of his side, even upon the self same day, not only of the week, but of
the month also, wherein he created Adam our first Father, and out of his side
brought forth Evah his wife, that by her help the whole race of Mankind might
be propagated.

God made Man after his own Image, to the end that knowing the dignity of his
Creation, he might be the rather incited to love and serve him. Not that he
should proudly ouerweene, That the shape and figure of God is answerable in a
true and just conformity with his own; for the word Image is not so to be
understood, to accord and correspond with the exterior shape or similitude, but
rather with the spiritual Intelligence, which consists of the more precious
part, namely the Soul. For as God by his uncreated Power is wholly God,
governing and giving life to all things; (for as the Apostle says, In Him we
live, move, and have our Being) even so the Soul by his providence gives life
to the body, and unto every part thereof; and is said to be the Image of God,
like as in the Trinity: for though in name it is but one Soul, yet has it in
it self three excellent dignities, The three dignities of the Soul.
The Understanding, the Will, and the Memory.

And as the Son is begotten of the Father and the Holy Ghost, and proceeds
both from the one and the other; in like manner is the Will engendered of the
Understanding and Memory. And as the three persons of the Trinity are but one
God, so these three powers and faculties of the Soul make but one Soul.

Man then was created according to the Image of God, The end, why Man was
created.
that every Like delighting in his Like, he should evermore wish to be
united unto his Similitude, which is God: first, to acknowledge him: next, in
knowing him, to honor him; and in honoring him, to love him; Why God made man
upright.
and in loving him, to serve and obey him. For this cause he made him with an
upright and erected body, no^ so much for his dissimilitude unto beasts, (who
be stooping and crooked, having their eyes directed to the earth) as to eleuate
his looks, and to mount his understanding toward heaven his original; leaving
all the objects of terrestrial vanities, and exercising his faculties in the
contemplation and speculation of things sublime and permanent.

God when he created Man, Three gifts bestowed upon Man in his Creation.
bestowed upon him three especial good gifts: the first, His own Image: the
next, That he made him after his own similitude: the third, That he gave him
the Immortality of the Soul. Which three great blessings (says Hugo S.
Victor) were conferred by God upon Man, Ecerp. lib. ^. cap. 2, 3, 4^
both naturally, and by original justice. Two other gifts he has enriched
Man with; the one under him, the other above him: under him, the World; above
him, God. The World as a visible good, but Transitory: God, as an invisible
Good, and Eternal.

Three opposite Evils.
There be three principal Hurts or Evils, which abuse and corrupt the three
before-named Blessings: the first, Ignorance of Goodness and Truth: the
second, an appetite and desire of Evil and Wickedness: the last, Sickness and
infirmity of the body. Through Ignorance the Image of God has been defaced in
us; by Carnal desires, his Similitude blemished; and by Infirmities, the body
for the present made incapable of Immortality. For these three Diseases there
be three principal Remedies, Wisdom, Virtue, and Necessity: to overcome
Ignorance, we are to make use of Wisdom, that is, to understand things as
they are, without idle curiosity. To suppress the appetite to do evil, we
are to embrace Virtue, which is the habitude of the Soul, after nature
conformable with Reason. To make Necessity tread down Infirmity, is meant of
absolute Necessity, Necessity absolute and conditional.
without which, things cannot be done; as without eyes we cannot see, without
ears hear, without feet walk, etc. There is another kind of Necessity
which is called Conditional; as when a man is to travel a journey, he uses
an horse for his better expedition. And so the like.

Theoricke. Practicke. Mechanicke.
For these three Remedies, all Arts and disciplines in general have been
devised and invented: as first, to attain unto Wisdom and Knowledge, the
Theoricke or Contemplative: for the atchieuing unto Virtue, the Practiuqe and
Active: and to supply Necessity, Mechanicke, which is that which we call
Handicraft, or Trading; which as Johannes Ludovicus in his Book called The
Introduction to Wisdom, says, Vtile indumentum excogitavit necessitas, etc.
i. Necessity found out Garments profitable, precious, light, neat, and vain.

The just measure of man's Body.
Man consists of the Body and the Soul. The true exact measure of Man's body
well proportioned, is thus defined; His height is four cubits or six feet, a
cubit being just one foot and an half: the foot is the measure of four palms
or hand-bredths; a palm is the breadth of four fingers joined. The arms being
spread abroad, the space between the end of the one longest finger, unto the
other, is the just measure from the plant of the foot, to the crown of the
head; according to Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 17. The parts of the Body are thus
proportioned; the face, from the bottom of the chinne, to the top of the
forehead, or skirt of the hair, is the tenth part of the height or length
thereof: the same is the breadth of the forehead from one side to the other. The
face is divided into three equal parts, one from the bottom of the chinne, to
the lowest tip of the nose; the second, from thence upward to the eye brow; the
third, from thence to the top of the forehead. The length of the eye, from one
angle opposed to the other, is the five and fortieth part: the like proportion
bears the distance and space betwixt the one eye and the other. The length of
the nose is the thirtieth part, and the hollow of the nosthrill the hundred and
eightieth. The whole head^ from the bottom of the chinne to the crown of the
head, the eighth part: the compass of the neck, the fifteenth: the length of
the breast and stomach, and so the breadth, almost the sixth part. The Nauil
holds the mid seat in the body, and divides it self into two equal
distances. The whole length of the thighs and legs, to the plant or sole of
the foot, is little less than the ^alfe part: the length of the foot the sixth
part: so also are the arms to the cubit, and the cubit to the hand: the hand
is the tenth part. Vitruv. lib. 13. Cardan. lib. 11. de Subtilitate, etc.

Plotinus the Platonicke Philosopher being earnestly solicited by the cunning
Painter Emutius, that he would give him leave to draw his picture, would by no
means suffer him; but made him this answer, Is it not enough that we bear
this image about us whilst we live, but we must by way of ostentation leave it
for posterity to gaze on? For he was of the opinion of Pythagoras, who called
the Body nothing else but the Case or casket of the Mind; and that he saw the
least of Man, who looked only upon his body. And Diogenes the Cynicke was
wont to deride those who would keep their Cellars shut, barred, and bolted,
and yet would have their Bodies continually open by diverse windows and doors,
as the mouth, the eyes, the nosthrils, and other secret parts thereof.
Stoboeus, Sermon. 6.

The Body is described by Lucretius in this one Verse: Tangere enim aut tangi,
nisi corpus nulla potest res;
i. Nothing is sensible either to touch or to be touched, but that which may be
called a Body.

God created three living Spirits, Three sorts of living Spirits created by God.
says Gregor. lib. Dialog. The first, such as are not covered with flesh: the
second, that are covered with flesh, but does not die with the flesh: the
third, both with flesh covered, and with the flesh perishes. The first,
Angels; the second, Men; the third, Brutes. The wise Socrates was accustomed to
say, That the whole Man was the Mind or Soul, and the Body nothing else but
the cover, or rather the prison thereof; from whence being once freed, it
attained to it is proper jurisdiction, and then only began to live blessedly.

Erasm. (in Declamat. de Morte) and learned Seneca says, That as he which
lives in another man's house is troubled with many discommodities, and still
complaining of the inconvenience of this room or that; even so the Divine part
of Man, which is the Soul, is grieved, now in the head, now in the foot, now
in the stomach, or in one place or other. Signifying thereby, That he lives
not in a Mansion of his own, but rather as a Tenant, who expects every
hour to be removed from thence.

Of the Soul of Man.
The Soul of Man, says Saint Augustine, aut regitur a Deo, aut Diabolo; It is
either governed by God or by the Devil. The Eye of the Soul is the Mind: it
is a Substance, created, invisible, incorporeall, immortal, like unto God, and
being the Image of the Creator: Lib. de Definition. Anim. Et sup. Genes. addit,
Omnis Anima est Christis Sponsa, aut Diaboli Adultera: Every Soul is either
the Spouse of Christ, or the Strumpet of the Devil.

Saint Bernard, Sermon. 107, uses these words; Have you not observed, That of
holy Souls there are three several states? the first, in the corruptible
Body; the second, without the Body; the third, in the Body glorified. The first
in War, the second in Rest, the third in Blessedness? And again in his
Meditat. O thou Soul, stamped in the Image of God, beautified with his
Similitude, contracted to him in Faith, endowed in Spirit, redeemed in Blood,
deputed with the Angels, made capable of his Blessedness, heir of Goodness,
participating Reason; What have thou to do with Flesh, than which no dunghill
is more vile and contemptible.

Saint Chrysostom likewise, De Reparat. Laps. If we neglect the Soul,
neither can we save the Body: for the Soul was not made for the Body, but the
Body for the Soul. He therefore that neglects the Superior, and respects
the Inferior, destroys both; but he that does observe order, and gives that
pre-eminence which is in the first place, though he neglect the second, yet by
the health of the first he shall save the second also.

Isiod. Etymol. 11. The Soul whilst it abides in the Body to give it life
and motion, is called the Soul: when it purposes any thing, it is the Will:
when it knows, it is the Mind: when it recollecteth, it is the Memory; when
it judges truly, it is the Reason: when it breaths, the Spirit: when
passionate, it is the Sense. And again, Lib. 1. de Summo Bono: O thou Man, Why
do thou admire the height of the Planets, and wonder at the depth of the
Seas; and can not search into the depth of thine own Soul?

The Philosophers concerning the soul.
We have heard the Fathers: let us now enquire what the Philosophers have
thought concerning the Soul. There is nothing great in Humane actions, says
Seneca in Proverb. but a Mind o^ Soul that disposes great things. Thus says
Plato, in Timaeo: To this purpose was the Soul joined to the Body, that it
should furnish it with Virtues and Sciences; which if it do, it shall be
gently welcomed of the Creator: but if otherwise, it shall be confined to the
inferior parts of the earth.

Aristotle, lib. 2. de Animal. says, The Soul is more noble than the Body;
the Animal, than that which is Inanimate; the Living, than the Dead; the Being,
than the Not being. Three things (says Macrob. lib. 7. Saturnal.) there be
which the Body receives from the providence of the Soul: That it lives, That
it lives decently, and That it is capable of Immortality.

Of Souls (says Cicero, 1. Tuscul. Quast.) there can be found no original
upon the earth; for in them there is nothing mixed or concrete, or that is bred
from the earth, or framed of it; for there is nothing in them of substance,
humor, or sollid, or fiery. For in such natures there is nothing that can
comprehend the strength of Memory, the Mind or Thought; which can record what
is past, or foresee things future; which do altogether participate of a Divine
nature. Neither can it ever be proved that these Gifts ever descended unto Man,
but from God himself.

And in another place; There is nothing admixt, nothing concrete, nothing
co-augmented, nothing doubled in these Minds or Souls. Which being granted,
they can neither be discerned or divided, nor discerpted, nor distracted. And
therefore they cannot perish; for perishing is a departure or surcease, or
divorce of those parts, which before their consumption were joined together in
a mutual connection.

Phocillides in his Precepts writes thus: Anima est immortalis, vivitque
perpetuo, nec senescit vnquam. i. The Soul is immortal, lives ever, neither
does it grow old by Time. And Philistrio: The Soul of a wise man is joined
with God, neither is it death, but an evil life, that destroys it. And
Egiptius Minacus, when one brought him word that his father was dead; made the
Messenger this answer, Forbear, o Man, to blaspheme and speak so impiously:
for how can my father be dead, who is immortal?

Nicephorus ex Evagrio. Panorm. lib. de Alphons. Reg. gestis, relates, That the
King Alphonsus was wont to say, That he found no greater argument to confirm
the immortality of the Soul, than when he observed the bodies of men having
attained to their full strength, begin to decrease and wax weak through
infirmities. For all the Members have the limits and bounds of their
perfection, which they cannot exceed, but arriving to their height, decline and
decay. But the Minds and Intellects, as they grow in time, so they increase in
the ability of understanding Virtue and Wisdom.

Elian. lib. 11. de Varia Historia, reports of Cercitas Megala Politanus, who
falling into a most dangerous disease, and being asked by such friends as were
then about him, whether he were willing to dye? O yes (said he) by any means;
for I desire to depart this world, and travel to the other, where I shall be
sure to meet with men famous in all kinds of Learning: of the Philosophers,
with Pythagoras: of the Historiographers, with Hecataeus: of the Poets,
Homerus: of Musitions, Olympius: who by the Monuments of their judgments and
learning have purchased to themselves perpetuity.

Note.
AEneas Sylvius reports of the Emperor Frederick, That sojourning in
Austria, it happened that one of his principal Noblemen expired; who had lived
ninety years in all voluptuousness and pleasure, yet was never known to be
either diseased in body, or disquieted in mind, by any temporal affliction
whatsoever. Which being related unto the Emperor, he made this answer; Even
hence we may ground that the Souls of men be immortal: for if there be a God,
who first created, and since governs the World, (as both the Philosophers and
Theologists confess) and that there is none so stupid as to deny him to be
just in all his proceedings; there must then of necessity be other places
provided to which the Souls of men must remove after death: since in this life
we neither see rewards conferred upon those that be good and honest, nor
punishments condign inflicted upon the impious and wicked.

Cicero, in Caton. Mayor. reports, That Cyrus lying upon his death bed, said
unto his sons; I never persuaded my self, o my Children, that the Soul did
live whilst it was comprehended within this mortal body: neither that it
shall die when it is delivered from this fleshly prison.

Anaxarchus being surprised by Nicocreon the Tirant of Cyprus, he commanded him
to be contruded into a stone made hollow of purpose, and there to be beaten to
death with iron hammers. In which torments he called unto the Tyrant and said,
Beat, batter, and bruise the flesh and bones of Anaxarchus, but Anaxarchus
himself thou can not harm or damnifie at all. The excellent Philosopher
intimating thereby, That though the Tyrant had power to exercise his barbarous
and inhumane cruelty upon his body; yet his Soul was immortal, and that no
tyranny had power over, either to suppress or destroy it. Brusonius, Lib. 2.
Cap. 3. ex Plutarc.

Of less constancy was Johannes de Canis a Florentine Physician of great fame
for his practice: who when out of the Principles of Mataesophia, he had
grounded the Soul to be mortal with the Body, and in his frequent discourses
affirmed as much; yet when his last hour drew on, he began to doubt within
himself, and his last words were these: So, now I shall suddenly be resolved
whether it be so or no. Johan. Bapt. Gell. Dialog. de Chimaerico.

As ill if not worse, Bubracius, lib. 28. reports of Barbara, wife to the
Emperor Sigismund; who with Epicurus placed her Summum Bonum in
voluptuousness and pleasure: and with the Sadduces believed no resurrection or
immortality of the Soul, but God and the Devil, heaven and hell, equally
divided.

From the Philosophers, The Poets concerning the Soul.
I come now to the Poets. Ovid, lib. Metam. 15. says, Morte carent Animae,
semperque priore relicta
Sede: novis domibus vivunt, etc.
The Souls can never dye; when they forsake
These houses, then they other Mansions take.


Phocilides the Greek Poet, Anima autem immortalis and insenesibilis vivit per
omne tempus. i. For the Soul is immortal, not subject unto age, but surviveth
beyond the date of Time. And Menander; Melius est corpus quam Animam aegrotare.
i. Better it is for thee to be sick in body than in Soul: and howsoever thy
Body fare, be sure to physic thy Soul with all diligence.

Propert. 4.7.

Sunt aliquid manes, let hum non omnia fiunt:
Luridaque evictos, effugit vmbra rogas.
Sp'rites something are; Death does not all expire:
And the thin Shadow scapes the conquered fire.
The ingenious Poet Tibullus, either inclining to the opinion of Pythagoras, or
else playing with it, (who taught, That the soul after death did transmigrate
and shift into the bodies of other persons and creatures) we read thus: Quin
etiam meatunc tumulus cui texerit ossa,
Seu matura dies fato proper at mihi mortem:
Longa manet seu vita, etc.
When these my bones a Sepulcher shall hide,
Whether ripe Fate a speedy day provide?
Or that my time be lengthned? when I change
This figure, and hereafter shall prove strange
Unto my self, in some shape yet unknown;
Whether a Horse of service I be grown,
Taught how to tread the earth? or Beast more dull
Of speed, (the glory of the herd) a Bull?
Whether a Foul, the liquid air to cut?
Or into what Man's shape this Spirit be put?
These Papers that have now begun thy praise,
I will continue in those after-dayes.


Manl. lib. 4. de Astronom. is thus quoted: An dubium est habitare Deum sub
pectore nostr^,
In coelumque redire; Animas coeloque venire?
Who doubts but God dwells in this earthly Frame;
And Souls return to Haev'n, from whence they came?


And Lucretius we read thus: Cedit enim retro de terra quid fuit ante
In terra, sed quod missum est ex Etheris oris,
Id rursum Coeli fulgentia templa receptus, etc.
That which before was made of earth, the same
Returns back unto earth, from whence it came.
But that which from the aethereall parts was lent,
Is up unto those shining Temples sent.


Of Man in general.
I have hitherto spoke of the two distinct parts of Man, the Soul and the Body.
A word or two of Man in general.

Homo, Man, is Anima Rationalis, or Mortalis; A Creature reasonable and
mortal. Not so denominated ab Humo, as Varro would have it; for that is common
with all other Creatures: but rather of the Greek word Omonoia, that is,
Concordia, or Consensus, Concord or Con-societie, because that Man is of all
other the most sociable. The Nobility of Man in regard of the sublimitie of
his Soul, is expressed in Genes. 1. Let us make Man after our own Image and
similitude, etc. The humility which ought to be in him, concerning the
substance whereof he was made, Genes. 2. The Lord made Man of the slime of the
earth. The shortness of his life, Psalm. 102. My days are declined like a
shadow, and I am as the Grass of the field. The multiplicitie of his miseries,
Genesis 3. In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread, etc.

Gregory Nazianzen in Oration. 10. uses these words; What is Man, that thou
art so mindful of him? What new misery is this? I am little and great,
humble and high, mortal and immortal, earthly and heavenly; the first from
this world, the later from God: the one from the Flesh, the other from the
Spirit.

Tertullian, An excellent Argument against such as deny the Resurrection.
Apollogetic. advers. Gentil. cap. 48. has this Meditation: Do thou ask me
how this dissolved Matter shall be again supplied? Consider with thy self, o
Man, and bethink thy self what thou wast before thou had Being: Certainly
nothing at all; for if any thing, thou should remember what thou had been.
Thou therefore that wast nothing before thou were, shall again be made nothing
when thou shall cease to be. And why can thou not again from Nothing have
Being, by the will of the same Workman, whose will was, That at the first thou
should have existence from nothing? What new thing shall betide thee? Thou
which wast not, were made; when thou again art not, thou shall be made. Give
me (if thou can) a reason, how thou were created at first; and then thou
may resolve me how thou shall be re-created again. Observe how the Light
this day failing, shines again tomorrow; and how the Darkness, by giving
place, succeeds again in it is vicissitude. The Woods are made leauelesse and
barren, and after grow green and flourish. The Seasons end, and then begin:
the Fruits are first consumed, and then repaired most assuredly: the Seeds
prosper not and bring forth before they are corrupted and dissolved. All things
by perishing are preserved: all things from destruction are regenerated. And
thou o Man, think thou that the Lord of the Death and the Resurrection will
suffer thee therefore to dye, that thou shall altogether perish? Rather know,
That wheresoever thou shall be resolved, or what matter soever shall destroy,
exhaust, abolish, or reduce thee to nothing, the same shall yield thee up
again and restore thee: For to that God, the same nothing belongs, who has
all things in his power and providence. The whole frame of heaven (says Saint
Ambrose in Psalm. 119) God made and established with one hand; but in the
creation of Man he used both. He made not the Heavens to his Similitude; but
Man. He made the Angels to his Ministry, but Man to his Image.

Saint Augustine, The Lives of Beasts, Men, and Angels.
super Joan. Sermon. 18. says, One is the life of Beasts, another of Men, a
third of Angels. The life of irrational Brutes desires nothing but what is
terrene: the life of Angels, only things celestial: the life of Man has
appetites intermediate betwixt Beasts and Angels. If he lives according to the
flesh, he leads the life of Beasts: if according to the Spirit, he
associateth himself with Angels.

Hugo in Didasc. lib. 1. speaking of the birth of Man, says, That all
Creatures whatsoever (Man excepted) are bred and born with natural defenses
against injuries and discommodities; Of the Birth of Man.
as the Tree is preserved by the Bark, the Bird is covered with her Feathers,
the Fish defended with his Skales, the Sheep clad with his Wool; the Herds
and Cattle, with their Hides and Hair; the Tortoise defended with his Shell,
and the skin of the Elephant makes him fearelesse of the Dart. Neither is it
without cause, that when all other Creatures have their muniments and defenses
borne with them, Man only is brought into the World naked and altogether
unarmed. For behoofull it was, that Nature should take care of them who were
not able to provide for themselves. But Man borne with Understanding, had by
his native defects the greater occasion offered to seek out for himself; that
those things which Nature had given to other Animals freely, he might acquire
by his Industry: Man's reason appearing more eminent in finding out things of
himself, than if they had freely bin bestowed upon him by another. From which
arises that Adage, Ingeniosa fames omnes excuderit Arts.


To the like purpose you may thus read in Chrysostom upon Matthew; God has
created every sensible Creature armed and defended; some with the swiftness
of the feet, some with claws, some with feathers, some with horns, some with
shells, etc. but he has so disposed of Man, by making him weak, that he
should acknowledge God to be his only Strength; that being compelled by the
necessity of his infirmity, he might still seek unto his Creator for supply
and succor.

The Ethnicks concerning Man.
To come to the Ethnycks: Solon being asked, What Man was? made answer;
Corruption in his birth, a Beast in his life, and Worms meat at his death. And
Silenus being surprised by Mydas, Silenus.
and demanded of him, What was the best thing which could happen to Man? after
a long pause, and being urged by the King for an answer, burst out into these
words; The best thing, in my opinion, that Man could wish for, is not to be
borne at all: And the next thing unto that is, Being borne, to be soon
dissolved. For which answer he was instantly released and set at liberty.

Phavorinus.
Phavorinus was wont to say, That Men were partly ridiculous, partly odious,
partly miserable. The Ridiculous were such, as by their boldness and audacitie
aspired to great things beyond their strength. The Odious were such as attained
unto them: the Miserable were they who failed in the atchieuing of them, Stoeb.
Sermon. 4.

Alphonsus.
King Alphonsus hearing diverse learned men disputing of the misery of Man's
life, compared it to a mere Comedy, whose last Act concluded with death. And
(says he) no such is held to be a good Poet, who does not wittily and worthily
support his Scoenes with applause even to the last catastrophe.

Aristotle the Philosopher being demanded, Aristotle.
What Man was? made answer, The example of Weakness, the spoil of Time, the
sport of Fortune, the image of Inconstancy, the balance or scale of Envy and
Instabilitie Stobae. Sermon. 96. Man (says an other) has not power over
miseries, but miseries over him; and to the greatest man the greatest
mischiefs are incident. Cicero says, That to every man belong two powers, a
Desire, and an Opinion; the first bred in the body, acciting to pleasure; the
second bred in the Soul, inuiting to goodness. And that man (says Plato) who
passes the first part of his life without something done therein commemorable
and praiseworthy, ought to have the remainder of his life taken from him, as
one unworthy to live.

From the Philosophers, we come next to the Poets. We read Homer in his Iliads
to this purpose interpreted: Hom. of Man, with other Poets.
Quale foliorum genus, tale and hominum, etc.
As of Leaves is the Creation,
Such of Man's the Generation:
Some are shak'd off by the wind,
Which strewn upon the earth we find;
And when the Spring appears in view,
Their places are supplied with new.
The like of Mankind we may say;
Their time fulfilled, they drop away.
Then they the Earth no sooner strew,
But others in their places grow.


Claudian writes thus: -- Etenim mortalibus ex quo
Terra caepta coli nunquam sincera bonorum, etc.
To mortal men, by whom the earth began
First to be cultured, there is none that can
Say, he is sincerely happy; or that Lot
Has designed him a temper without spot.
Him to whom Nature gives an honest face,
The badnesse of his manners often disgrace.
Him whom endowments of the Mind adorn,
Defects found in the body make a scorn.
Such as by War their noble fames increase,
Have proved a very pestilence in Peace.
Others, whom peaceful bounds could not contain,
We often have known, great fame by Arms to gain.
He that can public business well discharge,
Suffers his private house to rome at large.
And such as fault can with another find,
To view their own defects seem dull and blind.
He that created all, (and He alone)
Distributes all things, but not all to one.


Iacobus Augustus Thuanus, in his Title Homo Cinis, you may read thus: Disce
Homo de tenui Constructus pulvere, qua te
Edidit in lucem condition Deus, etc.
Learn, o thou Man, from smallest dust translated,
On what condition God has thee created:
Though thou this day in Gold and Purple shine,
And scorning others, think thy self Divine;
Tomorrow of thy pomp art dis-array'd,
And in the Grave (aside) for worms meat laid.
Why does thy tumerous heart swell thus in vain?
Things both beyond thee, and denied, t'attaine?
Why in Mansolean Structures aim to sleep?
Thinking thereby thy rottenness to keep
From the (less putrid) earth? O foolish man!
Be not deceived; for know, Before thou can
Aspire a glorious place above to have,
Thou must (as all) lie rotten in thy Grave.


Adages.
Adages concerning man; and their good or bad affections one toward another,
are these: Homo Homini Deus:
Homo Homini Lupus.
One Man, to Man a god we see:
Another a mere Wolf to be.


Amongst many other ingenious and accurate Emblems written by Anton. F.
Castrodunensis, I have only selected one to this purpose: Ornamenta gerens,
Cornix aliena superbit, etc.
Emblem.
The Crow trickt up in borrowed plumes, grows proud,
And thinks her self, with what is her own endowed.
But when each Bird does for her feather call,
Dis-rob'd, she grows a public scorn to all.
Man, whilst he lives, to be that Crow is known,
Who nothing that he wears can call his own:
Death summoning, and you stripped naked, then
Alas, what have you to be proud of, Men?


The Hierogliphycke of Man is the Palm tree; Hierogliphick
and that for a twofold reason: first, Because it brings forth no fruit,
unless the male be planted near and in sight of the female. By which it is
imagined they have a kind of Coitus or copulation; the boughs being full of
masculine gemmes, like seed. And next, because in the upper part thereof there
is a kind of brain, which the Hebrews call Halulab, and the Arabs, Chedar,
or Gemmar; which being bruised or tainted, the tree instantly withers, (as
man dies presently when his brain is perished) which is only to be found in
this Plant. Besides, in the top or head thereof there is that which resembles
hair. The branches grow after the manner of the arms and hands, extended and
stretched forth; and the fruit thereof is like fingers, and therefore are
called Dactili, or Digiti, Erudit. quid. lib. 2. Hierogl. Collect.

Concerning Hell and the torments thereof, Of Hell.
we read the Fathers thus. Gregory, Moral. lib. 9. says, In horrible manner
it happens to those wretched Souls, who have Death without death, End without
end, Defect without defect: because Death ever lives, the End always
begins, and Defect knows not how to be deficient: Death slays, but
kills not, sorrow excruciateth, but eases not; the flame burns, but
consumes not. And the same Father, Lib. 4. Dialog. The Soul confined thither
has lost the happiness to be well, but not to Be: for which reason it is
compelled to suffer death without death, defect without defect, end without
end; because unto it, Death is made immortal, Defect indeficient, and End
infinite. And Saint Augustine, lib. de Agenda cura pro Mortuis; speaking of the
Rich man tormented in Hell, says, That his care of the Living, whose actions
he knew not, was like ours of the Dead, or whose estate we are ignorant.
Isiod. lib. 1. de Summo Bono, says, That the fire of Hell gives light unto the
Damned, so far as they may see whereat to grieve, but not to behold from what
they may draw comfort. And the same Author in his Meditation, Gehennalis,
supplicij; Consider all the pains and afflictions of this World, all the
grief of torments, the bitterness of sorrows, and grieuousnesse of
afflictions, and compare them with the least torment of Hell, and it is easy
which thou suffer: for the punishment of the Damned is in that place
doubled; for sorrow burns the heart, and the flame the body. And Hugo, lib.
4. de Anima; The infernal Lake is without measure, it is deep without
bottom, full of incomparable heat, full of intolerable stench, full of
innumerable sorrows: there is misery, there is darkness, there is no order,
but all confusion; there is horror eternal, no hope of any good, nor
termination of evil.

Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 48. de Ira, uses this similitude: I would not have
thee to think, (says he) that as it is in this life, so it is in the other;
That to have partners and companions in grief can be any comfort or abatement
to thy sorrow, but rather of the contrary. For tell me, If a father condemned
to the fire, shall behold his son in the same torment, will not the very sight
thereof be as another death unto him? For if those who be in perfect health,
at the sight of others torments faint, and are ready to depart with life; how
much more shall they be afflicted and excruciated, when they are
fellow sufferers of the same tortures? Mankind is prone to compassion, and we
are easily moved to commiserate other men's grieuances: Therefore how can the
Father take comfort to behold his son in the same condemnation; the husband
the wife, or the brother the brother? etc. rather it does add unto their
miseries, and make their grief the greater,.

Saint Origin, in Matthew. cap. 16. uses this comparison; As every gate of a
city has it is proper denomination; so may we say of every port or door that
opens into Hell: one may be called Scortatio, or Whoring, by which
Whore-monghrs enter: another, Swearing, by which Blasphemers have access. And
so of Envy, Gluttony, and the rest; every one bearing name according to the
nature of the offense.

The Ethnicks concerning Hell.
Bion was wont to say, That the passage unto Hell was easy, because men might
find the way thither blinde-fold, or with shut eyes. For so it fares with all
dead men: from whence we read that in Virgil: -- facilis discensus Averni,
Noctes atque dies patet atri janua ditis.


The same Bion was wont to jest at the punishment of the daughters of Danaus in
Hell, who are forced to carry water in bottomless pales to fill a leaking
Vessel; saying, The torment had been greater if their pales had been whole
and sound, for so their burdens had been the heavier. Laertius, lib. 4. cap. 7.

And Demonax being demanded of one, What he thought the estate and condition of
the Souls departed was, in the other World? made answer, That he could not as
then resolve him, but if he had the patience to stay till he had been there,
he would write him news thereof in a letter. Intimating thereby, That he
believed there was no Hell at all. Erasmus, Lib. Apotheg. Sophocles, in Oedip.
calls Hell a black Darkness. And Euripides, in Aristid. An obscure House or
Palace, shadowed from the bright beams of the Sun. Theogius gives it the
name of the Black Gates. And Eustathius, in 1. Isliad, says it is a dark
place under the earth. Saint Basil, sup. Psalm. 33. calls it a dark Fire that
has lost it is brightness, but keeps it is burning. And Saint Gregory, Moral.
lib. 9. cap. 46. It burns, but gives no light at all.

The ancient Poets, in regard of the tenebrositie thereof, compare Hell to a
territory in Italy betwixt Baiae and Cumae, where a people called Cimerij
inhabit; which is so environed with hills and mountains, that the Sun is
never seen at any time of the year to shine amongst them. From whence grew
the Adage, darker than the darkness of Cimeria.

Hell is called in the Scriptures by the name of Abyssus, The Local place of
Hell.
which implies a deep and vast gulf or a bottomless pit, from which there
is an ascent up unto the earth, but no descent lower. Nicolaus de Lyra, upon
Esaias, holds it to be in the center of the earth.

Rabbi Abraham, The Rabbius of Hell.
in cap. 2. Iona, says, Sheol (a Grave) is a deep place, and directly opposed
to Heaven, which is above. Rabbi Levi, in cap. 26. Joan. affirms, That Sheol
is absolutely below, and in the Center. Moses says, Fire is kindled in my
wrath, (speaking of God) and shall burn to the bottom of Hell. The Psalmist
calls it the Pit of Perdition, Psalm. 55. And Psalm. 140.10. Let him cast them
into the fire, and into the deep pits, that they rise not again. Saint John,
Prove. 9.
Revel. 20. calls it a burning Lake. And Solomon speaking of the depth of
this place, says, that The Guests of an Harlot are in the depth of Hell. Prove.
15.24.
And elsewhere, The way of Life is on high, to avoid Hell beneath.

Hell is likewise called Tophet, which was a Valley near unto Jerusalem,
joining to the Fullers Poole, and the field Acheldema, situate on the South
side of Sion. It is called likewise Gehinnon, of the Valley of Hinnon, because
the place was the habitation of one Hinnon; and for that it was once in his
possession, therefore even to the days of our Savior it bare his name. Such is
the opinion of Aretius: and in this Valley did the Jews (following the
abomination of the children of Ammon) sacrifice their children in the fire to
the Idol Moloch.

Montanus, upon Esaias, is of opinion, That under the name of Moloch was
signified Mercury. Others, (as Scultetus writes) that it was Saturn, whom the
Poets feign to have eaten and devoured his own children. It was a brazen
Image, hollow within, and figured with his hands spread abroad, ready to
receive all such infants as through their cursed Idolatry were tortured in the
fire, and sacrificed unto him. Snepfsius describes this Idol to be made of
Copper, and stretching forth his arms and hands in manner aforesaid.

The Figure of a Moloch.
The Jews write of this Idol Moloch, That he was of a large and mighty
stature, fashioned like those used amongst the Serronides the ancient
Inhabitants of Gaul, (now France.) He had within his bulk or belly seven
several rooms or chambers; the first was to receive all such meat as was
offered unto him; the second, Turtle Doves; the third, a Sheep; the fourth, a
Ram; the fist, a Calfe; the sixth, an Ox; the seventh, a Child. This Idol
(as the Talmudists write) had a face of a Calfe, in the imitation of the
Idolatry which their forefathers had seen used in Egypt. His Priests ( Reg.
2.23.) were called Chemarimes, because they were smoked with the Incense
offered unto that Idol. This Tophet or Valley of Hinnon, amongst many other
abominations, was put down by the good King Josiah, and in mere detestation
thereof, dead Carrion and the filth and garbage of the City cast therein. The
Jews likewise report, That in this Valley of Tophet there was a deep ditch or
cave called Os Inferni, the Mouth of Hell, which could never be filled; into
which the Chaldaeans, having overcome the Israelites in battle, cast their
dead carcasses, which were neuermore seen. And to trace my Author a little
further: Some think this word Tophet to have deriuation, a Tophis lapidibus,
from the Topaz stone, which like to the Punicke nourishes fire. But this he
holds not to be altogether authentic; but rather of the Hebrew word Toph,
which signifies a Tabret or loud Instrument: because when they sacrificed their
children, they struck upon their Tabrets, that their noise might drown the
shriekes and clamors of their Infants, when they past through the fire: For so
says Piscator upon Esaias.

The Argument of Sir Thomas Moore upon this Dialogue.
To the Dialogue of Lucianus before recited, (entitled Nyceomantia, or an Answer
from the Dead) the most learned and never to be forgotten Sr Thomas Moore has
left this Argument:

Lucian (says he) would leave that chiefly to be remembered unto us, which
toward the conclusion of the Fable is whispered in the ear of Menippus by the
Prophet Tyresias: namely, That a private and retired life is the most contented
and secure of all other. Which the Grecians seem likewise to allude unto into
their old Adage, (...). For Riches, Glory, Power, Potency, with things of like
nature and condition, which the World seems most to acquire, are most frail
and uncertain. But chiefly the lives and fortunes of Rich men, as they are the
most subject and obnoxious to casualtie and disaster; so they have the greatest
correspondence with solemn Pomps and tragic Fables; which in many of their
miserable ends is frequent and apparent. Which the World gives us clearly to
understand, by that Decree made in Hell against auaritious and rich men: in
their bodies are not only designed to diverse pains and tortures, but even
their minds and souls transmigrated and shifted into Asses and brute beasts.
By which he insinuates unto us, That these covetous men be for the most part
barren of learning, sloathfull, and wanting judgment. It is inscribed, An
Answer commanded from the Ghosts or the Dead: by which is manifest, That he
observes the self same course in this Dialogue, which arises from that which
was before proposed to be learned from Tyresias. For always in these or the
like titles, some aim at the nobleness of the person, some at the dignity of
the Argument: after the manner of Plato, whom Lucian in this Dialogue seems
most to imitate. It consists of a long narration, in which he commemorateth
both the cause and the manner of his descent into the dark and lower Regions;
and the withal the occasion why so peremptory and strict an Edict was
denounced against the Rich men of the world. The maine and most illustrious
things in this Fable contained, are, The frivolous and uncertain doctrines and
documents of the Philosophers; the superstition and power presupposed to be in
Magitions and Magic: The several rooms and corners of Hell, with the
torments and punishments inflicted upon the miserable and wretched Ghosts; with
the equality of the persons there. And lastly, a cgmparison of Humane life,
with the affinity it has to vain Pomp, and the Fables devised by the
Tragic Poets. The occasion and beginning being derived from the habit and
known absence of Menippus, etc.

And now being so far entered into Lucian (though not pertinent to the Argument
in hand) I will commend another of his Dialogues unto your reading. Incited
thereunto by reason of the elegancie thereof: and the rather, because the
Scoene lies in Hell.

The Argument.
Three mighty Men amongst themselves contend,
To which of them preeedence shall be given.
The strife, sad Minos undertakes to end:
So the great odds betwixt them is made even.
The Speakers be Alexander, Minos, Hanibal and Scipio.

The Dialogue.
Alex. THou Lybian, I before thee am in fame,
And therefore justly a precedence claim.

Hanib. To which I Will never yield.

Alex. Minos the Wise
And most just Judge, this Quarrel comprimise.

Minos. What are you, speak?

Alex. This, Hanibal: I, son
To mighty Philip King of Macedon,
Called Alexander.

Minos. Glorious, by my life,
Both of you are; now tell me what is your strife?

Alex. It Is for prioritie: for he auerres
Himself the better Captain; but he erres.
For I, (as all report) not him alone
In prowess have exceeded; but Times gone,
And scarce remembered, cannot speak that name
Able to equal my unlimited fame.

Minos. Speak interchangeably your best and worst,
And freely too; but thou, o Lybian, first.

Hanib. Yet one thing I am proud of, To have got
The Greek tongue here, and my Antagonist not
In that before me. Next, I am of mind,
The worthier place should be to him assigned
Who bee'ng at first but low, and meanly stated,
Has even from thence great glories propagated;
Making himself most potent, in state hye,
And capable of Principality.
I with an hand-full Spain did first invade,
A bare sub-Consull, to assist and aid
My Brothers, in those Puny days: yet fired
TO attain the height to which I since aspired.
Ere long I took the Celtiberians, and
Subdued the Gauls with this all-conquering hand.
Huge mountains (and impassable before)
I cut, and those I led my Armies over.
The Flood Eridanus, swift above measure,
I did command, and crossed it at my pleasure:
Upon which, many Cities I ore'threw,
And did in time all Italy subdue;
Through which I made my Summers Progress still,
And visited Romes suburbs at my will.
Nay more, in one pitched battle I fought there, The Battle of Cannas.

So many warlike Romans slaughtered were,
(And these too of the valiantest and most stout)
Their very rings in bushels were mete out:
Made of their bodies bridges to pass floods,
And lakes on land grew from their reaking bloods.
All these did I, yet never had the pride
To be called Ammons son, or deify'de;
I feigned my self no god, nor had the impiety
To make my mother strumpet, though to'a Dietie.
I still professed my self a man, and fought
Against Princes of ripe judgment, such as thought
Themselves no more than mortal; Soldiers too
Both bold and valiant. I had not to do
With Medes and cold Armenians, a base Crew,
Such as still fled before he could pursue;
And if a man but set a face, and dare,
Poor wretches they his easy conquest are.
This Alexander was a Prince borne hye,
And his dead fathers kingdom did supply;
Fortune his large demaines increasing still,
With force impetuous, almost against his will.
Who when the Wretch Darius was o'rethrowne
At Issa and Arbela, as his own
He'appropriated all; was not content
To keep within his fathers competent
And moderat bounds, but must be needs adored.
The Medes lost looseness he again restored,
Nay more, professed it: in his lavish boules,
Of his best subjects rending out the Souls
From their torn bodies, (paying Natures debt)
He after such as slew them did abet.
I was my Countries Father, and when aid
They claimed of me, I instantly obeyed;
Encountering an huge Navy, all prepared
To invade Carthage: having all this dat'd
Most willingly, the word they had but sed,
And I my self soon gave both lost and dead.
This did I a Barbarian, and thought rude,
Inexpert of your Greekish plenitude.
I never read his Homer, nor was suitor
The Sophist Aristotle should become Tutor
To Hannibal: such helps I counted vain;
What came from me was mine own breast and brain.
And these are they by which I still prefer
My self before the Greek King Alexander.
But if you think this young man ought take place
Before me, cause a Diadem does grace
His temples? This I Am sure, It might show well
In Macedonia, but not here in Hell:
Nor therefore now should be before me chus'd,
Who have my self and mine own fortunes used.

Minos. He neither has like one ingenerous said,
Nor has a Lybian barbarism betrayed:
His smoother style, his eloquence, flies hye.
Now Macedonian, what can thou reply?

Alex. Silence, o Minos, would become me best,
Rather than I at this time should contest
Against one so impudent and rash: my grief
Is, That this Hanibal, so great a Thief,
Against so great a Conqueror should hold
This difference. But grow he never so bold,
(O thou most just of Judges) note me well,
And thou shall know how much I antecell.
Who being but a young man, took on me
The manage of a mighty sovereignty;
As my first justice, 'reaving those of breath,
Who had been actors in my fathers death.
Having subverted Thebes, I then became
To whole Greece such a terror, and my name
Amongst them so famous, that the Princes all
Chose me with unite voice their General.
Nor did I hold it fit to be confined
Within one kingdoms bounds, my'vnlimited mind
Aspired unto more amplitude; the rather,
Because in all things to exceed my father.
A World was my ambition, not content
Till I had made my known name eminent
In every part. Asia by force I entered,
And by the river Granicus aduent'red
A mighty battle, vanquished and pursued,
In that one fight whole Lydia I subdued.
Ionia and Phrygia then I took:
And passing thence (by Jove) I could not look
On any durst oppose me; conquering ever,
Where e're my Army moved, even to the river
Of Issa, where the King Darius then
Attended me with infinites of men.
What there I did, thou Minos can tell best,
How many in one day I lent to rest:
Charon well knows, his Barge that time unable,
And Styx scarce for such numbers nauigable;
Forced was he then, strange Ferry boats to hire,
And all too little. This out of the fire
Of mine own spirit I did; my dauntlesse breath
Still daring wounds, and boldly out during death.
I pass great acts by me in person done,
What I at Tyrus and Arebela won.
India (till then unknown) I did invade,
And of my Empire, the vast Ocean made
Th'vnbounded limits. The Elephants most rude
I tamed; King Porus having first subdued.
The Scythians, (soldiers not to be despised)
A Mars-starr'd people, no way ill advised,
Having past Tanais, I did soon subdue,
And with my troops of horsemen overthrew.
And as my rage unto my foes extends,
So still my love and bounty graced my friends.
That me a Man, those gave what was divine,
And called a god, none justly can repine:
For by the greatness of my deeds amazed,
(In others never known) their wonders raised
Me to that glory; yet no help it can,
For I a god and King, died like a man.
This Hannibal was left a Wretch, confined
To Lybia and Bithynia; of a mind
Barbarous, and merely inhumane, puffed with pride,
Who as he basely lived, he poorly died.
How Italy he conquered I omit,
By malice, falsehood, guile, not Virtue, it
Was brought so low; he bee'ng perfideous still,
And before others Worths vaunting his Will.
Now where he with effoeminacie brands
My looser life; none here but understands
How he in Capua lived; where this chaste man,
So temperat and abstemious, nothing than
But whor'd and surfetted, wantonning and playing,
The very soul of Discipline betraying.
Yet if what I in the West parts had atcheev'd,
Things above wonder, scarce to be believed,
Had not too little thought, I had not bent
My purpose to the Eastern Continent:
Who without bloodshed, and with small adoo,
Could have took in Romania, Lybia too;
Even to the Isle of Gades, unconquered yet,
Where mighty Hercules, Non vltra writ.
I held them scarce worthy my pains, since they
To my great name already seemed to obey.
Of many infinites let these suffice;
I now have said: judge ( Minos) thou art wise.

Scipio. Not before me (o Minos) thou do hear.

Min. Resolve me what thou art? how born? and where?
That with these mighty Captains dare compare?

Scip. I, Roman Scipio, who left Carthage bare
Of riches and of soldiers: I subdu'de
Of Africans th'vnnumber'd multitude,
In many and great battles.

Minos. And what now
Have thou to say?

Scip. To the Macedon I bow,
As my superior; but my self prefer
Before this Hannibal; judge if I err.
Nor from him do I challenge more than right,
As having once put him to shameful flight.
How comes he then so impudent and bold
As to contend against him with whom I hold
No competition? Yet of all it is known,
This Hannibal by me was overthrown.

Minos. By Jove, the Roman Scipio has spoke well;
And thus I judge: You Alexander excel
And have prioritie. The second place,
Scipio, belongs to thee. Nor is 't disgrace
Or least affront, o Hannibal, to thee,
That thou art numbered one amongst the three.

But from the Poets, it behooues me to look back unto the Theologists; for
with the torments in Hell there is no jesting. Bullinger in Esaias, with other
approved Divines, hold the fire of hell to be true and substantial fire. God
punished with fire in this world, Greenwood upon Tophet.
Sodom and Gomorrha, and the Murmurers, Numb. ca. 11. and the name of the place
was called Thabberah, because the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them. And
Christ shall come to judgment with fire, Esaias 66. Which shall have two
properties; to burn, which shall punish the Wicked; to shine, which shall
comfort the Saints: for so says Theoderet, Psalm. 96. And what shall hinder a
fire to be in Hell, when all the extremities of torment shall be put upon the
Damned?

Saint Augustine affirms this fire to be corporeal. Quest.
Now here a question may arise, being corporeal, whether it tormenteth the
body only, or body and soul together? and, How a corporeal fire can work
upon a spiritual Substance. Saint Bernard, De Interior. Domo, cap. 38. says,
Ignis exterius carnem comburit, vermis interius Conscientiam corrodit. i. The
fire without burns the body; the worm within tormenteth the Conscience. And
Isiod. de Sum. Bon. lib. 1. Duplex est poena Damnatorum; quorum mentem, vrit
tristitia, and corpus flamma. i. Double is the punishment of the Reprobate,
whose Mind sorrow burns, whose Body, the flame. In which they seem to
prove. That the fire fastneth on the body; but make question, Whether it have
power over the Soul. But Zanchy, De Operib. Dei, Part. 1. lib. 4. cap. 19. is
of opinion, That the Devils, with men's bodies and souls, are tormented with
fire everlasting. For as they were (like Simeon and Levi) brethren in the same
evil; so both of them shall be tormented in the same fire. Iustine Martyr,
Apolog. 1. pro Christian. affirms, That the Devil shall suffer punishment
and vengeance, enclosed in everlasting fire. The truth of which is ratified by
our Savior himself, in these words; Mat. 25.41.
Depart from me ye Cursed, into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and
his Angels. And is also apparent by the speech of Dives: for it is no parable,
but an history; as Saint Chrisost. says, Parabola sunt vbi exemplum ponitur
tacenter nomina. i. Those are Parables, Lukes. 16.24.
where the examples are propounded, but the names are concealed; but here the
name is expressed.

On such Atheists as will not believe this, may be conferred the words of
Ruffinus; Si quis neg at Diabolum aeternis ignibus mancipandum, partem cum ipso
oeterni ignis accipiet, and sentiat quod negavit. i. He who denies the Devil
to be doomed to everlasting fire, shall have part with him in those eternal
flames, and so be sensible of that which he would not believe. But after what
manner this corporeal fire shall torment the Devils and the damned Ghosts,
Hugo.
it is not for us to define. And, Melius est dubitare de occultis, quam
litigari de incertis, compescat igitur se humana temeritas, and id quod non est
non quaerat, ne illud bonum quod non est inveniat. i. Better it is to doubt of
things hid, than to contend of what is uncertain. And let no man rashly meddle
about things that are not revealed, lest he finds not the profit of those
things that are revealed.

It being probable, In five properties, the Fire of Hell differs from our
Fire Elementary.
That that fire is substantial and corporeal, vexing and tormenting the souls
of the Damned, let us see how it differs from this of ours which is
elementarie. First, They are said to differ in respect of heat; for this here,
compared with that there, is but as fire painted. For the Prophet Esaias speaking
of that terrible fire, saint, Who is able to dwell in this devouring fire? or
Who shall be able to dwell in these everlasting burnings? Secondly, In regard
of the light; for ours is luminous, cheerful, and comfortable; but the fire of
Hell gives no luster at all. For as Gregory, Mor. cap. 46. says, Cremationem
habet, lumen vero non habet. i. It burns, but lights not. Thirdly, our
elementall fire consumes the body only, but that of Hell burns both body
and soul. Fourthly, Our elementary fire confirmieth only that which is cast
into it; but that of Hell does always burn, but neither wastes it self, nor
that which it burns. Fifthly, The one may be quenched, the other can never be
extinguished and put out: The Chafe (says the Text) shall be burned with
unquenchable fire. Mat. 3.
Esaias 66. Their worm shall never die, their fire shall never be put out. It is
internal, external, and eternal; and as there is nothing that maintains
it, so there is nothing that can extinguish it. We read, Revel. 8. Vae, Vae,
Vae; three Woes: Vae pro amaritudine, Vae pro multitudine, Vae pro aeternitate,
p^earum: Woe for the bitterness, Woe for the multitude, Woe for the eternity of
the pains and torments. Concerning which, we may read Aquin. Minima poena
inferni, major est maxima poena hujus mundi. i. The least torment in hell is
greater than the greatest punishment that can be inflicted in this world.

Indicis in lite, brevis est vox, Ite, Venite:
Dicetur Reprobis, Ite; Venite Probis.
Aspera vox Ite, vox est benedicta Venite;
Quod sibi quisque s^rit praesentis tempore vitae.
Hoc sibi messio crit, cum dicitur Ite, Venite.
Three reasons, to prove the perpetuite of the Torments of the damned.
There were some comfort to the damned Souls, if their torment might have end;
but that shall never be, and no torment greater than that of perpetuity. The
reason of this perpetuity is threefold: the first drawn from the state and
condition of the Majesty offended. The second, from the state and condition of
the Reprobates; for as long as they remain sinful, so long shall they
remain tormented for sin. But in Hell they ever remain sinful; and sin
is like oil, and the wrath of God like fire; as long as the oil lasts, the
fire burns; and so long as sinful, so long tormented, and therefore damned
for ever. For most sure it is, That in Hell there is neither grace nor
devotion. The Wicked shall be cast in exteriores tenebras, extra limitem
Divinae misericordiae; i. Into utter darkness, without the limits of Gods
mercy. For though their weeping in Hell may seem penitential; yet they do
but Lugere poenas, non peccata; lament their punishment, but not their sin.
The third reason is drawn from Gods justice; for when life was offered them,
they refused it: and therefore justly, when in Hell they beg it, they go
without it.

I shut up the premises in the succeeding Emblem.

The Emblem.
IT is reported by the Poets and some ancient Historiographers, That in Dodonia
(a Forest in Greece, Dodonia quercus.
famous for the Oaks there growing, and therefore dedicate to Jupiter) there is
a Fountain or Well, into which whosoever puts a Torch lighted or flaming, it is
presently extinguished: but take one vnlighted, which never came near the
fire, and it is instantly kindled. The Motto which the Author of this Emblem
groundeth hereon, is, Sie rerum inver^^tur ordo. Having some consimilitude with
that of Gregory, 14 Moral. Hostis noster, quanto magis nos sibi rebellare
conspicit, quanto amplius expugnare contendit: Eos autem pulsare negligit, quos
quieto iure se possidere sentit. i. Our spiritual Enemy the Devil, the more
he perceives we rebel against him, the greater his opposition is against us:
but spares to trouble or molest such as he knows to be already in his quiet
possession. The Deu^lls, two maine Engin^.
The two maine Engines by which the Devil seeks to undermine Mankind, are
Desperation and Presumption. Concerning the first S. Bernard says, Comfort
against Desperation.
Let no man despair of grace, though he begin to repent in his later age; for
God judges of a man's end, not of his past life: for there is nothing so
desperate which Time cannot cure, nor any offense so great which Mercy cannot
pardon.

Livy tells us, That of all the perturbations of the mind, Despair is the
most pernicious. And Lactantius informs us, That if he be a wicked and wilful
homicide that kills any man wittingly; needs must he be the same or worse,
who lays violent hands upon himself dispairingly. For what is Despair, but
the fear of punishment, and distrust in Gods mercy; by reason of which, man
making himself his own judge, becomes his own Executioner. For as Stobaeus
says, The dread and terror of inevitable punishment is the sole cause of
desperation. Against which irremittable sin, Seneca, in Medaea, thus counsels
us; Qui nihil potest sperare, nihil desperet: He that has nothing to hope for,
let him nothing fear. And Ovid, lib. 2. de Ponto; Confugit interdum Templi
violator ad Aram;
Nec petera offensi numinis, horret opem.
Sometimes Church-robbers to the Altars fly,
And to the injured gods for mercy cry.


Against the sin of Presumption.
Concerning Presumption, Saint Augustine says, Nulla praesumptio est
perniciostor, quam de propria justitia and scientia superbire; o superba
praesumptio, o praesumptuosa superbia. i. No presumption is more dangerous,
than to be proud of our own righteousness or knowledge: o proud presumption!
o most presumptuous pride. Philo tells us, That one prime occasion why leven
was forbidden the Jews at the solemn Feast of Easter, was to teach them to
have a great care to keep themselves from pride and presumption, into which
they were apt to fall, who held any extraordinary conceit or opinion of
themselves; their hearts being suddenly swelled therewith, as the dough is puffed
up with the leven.

Claud. de 4 Honor. Cons. says, Inquinat Egregios adiuncta superbia mores:
i. Where Pride sets in it is foot, Presumption bred from Pride.
it corrupts the best manners. It is said to devour gold, and to drink blood,
and to climb so high by other men's heads, til at length it fall and break
it is own neck. Plutarch calls it a vapor, which striving to ascend high,
presently turns into smoke and vanishes. Therefore commendable was that
modesty in the son of King Agesilaus; who hearing that Philip the father of
Alexander the Great, much gloried in a victory not long before gained; sent
him word, That if he pleased to measure his shadow, he should find it no
greater after his Conquest, than it was before.

I conclude with Seneca, in Hercul, fuerent: Sequitnr superbos victor a tergo
Deus. And now come to the Author upon the former Emblem, most pertinent to this
purpose: Fax limphis Dodona tuis immersa, necatur
Quae micat igne: nitet, quae sine luce fuit.
Fons sacer iste deo, (sic pristina credidit aetas)
At Deus hic stigij rex Acheontis erat.
Patrat idem, cum font suo, regnator Averni
Ordinis inversi, gaudet and ille dolis;
Nempe pios rigidae percellit Acumine legis
Blanditurque malis, sanguine Christ tuo.


Thus paraphrased: A Taper without fire in Dodon drencht,
Is kindled: But if lighted, as soon quenched.
Which Well, the men of Old in their blind piety
Made sacred to a god, but no true Diety.
The Devil keeps this Fountain, nor does leave
By inverst order, Mankind to deceive:
Good men with the Laws rigor still pursuing;
Flattring the Bad with Mercy, to their ruin.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
THou Great God, now and ever blessed,
Thy Servants wretched and distressed,
Assist with thy Diuinest aid:
Lest We (like Those that did rebel,
And headlong were thrown down to Hell)
Be Reprobates and Outcasts made.
II.
O Thou, who Heaven and Earth do guide,
And above all sins hate Pride,
(Because soon after the Creation,
The first bright Angel led the way,
And then our two first Parents, They
Trod the same path, to our Damnation.)
III.
There is no Sin that can be named,
But with a strange self-love inflamed,
Originall'tis, and In-nate.
And since that time, it is (we find)
Dispersed into all Mankind,
To overthrow our blessed estate.
IV.
He that is with this Sin infected,
Has both Thy Love and Fear rejected.
Although Thou be the only Holy,
And that Thy Majesty and Might,
With Thy great Glory shining bright,
Are still to be adored solely.
V.
The Heart that is obstinate shall be Eccles. cap. 3. verse. 29.30.

With sorrows laden heavily.
He that is wicked in his ways,
What does he but heap sin on sin?
Which where it ends, does begin:
Whom nothing (being down) can raise.
VI.
To the persuasion of the Proud
No remedy there is allowed:
His steps shall fail, that steady seemed:
Sins Root in him is planted deep,
And there does strong possession keep;
He therefore shall not be esteemed.
VII.
We know the Sin from whence it grew;
We know the Torment thereto due,
And the sad place for it assigned.
And yet the more we seem to know,
The more we dull and stupid grow;
As if we senseless were, and blind.
VIII.
Open then our hearts, our eyes unmask,
And grant us what we humbly ask:
So much of Thy Diuinest Grace,
That we may neither err nor stray;
But finding out the perfect way,
We may evade both Pain and Place
IX.
Though Atheists seem to jest at Hell,
There is a Tophet, we know well:
(O Atheismes pestilent infection!)
There Is a Gehinnon, a sad Grave,
Prepared at first for such as have
No hope in the blessed resurrection.
X.
Three times our Savior wept, we read:
When he heard Lazarus was dead,
Bewailing Humane frailty then.
When to Jerusalem he rid,
And a poor Asses Colt bestrid;
At the gross folly blinding men.
XI.
He wept upon the Cross again,
Against Humane Malice to complain;
Seeing their insolence and pride,
When in such bitter gross despite
They crucified the Lord of Light,
Him who for Man's redemption died.
XII.
How necessary then are Tears,
To free us from all future fears
Of Death, of Torment, of Damnation?
Tears that can wash our Souls so white,
To bring us to Eternal light,
Instating us in our salvation.
XIII.
A contrite Spirit, a broken Heart,
Moist eyes, whence many dew drops start,
O grant us then, thou heavenly King:
So we with Hearts and Tongues united,
May with the Psalmist be accited,
And Praise and Glory to Thee sing.
XIV.
Ye Sons of Men, with one accord
All Strength and Glory give the Lord:
You that are Sons to men of Fame,
Give them the Lord, they are his due.
For know that it belongs to you,
To magnify his holy Name.
XV.
Within his glorious Temple He
Deserves Worship on the knee:
O kneel then at His sacred Shrine.
His Voice is on the Waters great,
His Glory thunders from his Seat;
His Power does on the Waters shine.
XVI.
His Voice is mighty, glorious too,
For all things the Lords Voice can do.
The strongest Cedars He does break;
When the Lords Voice from him is gone,
The Cedars even of Lebanon,
(Torn as they stand) his Power can speak.
XVII.
His Voice them of their leaves can strip,
He makes them like young Calves to skip.
Nor does the steadfast Mountain scorn,
Or Hermon, for his Dew so praised;
But when his voice aloft is raised,
To skip like a young Unicorn.
XVIII.
When the Lords Voice is lifted higher,
It does divide the flames of fire:
It makes the Wilderness to quake,
Even the great Wilderness of all,
The Desert which we Kadesh call,
It does compel to move and shake.
XIX.
His Voice does make the Hind to bear,
And all those Forests that clothed were,
Stand at his pleasure naked and bare.
And therefore in his Temple now
All meet, and to his Glory bow,
With Sacrifice of Praise and Prayer.
XX.
The Lord the raging Seas does sway,
The mighty Floods to Him obey;
And never shall his Kingdom cease.
The Lord shall give his People strength,
And will deliver them at length,
And bless them with his joyful Peace.
Non Delinquenti, sed peccata relinquenti, condonat Deus.
Ambros. THE PRINCIPAT
Ex muner g: glouer sculpt:



THE ARGUMENT of the seventh Tractat.
OF Gods great Works a serious view,
(For which all praise to him is due.)
The several Classes that are held
Amongst the Angels that rebel'd.
Of Lucifer the principal,
And his strange figure since his Fall.
Of Such as most in Power excel,
And of their Government in Hell:
Their Orders, Offices, and Names,
And what Prioritie each claims.
The List of Those that fell from Bliss.
The Knowledge that in Demons is,
And how far stretched. Next, of their Wrath
Toward Mankind, and what Bounds it has.
Discovery of those Ginnes and Snares
They lay t'entrap Men unawares.
Of Compacts common in these Ages;
And of the Astrologomages.
The second Argument.
IN Heaven, in Earth, in Hell, some sway:
Others again are taught to obey.
The Principats.
GOds wondrous Works that have before me been, Eccles. 42.15.

I will record, and speak what I have seen;
(Says Wisdom) No Work present, or decayed,
But by his powerful Word at first was made:
The Sun that shines, and does on all things look,
What is it else but an illustrious book,
In which the Almighties Glory may be read?
Has not the Lord, who has accomplished
All things in season, made each thing so rare,
That all his Saints his Glory shall declare?
These wondrous Works, surpassing humane sense,
TO express his Majesty and Excellence?
The Heart he searches, and the depth of man,
In his pre-Science, knowing all he can
Or think or act; the wonders of the Skies,
And each obscure thing's plain before his eyes:
Things past nor future can escape his breast,
All secret paths to Him are manifest.
Job 4.4.
No thought can Him escape, (of that be'assur'd)
Isay. 29.15.
Nor can the least word be from him obscured.
His Wisdoms exc'lent Works He does extend
From Everlasting, Never to have end.
He needs no Counselor, his Will to act;
To Him can none add, no man can detract.
O how delectable (Thou Lord of All)
Are thy stupendous Works in general!
By us to be considered, from things higher,
Even to the very common sparks of Fire.
They live, by Thee created firm and sure,
And they to everlasting shall endure:
And when he calls them to a reckoning, still
(As His) they are obseruant to his Will.
Doubled they are, one set against another,
And there is nothing his rare Works can smother;
The one, the others workmanship commends.
How far then, o thou Mighty God, extends
Thy wondrous Power? or Who (to Earth allied)
With thy great Glory can be satisfied?
Ecclesiast. Cap. 43.1.
Behold this high and sublime Ornament,
The beauty of the Heavens, the Firmament,
The Sun.
So glorious to the eye; in it, the Sun,
A marvelous Work, by the Creator done,
Which in it is daily progress through the Sky
Points unto us the hand of the Most-Hye.
He burns the Soil from his meridian seat,
And who is he that can abide his heat?
Three times more hot the mountain tops he makes,
Than he that with his great care undertakes
To keep a furnace in continual ^lame.
His fiery vapors He casts out, the same
In their own kind so luminous and bright,
As that they dazzle the beholders sight.
Great is the Lord that made the Sun indeed,
And by his Word commands it run with speed. Genes. 1.16.

The Moon He likewise made, in substance clear, The Moon.

According to the Season to appear;
That it should be a future declaration
Of Time, and the Worlds Sign to every Nation:
Feasts are by it appointed, the Months claim Exodus 12.2.

Proper denomination from her Name;
Waining or growing, be she bright or dull,
In her continual Change she is wonderful.
She Is a lamp placed above our heads, and thence
Sends down her shining beams in excellence.
The beauty of the Heavens, perceived from far,
Is every great or less refulgent Star: The Stars.

These, luster to the Firmament afford,
And shine in the high places of the Lord.
From whose command they no way dare rebel,
But all night long keep watch and sentinel.
Look on the Rainbow in it is mixed hew, Genesis 9, 13, 14.

Observe how beautiful it is in view, The Rainbow

What several colors, with what cunning laid,
And praise Him who so great a Work has made:
He into such a spacious arch extends it,
It is the hand of the Most-High that bends it. Esaias 40.12.

At his command the Snow makes haste from hye: The Snow.

The Lightnings of his judgments swiftly fly. The Lightning.

When He unlocks his Treasure, Clouds repair,
And like so many Fowls soar in the air;
His Power does give them strength. When he but speaks,
The mighty Hailstones into small he breaks. The Hail.

At his dread sight the mountains skip like Roes. The Mountains.

It Is at his pleasure that the South wind blows. The Wind.

His Thunders sound the trembling Earth does beat, The Thunders.

As does the stormy North the fields entreat.
The Whirle winds, like so many feathered Foul,
Scatter the Snow, the white flakes downward roll;
As if so many Grasshoppers together
Should light-on the earth, brought in by stormy weather.
The Eye admires the whiteness: The Rain.
and the Brain
Cannot conceive the beauty of the Rain.
The Frost.
The Frost like Salt upon the ground he powers,
Which hardened, sticks upon the Herbs and Flowers:
When the bleake North wind from his Quarter blows,
The Ice.
A congealed Ice upon the Water grows;
Upon the gathering of the waves it rests,
And with a crystal covering arms their breasts.
The Mountains it deuours, the Desa^ts burns,
And (like the Fire) what is green, to nothing turns.
Yet by a melting Cloud, and timely Rain,
These, seeming dead, are soon refresht again.
He by his Word the blustering Winds does still,
The Seas.
The Seas rough Surges, All obey his Will.
He in the unknown Deepes foundations lays,
And in the midst thereof does Islands raise.
They that the Ocean sail, (which has no bound)
Tell of the wonders that are therein found:
Which so miraculous to us appear
When they are told, we stand amas'd to hear.
The Whales:
For there be his rare Works of Beasts and Whales,
Begetting terror from their sins and scales.
Through Him all things are aimed as blessed ends,
And his established Word his Work commends.
When we have spoken most, yet all '^ but rain;
We never to their knowledge shall attain.
This is the sum of all, That He alone
Must be the sole All, and besides Him none.
Of his true Praise how can we give account,
Since He (we know) does all his Works surmount.
Psalm. 96.4.
The Lord our God is terrible and great;
Who shall his Power and marv'lous Acts repeat?
Praise, laud, and magnify him all we can,
Yet does He far exceed the thoughts of Man.
Exalt Him in our strength, and be not tired,
Yet shall not his ^east, fully be admired.
John. 1.15.
Who is it has seen Him, that his shape can tell?
Psalm. 106.2.
Or who can praise him as He does excel?
For greater things have yet escapt our view,
And of his rare Works we have seen but few.
The Lord has made all things in Earth and Heaven,
And unto such as fear Him Wisdome's given.
The Orders, Names, the Qualities, and Charge
The quality and condition of the malignant Spirits.
Of the blessed Angels, we have spoke at large.
It follows next, to touch the true condition
Of those malignant Spirits, whose proud Ambition
Cast themselves headlong both from the blessed Place
First made for them, and from the Almighties Grace.
Nor is it to be doubted, but that those
Who in their perverse malice durst oppose
Their glorious Maker, and against Him war;
But that they likewise still intentive ar',
And their perverseness totally inclined
To Gods contempt, and ruin of Mankind.
Now since those disobedient Sp'rites that fell
(With their grand Captain) down from heaven to hell,
Were out of all the Hierarchies extruded;
It therefore as a Maxim is concluded,
(Not to be questioned) That as the Angels blessed,
Who still inhabit their fair place of rest:
So likewise those by Lucifer mis-guided,
Are into several Ternions divided,
And have amongst them Orders and Degrees.
And though the benefit of Grace they leese,
Yet still that natural power and force retain, The Devils still retain
their first Natural Faculties.

At first bequeathed them: bee'ng reduced again
To Order, and their Offices still keep,
As once in Heaven, so in the infernal Deep.
To this, the Fathers with one voice agree.
For one writes thus; In the great Hierarchy
Of the blessed Spirits, some are employed to tell
Things futurely to come: others excel
In working Miracles; Dionys. Areopag. de Coelest. Hierar.
(for no portent
Is done on earth, but by some Angel sent.)
Some over others have predominance,
Employing them Gods honor to advance.
By executing Mysteries Divine,
Others in greater power and eminence shine;
Having vnnumber'd Armies in their sway,
Unto whose Hests the less degreed obey.
Some are so plenteously endu'd with grace,
That God himself in them has chus'd a place
In which to enhabit: and these have professed
His secret judgments to make manifest.
Others are with so sacred links entir'd
Unto their Maker, and withal inspired
With such re-pur'd zeal, there appears not much
Place intermediat betwixt Him and Such:
By what degrees they do precell the rest
In ardent love, so much more interest
They challenge with acuteness to behold
His Wisdom, Justice, and Grace manifold.
The degrees among Devils
Now as these several Functions are above
With Those that still persever in their Love:
So amongst the Disobedient is remaining
Like order still, their natural powers retaining.
For till the World be quite consumed and gone,
It is a Maxim to be built upon,
Angel over Angel, (which none alter can)
Devil over Devil, Man shall rule over Man.
Lucifer prince of Devils.
Of the Rebellious, Lucifer is prime
Captain and King; who in the first of Time,
From out the several Classes had selected
Legions of Angels, with like pride infected,
Against Jehovah; and with expedition
Hurld them with himself headlong to perdition.
And as in his Creation he was framed
Lucifer quasi lucem ferens.
More glorious far than others before named;
More goodly featured, beautiful, and bright,
And therefore had his name derived from Light:
So since his Fall, there is nothing we can style
So ougly foul, abominably vile;
The putred Fountain, and bitumenous Well,
From whence all Vice and malefactures swell.
Whose horrid shape, and qualities infest,
Are by the Poet Dantes thus expressed:
L' Imperador del Doloroso Regno,
Da mezo l petto vsciva Della Gliaccia.
Et pin eli ch'un Gigante, i^ ti conuegno
Che Giganti, nouo fan conte sue ^raccia
Vedi Hoggimai quant' esser Dee quel tutto
Ch' a Cosi fatta part si consaccia
Se fu si bell^ come e Hora brutto
E contra al suo fattore alzo le Ciglia
Ben de ^a lui procedor ogni lutto,
G quanto parve a me gran meraviglia
Quando vide tree faccie a l^suatesta
L' una dana^zia, and quella era vermiglia
De l'altre due ches' agginuge ano a questa,
Sour esso almeza Di Ciascuna spalla,
Es' agginuge ano al somno de la Cresta
La destra mi parea trabianca and gialla.
La sinistra al vedere, era tal quali
Vegnon di la onde' l nilo s' aunalla
Sotto Ciascuna vsciuan Due grand Ali
Quanto si Convenina a tanto ocello
Vele di Mar, non vidi May Cotuli
Non Havean penna Ma di vespertello,
Era lor modo and quelle ni su Alzana.
Si che tree venti si movean de ello
Quindi Cocito tutto s' Aggellava
Con sei sei occhi piangena, and con tree menti
Gocciava il pianto and sanguinosa Baua.
In which Description he first notes the place Lucif. Figure.

Where this great Prince of Darkness, shut from Grace,
Is now tormented, namely, 'a congealed Lake.
His mighty stature next, which he does make
Two thousand cubits. By his Crest is meant
His Envy, Arrogance, and proud of^ent,
Three Faces with three several colors stained,
Import in him three Vices still maintained:
One, fiery red, Wrath and Exorbitation
Denotes to us, with the Spleenes inflammation.
The pale and meagre, Avarice implies.
From the third, black and swarthy, does arise
Unprofitable Sloth. From the two eyes
Which to each face belongs, we may devise
All Appetites immod'rat. In the growth
Of these three Ills, Ire, Avarice, and Sloth,
Two Wings, two great accitements to those Sins
Propose to us: The first of them begins
In Turbulence and Fury; from hence grow
The winds of Cruelty that hourly blow.
Rapacitie and Gripplenesse are they
That to the Misers Avarice obey.
The horrid blasts that hence proceed, include
The most vnnat'urall sin, Ingratitude.
Sorrow with Negligence on Sloth attend:
The immoderat gusts of Hatred hence ascend.
Those winds of Wrath, Ingratitude, and Hate,
With fearful storms trouble and agitate
Cocitus streams, withal suppressing quite
Those good and godly motions which accite
Either to Faith, or unto Hope and Charity,
Lest any should in them claim singularity.
The greatness of his Wings improve the elation
Of his swelled heart and proud imagination.
That every face has a wide mouth and throat,
So much the Moral does to us denote,
That all whom such black sins contaminate,
His jaws and ravenous throat ingurgitate.
His Tears, which he did never yet employ,
But (as the Crocodile uses) to destroy,
Imports to us, that wretched Sinners state,
Whose slack Repentance ever comes too late.
And so far Dantes. I must now enquire,
To what sphere these Refractories retire:
Or in what place more servile they remain,
Who, as they Knowledge more or less retain,
Accordingly their faculties are squared.
One evil Angel takes into his guard
Priority among the Devils.
A Kingdom; he, a Province, and no more.
One lesser gifted, has predom'nance over
A City; and some other but a Tower:
Some over one particular man has power:
Some of one only Vice, and limited there.
Nor strive they in less eminence to'appeare,
Either subuerting Man, Forts to demolish,
Cities subvert, good Statutes to abolish,
TO encourage foreign or domesticke strife;
Than are the Angels, the blessed Sons of Life,
Each of them in their several Place and Calling,
Either industrious to keep men from Falling,
Preserving Cit'adels, instituting Laws
Wholesome and good; or bee'ng th'immediat cause
To secure Cities, Countries, and increase
(Home and abroad) happy and prosperous Peace.
A necessary observation.
Nor do the lower of bad Spirits obey
Those of superior office, because they
Or love them, or esteem them. The cause why
They yield themselves to such priority,
Is, for that the other have more power, and can
With greater subtlety insidiate Man:
For in their Fall they are stained with all impuritie,
From whose temptations there is no security:
Crafty they are, and prone to all iniquity,
No place debarred, bee'ng powerful in vbiquity.
With man they are at deadly opposition,
And into all his ways make inquisition;
First, tempt, and then accuse hourly prepare,
By day them to entrap, by night ensnare:
His senses they pervert, his thoughts estrange
From better unto worse, (a fearful change.)
They bring Diseases, Tempests, Troubles, Fears,
Not one of them but at his will appears.
By transformation, a blessed Spirit of Light
They challenge also as their proper right,
A Divine power. And though these Demons be
Amongst themselves at hostile enmitee;
Yet by conspiracy strive all they can,
How with unanimous force to destroy Man.
Yet this (worth observation) we may read A second observation.

In holy Scripture, That such as mis-leade
Our humane frailty, have not might a like
With the good Spirits, nor such force to strike,
As the blessed Angels, who the power retains
To take and bind old Satan fast in chains.
One story I have chosen, out of many, The Devil strives to imitate God in his
works, to the perdition of Mankind.

To show, the Devil does the Almighty zany
For in those great works which all wonder ask,
He is still present with his Anti-maske.
A man of Greece was with three children blessed, An excellent History, wherein to
the life is expressed the instability of Fortune.

To him so dear all, it could scarce be ghest,
Which he was most indulgent over. The first
A sweet and hopeful Boy, and therefore nursed
Not with a common care; for his estate
Was great, his birth did him nobilitate.
Two Daughters he had more: the elder fair
And well accomplished; but the youngest rare,
Not to be paralel'd: for she was one
Whom none was ever known to look upon,
But with such admiration, that he said,
Nature surpast her self, when she was made.
For all ingredients of her choice perfection
Appeared both in her feature and complexion,
(So fair she was.) Three Lustres being spent, Lustru^, according to Livy, the
space of five years.

And not a day but adding ornament
Both to her growth and beauty; now fifteen,
(An age we cannot properly call green,
Nor fully ripe, not mellow, scarce mature)
Not yet resolved, a Virgin to endure,
Nor fancy Man, but staggering betwixt
Both agitations, and her mind not fixed;
But sensible (as being much commended)
How far she others of her Sex transcended,
Though quite sequestered from the common road,
Yet much delighted to be seen abroad.
And 'cause emergent Venus from the Seas
Was said to rise; her humor best to please,
It was her daily custom to rise early,
To greet the goddess whom she loved so dearly:
She was called Dea Spannigena; because orta salo, i. borne of the Sea.
And hearing what of her the Poets sung,
To view the ^ome from which it is said the sprung.
Stirring betimes one morning with the Cock,
Pirates had hid their ship behind a rock,
And as she took her pleasure on the shore,
The youngest Sister stolen by Pirates.
Snacht her away: and then with fail and oar
Made speed from thence, and proud of such a Piece,
Hurried her to the farthest part of Greece,
So far remote from her own habitation,
That almost it appeared another nation.
We leave her there. The father having mist
His Darling, in whom chiefly did consist
The solace of his age; having most care
Of her, because she was so matchless fair:
At first some strange disaster began to doubt,
The Father^ fear for the loss of his Daughter.
And sent to seek her all the Isle about.
At once he is troubled with a thousand fears;
As sometimes dreading, that her unripe years
Might be seduced, and that some sprightly Youth
Had trained her thence: (but far alas from truth.)
Again, he does imagine a wild beast
Might seize on her; which more his grief encreast.
But of such fear there was no certain ground,
Because no part of her torn limbs was found.
If drencht by falling from a Rivers brim,
Her gall bee'ng burst, she would be seen to swim.
But when no Hill, no Valley, Rock, nor Cave,
Least sign of her, or of her garments gave;
A strong suspicion in his thoughts did breed,
Pirates had stolen her thence: (as 'twas indeed.)
Thus confident, he homeward back returns;
His breast with ardent inflammation burns:
To travel in her search none can dissuade him,
Nor in his quest may son or daughter aid him.
His travel to find her.
Himself he will commit to his own fate,
So parts, and leaves to them his whole estate;
With a strict vow, he never more will tread
Upon that ground, till find her live or dead.
Suppose him in his voyage, and decreed
(That in his purpose he might better speed)
To sail to Delphos, and that he may take
Instruction thence, in haste does thither make.
His Offering past, and all things done with grace,
(Best suting with the custom of the place)
This answer from the Delphian Priest he had:
"Thou careful Father be no longer sad, His answer from the Oracle.

"But from henceforth exhilerate thy mind;
"One Daughter thou have lost, but two shall find.
This saying much perplexed him; he withdrew,
Long pondring with himself, because he knew
He lost but one, he held that answer vain,
And in that thought returned to sea again.
The elder sister seeing both so gone, A passage of the elder sister

The house left desolate, she now alone,
Save with her Brother, whom naught could persuade
From sighs and sorrow, by their absence made;
The place grew tedious to her, since no cheer
Did in him or the family appear.
She therefore after some deliberation,
Purposed and did provide for Navigations.
A Bark she hyr'd, (disguised) to sea she makes,
And undergoes a strict vow for their sakes;
From which she never will her self unbind,
Till she her father or her sister find.
By chance she lands at Delphos, and bee'ng there,
Desires to know what she might hope or fear.
When (all the ceremonious Rites bee'ng done)
The Oracle thus spoke: Her answer from the Oracle.
"Thou that do run
"This desp'rat course, if thou expect'st success
"In this thy journey, then thy self profess
"One of my Priests; in comely green attire thee,
"Get Bow and Shafts, and note how I Will inspire thee:
"And those loose locks that 'bout thy shoulders flow,
"Wind up in curles, like young Apollo go.
No more he spoke: she held his words for true;
Encouraged, her adventure to pursue,
And search (so shaped) all foreign seas and lands.
We left the younger in the Pirates hands:
Who after many a dangerous billow past,
By crossing sundry channels, came at last
To a safe Harbor, with intent to stay
Till they had made sale of so choice a Pray:
The younger sister offered to sale.
And for no other cause kept her from stain,
But that thereby to raise the greater gain.
They brought her to the open market, there
Merchants from several coasts assembled were:
And in those days, than Beauty (much commended)
Nothing more soon bought, or more dearly vended.
They set her in an eminent place for view,
When soon a great concourse about her grew,
Thronging to gaze: The first thing they then did,
They took the veil off, which her face had hid;
At which the very air seemed to grow proud;
As when the Sun new breaks out of a Cloud,
To shine with greater fulgence does appear,
Than had the Sky in every part been clear.
No sooner was the veil drawn from her face,
But her bright eyes illumined all the place:
The Effects of her beauty.
At once they with such admiration gaze,
As what they only thought to merit praise,
Does now beget a wonder. Some suppose,
That a new Goddess is amongst them rose,
To be adored: for most of them agree,
That of a mortal strain she cannot be.
But they of better judgment, and more stayed,
Finding what change of face her fear had made,
Because the Rose and Lilly in her cheek
For mastry strove; they need no further seek,
Since they perceive sad grief her mind perplex,
But that she is the wonder of her Sex,
Merely humane: as knowing, To Divinity,
Passions cannot truly be said to be in the Deities.
Passions and troubled looks have no affinity.
And that she is no other, they may guess,
Because a Pyrat, after an O-Yes,
With a loud clamorous voice, and countenance bold,
Proclaims her for a Captive to be sold.
By which resolved, the Merchants nearer grow,
And some demand of them her price to know?
Of whom the covetous Slaves set such a rate,
As would have shook a common man's estate.
Yet some there were most willing to have paid
The entyre sum, to have enjoyed the Maid;
So it might with security be done.
But now a whisper is amongst them run,
(Which with it some suspicious fear did bring)
That she was only ^itting for some King.
And being of so choice a jemme possessed,
If such should hear her fame, (it might be ghest)
She might be forced from him. For Tyrants make
Their Will their Law: And what, for Beauties sake,
Will those leave unattempted, that sit hye?
This was the cause few cheapned, none did buy.
The Market ends; and now begins her fame,
The brute of which unto the Kings ear came:
Whose rareness had such general confirmation,
(With such additions too in the relation)
That he begins to love, The entrance into her Fortune.
before he see her,
And has a purpose, from the Slaves to free her.
He sends, they come; the Prince looks, and admires,
Within his amorous breast he feels new fires:
His love turns almost into adoration,
And all the Beauties now of his own nation
He vilifies, finding in her no want
Of any grace, to make her parauant.
Ten thousand Drams are her price; it is paid,
The Rouers think they good exchange have made.
O, but the King's so with his bargain pleased,
As if he had a second Empire seized;
No price could part him, The King inamored.
since he hoped to find,
The more she cost, the more she would prove kind.
She first was to a Princely chamber brought;
Hung with Attalicke Ar^^s richly wrought: So called from King A^talas: tht
first who was known to use rich Arras hangings and brought them to Rome.

There she was seated in a chair of state,
And Ladies ready at her call to wait.
A Queen-like robe was sent her from the King,
His chiefest Eunuch brought it, with a ring
Of exc'lent life and quickness: both she took,
With such a modest and a graceful look,
As did amase the bringer. These put on,
And with her answer he no sooner gone,
But straight in comes another, and presents
A Casket full of rich habiliments;
As Carquenets stuck full of shining gems,
Fit to have graced most glorious Diadems;
A jewel for her forehead, bright and fair,
With other stones to entangle in her hair:
A pendant Union to adorn her ear,
Rarer no Queen was ever seen to wear:
Some for her neck, and others for her breast.
Ornament adds to beauty.
And being in all these completely dressed,
Wonder in them, no change in her does breed,
But mildely she attends what would succeed.
When through a private door in comes the King,
A description of the King.
A youthful Prince, apparel'd like the Spring,
When he would court bright May: his years twice ten,
And somewhat more; you shall not see amongst men
A goodlier presence. And when to her view
He gives himself, the Attendants straight withdrew.
She rises from her chair, and with so low
Obeisance made, as if she meant to throw
Her self beneath his feet; spreading the place;
By which he knew her breeding was not base.
His first courting her.
He takes her by the hand, and bids her rife,
Which (by his help) she did, whilst from her eyes
Some few pearls drop, which pity seemed to crave,
Or else no change at all her visage gaue^
The Prince is pleased, those jewels he had sent
Should to her beauty add such ornament:
If but praiseworthy it appeared before,
These adjuncts had encreast it ten times more;
Appearing to him of such special note,
If then he loved, he now of force must dote.
He studieth next, some grace from her to have;
For he has quite forgot she is his Slave,
Rather a goddess dropped down from some Sphere,
To depose him, and she to govern there.
He grasps her fingers, soft, and white as Bisse,
And then presents her with a modest kiss:
One he bestows, a second then does seek;
Both she receives, and never turns her cheek,
But with such modesty she gave them still,
As if part with, and part against her will.
The Prince has now to her a further suit,
But still as he would move it, he grows mute:
Yet in his face such Rhet'oricke she does spy,
As if his tongue were speaking in his eye.
At length he 'gan entreat her to accept
A Traitor, to betray the Fort she kept,
The maiden Tower, which though some had assailed,
Yet never any in the attempt prevailed.
Her rare Modesty.
Which was a motion she so ill could brook,
That such a blush into her face it struck,
As none could truly judge from whence it came,
Whether from sudden Anger, or from Shame.
But when he saw her, with de^ected eye
Fixed on the ground, to yield him no reply;
Yet he so far pursued it, to persuade
An answer to the motion he had made.
She Is so far distant from all putrid sin,
That though she knew the bondage she was in,
Hereditarie Virtue (in her bred)
Courage infused, and thus to him she sed:
From that sad Fate (Great Sir) which has made me Her Answer.

Thus wretched, the great'st Princes are not free.
Even I not many months since did deride
That Fortune which so far does now divide
Me from my Country. Yet (in some part) since
She makes amends, to expose me to a Prince
So royal, to whose unexampled feature
If his mind suit, the earth affords no creature
That can out do his goodness. But if ^a case
Of such a golden outside, enclose base
And sordid metal; I must tell you then,
These Presents I thus throw you back again:
They are not mine, receive them all in gross,
And add^ not these unto your former Having relation to the price he had paid
for her ransom.
loss.
Which said, like one now almost in despair,
She tore those gems from neck, breast, brow, and hair,
(But with a modest anger, as 't was meet)
And humbly lay them at his Highness feet.
Then spoke, I have one jewel I more prise
Than all the wealth that in your Treas'ry lies:
Which (spite of all disaster) I will keep
Unblemished; (and with that began to weep.)
Put me to any test, and you shall find,
My body you may kill, e're slave my mind.
But why should I in such vain doubts proceed, True Virtue hardly to be
corrupted.

When of the least suspicion there is no need?
Since from your sweet aspect there grows such cheer, A modest Insinuation.

Chastity need not start, nor Innocence fear.
And this reply she vtter'd with such grace,
(His constant eye bee'ng fixed still in her face,
And listni^g to her soft and musical tongue,
Which nothing else save Truth and Goodness sung)
He grasped her tender waste his arms between,
And vowed thenceforth to acknowledge her his Queen.
Where we instated leave her, and she rather,
She is made Queen.
Because we now must haste to seek her Father.
Whom no surge frights, how rough soever curled,
The Fathers success in his travels.
His purpose is to wander 'bout the world,
To cross all seas, throug every land to stray,
For if not home, he cannot miss his way.
Who now after a long peregrination,
As having sought in many'a foreign nation,
(Some so remoat, scarce heard of him before)
At length he came within the sight of shore
Where his fair Daughter, bu^ a Captive late,
Was now advanced unto a Regal state.
(Indulgent Father) this had (...) but known,
Into the Sea himself he would have throwne^
With desp'rat haste, hi^ choice Delight to find;
Thinking the Tide too slow, too slack the Wind.
The Instability of Fortune.
O but obserue^ When Fa^e intends to cross,
Our joy to sorrow (...), our gain to loss;
And when we to our wishes come most ^^ere,
It often falls we have most cause to ^eare.
For suddenly a mighty tempest rose,
With many a stubborn (...) wind blows;
His Bark the hillo^ (...) sh^lues,
The Father shipwrackt.
The poor men forced to swim and save themselves
On planks and (...) to the shore they make,
And them the I stande^^ for Pyrate ^^ke
Taken for a Pyrat.
(Hapless Misprision ^) For they troubled long
With such sea-Rouen, who often (...) strong,
Had many outrages committed (...)
And these they thought to suffer such hard fate
By Divine Justice, for such (...) and spoil
As had been late committed on their soil.
In this suspicion, (...)
Wearied and faint, and now ^earce able more
To help themselues^ the Inhabitants surprise
Them one by one, as on the Beach he lies.
But Him, because both by his grave aspect
And habit, he the rest seemed to direct,
They held for Captain hearing him most hard;
For over him they for (...) strongest guard
Hailed him to the Dungeon and so hateful made him,
Imprisoned.
That they with heavy give and fetters lade him:
His hands they manacle, and harshly speak,
As fearing he the prison walls would break.
Which, had it but arrived his Daughters ear,
She soon had rid him both from pain and fear.
Here we have lost him, wretched and unknown,
Till robes prove rags, his head and beard o're-growne.
Where have we left the elder all this while? The success of the elder Sister
in her travels.

(I now remember me,) In Delphos Isle;
Clad like Endymion upon Latmos hill,
On whom the Moon could never gaze her fill.
Or like Amyntas in Arcadian green,
The very next day he had Phillis seen.
Or like Adonis, fitted to the chase,
Whom Venus met, and sweetly did embrace.
Had she had wings, as she had Shafts and Bow,
Save in her stature, you could hardly know
Her from the Loue-god Cupid. Now her mind
She fresh and suting with her shape does find,
Ceasing her former losses to bewail.
Thus with a sprightly courage she fets sail:
At every Coast she landeth she enquires,
But finds no answer framed to her desires.
Twelve times the Moon had wain'd, and filled her round,
And yet her sister no where to be found.
At length upon the fortunat Isle she lands,
Where then her wretched father was in bands;
And the bright Damsel new instated Queen.
Not many days before, the King had been
Invited, two great Princes to atone; The King absent.

In whose forced absence she now reigns alone.
In which short int'rim, news is brought to Court,
Of a strange ship new landed in the Port:
But chiefly, That one passenger therein
Is of a choice aspect, whose beardlesse chin
No manhood shows; they took him at first sight
To be no other than Jove's Catamite:
(For such was Ganimed, by all account,
What time he snatched the Boy from Ida Mount.)
The Queen (all spirit before) is now grown fiery
To know him better by more strict enquiry,
Answer's retun'd, his person is Divine,
As one made sacred at Apollo's Shrine;
And there is no greater sacrilege, than wrong
And that to Apollo shall belong.
A Lord is sent the young Priest to inuit: Her Intertainment at Court.

He comes, and she affects him at first sight.
For Nature has a secret working still,
And to her own ends swayes the captived will.
Nor is it wonder she so soon is won,
Since such near blood in both their veins does run.
The Delphian Idol, when he saw the state
Pregnant reasons why the one Sister did not know the other.
The Lady bore, was much amas'd thereat;
Her princely habit, and her numerous Train,
The distance that she kept, thereby to gain
The more observance, seated in a Throne,
And marking with what gems her garments shone;
The Diamonds that were wouen in her hair,
And every thing about her then so rare:
For she in all respects so far surpast
His fathers Daughter, when he saw her last,
It never once could sink into his mind,
Seeking a Captive, he a Queen should find.
Besides, her port, her gesture, garments strange,
Suting that Country, bred in her such change:
The disguised Priest has quite forgot her face,
And apprehends some goddess is in place.
Again, The Delphians habit did so blind
The Princess eyes, she little dreamed to find
(Though else he hardly could her knowledge escape)
A woman or a Sister in that shape.
And though they make a serious inter-view,
Looking both often and long, yet neither knew:
Though an alternate sympathy appeared,
That one unto the other was indear'd.
She feasts the Priest, and with such sumptuous cheer,
As if Apollo's self had then been there.
Some short discourse they had, the banquet ended,
But nothing to their own affairs that tended.
All the choice favors she can well afford
She freely gives: night grows, he hasts aboard;
But she will not suffer him to lie so hard,
For in the Court his lodging is prepared;
And in that Island whilst he makes abode,
He is to her as welcome as his god.
Now (courteously compelled) Time calls to bed,
And they are both to sundry lodgings led:
His chamber rich, and his Attendants great.
She now retired, A strange apprehension in the Queen.
begets a strong conceit;
Which may in her the better be allowed,
Since there is no Faire-one but is somewhat proud.
Thinks she, My beauty is of such rare note,
That all who look on me, from liking, dote.
My royal husband, Sovereign of the land,
Swayes all his Subjects; and I him command.
If any of my feature make relation,
His praise he soon turns into admiration.
I am not seen in public, but they cry,
She is descended from some Deity.
But what is all this, if only these allow
My Beauty, such as never took strict Vow?
Here Is one that is to the Votaries allied,
By a religious Oath from Venus tied:
Now were there in my face such virtue found,
To pierce his chaste breast with an unseen wound;
Should it tempt him, whom all lust does abjure,
To gain the Palm by merit, I am sure.
But till of such, a trial I have made,
To be still equaled I am much afraid.
She Is now resolved to put her to the test,
And the next morning sends to see her guest. The Queen courteth her Sister.

He Is brought into her presence; whom she spies
No sooner, but she courts him with her eyes:
Next, change of blushes in her looks appear,
As if she would say something, but did fear.
She then began to woo him with her hand;
But that he would not seem to understand:
Then with her sighs, but all the while was mute,
And she no whit the nearer in her suit.
But to break silence she is now decreed;
Knowing, Who spares to speak, often fails to speed.
To prove how far bright beauty can prevail,
She to this purpose frames a passionate Tale.
No Sex, (says she) no Age, Degree, or State,
But all are subject to the will of Fate: A cunning Apology.

Their power so strong (I cannot say so just)
As what they bid we shall do, that we must:
Our Wills are not our own, nor can we do
But merely that which they enforce us to.
That their strict Laws no Mortals can evade,
Even I this day am an example made;
Who apprehend the best, and would pursue it,
But against mine own best nature must eschew it.
With that she blushed, and turned her cheek aside,
As if the love she showed, she feign would hide.
Proceeding thus; I that am now a wife,
Did once resolve to lead a Vestall life;
Many Women allege these things wantonly which she does only wittily.
And gladly would have kept it to this hour,
But my chaste Will they altered by their power.
After my Virgin girdle was vnty'de,
And that I was made both a Queen and Bride;
My best endeavors I did then imply
To keep unbroken our conjugall Ty.
But they have brought thee from I know not whence,
To make me with my nuptial Oath dispence^
They have enforced my Lord to a fa^ Clime,
To sort to us convenient place and time:
If to do what? Thou do desire to hear,
Look in my face, and thou may read it there.
And if I to my Lord prove thus ingrate,
What is it but our fortunes, and his fate?
My loue-sicke thoughts are thus before thee laid;
And know, she sues that must not be gain-sayd;
For irresistable is my desire:
Pause, but return short answer. I Will retire.
This spoke, (as much ashamed) away she flings.
Now the young Priest conceiues a thousand things:
The Delphian strangely entangled.
What say or do, he does both fear or doubt;
Ensnared he is, and no way can get out.
Such a Dadalian Mase should Theseus try,
He never could find the door he entered by.
He apprehends, what strange malicious spleenes
Mean women (loue-crost) have; then, what is in queens:
By them he may conjecture, as to swell
More, by how much in greatness they excel.
And than a woman, who has greater art
To search and diue into a woman's heart?
As better finding how the cards were dealt,
By the like passions she her self had felt.
But for a while I must her Sex forget,
For by no means I must disclose her yet.
Casts all doubts.
He knows he is a stranger, and alone,
That to support him against the Queen there is none:
How doubly now his life is laid to gage.
For if oppose her suit? her insenc't rage
May prove implacable. And then again,
To yield to her late motion were but vain;
Since Nature (in the moulding) did deny
To lend her that which should the Queen supply.
If say he was a Woman, and disclose
His Sex to her? The Princess might suppose
He was some strange Impostor, to abuse
Apollo's name, which nothing could excuse.
But that which moved him most, It might prevent
The aim at which his travel first was bent.
And in that shape, some hope he still does gather,
In time to find a Sister or a Father:
To compass which he will make future trial,
And give the lustful Queen a flat denial.
In which resolve he waits what shall succeed;
When in the Queen comes, The Queens courting habit.
having changed her Weed,
Which now flies loose about her, her bright hair
More wantonly displayed, her breasts quite bare,
Save with a slender thin transparent Lawne
(Scarce visible it self) before them drawn.
Indeed I cannot to the life express
The art she used in her careless Dress:
An Habit more for dalliance than for state,
And yet as rich as that she put off late.
In which, great care was mingled, with neglect,
And each thing added to her sweet aspect.
By this, let no man rashly apprehend,
That Lust and hateful Spouse-breach was her end; An Apology for the Queen.

Asperse her spotless virtues let none dare,
Since she was every way as chaste as fair.
It only was an innate foeminine pride
Which evermore to beauty is ally'de:
For where is a supposed Singularity,
There (for the most part) can be brookt no paritie.
And in the least kind should the Youth but bow
To her feigned motion, and so break his Vow;
She would have held him impiously base,
And so dismissed him branded with disgrace.
Yet further she is constantly inclined,
Like Gold to try him, that is by fire refined.
And therefore she appeared in that loose vesture,
With passionate looks, and an effoeminate gesture;
All things so suitable, as if she came
An Icy-vein'd Hippolitus to inflame.
He on his elbow sadly leans the while;
But she affronts him with an amorous smile,
And plucks him by the sleeue, bids him be'of cheer,
Tells him the way to pleasure is made clear:
Entreats (withal) an answer, since she knows
There Is nothing can their purpose interpose.
He then, as one awakened from a transe,
Rowseth himself, and casts a scornful glanse
Upon the Queen, striving to make appear
Wrinkles in that smooth brow which none could bear.
The Delphians answer.
Then said, Is 't possible that one so young
Should be so wicked? That so sweet a tongue
Can utter such harsh discords? Or to find
In a rare Feature so deformed a Mind?
Or may it be, that such as to their Will
Have Power annexed, should stretch both to do ill?
Great Ones on earth we to the gods compare,
And whilst they keep their Goodness such they are:
But they, if once they swerue from Virtue, then
In the gods sight are worse than common men.
For my part, prove you ill as can be ghest,
Or worse than yet you have your self expressed,
(Which scarce can be) I Am steadfast in my will,
Constant unto my Vow, and shall be still.
So turns aside. At which she seems enraged,
The Queens counterfeit passion.
And calls to such as were to her engaged
In the Kings absence, with a brow austere
Said, Am I not your Queen, and now most near
To extreme danger? You who have dependence
And means from us; I through your weak attendance
Might miserably have suffered. See! this Guest,
Whom almost I had took into my breast,
Because of his strict order; gave him all
Respect and reverence canonical:
Nay had his god been present, (as it is said
He once came down, either to court some Maid
On whom he doated; else, when The Earths proud Race
In mighty battle had the gods in chase,
Apollo amongst the rest, not least affeard,
This was in that great Gigomantia, or the battle betwixt the Titanoys and the
gods.
Fled to the earth, and kept Admetus Herd
Till that great Broile was over:) had he than
Been cast upon this shore, as this young man;
Nay, had I looked in his best fulgence on him,
No greater favors could I cast upon him,
Than on his Priest I'haue done, (let me proclaim
Him to the world unworthy such a name)
For he, who but adult'rates such a style,
(I know not whether I should frown or smile)
To utter it) would such a deed have done,
As had at that time his own god the Sun
By accident beheld his Priest so base,
Behind a Cloud he would have shrunk his face.
My meaning you may guess: it was a deed
So heinous and so horrid, that it need
No further tongue; my modesty (alas)
Cannot endure to tell you what it was:
Only imagine it of such distaste,
I had dishonored been, the King disgraced.
This said, her self into a chair she threw,
In such an angry posture, that none knew
But all was serious, and about her came,
Asking what service she from them would claim,
T'auenge her in the absence of the King?
When suddenly she from her seat does spring,
Like an insens't Virago, and then bad,
A sharp two-edged sword quickly might be had.
Scarce had the Princess spoke, but it was brought:
"Engines for ill are found as soon as sought.
Which peising in her hand, Take this (says she)
Who of you all loves best the King or me,
And sheath it in the breast of that Imposter,
Whose simple looks does many mischiefs foster:
Hasty and bold was his attempt on me;
So, sharp and sudden my revenge shall be.
At this they started and drew back: for tho All generally are afraid to lay
violent hands on persons enterd into holy orders.

They held the Queen chaste, and did likewise know
Her strict impose (although severe) was just,
As due infliction for such capital lust;
And that a speedy vengeance was most fit:
Yet none was pleased to have a hand in it,
Because they held it impiously profane,
To wrong such as had holy Orders taken.
She seeming more insenc't now than before,
Said, Must I then my subjects aid implore,
In absence of a Sovereign? and their pride
Or neglect such, a Queen must be den'yd?
Has he all his true-breasted took along,
And left no one to right our mutual wrong?
I now remember me, some nine months past,
How desp'tat Rouers on this shore were cast,
Villeins debosht and bloody, stern and bold;
And what is it for freedom or for gold
These will not act? or both these joined together?
Go fetch the Captain thence, and bring him hither;
Knock off his gyues, say I propose his peace,
With large reward added to his release.
A Messenger is sent, who makes what speed
He can to excuse the rest from that black deed:
For every one in deep amasement stood,
As loath to dip their hands in sacred blood.
A short digression.
Pray give me leave to make a short digression,
Of a most needful note to make expression;
Fitly'inserted here, to avoid confusion.
Which else might be some maime to the conclusion.
She was no sooner Partner in the Throne,
But fearing how her father would bemone
The Queen every way virtuous.
Her desp'rat loss; she is willing that her state
He and her friends should all participate.
And therefore Letters were dispatched with speed,
To signify how all things did succeed:
The journall of her travels she recites,
With every circumstance, and then inuites
Her Father, Brother, Sister, (having past
So many dangers, and now come at last
To such an eminent fortune) they would please
To leave their native Soil, crossing the seas,
To give her a wished visit, since all joys,
Pleasures, delights, and honors, seemed but toys
And idle dreams; nay even the Diadem
It self, if not worn in the sight of them.
Too late this news was, for upon her loss
Immediately the good man needs would cross
To Delphos: then the Sister him pursues,
Of him or her to enquire some certain news;
Resolved, abroad their travels how to frame.
So both were absent when these letters came.
The Brother prepares for travel.
But the glad tidings when the Brother h'ard,
He for a voyage instantly prepared:
For till he saw her in her state appear,
Each day an Age seems, every hour a year.
Imagine him arrived upon the Coast
Where she whose presence he desired most,
Waits till the Captain of the Pirates can
Be thither brought; who meagre, pale, and wan,
The Father appears at Court.
Enters, but like the picture of Despair,
His head, brows, cheeks, and chin o'regrowne with hair;
His Clothes so ragg'd and tattered, that alas
No one could ghes^e him for the man he was.
Besides, consider but their several change,
No wonder each to other seemed so strange:
For none of them could have least expectation
To meet there, after such long separation.
Therefore the Queen conceiues not the least doubt,
But that he was the same he was given out:
For a mere desp'r^t Ruffian she does take him,
And in the open co^^^uence thus bespake him:
Thou of the Seas, a Rouer and a Thief, The Queens speech to her Father.

And of these late w^ackt Pirates, head and chief;
By the Heavens just doom thrown upon our borders,
And for your outrages and base disorders
Doomed unto lasting durance; if this day
I shall propose to she a certain way
By which thou may it thine own enlargement gain,
With all the rest of thine imprisoned train,
Will thou accept it? He who had not seen The Fathers answer to the Queen.

The Sun of long, till then, casts on the Queen
A steadfast look, and with some admiration
Of her rare beauty, makes this protestation:
Angel, or goddess whether? It Is my fear
To question which you are? for you appear
To be the one or other; since that face
Had never breeding from a mortal Race:
O, but your language, tuned to such a motion,
Makes me believe you'are she who from the Ocean Venus.

Was thought to be emergent. Elce that Maid Pallas.

Who of the brain of Jupiter was said
To be conceived; not borne (although there bred)
Till Vulcan with an hatchet cleft his head.
Elce Juno, she that (...) Hymen's fires,
The Queen of Marriage and of Chaste desires. Juno syrnamed Prombu.

One of these three unto your lot must fall,
Who strove on Ida for the golden Ball.
You speak of my enlargement: Set me clear,
And were 't to coape a Tygre or a Bear,
With Theseus Minotaure, or Perseus Whale,
That huge Sea Monster, who had (...) scale
Less penetrible than brass; set me upon
A fierce Chimaera, as Bellerephon
Was once implov'd, (three horrid shapes commixt)
An Hiena and a Crocodile betwixt,
(...)
But since I needs must into mischief run,
Your Will is Law, and something must be done.
Yet first bear record, you and all your Train,
I am no such base Ruffian, as to stain
My hands in innocent blood: I have nor skill
Nor practice, how to ravish, rob, or kill.
No Pyrat, but a Father much distressed, He discloseth himself.

By Neptune's fury shipwrackt in the quest
Of a lost Child, whom might I live to see,
Death (now alas) would be new life to me:
But that is past hope. In search of her I came,
Epyre my Country, Thestor is my name:
And be you Testates all of you, how I
A wretched Father, Fortunes Martyr die.
No sooner had he vttred that last word,
And ready now to fall upon the sword;
But out the Priest steps from amongst the rest,
And snatched the weapon from her fathers breast. The elder Sister saves her
Father with purpose to kill the Queen her Sister.

Which forced out of his hand, she said, No, father,
There is no cause why you should die, but rather
This lustful Queen; Then aimed to strike her dead:
Who stands amas'd at what her father sed.
A Courtier next her the keen point put by;
When suddenly the Queen was heard to cry,
O Father, I am she you long have sought:
And with that word, about his neck him caught.
This when the elder Sister (wondering) sees,
Her hair with struggling fell below her knees; The Delphian Priest by accident
discovered.

Seeming to those which did this change behold,
As were she mantled in a shroud of gold:
Which made her Sex apparent to their view;
So by degrees each one the other knew.
How should my barren Brain or Pen be able
TO express their joys, which are not explicable?
For ecstasies arising from the heart
By sudden chance, surcharging every part
Of the Souls faculties, in most strange fashion
Make rapture to proceed from admiration:
In such a pleasing diffidence they grow, Sudden joys not suddenly expressed.

They scarce believe what they both see and know;
Of what all are assured, no one but fears,
Till joys affects breed the effect of tears.
Much would be said, but none can silence break;
All full of matter, but none power to speak.
The brother arrived at Court.
In this distraction there is a rumor grown
Of a young man a stranger, and unknown,
Arrived at Court; who hearing the great fame
Of that brave Queen, as far as Epire came
To visit her. At the word Epire they
Are startled all: the Princess bids make way
To give him entrance. O what expectation
Had they then to behold one of their Nation!
Several distractions.
By reason of her Letters, the Queen she
Might happily conjecture who't might be.
But the two other could not apprehend
What man should be employed, or who should send.
Therefore new scruples in their thoughts begin,
When by a Lord-like Eunuch vsher'd in,
He Is brought into the Presence, and soon known,
Because assuming no shape but his own.
Then suddenly they all upon him run;
The Sisters cry out, Brother; Thestor, Son:
And all at once their arms about him cast;
But were so changed from that he saw them last,
To have retired himself was his intent,
Not understanding what such greeting meant:
Because the elder Sister at first sight
Appeared to him a strange Which was by reason of her doubtful shape.
Hermophrodite:
Nor of the other could he knowledge have,
The Sire so ragged, and the Queen so brave.
But finding them persist in their embraces,
And seriously then looking in their faces;
Partly by that, part by their tongues, at length
His timorous doubts begin to gather strength.
Assured at last, ever either Sister greet,
He casts himself low at his fathers feet:
A Blessing is no sooner craved but had.
The Queen commands her Father to be clad
In a rich habit suting his estate.
Which whilst her servants haste to accommodate,
The Brother now has leisure to impart
Cordial salutes from an unfeigned heart,
(With his fair Sisters now no longer strange)
Which they with him as freely interchange.
By this, the Queen is given to understand,
The return of the King.
The King her Lord and Husband is at hand,
With those two Princes, 'twixt whom he had made
Such peace, not one the other should invade.
Whom by his wisdom, after long hostility,
He had reduced unto a fair civility,
Contracting league betwixt them; and as Guests
To Triumphs, to Ovations, and high feasts
Invited them: his sole and maine intent,
To make that league more firm and permanent.
The King, before he can approach the Court,
Of all the former news has full report,
Of Father, Brother, Sister; and so met,
As that the Island shall remain in debt
To all posterity, where he is instated,
To have the bruit from Age to Age related.
For where the place he lived in was obscure,
The memory of this shall make 't endure,
Whilst there is a Summer to succeed the Spring,
Or Winter, Autumn; whilst upon his wing
Time has a feather: and shall credit win,
Till Lachesis have no more thread to spin.
The patient Reader I am loath to cloy,
TO express their meeting, jubilee, and joy;
Who doubtless will conceive it to be such,
Though more than need, yet was not thought too much.
Besides, in Feasts and Banquets (knew I when)
I Would rather blunt my knife, than tire my Pen.
These and the like occasions were the cause, The original of Idolatry.

Men to their good success gave such applause,
That one, unto the Oracle indeer'd,
A stately Temple to Apollo reared.
And Thestor, who through Neptune had the fate
To find his best loved child, did consecrate
To him an Altar, thinking so to please
The Power that wrackt, then saved him from the Seas.
And so the Queen, since Fortune was so kind
To have her in all troubles still in mind,
She in a new-built Temple yearly praised her,
Who to that height from her dejection raised her.
Such as in woods and forests have by chance
Escaped wild beasts, through their blind ignorance,
Have had a strong conception there might be
A Genius or some Sp'rit in every Tree,
To whom their safety they ascribed. If pass
A brook or river where least danger was;
This or that water-Nymph, they durst protest,
Had leant them aid when they were most distressed.
And thus the Devil did the Ethnycks fool,
That would over every Grove, Lawne, Stream, or Poole,
Instate goddess or god, on whom to call;
That Power neglecting, who created All.
The Devils first course of Idolatry.
At Divine worship has been still his aim,
For all Idolatry from him first came.
Nine Classes of Devils.
Of the Rebellious there be Orders nine,
As corresponding with the Spirits Divine.
Order.
In the first eminent place are those installed
As would on earth be worshipped, and gods called.
As he that did his Oracles proclaim
In Delphos, Shadowed by Apollo's name:
He that the Pythian Prophetess inspired,
As likewise those the Egyptians so admired,
D. Stroz. Veneti^ lib. de sperit. and Incant.
Ascribing to themselves Honor and Fear;
And those in sundry Idols worshipped were:
And of these Beelzebub is Lord and Master.
Order.
Prince of the second is that great Distaster
Of Sanctity and Truth, Author of Lies,
Who always speaks in doubts and fallacies;
Order.
He Is Python styled. The third Class comprehends
Vessels of Wrath, who have no other ends
Than to to devise all Mischiefs; Belial he
Is called, for his approved Iniquity.
Order.
In The fourth Form are such Spirits as convince
Man in his sin, then punish him; their Prince
Order.
Is Asmodeus. The fifth Scale comprises
Deceivers full of fraudulent disguises;
And it is their function, office, and condition,
TO attend the deformed Witch, and damned Magition:
Order.
And of these Sathan's chief. The sixth contains
The airy Potestates, who Hailes and Raines,
Thunders and Lightnings have great dom'nance in:
And of these the prime Lord is Merasin.
Order.
In the sev'nth are the Furies; they give life
To Discord, War, Strage, and contentious Strife,
Then cast them upon Man in their fierce wrath:
Abaddon over these dominion has.
Order.
The eighth includes Explorers that accuse:
Those Astaroth does as his Vassals use.
Order.
The ninth and last, Tempters who ambush Souls,
Those Maimon in his Principat controules.
Now of these Cacadaemons we have ground
For many names, in sacred Scripture found.
The word Diabolus does signify Diabolus.

A false Accuser full of calumny.
Belial is likewise read there, and the word Belial.

Imports an Outlaw without Yoke or Lord.
Knowledge acute, Daemonium implies: Daemonium.

And Beelzebub is the King of Flies. Beelzebub.

Satan, an Adversary; Bohemoth, a Beast: Satan.

Leviathan, where gross sins are increast, Bohemoth.

And builded up. Such from Abaddons race Leviathan: Abaddon.

Be styled, as are extermined from grace.
We find in Dantes these by observation, The names of Devils according to
Dantes

Alchino, i. Unto Vice an inclination.
Then Calchabrina, i. One who does despise
All Divine Grace. Neither did he devise
Vainly these names. An euill-biting Dog
Cagnazzum; Coriato, a fat Hog;
Barbariccia, i. Fraudu'lent and Unjust:
And Libicocco, One inflamed with Lust.
Faraffel does a Trifler intimate;
And Rubicante, Fired with Spleen and Hate.
Briefly to pass their names over, it would well
Become this place, to speak how many fell
In that great Conflict; and it is my desire,
As far as leave permits me, to enquire.
Most probable it is, and best agreeing Concerning the number of Angels that
fell.

With common Sense, since all things that have Being,
By natural instinct their Powers extend,
And faculties, all aiming at the end
For which they first were made; and Nature still
Her ordinary course strives to fulfill:
So that all Births which out of order come
Are monstrous and prodigious, of which, some
(Although not many) in each Age we see:
As likewise that Sin still does disagree
With Divine nature, and therefore their Fall
And proud Rebellion most unnatural,
As mere Extrauagants, these reasons may
Induce us to believe, and think that they
Are more in number that remain in Bliss,
Than those cast headlong to the deep Abisse.
Some learned Rabbis have opinion held,
The number of the Angels that rebelled,
And in one Conjuration then compacted,
Out of each several Ternion extracted,
Equal one Chorus. Saint John does aver,
Apoc. 12.14.
That he beheld the Dragon Lucifer,
The third part of the Stars with his Tail draw
By stars are meant intelligences or spirits.
From the high Heavens, (which he in Vision saw.)
But of the Angels, th'exact number who
Shall undertake to tell, he shall but grow
From Ignorance to Error; yet we may
Conjecture, That as in perfection they
Excel all other Creatures; so conclude,
That likewise they exceed in multitude
Those that have had, still have, or shall have Being.
For diverse Authors are in this agreeing,
More Angels than Men, more men than Animals.
Man's generation has been multiply'de
Above all other Animals beside.
Says Daniel, Thousand thousands Him before
D. Stroz. lib. de natural magis. Daniel 7.10.
Stand, and 'bout him ten thousand thousands more.
Which Thousand he thus duplicates, to show
Their countlesse number, which our dull and slow
Nature wants faculty to aphrehend.
As likewise when he further would extend
Their Legions, Miriads he to Miriads lays:
Noting to us, of those that sound his praise
The infinite Armies, like a Circle round,
The number ending where it first was found.
In John it is read, A mighty voice I heard
Apocalip.
Of many Angels, and their Troops appeared
To be of thousand thousands. Job said well,
The number of his Soldiers who can tell?
Amongst others, one much daring, his bold Pen
Seemed to outstrip his Understanding, when
He would confine each Chorus to contain,
Albert. magn. de Angel. number.
(The mere Chimaera of an idle brain)
Saying, To each belongs (in these blessed Regions)
Six thousand six hundred sixty and six Legions:
Each Legion too does (bee'ng exactly told)
Six thousand six hundred sixty six Angels hold.
But of their number let no man discuss
Further than sacred Scripture warrants us.
Concerning the motion of the Angels.
It follows that I next make inquisition
Into the Angels motion, a Position
Needful to be examined. Know then, He
Is not contained in place, as Brutes and we;
But Place it self he in Himself contains,
Bee'ng said to be still where his Power remains.
And though it pass our weak ingeniositie,
Yet He is known to be of strange velocitie;
And without passing places, can with ease
Or go or come at all times when he please:
From heaven to earth He can descend, and be
Above and here in space vnmomentarie:
Hence, thence, He (vndisturb'd) has passage fair
Through both the elements of Fire and Air,
Without encumbrance or the least molest.
And though it sink not into the Ethnycks breast,
He Is without circumscription, vnconfin'd.
For if these Spirits, Places had assigned,
And so from one into another shifted,
How could they then so suddenly be lifted
Into the upper Heavens? or thence apply
Themselves to the earth in twinkling of an eye?
It is agreed upon, the Good and Evil,
The blessed Angel, as the cursed Devil,
Have all those faculties, and without aine
Or passing intermediat things, can gain
To what they purpose, in one instant round
The spacious world, and where they please be found.
Those that the Mathematicke, Art prosesse
Tell us, That 'twixt the eight Heaven and earth's no less
Than one hundred and sev'nty millions 100 and three The distance between the
8. Heaven and the Earth.

Of spacious miles mete by Geometry.
By which account, the mighty space extending
Is, from the watery and tenth Heaven descending,
Ten times so much at least: for if a stone
Should from the starry and eight Heaven be thrown,
And every hour pass without intermission
One thousand miles in it is swift expedition,
In motion still, without stay or re-calling,
It must be sixty five years in it is falling.
To amplify what has before been said, With some months, days and hours
added.

Some Sectifts have their ignorance betrayed;
Affirming Angels are not: If they were,
They, with the Soul, of force must likewise bear
Bodies about them too, and so to be
Subject unto our visibilitie.
How vain this is it may be easily ghest,
When none that has Philosophy professed,
But hold, That there are Substances Divine,
Intelligence called, which never did incline
The Intelligent Substances are incorpor^all.
Into commixtion, or known to require
Substance from the Earth, the Water, Air, or Fire.
A second thing the object, That if so great
Their number be, as that the Aire's repleat
With infinite Armies? 't must be needs confessed,
That they should hourly whole Mankind molest.
But these consider not, He that created
All things out of mere Nothing, has instated
Them in such order, distance, and consent,
One to another's no impediment.
Neither is any of his great Works found
That has the power to pass beyond his Bound:
As in the Waters element, though far
It'exceeds the Earth, yet keeps within it is ba^;
And though the proud waves with curled billows rore,
Threatening as if to swallow up the shore;
Yet by the Almighties hand their power is stayed,
No Inundation or great Deluge made:
Unless his Wrath some sudden vengeance brings,
Opening Heavens spouts, and letting loose the Springs.
No marvel then, that Spirits be in number
So many, that the very Air they comber;
And they to us, and we to them so odious,
They neither hurtful are nor discommodious:
Their Malice not bee'ng able to withstand
Those bounds prefixed by the Almighties hand.
For so much in Jobs History is found;
Job. cap. 1.
When Satan says, he has compast the earth round,
He does not say, In his large progress he
Has done to Man least discommoditie
Or harm at all not that he wanted Will,
But (in himself) the Power to hurt or kill.
Nor durst he touching Io^ make inquisition,
Till he from God himself had free permission;
Who gave him limit, and his fury s^aid
Upon his outward Fortunes, when he said,
Lo, all he has now, at thy ^^^cy stand;
Only against his person (...) hand.
Again, when He (...) Body to him gave
Captive, his Life he did command him save,
Whence we may ground, Though this rebellious Prince
Great Lucifer, with his Adherents, since
Their Fall retain the ability and power
To measure The Earth in least part of an hour;
Yet without leave they neither dare nor can
Use the least violence on Gods creature Man.
Next, touching the rare knowledge which insists
In them by nature; The admirable knowledge of Spirits.
Some Theologists
Affirm them pregnant in Theology,
Philosophy, Mathematics, Astrology,
In Music they are skilled, expert in Physic,
In Grammar, Logic, and Arithmeticke.
Nay, he that is among them the most low,
Contemned and vile, more than weak Man does know.
Nor are their reasons vain; for in respect
A Spirit is but a mere Intellect,
Not burdened with a body, of agilitie
Nimble and quick; therefore with much facility
In all materials he acquainted is,
From the Earths superficies, to th'Abisse.
He knows such virtues as in Stones abide,
Gems, Minerals, creeping Worms, and Beasts (for hide
From him you nothing can) for he does vant
Still in the Marble, Porphyre, Adamant,
The Coral, Pumice, and the Chrysolit,
The Smarage, Topaz, and the Margarit,
The Onyx, Carbuncle, Gold, Silver, Lead,
Brass, Iron, and Sulphur. He is likewise read
In the proprieties of Creeping things,
Ants, Toads, Snakes, Serpents, (all that the earth brings.)
Of all the several Fishes he has notion,
Bred in fresh waters or the briny Ocean.
Of Beasts the sundry qualities he finds,
Lions, Bears, Tygres, Camels, Horses, Hindes,
The Elephant, the Fox, Ape, Ass, Mule, Cat,
Sheep, Wolf, Hare, Hedgehog, with each other, that
The Earth produces. So in Herbs and Trees,
Plants, Leaves, Fruits, Roots, Seeds, juices, Liquors, these
No Artist has like skill in. He can tell
The several qualities of Fowls, and well
Distinguish them; as, such and such belong
To the Earth, Air, or Water. He is strong
In further knowledge of the Elements,
As in their power, their natures, and extents,
Of Thunder, Tempest, Meteors, Lightning, Snow,
Chasemates, Trajections, of Hail, Rain. And so
With piercing eyes he has a deep inspection
Into the Sun, Moon, Stars, the true direction
Of all Stars fixed or wandering; Zodiac Lines,
Articke and the Antarticke Poles, and Signs,
The courses of the Heavens, the qualities,
Their influence, their effects, and properties.
And as they have a vertuall power to know
All our inferior bodies here below;
So of the Spirits of Glory or Perdition,
The Orders, Offices, and the Condition.
Briefly, There is no Creature God has made,
From the first Chaos, but it may be said,
Whether it be abortiue or full grown,
That to the Angels nature it is known.
Since then so great and so profound 's their skill,
Infused into them by the Makers Will;
No wonder it is, that they such strange things can,
Beyond the weak capacity of Man.
We only by things sensible attain
To a small knowledge, and with mighty pain;
And into error we may quickly fall:
For in it is no certainty at all.
Spirits cannot err and be deceived, as we,
Seeing and knowing all things perfectly,
Where the knowledge of Spyrits is limited.
In their true real Essence: which is meant
Only of Natural things, and has extent
No further. For, as Angels Creatures be,
The are limited in their capacity;
In all such things as on Gods Power depend,
Or Man's Free Will, their skill is at an end,
And understand no further than revealed
By the Creator: else it is shut and sealed.
Hence comes it that the evil Angels are
So often deceived, when as they proudly dare
To pry into Gods Counsels, and make show
By strange predictions future things to know.
This makes their words so full of craft and guile,
Either in doubts they cannot reconcile,
Or else for cettainties, false things obtruding,
So in their Oracles the World deluding.
Whose answers either were so doubtful, and
So intricate that none could understand,
Or merely toys and lies for their words were,
By interpointing, so disposed, to bear
A double sense, and seeming truth to tell,
Whether or this or that way the chance fell.
But the good Angels they can no way err: The Good Angels cannot err.

The reason is, That they themselves refer
Wholly to Gods good pleasure, from which Square
And perfect Rule they never wandering are.
They judge not rashly, hid things they desire not,
And after future chances they enquire not;
Nor further of ought else to understand,
Than they are limited by his command.
How many thousand trains has Satan laid,
By which he daily does frail man invade; Sundry Seducements of Satan
discovered.

By entering Contract as a seeming friend,
Thereby to draw him to more fearful end?
Of which the Fathers witness; for one says, Cipr. de dupl. Martyr.

The Devil with Magitions compact has.
Another, August lib. 2. de doct. Christ. cap. 23.
That all Magic cov'nants be
Mere superstition and Idolatry;
Which grows from a society combined
Betwixt the evil Demons and Mankind.
If these were not, Cap. de Malef. and Mathem.
Why should the Civil Law,
Firm'd by the Imperial sanction, keep in awe
Such damned Impostors? For the words thus run;
Many (we know) abstruse Arts have begun
To put in practice, to disturb the Air:
Upon the innocent Souls these likewise dare
Vomit their malice, and from the graves call
Spirits from rest, by Diabolical
And cursed Spells. All such as shall rely
On things preposterous and contrary
To Natures course, Gods people to annoy,
The Churches Curse, them and their Arts destroy.
The like against these selfe-opinion'd fools
Is Articled in the Parisian Schools. Artic. 3. Scol. Parisien. Esaias cap. 28.
Percussimus foedus cum morte, and cum Inferno fecimus pactum

Of such like Miscreants it is in Esaias said,
We have struck hands to league with Death, and made
Covenant with Hell. Matthew 4.
How can Man be exempt
From this Seducer, he that dared to tempt
The Son of God? All these will I give thee,
If thou will prostrat fall and worship me.
Of these Compacts and Covenants we find
Two sorts, Of these compacts writes Sprangerus, Spinaeus, Nabarra, Grillaend
Remgius, Sibilla, Mengius, etc.
and both blasphemous in their kind.
The first, When willingly we seek inspection
Into that Art, and labor our direction
From Magic books, or use their Circles, Lines,
Their superstitious Characters and Signs.
The second, when without maleuolence
We search into that art, with no pretense
Of Curiosity; only we use it
Knowledge to gain, and got, not to abuse it.
The manner of the Devils temptations set down, the better to avoid them.
And that is dangerous too; all Such compact
League with the Devil, as in word or act,
Breathe words unknown, obscure, inserted vainly,
Or such things as are holy, use profanely;
As by observing certain Characters,
Signs, Figures, Angles, Squares, Diameters, etc.
Certain Days, Hours, Stars, Planets, Constellations,
Grains, Numbers, Instruments, of antique fashions,
And these beyond their natural operations.
When Sacraments, or any thing that is holy
Shall be abused by their ridiculous folly:
When Images of Wax or such like matter
Are cast into a pot and boiled in water:
When certain Numbers, unknown Marks or Notes
Writ in strange colored paper, he deuotes
To superstitious use. When as to Coin
Of gold or silver, or of brass, they join
Stamps of new Characters; and this to be
When such a Planet is in such degree.
Pasetis a great Magitian.
Such Pieces did Pasetis use to wear:
What e're he bought, he never paid too dear;
Who parting from the Merchant, did but name
The sum he paid, and back to him it came.
When holy Ceremonies (through the Malicious)
Are made idolatrous and superstitious.
When Linen never washed is used; and he
Must hold a Wand that is cut from such a Tree:
With which he strikes the East, and then the West,
The North or South, (as to his purpose best.)
That all his Hair shaues off by night or day,
Thinking thereby to drive the Div'll away.
That takes dust from a Sepulcher, to use;
Or from the Grave the Deads bones, to abuse.
Or ought besides that shall seem retrograde
To Reasons course, or what is by Nature made.
Diverse magic books were impiously fathered upon good and godl^ men.
Further, Unto this Covenant does belong^
All such as stand in their opinions strong,
To meditate those fond Books bearing name
From Ada, Abelus, Enoch, Abraham,
Cyprian, Albertus Magnus, or Honorius
Paulus, with those in Magic still held glorious;
Who boast ambitiously with great ostent,
This Art had both it is birth and ornament
Either from Adams Custos, Razael;
Or else from Tobits Keeper, Raphael.
Another strange Book they produce, and say
'Twas Salomons, called his Clavicula. Salom. Clauic.

These Magi, by old Satan thus misguided,
Another Volume in sev'n parts divided,
Stuffed with Spells, Charms, Oblations, (all Confusions
Of Nonsense, and the Devils mere obtrusions)
As a Work learned and sacred, still prefer,
To every curious young Practitioner.
All these are but his subtle trains, to draw
Men from Gods Fear, and honor of his Law.
For in this Art whoeuer strives to excel,
He strikes a lasting Covenant with Hell.
And as in these, so likewise in past Ages,
He wanted not his Astrologomages: Astrologomages

For most of this prognosticating Tribe,
Metals unto each Planet can ascribe;
Silver unto the Moon, to the Sun was
Gold sacred, unto Jove Copper and Brass; Several metals ascribed to every
sundry Planet.

To Venus, white Lead; unto Saturn, Black;
Iron and Steel to Mars; nor does there lack
Amber to Mercury. To each of them Electrum is either amber, or a mixture of
gold and silver.

They likewise consecrate some several Gem:
Unto the Sun the Carbuncle is due,
And Hyacinth, of color green and blew. Several gems consecrated to the
Planets.

Th'Adamant and Crystal to the Queen of Night;
To Saturn, the Onyx and the Chrysolite;
The Saphyr with the Diamond, to Jove;
The Jasper and the Magnet Mars does love;
Smaraged and Sardix Venus does not hate; Achates quod merorem and curat Abigal.

Nor Mercury the Topaz and Achate.
Now in these stones at set hours they would cut
Faces, in which the Heavenly Signs should put
Strange virtue; so that each impressiue fashion
Should have in it a several operation:
(The manner would seem tedious) These impressed,
They held to be much nobler than the rest.
As first, the signet of the Sun to have The signet of the Sun.

Power to make men wise, valiant, potent, grave,
Moon.
Happy, but full of Thoughts. The Moone's to make
Prosperous in Voyages they undertake,
Jupiter.
And gracious amongst women. Jove's Seale-Ring
Does Friendship, Dignities, and Honors bring,
To Riches, Office, into Princes grace,
To peace of thoughts, Priesthood, and eminent place;
All these, if Saturn nothing shall oppose.
Mars.
The Seal of Mars makes powerful over Foes,
Victorious, full of Fortitude, audacious,
If Mercury shall at that time be gracious.
Venus^
The impression that from Venus they derive,
Does make men lovely, gracious, to survive
In Princes favors, but in Women's best;
It helps in fortunat Marriage, does inuest
In graceful Clergy, banisheth all care,
And makes Man affable and debonaire.
Mercury.
Mercury's, works to be solicitous,
Quick, nimble witted, and facetious,
Cunning in Trading, crafty, worldly wise,
And apt for all Commerce and Merchandise,
Ingenious in each Mechanicke trade,
And fortunat in every bargain's made.
Saturn.
Saturne's makes Man of a relenting strain,
A thousand ways insidiating gain;
To Rich men dear, to hate Women above measure,
And fortunat in finding hidden treasure.
And these are the delirements practiced still
By those professing natural Magicks skill.
The absurdity of the former explained.
In the Heavens motion who so dull can be,
But knows them of such quick velocitie,
That before they such pourtraitures can fashion,
The Stars, that are still moving, change their station.
Nor can a Figure cut in Lead or Gold,
Silver, or other metal, that does hold
No correspondence with the Stars, then take
A second nature, and the first forsake:
Adding to the Material a new Power,
Which never it assumed until that hour.
But our Theologists and Doctors all
(Without exception) this, plain Magic call.
Bonavent. in Centileg.
Says one; These Observations, from the first,
Idolotrous are, by God himself accursed,
And interdicted by the Church: for sure
We are, That what they by the Stars procure.
Is mere deception and illusion vain,
By Satan's cunning crept into Man's brain.
The School of Paris does that Art thus tax; All Magic condemned by the
school of Paris.

Those Images of Metal or of Wax,
Or other Matter wheresoever sought,
Whether by certain Constellations wrought;
Or whether they are figures that infer The words of the Cannon.

Sculpture or form of certain Character;
Or whether that Effigies be baptized,
Or else by Incantation exorcis'd,
Or consecrate, (or rather execrate)
Observing punctu'ally to imitate
Books of that nature; all we hold to be
Errors in Faith and true Astrology.
My Verse no longer shall your patience tire;
The Prose may yield what further you desire.
Amor Dei est in Donatione, Condonatione, Missione. Remissione.


Explicit Metrum Tract. septimi.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogliphicall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractat.
Of wilful ignorance.
I Began the precedent Tractat with a Contemplation of the great Works of the
Almighty; I descend now to an apprehension, What Ignorance, (or at least
wilful Ignorance) is.

Seneca, in Octavia, says, Inertis est nescire quod liceat sibi: It is the
part of a sloathfull man to be ignorant of such things, to the knowledge of
which he by his industry may attain. It is a thing worthy remarke, to observe
how the Dull and Stupid emulate and envy the Pregnant and Learned. One not
unfitly compared them to a Fox, Henv. Bibellius lib. facetiar. 1.
who being hungry, and spying a Pear tree laden with ripe fruit, laid all his
force to the root thereof; but finding his strength too weak, and that by his
vain shaking thereof nothing fell from thence, he departed, saying, Fie upon
them, these Pears are a bitter fruit, and would never have agreed with my
stomach. The same Fox looking upon an Ass, and imagining that his hanging
testicles would every instant fall; after he had followed him some miles, till
he was weary, and finding himself frustrat of his expectation, returned back
with these words; Now I consider better with my self, the stones of this Ass
are stinking and loathsome, besides they are very hard of digestion. It may be
thus applied: There is no wise or discreet man but does honor all good
Sciences and humane Learning; To such only they are in contempt and scorn,
whose weakness of judgment, and imbecilitie of brain find themselves unable
to attain to such noble Mysteries.

It is reported of one Daiglinus a Mimicke in the city of Constance, That
hearing of a simple and ignorant man to be elected Consul, came to him in a
kind of gratulation for his new honor, in these words; O Sir, I hold you to
be a most fit man to undertake this noble Office of Judicature. The other
demanding of him the reason why he thought so? He made him this answer;
Because, Sir, you have so husbanded your good words, and so treasured up your
wisdom, that hitherto neither of them has been heard to proceed from you. Of
such wise Senators there is a proverb amongst the Germans to this purpose; If
thou have Wit which thou would not be robbed of, trust it with such an
Alderman; for there it shall be most safe, because no man will suspect any such
thing from him. To be ignorant in such things as concern every man in his
private estate, is not only a blemish, but a mischief. According to that of
Horace, Lib. 2. Sat. 6.

-- Sed quod magis ad nos,
Pertinet and nescire malum est, etc.
Such things as most concern us, not to know,
Is ill in us; and therefore we must grow,
To search if those instated above the rest,
Be more in Riches than in Virtue blessed.
Next, think upon the means that they accite
To friendship, goodness, or to do what is right:
And then, not only what is Good to find,
But to the sovereign Good apply thy mind.
Of wilful Ignorance says Solomon, Qui evitat discere, incidit in mala: He
that despises to learn, falls into evil, Prove. 17. Therefore were my People
lead captive, because they had no knowledge; says Esaias, cap. 5. And in Cap.
27. It is not a wise People, therefore he will not have mercy on them, that
made them; and He that fashioned them will not spare them. And Baruch, cap. 3.
And because they had no wisdom they perished in their folly. We read Saint
Augustine thus: Of the evil mother Ignorance come two like bad Daughters,
Deception, and Doubt; the one wretched, the other miserable; the first
pernicious, the last pestilent. Bernard in one of his Epistles says, Men are
ignorant of many things needful to be known, either by the injury of
Knowledge, the sloathfulnesse in learning, or the backwardness in acquiring;
yet are none of these excusable. And the same Father, sup. Cant. The knowledge
of God and thy self, are both necessary to salvation: for as from the
knowledge of thy self the fear of God arises in thee, and by that knowledge
thou art taught how to love him; So on the contrary, From not knowing thy
self grows Pride, and from not knowing God, Desperation. And in another
place; Ignorantia sui initium omnis peccati; ignorantia Dei consummato omnis
peccati, etc. The blockishnesse of the mind is the stupiditie of acute reason,
bred from the gross senses of carnal Intemperance. Hugo.
Not every one that is ignorant is free from punishment: for such may be
excused who gladly would learn if they knew what to learn; but such cannot be
pardoned, who knowing from whom to learn, apply not their will and industry
unto it. Seneca in one of his Proverbs says, It is a more tolerable
punishment not to live at all, than not to live a Knowing man. And in another
of them; It is no lighter thing to be altogether ignorant what is lawful, than
to do that which is unlawful. Socrates says, Where there is no Capacity,
there Counsel is vainly bestowed. And Solon; Ignorance has ever the boldest
face, nor is it easy to be truly discovered, till it be matched by Knowledge.
The Inscious man may be known by three things: He cannot govern himself,
because he wants Reason; nor resist his carnal affections, because he lacks
Wisdom; nor has he freedom to do what himself desires, because he is in
bondage to Ignorance. Idleness begets Ignorance, and Ignorance ingendreth
Error. The three-shap'd Monster Sphinx is the emblem of Ignorance; which is
thus expressed: St^ltus quod perdat habet, sed in id quod oportet impendat non
habet.
Quid Monstrum id? Sphinx est: cur candida Virginis ora,
Et Volucrum pennas, crura Leonis habet?
Hanc faciem assumpsit rerum Ignorantia, tanto
Scilicet est triplex causa and origo mali.
What Monster's that? It Is Sphinx. Show me the cause
Why a Maids face, Birds wings, and Lions paws?
Such shape bears Ignorance, or want of skill;
And is the triple ground of so much ill.


Having somewhat discovered the defects of Ignorance, let us a little look
into the excellency of Knowledge. The excellency of Knowledge.
He that wants Knowledge, Science, and Nurture, is but the shadow of a man,
though never so much beautified with the gifts of Nature. It is a saying of
Socrates, That in war, Iron is better than Gold: And in the course of a man's
life Knowledge is to be preferred before Riches. Excellent was that Apothegme
of Pythagoras; He that knows not that which he ought to know, is a Beast
amongst men: He that knows no more than he has need of, is a Man amongst
Beasts: But he that knows all that he ought to know, is a god amongst Men.

The first thing we ought to study, is truly how to know God: For we read in
Jeremy, Cap. 9.
Let not the Wise man glory in his Wisdom; Let not the Strong man glory in
his Strength; Let not the Rich man glory in his Riches: But he that glories
let him glory in this, that he knows Me, because I am the Lord who makes
Mercy and Judgment and Justice on the Earth. He is known by the consideration
of his Creatures: Says Job; Job. 11.
Ask the Beasts, and they will teach thee; demand of the Fowls of Heaven, and
they will declare unto thee; Speak to the Earth, and it will answer unto thee;
the very Fishes in the Sea will tell thee: For who is ignorant that the hand of
the Lord has made all these? We may know him by the Scriptures: Cap. 6.
Search the Scriptures, (says John) because in them you think to have life
eternal; and these are they that testify of me. Again, Cap. 17. For this is
life eternal, to know thee to be the only true God, and him whom thou have
sent, Christ Jesus. In the face of the Prudent, Prove. 17.
Wisdom shines, says Solomon. And Ecclesiastes, Cap. 8. The Wisdom of man
shines in his countenance, and the most Mighty shall change his face.

Touching the Knowledge of our selves; Of the Knowledge of our selves.
Be mindful of thine own nature, (says Basil) and thou shall never be
tumor'd with Pride: so often as thou obseruest thy self, so often shall thou know
thy self; and the accurat knowledge of that, is sufficient to lead thee as by
the hand, to the knowledge of God. For man to acknowledge himself ignorant
(says Didimus) is a great point of Wisdom: and of justice, to know himself
to be unjust. And Chrysostom says, That he best knows himself, who
thinks worst of himself.

Wise Socrates being demanded, Socrates.
Why he writ no Work to leave to future memory? with great modesty
answered, That whatsoever he could write was not worthy the paper which he
should write in. Stob. And Demonax being demanded, Demonax.
When he first began to be a Philosopher? replied, At the very first hour when
I began truly to know my self. Stob. Sermon. 21. Heraclitus being a young man,
Heraclitus.
was therefore judged to be most wise, because being asked, What he knew? he
made answer, That he knew only this, that he was able to know nothing. Ex
Aristom. scriptis. Theocritus, Theocritus.
demanded, Why being of such ability in learning and judgment, he would write
no famous Work to leave unto succession? replied, The reason is, because to
write as I would I cannot; and to write as I can, I will not, Stob. ex Aristom.
Bias, Bias.
to induce men to the true knowledge of themselves, counseled every man to
look upon his own actions in a myrrhor, that such things as appeared good and
commendable, he might cherish and maintain; but whatsoever sauored of suspicion
or deformity, he might correct and amend. As the eye which discerns all
other objects, yet cannot see it self; so the corrupt heart of man can more
accurately look into the vices of other men, than their own.

We read of Placilla, Placilla the Empress.
the religious wife of the Emperor Theodosius, Still to admonish her husband
after he came to wear the Imperial Purple, That he would not forget that
he had been once no better than a private man; and that the title of Caesar
should not make him think himself a god, as others before him had done: but
rather calling still to mind his own frailty, by acknowledging himself to be
Gods Servant, he should prove the better Sovereign. Nicephorus Calistius, lib.
12. cap. 42. Says Terence, in Heuton. Terence.
It an^ comparatam, etc. Is the nature of men grown to that pass, that they
can look better into other men's actions, than they can judge of their own? Or
is the reason thereof, That in our proper affairs we are hindered by too much
joy, or too much grief? Horace gives us this counsel, Lib. 1. Sat. 3.

-- Teipsum
Concute, number tibi quid vitiorum Inseverit olim
Perfectio est in tribus rebus, deuotio in religione patientia in adversis, and
prudentia in vita.
Natura, aut etiam consuetudo mala, etc.
Sift thy self thoroughly, whether there be nursed
Those wicked seeds of Vice which Nature first
Did plant in thee; Examining to know
What other ills might from bad Custom grow.
Fearne in neglected fields we see aspire,
Though it be good for nothing but the fire.
Perseus in his first Satyr says, -- Nete quaesiveris extra.


And Iuv. Sat. 11.

-- Illum ego iure
Despicians qui scit quanto sublimior Atlas
Omnibus in Libiae sit montibus: Hic tamen idem
Ignoret quantum ferrata distat ab Arca
Sacculus, e Coelo discendit Nosce Teipsum:
Gnothi Seauton, etc.
His judgment I by good right may despise,
Who for no other cause thinks himself wise,
Than know the mountain Atlas lifts his head
Sapientissimus hominum est qui fi^es respicit.
Above all other hills in Lybia bred:
Yet I from him the difference cannot wrest,
Betwixt a small Bag and an iron-barr'd Chest.
To Know thy Self did first from Heaven descend;
Of all thine actions then make that the end:
Whether thou purpose Marriage to embrace,
Or in the sacred Senate seek'st a place.
Thersites aimed not at Achilles Shield,
Qui non discernit bonum? malo, adiunge ^um cum bestijs.
Which merit did to wise Ulysses yield.
If being Consul, doubtful causes come
To be debated; e're thou give thy doom,
Or without good aduisement silence break,
Examine first what is in thee e're thou speak;
And what thou art: Ne creed tesap^entem esse, do nec eo animi robare fue^is vt
possis regere cupiditates.
Whether a Curtius, or
A Matho, or some vehement Orator.
Nay thou must be so careful as to know
The measure of thy cheeks, lest ought might grow
Unawares from thence; and with like care entreat
As well in every small cause, as the great.
Thomas Aquin. in his Epistle of the means to acquire Knowledge; A way to get
Wisdom.
Let this (says he) be my admonition, and thy instruction, Shun verbositie,
speak seldom, and then to the purpose; have a pure conscience, and pray
often; study much, and be familiar with few: shun superfluous discourse, follow
the steps of godly and devout men: Regard not from whom thou hear what is
good, and having heard it forget it not: What thou read or hear, cease
not till thou do understand: Be resolved of doubts, and search not too far
into things which are not lawful for thee to know.

Knowledge is one thing, Of Wisdom.
but Wisdom is a degree far above it; for a man may know the World something,
understand himself a little, but be altogether forgetful of God. For Solomon
says, Prove. 11. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of Wisdom. Therefore
it shall not be amiss to enquire, What Wisdom is? One calls it the knowledge
of many and miraculous things. Arist. lib. Rhetor. And in another place, The
knowledge of the first and most high causes. The difference between Knowledge
and Wisdom.
Aristot. lib. 1. Metaph. Apharab. lib. de Divis. Philosoph. says it is the
knowledge of things everlasting. Wisdom differs from Science in this
respect, because Wisdom is the knowledge of things Divine; and Science, of
things Human. Therefore we thus read Saint Augustine, Corinth. 1. Cap. 11.
Wisdom is the contemplation of things eternal; Science is the occupation of
things temporal. And in his book De Trinit. we read him thus: This is the
true distinction betwixt Wisdom and Knowledge, That the intellectual
knowledge of things eternal belongs to Wisdom; the rational knowledge of
things temporal belongs to Science.

The word Sapientia comes of Sapio, The Etimologie of Wisdom
which is, Truly to know: and those which in ancient times professed it, were
called Sophoi, i. Wise men. For so were those famous men of Greece called,
namely, Thales Milesius, Solon Salaminius, Chilon Lacedaemonius, Pittachus
Mytilinaeus, Bias Primaeas, Cleobulus Lyndius, Periander Corinthius. After whom
succeeded Pythagoras, who in his modesty would not call himself Sophus, but
Philosophus; that is, not a Wise man, but a lover of Wisdom. His reason was,
That no man can truly call himself wise, because Wisdom solely appertains
unto the Creator of all things. All true Wisdom is to be asked of God; as we
may read, Reg. 2. Cap. 3. And God said unto Solomon, Because thou have asked
this thing, and have not asked for thy self long life, neither asked Riches
for thy self, nor have asked the life of thine Enemies, but have asked for thy
self Understanding, to hear judgment; Behold, I have done according to thy
words: Lo, I have given thee a wise and an understanding heart, so that there
has been none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall the like arise
unto thee, etc. Wisdom (says Solomon in his Book of Wisdom) cannot enter
into a wicked heart, Cap. 1. ver. 3.
nor dwell in the body that is subject unto sin. Bar. 3. verse. 10. What is
the cause, o Israel, that thou art in thine Enemies land? and art waxen old in
a strange Country? and art defiled with the Dead? and counted with them that
go down to the Graves? Thou have forsaken the Fountain of Wisdom: for if
thou had walked in the way of God, thou had remained for ever. And again,
Verse. 26. There were the Giants, famous from the beginning, that were of great
stature, and so expert in war; these did not the Lord choose, neither gave he
the way of Knowledge unto them, but they were destroyed, because they had no
Wisdom, and perished through their own foolishness. Who has gone up to
Heaven to take her, and brought her down from the Clouds? Who has gone over
the sea to find her, and has brought her rather than fine Gold? No man
knows her ways, neither considers her paths, etc. We read also, Job
38.36. Who has put Wisdom into the Reins? and Who has given the Heart
Understanding? The excellency of Wisdom
etc. And Cap. 28. verse. 12. But where is Wisdom found? and Where is the
place of Understanding? Man knows not the price thereof, for it is not found
in the land of the Living. The Depth says, It is not in me: The Sea also
says, It is not in me: Gold shall not be given for it, neither shall Silver be
weighed for the price thereof. It shall not be valued with the wedge of the
Gold of Ophyr, nor with the precious Onyx, nor the Saphyr: the Gold nor the
Crystal shall be equal unto it, nor the exchange shall be for plate of fine
Gold: no mention shall be made of Coral, or of the Gabish. For Wisdom is
more precious than Pearls; the Topaz of AEthiopia shall not be equal unto it,
neither shall it be valued with the wedge of pure Gold, etc.

The Wisdom of the Just.
The wisdom of the Just (says one of the Fathers) is to color nothing by
ostentation, to hide no sense by equivocation; to love Truth because it is
true, to hate Falsehood because it is false; to distribute good things
willingly, to suffer bad things patiently, to revenge no injury. But this
simplicity of the Just will be derided; because that of the wise men of the
world, the purity of Virtue is held to be foolishnes. For what to the worlds
eye can savor of greater folly, than to speak simply and truly, without
mental reservation, and to practice any thing without crafty imagination? To
revenge no injuries that are offered us? and to pray for such as speak evil
against us? To desire poverty, and despise riches? Non est sapiens, donec
cupiditates suas omnes vincat.
Not to resist him that takes violently from thee? and when thou art struck
on the one cheek, that the other should be offered by thee. Greg. 10. Cap. 27.
Moral. Saint Bernard in one of his Epistles has these words: O vtinam saperes
and intelligeres, ac novissima provideres, etc. i. O that thou would be wise
and understand, and provide for the last things: thou should be wise in
those things which concern God, thou should understand such things as
belong to the World, and foresee all the dangers of Hell. By this means thou
should abhor what is infernal, desire what is supernall, contemn what is
terrestrial. Ricard. De Contempl. Cap. 1. says, Nothing than Wisdom is more
ardently beloved; nothing more sweetly and delightfully possessed. From hence
it grows, that many would, but few can be wise. All just men may be just, that
truly desire to be so. Thou may love Wisdom, and yet want it; but the more
thou do love justice, the more just thou shall be. Hugo, de Claus. Anim. lib.
1. teaches us, That Idleness breeds Folly, and Industry begets
Knowledge. The Labor to attain unto Knowledge is divided into three, namely
Discipline, Exercise, and Doctrine: In our Childehood is the labor of
Discipline; in our Youth, of Exercise; in our Age, of Doctrine: that what we
knew not, in our Childehood we may learn; what we learned in our Childehood,
we may exercise in our Youth; what we exercised in our Youth, we may teach
unto others in our Age.

The Poets concerning Wisdom we may read thus: The Poets concerning Wisdom.
Wisdom and Virtue are the two wings by which we aspire and attain unto the
knowledge of God. According to that of Boeth. lib. 4. Met. 1.

Sunt etenim pennae Volucris mihi,
Quae Celsa conscendant Poli.
Quas sibi cum velox men's induit,
Terras perosas despicit.
The Feathers of a Bird I wore,
By which above the Poles I soar.
Which when my swift Mind does embrace,
All earthly things I count as base.
A Wise man, by others, is held to be little less than Jupiter himself. As
Hor. lib. 1. Epist. ad Mecen.

-- Sapiens vno minor est Jove: Dives,
Liber, Honoratus pulcher, Rex denique Regum.
The Wise man somewhat is to Jove inferior,
Rich, free, fair, honored, King over Kings, superior.
And in another Epistle of his, ad Mecen.

Virtus est vitium fugere, and sapientia prima
Stultitia caruisse. --
He Is only virtuous, that does Vice despise;
And who hates Folly shall be counted wise.
We read diverse of the Greek Poets to the like purpose: Amongst the rest,
Hesiod thus interpreted: Hic quidam optimus, qui per se omnia cognoscit
Intelligens sequentia. --
Qui seipsum habet pro sapiente, eum habent deus and homines pro ignare.
He Is the best, who can challenge as his own,
To conceive all things needful to be known,
(Things due to understanding) and can call
To mind beforehand, what may after fall.
He Is likewise a good man, who does not heed
Warning, by others mischiefs to take ^eed;
But gives it of himself. But he whose pride
Thinks that his own breast does all Wisdom hide,
And others judgments to be vain and weak,
Who (save himself) will list to none that speak.
I hold that man is every way unable,
To others, and himself unprofitable.
Phocilides also we find thus quoted: Sapientiam sapiens dirigit Arts
Coartifex, etc.
The Wise man knows his wisdom how to use:
The Artificer, what Art is best to choose.
It Is a true saying, and approved long,
The Wise man is more worthy than the Strong:
The fields he tills, the City he can guide,
And for the Ships in tempests well provide.
And ingenuous Menander thus: Non est Sapientia possessio pretiosior, etc.
Than Wisdom, no more rich possession;
It Is of thy self to make expression,
And in by thoughts descend so low
To learn those things thou do not know.
Our speech which we so highly prise,
Was first invented by the Wi^e.
Nor can we truly call him such^
Who little does, and speaks much.
Wisdom does Riches far excel;
For that does teach us to live well.
By hearing Wise men, Wisdom 's caught,
And none 's so wise, but may be taught.
His proper losses he will hide,
And make Discretion still his Guide.
Yet I ^ha^ Wise man needs must hate,
Who shall neglect his own estate.


All Ages have afforded men to this day famous, Philip of Macedon.
for their Virtues, Knowledge, and wise and witty sayings: I will give you only
a taste of some few, and those the least vulgar. One Smithicus complaining of
Nicanor, That he incessantly spoke evil of the King, and therefore desired to
have him severely punished; Philip of Macedon would no way assent thereto: but
after hearing the same Nicanor to be in great indigence and want, he sent him a
great sum of money. Soon after Smithicus brought him word, That in all
companies Nicanor spoke well and nobly of him. To whom the King answered, Thou
see how much better a Physician I am than thou.

Two fellows of notorious bad life accusing one another before the Kin^; he
gave sentence, That the one with all speed should depart^ the kingdom of
Macedonia, and the other with the like celeriti^ follow him. The ^ame Philip
having taken a full, and when he ^ose again spying the print of his whole body
in the dust; signing said, O the great folly of Princes, whom many kingdoms
cannot content in their life, yet so small a piece of (...) suffice them in
their deaths, etc.

When a fair young woman was brought to Alexander late in the night, Alexander.
and the King demanding, Why she stayed so long? She (...) answer, That she but
tarried until she had got her husband to bed: He called to his servants, and
with an angry countenance^ ^ommanded them to convey her back to her house; For
(said he) by your defaul^ I was but a little from being made an (...). One
Parillus, numbered amongst Alexanders friends, demanded a dowry of him toward
the marriage of his daughters. To whom the King bad fifty talents should be
presently delivered. But he replying, That ten were sufficient. True, (says
Alexander) for thee to receive, but not for me to give. When he sat in
judgment, he ever used to stop one ^are whilst the Accuser told his tale. And
being asked the reason? Because (says he) I reserve still one ear for the
Defendant. Having made a journey to Delphos, and at that time the Prophetess
(being a day prohibited) would by no entreaty solicit the god for any answer:
Aristotle haled her into the Temple perforce; and by his violence being drawn
thither whether she would or no, she uttered these words, Thou art invincible
my son. At which word he dismissed her, saying, It is enough for Alexander,
I receive these words as an answer from the Oracle, etc.

Antigonus.
It is said of Antigonus the first King of Macedonie, That being asked, Why in
his youth being no better than a Tyrant, in his age he governed with such
clemency and gentleness? his answer was, That in his youth he strove to get a
kingdom, and in his age he desired to keep it. The Poet Hermodotus in one of
his Poems had called the King, the son of Jupiter. Which when the King heard,
he said, Surely he that attends me in my chamber when I am forced to do the
necessities of Nature, was never of that Fellows counsel.

Julius Caesar:
When the Soldiers and men at Arms that followed Scipio in Africa were fled,
and Cato being vanquished by Caesar at Vtica, had slain himself; Caesar said,
I envy thy death unto thee, o Cato, since thou have envied unto me the saving
of thy life. In a great battle, when one of his Standard-bearers was turning
his back to have fled^ Caesar took him by the shoulders, and turning him
about, said, See Fellow, yonder be they whom we fight against. When many
dangerous conspiracies were abroch, and diverse of his friends wished him to be
chary of his safety; he answered, Much better it is to die at once, than to
live in fear always.

The Inhabitants of Tarracon, as a glad presage of prosperous success, brought
tidings to Augustus, August. Caesar.
That in his Altar a young Palm tree was suddenly sprung up. To whom he made
answer, By this it appears how often you burn Incense in our honor. When he
had heard that Alexander having at two and thirty years of age overcome the
greater part of the known world, and had made a doubt what he should find
himself to do the remainder of his life: I marvel (said Augustus) that
Alexander judged it not a greater act, to govern well what he had gotten, than
to purchase so large a dominion. It was he who said, I found Rome made of
Brickes, but I will leave it of Marble. Which saying puts me in mind
(considering the uncertainty and instability of things) of an excellent
Epigram composed by Ianus Vitalis, de Roma antiqua, Of ancient Rome: Quid Romam
in media quaeris, novus Advena Roma,
Et Romae in Roma nil reperis medio?
Aspice murorum molas, praerupt aque saxa,
Obrutaque horrenti vasta Theatra situ:
Haec sunt Roma, etc.
New Stranger to the City come,
Who midst of Rome inquire for Rome,
And midst of Rome can nothing spy
That looks like Rome, cast back thine eye;
Behold of walls the ruined mole,
The broken stones not one left whole;
Vast Theaters and Structures high,
That level with the ground now lie.
These now are Rome, and of that Town
The Imperious Relics still do frown,
And even in their demolisht seat
The Heavens above them seem to threat.
As she the World did once subdue,
Even so her self she overthrew:
Her hand in her own blood she'embru'd,
Lest she should leave ought vnsubdu'd:
Vanquished in Rome, Invict Rome now
Intombed lies, as forced to bow.
The same Rome (of the World the head)
Is Vanquisher and Vanquished.
The river Albula's the same, The river Tyber first called Albula.

And still preserues the Roman name;
Which with a swift and speedy motion
Is hourly hurried to the Ocean.
Learn hence what Fortune can; what is strong
And seems fixed, endures not long:
But more assurance may be laid
On what is moving and vnstayd.


Phocion a noble Counselor of Athens, Phocion.
of high wisdom, singular prudence, noble policy, incorrupt manners, and
incomparable innocence and integrity of life, of such admirable constancy of
mind, that he was never known to laugh, weep, or change countenance: He,
knowing the ignorance and dissolute manners of the people; upon a time having
made a very excellent Oration, much commended and highly applauded by the
multitude, he turned to his friends and said, What is it that I have spoke
amiss, or otherwise than well, for which the people thus extol me. To
Demosthenes the Orator (who said unto him, The Athenians will put thee to death
one day, Phoci^n, when they shall grow to be mad) he replied, Me indeed when
they are mad; but thee most certainly when they come to be in their right wits
again. Alexander sending unto him an hundred talents, he demanded of the
messengers that brought it, For what cause the King was so bountiful to him
above others? They answered, Because he judged him, of all the Athenians, to
be a just and honest man. When refusing the gold, he said, Then let him suffer
me not only to be so reputed, but to prove me to be such an one indeed, etc.

Pompey the Great.
Pompey being young, and having done many worthy and remarkable services for
Sylla, (who was now grown in years) demanded a Triumph; which Sylla opposed.
But after Pompey in a great confluence of people had said aloud, Sylla, Art
thou ignorant that more people adore the Sun at his rising, than his going
down? Sylla with a loud voice cried out, Let him triumph.

Cicero.
To one Caius Pompilius an ignorant Lawyer in Rome; who being brought to give
evidence in a Cause, and saying, That he knew nothing, nor could speak any
thing in the matter; Cicero replied, You think perchance, Pompilius, that you
are asked a question about some point in the Law. Pompey and Caesar being at
great debate and variance, he said, He knew not whose part to refuse, or whose
side to follow. After the great battle fought in Pharsalia, when Pompey was
fled, one Nonius a great Captain thinking to encourage the Soldiers, bad them
to be of good comfort, for there were yet seven Eagles left. To him Cicero
replied, Thy chearing, o Nonius, might prove very aduantageous unto us, if we
were now to fight against Iayes. Of one Cuminius Revelus (who was chosen
Consul, and within two hours displaced, by reason he was tainted of Perjury)
he said, That he had one chance happened him above all other in that place; for
the Records were searched, in which Consuls time he was Consul. To one Julius
Curtius, belying his age because he would be still esteemed young; Cicero
said, Then it appears, That at the same season when you and I were young
scholars first, and exercised Orations together, you were not borne. And to
one Fabia Dolabella, (affirming she was but thirty years old) he replied,
Indeed Lady I have heard as much as you speak, twenty years ago.

Demosthenes.
Demosthenes being one of the ten whom the Athenians sent Ambassadors to
Philip King of Macedon; at their return, when Eschines and Philocrates (whom
Philip had entertained with extaordinary courtesy above the rest) had spoken
royally and amply in his commendations; praising him especially for three
things, That he was of an extraordinary beautiful aspect, That he had a
fluent and eloquent tongue, and, That he was a liberal and free Drinker;
Demosthenes interrupted them, and avouched publicly, That not one of all
those was seemly in a King: For the first (he said) belonged to Women; the
second appertained to Sophists and Rhetoricians; and the third to Sponges.
Being banished the City, in his way he looking back, lifted up his hands
toward heaven, saying, O Pallas, thou Lady of this City, why take thou such
delight in three the most unlucky Monsters of the world, the Owl, the Dragon,
and the People. Being reviled by an injurious prating Companion, and being
forced to make reply in his own behalf, (by which, scolding and loud language
must needs arise) I am now compelled (said he) to undertake such a combat, in
which he that has the upper hand gets the worst; and whosoever overcomes
shall be most sure to lose the Victory, etc.

It was a saying of the Emperor Sigismund, That those Courts were only happy,
Sigismund Imperat.
where proud men were depressed, and meek men advanced. The same Prince being
asked, What man he held worthy of a Diadem? Only such an one (says he) whom
prosperity puffs not up, neither can adversity dismay. To one who praised
him above measure, so far hyperbolising, that he would needs make him more
than mortal; the Emperor much displeased with such palpable flattery,
struck him two or three blows upon the cheek. Who saying to the Emperor, Why
do you strike me? Mary (quoth the Emperor) because thou did bite me, etc.

Frederick the Emperor being demanded, Freder. Emper.
Which of his Subjects and Servants he loved best, and that were dearest unto
him? made answer, Those that fear not me more than they fear God. The same
Emperor, when one asked him^ What he thought to be the best thing that could
happen to a man in this world? Replied, To have a good going out of the World?

Rodulphus Caesar, Rodulph. Caesar.
the first that traduced the Empire into the Austrian Family^ when one asked of
him, Why generally all men despised the exercise of such Arts as they had been
taught? but to rule and govern (which was the Art of Arts) no man refused?
That is no wonder, (said he) because they think all such to be Fools, that
cannot rule; and there is no man that thinks himself a Fool.

But what are all these, where the wisdom to seek after God shall be in the
least kind neglected? Wisd. 7. ver. 28.
God (says Solomon) loves no man, if he dwells not with Wisdom: for she
is more beautiful than the Sun, and is above all the order of the Stars,
and the Light is not to be compared unto her; for Night comes upon that, but
Wickedness cannot overcome Wisdom.

I end this Argument with these few lines extracted Ex Antholog. Sacr. Jacob.
Billij: Pythagoras olim quid sensuerit, etc.
Not what Pythagoras in times past thought,
Not sharp Chrisippus by his study sought;
What Plato's, or what Zeno's censure was,
Or what the opinion of Protagoras:
What Anaxagoras brought forth to light,
Or Aristotle, the learned Stagerite:
How many heathen gods there were to show,
Or goddesses: shall we call this, To Know?
He that for such cause shall himself advance,
Can brag of nothing but blind Ignorance.
He only can of Wisdom truly bost,
Who knows the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.


Of things prodigius.
Many things are found to be monstrous and prodigious in Nature; the effects
whereof diverse attribute to sundry causes: some, either to defect, or
super-aboundance in Nature; others, to the power and operations of Demons,
Plin. lib. 9.6. cap. 14.
good or bad. We read, That when Lucius Martius and Julius Sextius were Consuls
in Rome, two mountains removed from their proper places, and so impetuously
met together, that having vented a great quantity of fire and smoke into the
air by the violence of their encounter, they returned back again into their
own situation, first having destroyed many Villages which lay betwixt them,
killing much cattle: where many Roman Knights too aduenturous perished by the
same prodegie. Plin. 9. cap. 10.
The same Author relates, That in the time that Nero Caesar wore the Imperial
Purple, Vessus Marcellus, whom the Emperor had sent into the Kingdom of
Naples, had two fields, distant the one from the other certain furlongs; the
one was a fair green meadow, the other planted with Olive trees, which
miraculously changed places; for the Olive field was transported where the
meadow was, and the meadow to the place where the Olives grew: And this was
supposed to be done by an Earthquake. This is approved for a truth by the
Annals of sundry Learned men, bur especially remembered in the book of the
Mountains.

It has been likewise observed, that in the sacrifice of Beasts no hearts have
been found in the bodies: For so it happened when Caesar the Dictator first
sat in the golden Chair. Plin. lib. 14. ca 7. Cicero de Devin. cap. 9.
Cicero and Pliny both report, That Caius Marius offering sacrifice at Vtica,
no heart was found in the beast: which the Priest coniectured proceeded from no
natural cause. And therefore it may be thought to be the imposture of evil
Spirits, who to delude and abuse the people, stole the heart away from the
Altar; inspiring the Priest to say something thereupon, as partly foreseeing
what was likely to succeed after.

It is recorded also, That in the sacrifice which Marcus Marcellus made before
he was slain in the battle fought against Hannibal, That the first day the
Priest could find no heart in the beast; and the second day opening another,
he found two.

Aulus Gellius tells us, Aul. Gel. lib. 16. cap. 15.
That upon the same day when Pyrrhus died, after the heads of the sacrificed
beasts were cut off, they licked up their own blood which was spilt upon the
ground. As also, That the same year when Hannibal was vanquished by Scipio
(Publ. AElius and Cneius Cornelius being Consuls) wheat was seen to grow upon
trees. Many more I could allege to the like purpose, etc.

Ficin. Epist. lib. 11. uses these words; Prodegies happening before or at the
death of Princes, Philosophica Sententiae.
come not by fortune, because they observe order: nor by Nature, by reason they
are diverse amongst themselves. If therefore neither accidentally nor naturally,
it must needs infer, they arise by a more sublime Intelligence, exuperant
above the power or strength of Nature. And they are referred unto three chief
causes. For there is Person, which is the Demon Familiar, which the
Theologists call Angelus Custos. Then there is a Power, called the Keeper or
Guardian of the Place, the House, the City, or the Kingdom; and this is tituled
by the name of Principate. Above these is the sublime Order or Chorus of
Powers, Demons, or Angels; into which number or lot, by the similitude of
Office, the excellent Mind or Soul is to shift, as it were into it is own
Star, there to remain as a Colleague in the same office. And as there are three
Authors of prodegies, so there are three kinds: The sublime Class kindles
the crested or bearded Comets, provoke Thunder, casts out Lightning,
causes Incendiaries and falling Stars. The Power of the Province, shakes
the Prefect, ouerturneth buildings, declares Oracles, and designeth violent
Heats and Vapors. The Familiar Custos or Demon begets Dreams, causes or
disturbeth sleeps, and takes charge of man as well in his private chamber, as
in the streets or fields. The first gives us to know, That excellent Spirits
are not by Death extinguished or neglected, but are rather transmigrated from
the earth, to reign with the Powers above. The second fore-shewes the
calamity of a People new left destitute of a Prince or Governor; thereby
fore-warning them to prevent and prepare themselves against all imminent
perils. The third gives us warning, that the time of the last expiration being
come, his friends and Allies should take notice of the Divine favor, that his
body dying, his Soul still suruiueth, and that he is not lost to his friends
and familiars. This was the opinion of some Philosophers. Iamblic. de Myster.
says, That as God oftentimes from the mouth of Fools produces wisdom,
declaring thereby, that Man speaks not, but God himself: so by every slight
and vile thing he portendeth what is to ensue, keeping still his own
super-eminence, and thereby instructing our weak understanding. And Guliel.
Pachimer. Hist. lib. 6. says, Prodigium est Divinae irae signum, etc. A
Prodegy is a sign of the wrath of God; but whether it portendeth or looks
upon things past or present, is beyond our apprehension. But this is an
argument which I desire not too long to insist upon, etc.

In the discourse of Lucifer and his Adherents, newly fallen from grace, it
will not be impertinent to speak something of his first and greatest
masterpiece, in tempting our first Parents to sin, by which came death. For
Death was not made by God, being nothing else (as Saint Augustine against the
Pelagians says) but a privation of life, Ang. contra pelag. cap 9.
having a name, and no essence; as Hunger is said to be a defect of food,
Thirst a want of moisture, and Darkness the privation of light. It therefore
having a name, and no Being, God was neither the Creator nor Cause thereof.
Solomon says, Wisd. 1. v. 13.14.
God has not made Death, neither has he any pleasure in the destruction of
the Living: for he created all things that they might have their Being, and the
generations of the world are preserved. And in an other place; Wisd. 2. ver. 24.
Through envy of the Devil came Death into the world. He then being the author
of Sin, is likewise the author of Death. And yet though he had power to tempt
man to Sin, (Man having Free Will) he could not constrain him to give
consent.

This proud Angel by his own insolence being cast from heaven, began to envy
man's felicity upon earth; and to that purpose entered the Serpent, Genesis 3.1.
which is said to be more subtle than any beast of the field. Lib. 3. cap. 2.
And as Rupertus super Genesis says, Before the Serpent was made the Devils
Organ, he might have been termed most wise and prudent: Math. 10. v. 16.
for it is said in Matthew, Be ye therefore wise as Serpents. Chris. sup. Genesis
Homil. 15.
Him (as Saint Chrysostom writes) the Devil found best sitting for his
hellish enterprise, and in his spiritual malice (by means of his Angelical
presence and excellent nature, abusing both as instruments of his falsehood and
treachery) he wrought with, to speak to the woman, being the weaker Body,
and therefore the less able to resist temptation. Neither did the Serpent
speak unto her, but the Devil in him; as the good Angel did in Balaams Ass:
Numb. 22.28.
for the good Angels and evil work like operations, but to diverse effects.

Petrus Commestor in his Scholasticall History writes, Hist. scholast. cap. 2.
That at the time when the Serpent tempted the woman, he was straight, and
went upright like a man; but after the Curse he was doomd, to crawle upon the
face of the earth. And Venerable Bede says, Bead in Alleg. sup. bib.
That the Devil chose a Serpent which had the face of a woman, Quod similia
similibus applaudant, That Like might be pleasing to Like.

The Holy History does recite three distinct punishments, of the Serpent, The
Serpent cursed.
the Woman, and the Man: the Serpent was cursed beyond any other beast or
creature, to crawle upon his belly, and eat dust all his life time, envy being
put between the woman and her race on the one side, and the Serpent and his
race on the other; so that Man should break the head of the Serpent, and the
Serpent bruise the heel of Man.

The Woman was punished by plurality of pains in her conception, The Woman's
Sentence.
and to bring forth her children with tears and lamentations, etc. In the next
place comes Man, who having heard and given consent to the words of his wife,
The Sentence pronounced against Man.
and eaten the fruit of the forbidden Tree, he must also be punished; God said
unto him, That the earth should be accursed for his sake, in travel and pain
should he till it all his life time, it should bring forth thorns and thistles
unto him, he should feed on the herbs of the field, and eat his bread in the
sweat of his brows, until he was returned unto that earth from whence he had
been taken.

Of this great Tempter the Devil, by whom sin, death, and damnation first
entered, S. Aug. ins^litoq. cap. 16.
Saint Augustine in one of his Meditations uses words to this purpose: The
Tempter was present, neither wanted there time or place; but thou keptst me, o
Lord, that I gave not consent unto him. The Tempter came in Darkness, but thou
did comfort me with thy Light. The Tempter came armed and strong; but thou
did strengthen me and weaken him, that he should not overcome. The Tempter
came transfigured into an Angel of Light; but thou did illuminate me to
discover him, and curb him that he could not prevail against me.

He is the Great and Red Dragon, the old Serpent called the Devil and Satan,
having seven heads and ten horns; whom thou did create, a derider and mocker
in the great and spacious sea, in which creep Creatures without number, small
and great. These are the several sorts of Devils, who night and day travel
from place to place, seeking whom they may devour, which doubtless they would
do, did not thou preserve them. This is the old Dragon who was borne in the
Paradise of pleasure, that with his tail sweepes away the third part of the
Stars of heaven, and casts them on the earth; who with his poison infects the
waters of the earth, that such men as drink thereof may die; who prostitutes
gold before him as dust; As Mammon.
who thinks he can drink Jordan dry at one draught; and is made so that he
does not fear any.

And who shall defend us from his bitings, and pluck us ou^ of his jaws, but
thou o Lord, who have broken the head of the great Dragon? Do thou help us,
spread thy wings over us, that under them we may fly from this Dragon who
pursues us, and with thy shield and buckler defend us from his horns. It is
his sole desire and continual study, to destroy those Souls whom thou have
created: And therefore, o God, we call unto thee, to free us from our deadly
Adversary, who whether we wake or sleep, whether we eat or drink, or
whatsoever else we do, is always at hand night and day with his craft and
fraud, now openly, then secretly, directing his impoysoned shafts to murder
our souls.

And yet such is our madness, that though we behold this Dragon daily with
open mouth ready to devour us, yet we notwithstanding, wanton in our sloth,
are secure, before him who desires nothing so much as to destroy us. He
always waketh without sleep, to pursue us, and we will not awake from sleep
to preserve our selves.

Behold, he lays infinite snares before our feet, and spreads ginnes in all
our ways, to entrap our Souls; and who can avoid them? He has laid snares in
our Riches, snares in our Poverty, in our meat, our drink, our pleasure, our
sleep, our watching, in our words, our actions, and in all our ways. But
thou, o Lord, free us from the snares of the Hunter, that we may confess unto
thee and say, Blessed is the Lord, who has not delivered us into his jaws to
be devoured. My Soul has escaped as the Sparrow from the snare of the Hunter,
the snare is destroyed, and I am now set free. Amen.

Of spirits that challenge to themselves divine worship.
Now of those Spirits which attributed unto themselves Divine worship and
adoration, Such an one was he who spoke in the Oracle of Apollo at Delphos,
called the Diuiner: he made choice of a Virgin called Pythia, who sat on a
Trypos or three-footed stool, and held a rod in her hand; and when she
delivered any answer, was crowned with a Chaplet of fresh green Laurel.

Diverse Oracles.
There were Oracles in many other places: Liber or Bacchus was the Oracle of the
Sicilians, Ceres to the Rhodians, Diana to the Ephesians, Berecinthia to the
Romans, Belus to the Assyrians, Juno to the Numidians, Venus to the Thebans and
Cypriots, etc. In whom poor abused Idolaters reposed all their confidence,
tendering their vows and sacrifices in vain, their ridiculous answers being
mere imaginary and fabulous, as proceeding from the Devil, who is the Father
of Lies, etc.

It is worthy observation, to see in what absurd and more than brutish manner
he abused the Gentiles. The Sarronides of ancient Gaul.
The Sarronides were a kind of Philosophers who used Divination and Sacrifice
among the ancient Gauls: These in their solemn meetings would cut the throat
of a man, and by the manner of his fall, the flux of his blood, or the
separation of limbs and members, predict of future things.

They had Idols of immeasurable height, Their Idols.
made of twiggs and osiers, which they stuffed and filled with living men, and
then setting them on fire, Caesar in Coment.
with straw, reeds, and other things combustible, there the poor creatures
died most miserably. Commonly they made use of malefactors and such as were
apprehended for robberies: but for want of such offenders, they would not spare
honest and innocent persons. The like we read amongst the Samothracians,
observed in the honor of Ceres and Proserpina, in an Island where Hebrus falls
into the AEgean sea.

Strabo says, Strab. lib. 3.
They builded Colossi of wood, many parts whereof were interlaced with straw:
in these they in their sacrifices were accustomed to burn beasts and men among
them. Diod. lib. 4.
And Diodorus writes, That they used an impiety answerable to their brutish
nature; for they would reserve men, such as were convinced of notorious crimes,
for the space of some years, then spit them on sharp stakes from the
fundament to the mouth, then place them upon the piles of wood and put fire
unto them: and this was their manner of invocation to their false gods. Pomp.
Mel. Lib. 3. cap. 7.
Pomponius Nela thus speaks of them: The Gauls are a proud Nation,
superstitious, and cruel; for they undoubtedly believe, that men are the best
and most acceptable sacrifice to their gods.

The greatness of their Idols and Statues is not to be wondered at, because it
should seem they were frequent in those times: for we read in Pliny, Plin. l
34 c. 7.
We beheld (says he) huge massy statues of new invention, which they called
Colossi, and were no lower than Towers, but of equal height with them. Amongst
which he names Apollo Capitelinus, of thirty cubits height, Jupiter
Tarentinus, of forty cubits height; the Sun at Rhodes, seventy; Apollo of
Tuskany (which was in the Library of the Temple of Augustus) contained fifty
foot in height: that which Nero caused to be made, was an hundred foot high:
Zenodorus.
but of the greatest Zenodorus speaks, which was the statue of Mercury erected
in Auergne a province belonging to the G^^les, which surpassed all others in
height, bigness, and value, being four hundred (...) from the Basse to the
crown. This shows, that the statues of Idols belonging to the Gauls were of
extraordinary and wonderful greatness; which (as Caesar says) they filled
with living men, Iul. Caes. in Coment. lib 6.
making them their Sacrifices and Offerings.

Nor were the Gauls thus seduced by the Devil only, but even the Romans also:
for the Historiographer Livy tells us, That after the great overthrow at
Cannas (a town in Apulia) by Hannibal, certain extraordinary Sacrifices were
performed, by consultation had with diverse fatal books; Humane Sacrifices
performed at Rome.
wherein a man and woman of Gaul, and a man and woman of Greece, were brought
to the Ox market in Rome, and laid along upon the ground alive, in a place
round begu^t with stones, which never had been sullied with humane Offering,
and there sacrificed according to the Roman Rites and ceremonies. The like
has been amongst the Arabians, Thracians, Scytheans, Egyptians, and
Grecians: of which I will only deliver you what I have read in one or two
Authors.

Dionys. Hallic. lib. de Antiq. Romans 3.
Dionysius Halicarnaffeus to Hethus, That Jupiter and Apollo (under whose names
the Devil him self was shadowed) because the tenth borne of every male
child was not sacrificed unto them, sent great and grievous calamities and
plagues throughout Italy. And Di^dorus declares, Diod. lib. 20.
That in his time there was at Carthage an Idol of Saturn and it was supposed
(says he) that Saturn was much offended with the people, because in former
times they had been wont to sacrifice unto him the most worthy and best born of
their children; but by the success of times, in stead of their own children,
they bought and entertained others, secretly nourishing them in their houses,
and after sacrificed them to their gods. The which being discovered, and they
easily persuaded, That by this dissimulation and impostemus dealing, Saturn
was insenced against them, (because that some of their Allies were despoiled,
and part of their Country laid waste by the public Enemy) therefore the
better to appea^^ him, they sacrificed publicly at one time two (...) young
(...) such as were the choicest and best borne of all their Nobility and after
that, picked out three hundred (...), which with their own good liking
(because they perceived themselves to be suspected) gave their lives freely to
be sacrificed. He that of these things desires to be further satisfied, let him
read Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, Lib. 4. cap. 7.
who has many examples and discourses to this purpose, extracted out of sundry
Nations: affirming, That in the time of Adrian, and when the Evangelical
doctrine began somewhat earnestly to be embraced, these abominable cruelties by
degrees ceased, and were in short time abolished.

Of the prioritie and degrees that Devils have amongst themselves, of their
Fall, number, motion, and excellency of knowledge, so much has been spoken
as may (with safety and without profaneness) be held sufficient. And to
prove that there is Daemoniacall Magic needs not be questioned; as may be
gathered by the ancient Philosophers, The antiquity of Magic.
Tresmegistus, Pythagoras, Plato, Psellus, Plotinus, Iamblicus, Proclus,
Chalcidius, and Apuleius: And of the Perepateticks, Theophrastus, Ammonius,
Philoponus, Avicenna, Algazel, and others. Saint Clement witnesses, Clement
lib. 4. Recognit.
That this Art was devised before the Flood, and first by Devils delivered unto
the Giants: and that by them Cham the son of Noah was instructed. For thus he
writes, Art Magic before the Flood.
They taught, That the Devils by Art Magic might be obliged to obey men,
which was done by charms and incantations, and as out of a forge or furnace of
mischief (all light of piety being subtracted) they filled the world with
the smoke of that ungodly practice. For this and some other causes was the
Deluge brought upon the world, in which all mankind was destroyed saving Noah
and his family, who with his three sons and their wives were only preserved.
Of which sons, Cham, to one of his sons called Nisraim, taught this
Devilish Art: from whom the Egyptians, Babylonians, and Persians derive their
progeny. The Nations called him Zoroaster: in whose name diverse Magical
books were divulged, etc. It is said, that he comprehended the whole Art in
an hundred thousand Verses, and after in a great whirle-winde was hurried away
alive by the Devil, Suidas.
from the midst of his Scholars, as Suidas reports.

Apuleius ascribes to the Persians the invention of twofold Magic: Apul.
Plut. in lib. de Isid. and Osyrid.
for they believed in two gods, as the Authors and Lords of all things; one
good, whom they styled Ormusda, and thought him to be the Sun: Another evil,
whom they called Arimanes, or Pluto. From these they derived a double Magic;
one which consisted altogether in superstition, and the adoration of false
gods; the other in the inuestigation and search of the obscurities of hidden
Nature, The Division of Magic. Theurgia Goetia sieve Necromantia.
to acquire the secrets thereof. Hence some divide this abstruse Art into
Theurgia, White Magic, and Goetia, Black Magic, or the Black Art,
otherwise called Necromantia. The effects of the first they confer upon the
good Angels, and the effects of the other upon evil: affirming the one to be
lawful, the other unlawful; for so Scotus Parmensis with diverse other
Platonickes have affirmed. But that they are both most blasphemous and impious,
hear what Cornelius Agrippa an Archimagi himself writes: Cornel. Agrip.
these be his words, This Theurgia under the names of God and his good Angels,
does comprehend and include the fallacies of the evil Demons: and though the
greatest part of the ceremonies profess purity of mind and body, with other
external complements; yet the impure and unclean Spirits are deceiving
powers, and undermine us, that they may be worshipped as gods. To which he
adds; The Art Almadel, the Art Notarie, the Art Paulina, the Art of
Revelations, and the like, full of superstitions, are so much the more
pernicious and dangerous, by how much they appear to the Unlearned, Divine and
gracious.

Artic. 9.19.23.
Hence came that Decree in the Parisian School, That for God, by Magic Art to
compel his Angels to be obedient to Incantations; this to believe is an error.
That the good Angels can be included in gems or stones, or shall consecrate or
make holy any figures, Images, or garments, or to do any such things as are
comprehended in their wicked Arts; to believe, is an error. For, by what can
these Spirits which they use in their exorcismes be thought, or called good,
when they desire to be adored as gods, and to have sacrifices made unto them?
than which treason against the Divine Majesty, there is nothing in them more
alien and foreign; they as much abhorring and detesting it, as the evil Angels
pursue and seek after it.

The Deriuation of Goetia or Necroma^tia.
Goetia in the Greek tongue signifies Impostura, or Imposture: even as
Necromantia comes of Nechros, Mortuus, which is dead, and of Manteia, which
is Diuinatio, as much to say as a divination from the Dead. But from
definitions, I will proceed to history.

Of the Witch Hercyra.
In the year 1558, in a Village belonging to Thuringia, not far from the town
^ena, a certain Magitian being apprehended and examined, confessed publicly
that he learned that hellish Art of an old woman of Hercyra; and said, that by
her means he had often conference with the Devil, and from him had the skill
to know the properties and virtues of diverse herbs and Simples, which helped
him in the cure of sundry diseases and infirmities.

Arts. magus.
Artesius a grand Magitian so speaks of the Art, as if there were no
difference at all betwixt white and black Magic: first he proposes the
Characters of the Planets, Rings, and Seals, how and under what constellation
they ought to be made. Next, what belongs to the art of Prediction and telling
things future, especially by the flight of Birds. Thirdly, how the voices of
brutish Animals may be interpreted and understood; adding the Divination by
Lots from Proclus. Fourthly, he shows the power and virtue of Herbs. Fifthly,
what belongs unto the attaining of the Philosophers stone. Sixthly, how things
past, future, and present, may be distinguished and known. Seventhly, by what
rites and ceremonies Art Magic may be exercised. Eighthly, by what means life
may be prolonged: where he tells a tale of one that lived one thousand twenty
and five years, etc.

The mention of these things are not, that the least confidence or credit
should be given unto them; but to show by what cunning and subtle snares the
Devil works, to entrap and entangle poor Souls in his manifold deceptions
and illusions.

In this Goeticke and Necromanticke Magic, Al Magic is a compact with the
Devil.
it is observed by D. Thom. Gulielmus Parisiensis, Scotus, Gerson, Abulensis,
Victoria, Valentia, Spinaeus, Sprangerus, Navarra, Grillandus, Remigius, and
others, That it is the foundation of a secret or express compact with the
Devil, by the force of which, miserable men pawn and oblige their souls unto
him: He interchangeably submits himself to them as their Vassal; he is
present as soon as called, being asked he answers, being commanded he obeyes;
not bound upon any necessity, but that he may thereby intricate and indeare
unto him the souls of his Clients, to destroy them more suddenly and
vnsuspectedly. For the Magitian has only a confidence that he has empire
over the Devil; who again counterfeiteth himself to be his servant and
Vassal.

Eutichianus Patriarch of Constantinople records this History: Eutichian.
Patriarch.
In the time of the Emperor Iustinianus (says he) there lived in Adana a
city of Cilicia, one Theophilus, A strange History of one Theophilus.
who was by office the Steward of the Church; he was so beloved and gracious
in the eyes of all men, as that he was held to be worthy of an Episcopal
dignity. Which notwithstanding he most constantly refused: and afterward being
vnmeritedly accused, by such as emulated his honest life and sincere carriage,
he was put by his place of Stewardship: which drove him into that desperation
and impotencie of mind, that by the counsel of a Jewish Magitian, he
renounced his Savior by an Indenture writ under his own hand, delivering
himself wholly into the empire of Satan, who was many times visible unto him.
But now miserable man what shall he do? he grows repentant of the act, and
troubled in Spirit, when he thinks how much he has insenced his Maker and
Redeemer, by delivering himself up a voluntary slave and captive to the great
Adversary the Devil. The story says, In this anxietie and perturbation of
mind he thought it best to fly for succor to the blessed Virgin Mary; and to
that purpose retired himself to a Temple consecrate unto her, in which he
tendered many supplications and prayers, joined with fasting and tears, making
great show of effectual repentance. Forty days together he frequented the
Church, without intermission or cessation of weeping and praying; presenting
his blasphemous writing upon the Altar, which miraculously (as they say) was
taken thence, and he received again into Gods favor.

The manner of Homage done to the Devil.
The manner of this homage (and others) done to the Devil, is as follows:
First, the Magitian or Witch is brought before the Tribunal of Satan, either
by a familiar Spirit, or else by a Mage or Hag of the same profession: he sits
crowned in a Majesticke Throne, round inguirt with other Devils, who attend on
him as his Lords, Barons, and Princes, richly habited. The Palace seems
wholly to be built of marble, the walls hung with gold and purple-coloured
Arras; all showing the pomp of regalitie and state. Satan himself from his
Royal seat casts his eyes round about, as if ready to incline his benign
ears to any humble suitor whatsoever.

Then steps forth a Devil of a venerable aspect, and says, O most potent Lord
and Master, great Patron of the spacious Universe, in whose hands are all the
riches and treasures of the earth, and all the goods and gifts of the world,
this man I present before thine Imperial Throne, to follow thy standard, and
to fight under the patronage of thy great name and power; who is ready to
acknowledge thee to be God and Creator of all things, and none but thee. It
shall be in thy clemency, o most sovereign Lord, to vouchsafe this man (or
woman) the grace of thy benign aspect, and receive him (or her) into thy
patronage and favor.

To which he with a grave countenance and loud oration thus answers; I cannot
but commend this thy friend, who so cordially has committed himself into our
safeguard and trust; whom as our Client and Fauorit we accept, and promise to
supply him with all felicity and pleasure, both in this present life and the
future. This done, the miserable wretch is commanded to renounce his Faith and
Baptism, the Eucharist, and all other holy things, and to confess Lucifer his
only Lord and Governor. Which is done with many execrable ceremonies, not fit
to be here remembered. Then is the Writing delivered, (as was before spoken of
Theophilus) written with the blood of the left thumb. Then does the Devil
mark him either in the brow, neck, or shoulder, but commonly in the more
secret parts, with the stamp or character of the foot of an Hare, a black
Dog, or Toad, or some such figure, by which he brands him (as the custom was
of old to mark their slaves and captives whom they bought in the market for
money) to become his perpetual slave and Vassal.

And this, Nigerius, Sprangerus, Bodinus, etc. say, The wicked Spirit does, as
desirous to imitate God in all things; who in the old Testament marked his
chosen People with the seal of Circumcision, to distinguish them from the
Gentiles; and in the New Testament with the sign of the Cross, which, as
Hieronimus and Nazianzen say, succeeded that of Circumcision. And as the Devil
is always adverse to his Creator, so he will be worshipped with contrary
Rites and ceremonies. Therefore when Magitians and Witches present themselves
unto him, they worship him with their faces from, and their backs toward him,
and sometimes standing upon their heads, with their heels upward: but which is
most beastly and abominable of all, in sign of homage he presents unto them
his tail to kiss. For so Petrus Burgolus and Michael Verdunus, with diverse
other Magitians besides, have confessed.

Now to speak of those Sorteligers, Pythagoras used characters, etc.
and the effects of their Art. S. Austin is of opinion, That Pythagoras used
characters, numbers, and letters, by which he wrought many things seeming
miraculous. Amongst others, he tamed a wild Bear of an unmeasurable
greatness and fierceness, making it to follow him like a dog, whithersoeuer
he went or came, and at length gave him leave to depart again into the
Deserts; but with condition, That he should never offer any violence to man or
woman: which Covenant (it is said) he kept inuiolate.

Coelius tells us, Coel. li. 9. ca. 7.
That the same Pythagoras near to Tarentum spying an Ox to feed upon Beans,
called the Heardsman, and bid him drive away the beast, and to forbid him from
eating any more of that kind of grain. To whom the other laughing, replied,
That his Ox was not capable of such admonition, Plut. in Vita Numae.
but told him his advice had been better bestowed in his School amongst his
Scholars. Which said, Pythagoras having murmured some few words to himself,
the Ox left eating, ran to his manger in the City, could never after be
coupled to the Yoke, but like a domesticke Spaniel would take food from the
hands of any man.

Much after this kind is that which the Laplanders, the Finlanders, and the
Bothnienses vse^ Lapland. Finland Bothnienses.
The Necromancer enters his chamber, with his wife and one companion only;
there he takes a brazen Frog and Serpent, lays it upon an anvill, and gives
it a certain number of blows with an iron hammer: then after the muttering of
some few Magic Verses, in a great rapture he falls down into a trance.
Whilst he thus lies as seeming dead, his Attendant watches him, lest he be
troubled with Flea, Fly, or any such thing. At length coming to himself, he
can resolve you of any difficulty, whose solution you before demanded.

The like may be said of that superstition used by the Magitian Iamnes, Iamnes
Magus.
Schoolmaster to the Emperor Theophilus; who (as Cedrenus witnesses) when
three great Commanders and Captains of the barbarous Nations were up in arms
against the Empire, Theophilus doubtful of the event of that war, desired of
Iamnes to be resolved thereof. Who presently caused three great iron Hammers to
be made: which done, he delivered them into the hands of three strong and able
men, and about midnight, after some incantations whispered, he brought forth a
statue with three heads, and commanded them with all their strength to strike
upon those three heads at once; which they did: two of them were quite beat
off, and the third was much bruised, but not decollated. By which Iamnes gave
the Emperor hope of victory: and such indeed was the event of that War; for
of those three Captains two perished in the battle, and the third grievously
wounded, with the small remainder of his Army got with great difficulty into
his Country. Nicetas affirms, That Euphrosine the wife of Alexius Angelus
Emperor of Constantinople, was much devoted to this kind of Magic.

In Diocesi, Argento ratensi. Meng. in Comp. Exercis.
The Count of Vestrauia, by a Concubine of his (whose company before his
lawful Nuptials he had used) was alike effascinated. She by the advice of an
old Witch had cast an enchanted pot into a deep Well which was in a back yard
belonging to the Palace of the said Earl; by which he was made incapable of
all congresse, and therefore out of all hope of any Issue to succeed him. Which
continued for the space of three whole years: after which season, meeting with
this gentlewoman of his former acquaintance; after a friendly salutation had
past between them, she asked him how he fared since his marriage, how his wife
and he agreed together, and how many children they had between them? The
Earl out of those words gathering some cause of suspicion, dissembling his
discontent, answered, That (he thanked Heaven) all was well at home, and that
God had blessed him with three sweet and hopeful children, and that his wife at
the present was as great as she could well go with the fourth. At which answer
he perceived a change of color in her face; when she in a great rage said,
And may I believe this? Then evil betide that cursed old Hag, who persuaded
me, That she had so wrought with the Devil that you should never have child,
nor have the ability to be the father of any. The Count smiling at this,
desired to be satisfied from her, what she intended by those words. To whom she
disclosed all the circumstances, How being much grieved that he had so
unkindly forsaken her, she had dealt with a Witch, who had promised unto her,
etc. telling him of the enchanted pot. Which the Count upon her words causing
to be searched and found, and after burnt, his natural vigor and virtue
returned, and he was after the father of a numerous Issue.

One near to this, Niderus in Fermicarth.
but of greater malice, Niderus reports to have happened in a town called
Boltingeu: A famous Conjurer called Stradelin, In Dioesi, Lansonensi.
being convicted of sundry malefactions; among other confessed, That for malice
he bore to a man and his wife, for seven years together he had strangled
seven children in her womb, insomuch that all her births were abortiue. In all
which time all their Cattle in the same sort miscarried, and not one of them
brought forth a living and thriuing Issue. And all this was done by burying a
Lizard under the threshold of his door, which if it were removed,
fruitfulness and fertility should come again both to her, and to their herds
of cattle. Upon this free confession the threshold was searched, but no such
Worm or Serpent found: for it is probable, that in that time it was rotten and
turned to dust. But they took the threshold and all the earth about it, and
caused them to be burned, and then the Ligature ceased, and they were all
restored to their former increase of progeny.

The same Author speaks of one Oeniponte a most notorious Witch, Oeniponte
Maga.
who by making a picture of wax, and pricking it with needles in diverse parts,
and then burying it under the threshold of her neighbors house, whom she much
hated, she was tormented with such grievous and insufferable prickings in her
flesh, as if so many needles had been then sticking at once in her body. But
the Image being found and burned, she was instantly restored to her former
health and strength.

But to leave these, and come to other kinds of Sorceries and Witchcraft,
Grillandus.
such as we find recorded in History. Grillandus is of opinion, That every
Magition and Witch, after they have done their homage to the Devil, have a
familiar Spirit given to attend them, whom they call Magistellus, Magister
Martinettus, Magistellus. Martinettus.
or Martinellus; Martinellus.
and these are sometimes visible unto them in the shape of a Dog, a Rat, an
AEthiope, etc. So it is reported of one Magdalena Crucia, That she had one of
those Paredrij to attend her, like a Blacke-More. Glycas tells us, Glycas^
That Simon Magus had a great black Dog tied in a chain, Simon Magus.
who if any man came to speak with him whom he had no desire to see, was ready
to devour him. His shadow likewise he caused still to go before him: making
the people believe that it was the soul of a dead man who still attended him.

These kinds of familiar Spirits are such as they include or keep in Rings
hallowed, These are called Paredrij.
in Viols, Boxes, and Caskets: not that Spirits having no bodies, can be
imprisoned there against their wills; but that they seem to be so confined of
their own free will and voluntary motion.

Johannes Leo writes, That such are frequent in Afric, shut in caves, Aves
Hariolatrices.
and bear the figure of birds called Aves Hariolatrices, by which the
Magitions raise great sums of money, by predicting by them of things future.
For being demanded of any difficulty, they bring an answer written in a small
scroll of paper, and deliver it to the Magition in their bills. Martinus
Anthoni^s Delrius, of the society of Jesus, a man of profound learning and
judgment, writes, An advocat of Burgdegal.
That in Burdegall there was an Advocate, who in a Viol kept one of these
Paredrij enclosed. He dying, his heirs knowing thereof, Mart. Anton. Delrius.
were neither willing to keep it, neither durst they break it: and demanding
counsel, they were persuaded to go to the Jesuits College and to be directed
by them. The Fathers commanded it to be brought before them and broken: but the
Executors humbly besought them that it might not be done in their presence,
being fearful lest some great disaster might succeed thereof. At which they
smiling, flung it against the walls and broke it in pieces; at the breaking
whereof there was nothing seen or heard save a small noise, as if the two
elements of water and fire had newly met together, and as soon parted.

Philostratus.
Philostratus tells us, That Apollonius Tyan^us was never without such Rings.
And Alexander Neapolitanus affirms, That he received them of Iarcha the great
Prince of the Gymnosophists, which he took of him as a rich Present; for by
them he could be acquainted with any deep secret whatsoever. Such a Ring had
Johannes Iodocus Rosa, Iarcha Magus.
a Citisen of Cortacensia, who every fifth day had conference with the Spirit
enclosed, using it as a counselor and director in all his affairs and
enterprises whatsoever. By it he was not only acquainted with all news, as
well foreign as domesticke, but learned the cure and remedy for all griefs and
di^eases: insomuch that he had the reputation of a learned and expert
Physician. At length being accused of Sortelige or enchantment, At Arnhem in
Guelderland he was proscribed: and in the year 1548 the Chancellor caused his
Ring in the public market place to be laid upon an Anvil, and with an iron
hammer beaten to pieces.

A strange stiri^ related by Mengius.
Mengius reports, from the relation of a dear friend of his, (a man of
approved fame and honesty) this history: In a certain town under the
jurisdiction of the Venetians, one of these praestigious Artists (whom some
call Pythonickes) having one of these Rings, in which he had two familiar
Spirits exorcised and bound, came to a Predicant or preaching Friar, a man of
sincere life and conversation; and confessed unto him, that he was possessed
of such an enchanted Ring, with such Spirits charmed, with whom he had
conference at his pleasure. But since he considered with himself, that it was
a thing dangerous to his Soul, and abominable both to God and man, he desired
to be clearly acquit thereof; and to that purpose he came to receive of him
some godly counsel. But by no persuasion would the Religious man be induced to
have any speech at all with those evil Spirits (to which motion the other had
before earnestly solicited him) but admonished him to cause his Magic Ring to
be broken, and that to be done with all speed possible. At which words the
Familiars were heard (as it were) to mourn and lament in the Ring, and to
desire that no such violence might be offered unto them; but rather than so,
that it would please him to accept of the Ring and keep it, promising to do
him all service and vassallage: of which if he pleased to accept, they would in
short time make him to be the most famous and admired Predicant in all Italy.
But he perceiving the Devils cunning, under this color of courtesy, made
absolute refusal of their offer; and withal conjured them to know the reason
why they would so willingly submit themselves to his patronage? After many
euasiue lies and deceptious answers, they plainly confessed unto him, That they
had of purpose persuaded the Magition to hear him preach, that by that sermon
his conscience being pricked and galled, he might be weary of the Ring; and
being refused of the one, be accepted of the other: by which they hoped in
short time so to have puffed him up with pride and heresy, to have precipitated
his soul into certain and neuer-ending destruction. At which the Churchman
being zealously enraged, with a great hammer broke the Ring almost to dust, and
in the name of God sent them thence to their own habitations of darkness, or
whither it pleased the higher Powers to dispose them.

Of this kind doubtless was the Ring of Gyges (of whom Herodotus makes
mention) by virtue of which he had power to walk invisible; Gyges Ring.
who by the murder of his Sovereign Candaules, married his Queen, and so
became King of Lydia. Such likewise had the Phocensian Tyrant, Clemens
Stromataeu^.
who (as Clemens Stromataeus speaks) by a sound which came of it self, was
warned of all times seasonable and unseasonable, in which to manage his
affairs: who notwithstanding could not be forewarned of his pretended death,
but his Familiar left him in the end, suffering him to be slain by the
Conspirators. Such a Ring likewise had one Hieronimus Chancellor of Mediolanum,
which after proved to be his untimely ruin.

Concerning the mutation or change of Sex, Of Women that have changed their Sex.
which some have attributed to the fallacies of the Devil; it is manifest that
they have been much deceived therein, since of it many natural reasons may be
given, as is apparent by many approved histories. Phlegon in his book De
Mirabil. and Longev. tells us, That a virgin of Smyrna called Philotis, the
same night that she was married to a young man, those parts which were inuerted
and concealed, began to appear, and she rose in the morning of a contrary
sex. As likewise, That in Laodicea a city of Syria, one AEteta after the same
manner rose from her husbands side a young man, and after altered her name to
AEtetus; at the same time when Macrinus was President of Athens, and L. Lamia
and AElianus Veter were Consuls in Rome.

Fulgotius, lib. 1. Ex^up. cap. 6.
In the time that Ferdinand the first was King of Naples, one Ludovicus Guarna a
citisen of Salern, had five daughters, of which the two eldest were called
Francisca and Carola; either of which at fifteen years of age found such
alteration in themselves, that they changed their foeminine habits, and names
also, the one being called Franciscus, the other Carolus. In the reign of the
same King, the daughter of one Eubulus being delivered unto an husband,
returned from him altered in her sex, sued for her dowerie, and recovered it.

Amatus Lusit. Cent. 2. Curs. 39.
Amatus Lucitanus testifies, that in the town of Erguira, distant some nine
leagues from Couimbrica, there lived a Nobleman who had a daughter named Maria
Pachecha, who by the like accident proving to be a young man, changed her habit,
and called her self Manuel Pachecha. Who after made a voyage into the Indies,
and became a valiant soldier, attaining to much wealth and honor; and
returning, married a Lady of a noble Family, but never attained to have issue,
but had an effoeminat countenance to his dying day. The like Livy remembers of
a woman of Spoleta, in the time of the second Punicke war.

Ant. Torquin. Dial. 1.
But a story somewhat stranger than these is related by Anthonius Torquinada;
That not far from the city Beneventum in Spain, a Countryman of a mean
fortune married a wife, who because she was barren used her very roughly,
insomuch that she lead with him a most discontented life. Whereupon one day
putting on one of her husbands suits, to disguise her self from knowledge, she
stole out of the house, to prove a more peaceable fortune elsewhere: and having
been in diverse services, whether the conceit of her man's habit, or whither
Nature strangely wrought in her, but she found a strange alteration in her
self, insomuch that she who had been a wife, now had a great desire to do the
office of an husband, and married a woman in that place whither she had retired
her self. Long she kept these things close to her self, till in the end one
of her familiar acquaintance traveling by chance that way, and seeing her to
be so like unto that woman whom he before knew, demanded of her, If she were
not brother to the wife of such a man, who had forsaken his house so many
years since? To whom, upon promise of secrecy, she revealed all, according to
the circumstances before rehearsed. Examples to this purpose are infinite: let
these suffice for many.

A strange Tale is that which Phlegon the freed-man of Hadrianus reports, The
History of M^chates and Philemium.
of which he protests himself to have bin eye witness. Philemium (says he)
the daughter of Philostratus and Charitus, fell deeply inamoured of a young man
called Machates, who at that time ghested in her fathers house. Which her
parents took so ill, that they excluded Machates from their family. At which
she so much grieved, that soon after she died and was buried. Some six months
after, the young man returning thither, and entertained into his wonted lodging,
Philemium his Beloved came into the chamber, spoke with him, supt with him, and
after much amorous discourse, she received of him as a gift, a Ring of iron and
a Cup guilt; and she in interchange gave him a Ring of gold and an
hand-kerchiefe: which done, they went to bed together. The Nurse being very
diligent to see that her new ghest wanted nothing, came up with a candle and
saw them both in bed together. She ouer-joyed, runs in have to bring the
Parents news that their daughter was alive. They amassed rise from their bed,
and find them both fast-sleeping; when in great rapture of joy they called and
pulled them to awake. At which she rising upon her pillow, with a severe look
cast upon them thus said, O you most cruel and obdurat Parents; and are you so
envious of your daughters pleasure, that you will not suffer her for the space
of one three days to enjoy her dear Machates? but this curiosity shall be
little for your ease, for you shall again renew your former sorrows; which
having spoke, she changed countenance, sunk down into the bed, and died: at
which sight the father and mother were both intranced. The rumor of this came
into the city, the Magistrates caused the grave to be opened, but found not the
body there, only the iron Ring and the Cup given her by Machates. For the same
Coarse was then in the chamber and bed; which by the counsel of one Hillus a
Soothsayer was cast into the fields: and the young man finding himself to be
deluded by a Specter, to avoid the ignominy, he with his own hands slew
himself.

Possible it is, Hillus Magus.
that the inferior Devils at the command of the superior should possess the
bodies of the Dead for a time, and move in them; Eunapius.
as by examples may appear. Eunapius reports, That an Egyptian Necromancer
presented the person of Apollineus before the people. But Iamblicus a greater
Magition standing by, told them, It was not he, but the body of a Fencer who
had before been slain. When whispering a stronger charm to himself, the
Spirit forsook the body, which falling down dead, appeared to them all to be
the stinking carcass of the Fencer before spoken of, and well known to them
all.

Donica:
The like is reported of one Donica, who after she was dead, the Devil had
walked in her body for the space of two years, so that none suspected but that
she was still alive: for she did both speak and eat, though very sparingly;
only she had a deep palenesse in her countenance, which was the only sign
of death. At length a Magition coming by, where she was then in the company
of many other Virgins; as soon as he beheld her, he said, Fair Maids, why
keep you company with this dead Virgin, whom you suppose to be alive? When
taking away the Magic charm which was tied under her arm, the body fell
down liuelesse and without motion.

A strange Story of Cornelius Agrippa.
Cornelius Agrippa living in Louvaine, had a young man who tabled with him. One
day having occasion to be abroad, he left the keys of his study with his
wife, but gave her great charge to keep them safe, and trust them to no man.
The Youth ouer-curious of novelty, never ceased to importune the woman till
she had lent him the key to take view of his Library. Which entering, he
happened upon a book of Conjuration: he reads, when straight he hears a great
bouncing at the door, which he not minding, reads on; the knocking grows
greater, and the noise louder: But he making no answer, the Devil breaks
open the door and enters, and asks what he commands him to have done, or why
he was called? The Youth amassed, and through fear not able to answer, the
Devil seiseth upon him, and wrythes his neck asunder. Agrippa returns,
finds the young man dead, and the Devils insulting over him: He retyres to
his Art, and calls the Devils to account for what they had done: they tell all
that had passed. Then he commanded the homicide to enter into the body, and
walk with him into the market place where the Students were frequent, and
after two or three turns to forsake the body. He did so; the body falls
down dead before the Scholars; all judge it to be of some sudden Apoplexy,
but the marks about his neck and jaws make it somewhat suspicious. And what
the Archi-Mage concealed in Louvaine, (being banished thence) he afterward
feared not to publish in Lotharinge.

A strange Story.
Don Sebastian de Cobarruvias Orozco, in his treasury of the Castilian Tongue
(speaking how highly the Spaniards prise their beards, and that there is no
greater disgrace can be done unto him, than to be plucked by it, His name Cid,
Rui, Diaz.
and baffled) reports, That a noble Gentleman of that Nation being dead, a
Jew who much hated him in his life, stole privately into the room where his
body was newly laid out; and thinking to do that in death, which he never
durst do living, stooped down to pluck him by the beard: at which the body
started up, and drawing his sword (that then lay by him) half way out, put the
Jew into such a fright, that he ran out of the Room as if a thousand Devils
had been behind him. This done, the body lay down as before unto rest, and the
Jew after that, turned Christian. Let these suffice out of infinites.

Having discoursed in the former Tractat, of the Astrologomagi, Of Astrology.
it shall not be impertinent to speak something concerning Astrology, which
is defined to be Scientia Astris, a knowledge in the Stars; of which (as
Pliny witnesses in the 57 book of his Natural History) Atlanta King of the
Mauritanians was the first Inuentor. Of this Art the sacred Scriptures in
diverse places make mention: As in Deutron. 4.19. And lest thou should lift up
thine eyes to heaven, and when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the
Stars, with all the Host of Heaven, should be driven to worship them and
serve them: which the Lord thy God has distributed to all people under the
whole heaven. Again, Esaias 47.13. Thou art wearied in the multitude of thy
counsels; let now the Astrologers, the Star-gasers, and Prognosticators stand
up, and save thee from those things that shall come upon thee, etc. Now
wherefore God created those blessed Lights of heaven, is manifest, Genesis 1.14.
And God said, Let there be Lights in the Firmament of the heaven, to separate
the day from the night, and let them be for signs and for seasons, and for
days and years. Again, Cap. 8. verse. 22. Hereafter seed time and harvest,
and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night shall not cease so
long as the earth endure. Esaias 44.24. Thus says the Lord thy Redeemer, and he
that formed thee from the womb; I am the Lord that made all things, that
spread out the heavens above, and stretches out the earth by my self; I
destroy the tokens of Soothsayers, and make them that conjecture, fools; and
turn the wise men backward, and make their knowledge foolishness. You shall
read also Jeremy, 10.2. Learn not the way of the Heathen, and be not afraid
of the signs of heaven, though the Heathen be afraid of such.

We hear what the Scriptures say: Philosophers concerning Astrology.
let us now examine the Philosophers. Francisc. Patr. de Regno, lib. 2. cap.
16. says, That Julius Caesar was the most skillful of all others in the art of
Astronomy, of which he published diverse learned books; by which he had
knowledge to predict his own fate, but had not the skill to avoid it.
Astrology (says Aristotle, Metaph. lib. 12. cap. 4.) has a speculation into
a sublime substance, sempiternall and sencible, which is heaven. Other
Mathematick Sciences meddle not with Substances, as Arithmeticke and Geometry.
Theon. 1. de Anim. cap. 1. The nobility of Astrology is more ample, by reason
of the more worthiness of the subject about which it is conversant. Astrology
(says Alexand. Aphrod. Metaph. 5. does not dispute of the nature of the Stars,
but of their course; it only contemplateth their motions, progresses, and
regresses. Plato, de Republ. Dial. 7. proves Astrology to be not only
conducefull to Agriculture and to Navigations, but also to military Discipline.
Of the excellency of Astronomy you may read Pliny, lib. 7. cap. 37. of the
invention thereof. Cael. Rhodig. lib. 20. cap. 7. of the Inuentors. Iolidorus,
of the use of it concerning military affairs. Cael. Rhodig. lib. 18. cap. 34.
of the truth and profit thereof. Io. Dansk. de Saxonia, of the defense thereof.
By Gabriel Perovanus, What things every one has found by Celestial
observation. Pliny. Quantum Astronomia metiuntur, tantum, Astrologi mentiuntur;
says Marcil. Fic. lib. 4. cap. 36.

Now those who give just reasons, Why judiciarie or Diuinatorie Astrology
ought to be exploded and abandoned, are Epiphanius, disputing against the
Pharisees and the Manichees; Basilius Hexameri, Homil. 1. Chrisost. in Genes.
Homil. 5. Saint Augustine also greatly complains, how himself had been
deceived therewith, and inueigheth not only against the Art, but also against
the Professors thereof: Confess. Lib. 4. cap. 3. and in diverse other of his
Works.

Apothegmes.
Bion was wont to say, That those Astronomers were to be held ridiculous, who
when they could not discern fishes in the water swimming toward them on the
shore, yet would not blush to say, That they were able to see and discover
those hidden things which were in the heavens. Stobae. Sermon. 78. It was a Maxim
held by Ariston, That of those things whereof the Philosophers search to have
inspection, some belong to us to know, and some not, and some things are
altogether above our reach. Intimating, That the discipline of good manners di^
pertain unto us to know, but not vain Sophismes; because they were not only
not profitable, but also the breeders of wrangling contentions: but Astrology
and Astronomy were altogether above our reach. Stob. Sermon. 78. Thales whilst
he was earnestly looking upon the Stars, falling into a ditch, and coming
out all bedawbed with dirt, was thus taunted by his Maid-seruant; Justly, Sir,
is this mischance, happened unto you, who look up toward the heavens to learn
what is there, being ignorant in the mean time, of what lies before your
feet. The Poet Accius was wont to say, That he never could give any confidence
to those Augurs and Star-gasers, who only filled other men's ears with air,
to furnish their own private coffers with gold. With this witty Dilemma was
Favorinus wont to taunt the judicatorie Astrologers; Either they predict (says
he) things adverse, or prosperous: if in prosperous things they fail, thou art
made miserable in thy frustrate expectation; if in adverse things, though they
happen not, thou art made miserable by thy vain fear. If they speak truly,
and things happen vnprosperously, thou art made miserable in thy mind, before
thy misery come upon thee: if they promise happy things, and they in time
happen unto thee; yet from hence discommoditie notwithstanding does arise: the
expectation of thy hope will more trouble thee with doubtful suspense, than
the fruit thereof when it comes can yield thee profit or delight. Therefore
(he concludes) I wish none of any brain or understanding to trouble
themselves in seeking after these presaging Astrologers, who presume but
vainly, That they can truly predict of such things as are to come.

The Egyptians hierogriphycally (says Pier. Valor. lib. 38. page 369) did
signify Astrology; Hierogliphick
Per maculosam Hinnulij pellem, i. By the spotted skin of a Dog-fish. Emblem.
It was also emblematically observed by Nestors Bowl, the great cup which he
used to quaffe in: which Alciatus, Emblem 101, expresses thus: Nestorum
geminis Cratera hunc accipe fundis,
Quot gravis Argenti, etc.
Nestor's great Bowl, with double bottoms made,
Forged out of massy silver, was conveyed
For observation; being round inchac'd
With golden studs, on it four handles placed,
On each of which a golden Dove was set.
Which Bowl the long-lived Nestor (much in debt
To Time and Nature) only (as it is read)
Of all the Greeks, could lift it to his head,
And quaffe it brim'd: for which he was commended.
Tell us, o Muse, what was by this intended?
In this large Goblet, of so huge a mass,
Heaven with the round circumference figured was.
Next, in the Silver metal fined and try'de,
The color of the Firmament's imply'de.
Then by the golden studs, the Stars are meant;
The Pleiades, the four Doves represent.
And by the two embossed Bottoms were
Figured the greater and the lesser Bear.
Wise Nestor these by long experience knew,
Howeuer they seem difficult to you.
"The Soldier knows what'longs unto the Wars,
But he that is learned can command the Stars.


Icarus the son of Dadalus is another Astrologicall Emblem composed by the
same Author; who flying too near the Sun, and melting his waxen wings, was
precipitated into that sea which still bears his name. From whom this
admonition is derived: Astrologus, caveat quicquam praedicere praeceps:
Nam cadet Impostor, dum super Astra volat.
Astrologer, beware what thou
Do rashly undergo:
The Impostor aiming at the Stars,
(Whilst looking high) falls low.


Mathesis.
Mathesis or Mathema, is as much as Disciplina, and signifies Disce, or Doceo.
Mathematri are called those Arts which consist of firm demonstrations, in
which those which are expert are called Mathematici; namely those which
profess Geometry, Music, Arithmeticke, and Astronomie^ The Chaldaeans, who
in process of time turned Astronomy into divining Astrology, called
themselves Mathematicians; by which they have made the name notoriously
infamous.

Johannes Picus Mirandula, in Astrolog. lib. 12. cap. 2. says, That Astrology
makes not men wise: and therefore of old it was only the study of children;
and whosoever gives himself wholly to the practice thereof, he gives great
occasion and liberty to errors in Philosophy. The Mathematicians or judiciarie
Astrologers (as Tacit. Lib. Histor. 1. relates) are a kind of Professors, to
great men unfaithful, and to all such as put confidence in them, deceitful;
and their practice was altogether exploded in Rome. Stobaeus, Sermon. 2. de
Impudentia, reports, That Ariston was wont to say of all such as gave
themselves over to Encyclopaedia or Mathematical discipline, neglecting mean
time the more necessary study of Philosophy; That they might fitly be
compared with the suitors of Penelope, who when they could not enjoy mistres,
went about to vitiate and corrupt the maids. Dion Cassius tells us, That the
Emperor Hadrian by his skill in this Mathesis could predict things future; by
which he knew Varus not to be long lived: from that verse of Virgil, Ostendit
terris hunc tantum Fata, neque vltra
Esse sinunt, etc. --
i. The Fates will only show him to the Earth, and then suffer him to be no
more.

Clemens, lib. 5. Recognit. says, As it happens unto men who have dreams,
and understand nothing of their certainty, yet when any event shall happen
they apt their nightly fancy to that which has chanced: even such is this
Mathesis; before something come to pass, they can pronounce nothing which is
certain, or to be built upon: but when any thing is once past, then they begin
to gather the causes of that which already has the event.

By the creature Oryges painted or insculpt, Hierogliphick
the Egyptians did hierogliphycally figure a Mathematician: for they with
great adoration honor their Star Sothes, which we call Canicula; and with great
curiosity observe the time when it rises, because they say the Oryges is
sencible of the influence thereof, by a certain sound which it yields; and
not only gives notice of it is coming, but saluteth it when it appears
rising. Pier. Valor. Lib. 10. Page 90.

The Emblem.
THe Emblem to conclude this Tractat I borrow from Iacobus Catsius, Emblem.
lib. 3. which presents a hand out of a Cloud, holding a Brand in the fire;
that part which handeth being free, the other flaming; The Motto, Qua non vrit.
It seems to be derived from Eccles. cap. 3.16. He has set water and fire
before thee, stretch out thine hand to which thou will. Before Man, is life and
death, good and evil; what him likes shall be given him. So also Ierem. 21.8.
And unto this People thou shall say, Thus says the Lord, Behold, I set before
thee the way of Life, and the way of Death. And Deutronom. 30.19. I call Heaven
and Earth to record this day against you, that I have set before you Life and
Death, Blessing and Cursing, choose therefore Life, that, etc. Whosoever is free,
and will willingly run into fetters, what can we call him but a fool? And he
who becomes a Captive without constraint, must be either thought to be
wilful, or witless. And as Theopompus affirms, If the Eye be the chuser, If
thou choose Beauty, it fades: If Riches, they often consume: If Friends, they
grow false: If Wisdom, She continues.
the Delight is short: If the Will? the end is Want: But if Reason? the effect
is Wisdom. For often it happens, after the choice of a momentarie pleasure,
ensues a lasting calamity.

The Authors Conceit hereon is this: Pars sudis igne caret, rapidis calet
altera flammis;
Hinc nocet, illaesam calfacit inde manum.
Ecce, Bonum Deus, ecce Malum mortalibus affert
Quisquis es, en tibi Mors, en tibi Vita patet:
Optio tot a tua' est, licet hinc, licet inde capessus.
Elige, sive invet vivere, sive mori.
Quid tibi cum Sodoma? nihil hic nisi Sulphur and Ignis,
Quin potius placidum ( Loath duce) Zoar adi.


Thus paraphrased: After the choice of Momentary pleasure, ensues endless
calamity.
Part of the Brand wants fire, and part flames hot;
One burns the hand, the other harms it not.
Behold, o mortal Man, whoever thou be,
Good, Bad, both Life and Death, proposed to thee:
God gives thee choice, the one or other try;
By this thou liv'st, and thou by that shall die.
Leave Sodom then, where Sulphur raines in fire,
And (with good Loath) to Zoar safe retire.


Electio non est de preterito, sed de futuro, Plut.
A moral interpretation may be gathered from the same, with this Motto anexed,
Omnia in meliorem partem. Bodinus says, Men use to choose a fair day, by the
gray morning; and strong beasts, by their sturdy limbs: But in choice of
pleasures there is no election to be made, since they yield us no profitable
use. Others choose Advocates by the throng of their Clients: Physicians, by the
fame of their Cures: and Wives, by their rich Portions or Dowers. And well they
comply with the proverb, He that makes his choice without discretion, is like
one that sows his Corn he wots not when, and in the harvest expected reapeth
he knows not what. Needful it is therefore that we be chary in our choice,
since there are so few brought within the compass of Election. According to
that of the Poet.

Virg. lib. 6. AEnead.
-- Pauci quos equus amavit
Jupiter, aut ardens evexit ad aethera virtus.
There are but few whom upright Jove does love,
Or zealous Virtue gains them place above.
In another place he says, Pauci laeta arva tenemus: i. There are but few of
us who attain to the blessed Fields.

If Morallists were so watchful, how much more ought we Christians to be
wary, how in all things proposed unto us, we still (like Mary in the Gospel)
choose the better part. For, Liber esse non potest, cui affectus imperant, and
cupiditates dominantur: i. he is not said to be free, whom his affections sway,
and over whom his own lusts and desires have dominion. Lipsius, Cent. 1. ad
Belg. Epist. 5. says, Vt torrem semiustum? foco qui tollit, non ea part
arripit and tractat qua incanduit, sed qua ignem nondum accepit, sic nos docet,
etc. i. As he who snatcheth a Brand out of the fire, takes not hold thereof
by that part which is flaming, but rather that which has not touched the fire;
so we ought not to meddle with the bitter and burning things of Chance, but
rather such as are more benign and comfortable.

The Authors invention follows: Hinc rubet igne sudes, nullis crepat inde
favillis,
Hinc poterit tangi, sauciat inde manum.
Res humana bifrons, tu qua iuvat arripe quicquid,
Te super aetherea, te regione fluit.
Damna suum lucrum: suagandia luctus habebit:
Excipis incumbens, si sapienter, onus.
Morosum, nec laeta iuvant, and rideat orbis,
Quod gemet ille tamen, quodque quaeratur habet.


Thus paraphrased: Fire here, none there, yet is it but one Brand;
One burns, the other end scarce heats thine hand.
Fate has two foreheads; what to hate or love,
To leave or like, is offered from above.
Loss has it is Gain, and Mourning, a Reward:
Stoop willingly, the burden is not hard.
Mirth does not please the Sad; and though Fate smile,
We shall find some thing to lament the while.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
AId me, o Lord my God, for there be three
Grand enemies, the Flesh, the World, the Devil:
Who with their Nets and Snares insidiat me,
And now and at all times await me evil.
I cannot free me from this Body, nor
The Temptations of the flesh.
It part from me, but still bear it I must:
Thou gav'st it: to destroy it I abhor;
To mar what thou have made, I were unjust.
Yet when I pamper what I dare not perish,
What is it less than mine own Foe to cherish?
II.
Tempt. of the World.
The World inguirts me, and five several ways
At once inuades me; by the Taste, Touch, and Smell,
The 5 Senses.
Hearing, and Sight: not one Sense but betrays
The Fort, and against the Lord of it rebel.
Beauty assaults, and then the Eye gives place:
The Sirens sing, by which the Ear is taken:
Sweet Vanities have still the Smell in chase:
The Touch by Lust: the Taste by Surfeit shaken
Thus the vain world does with temptations round me,
Making those Gifts that should preserve, confound me.
III.
Tempt of the Devil.
The Devil, whom our weak Eyes cannot view,
Is therefore to be more bewar'd and feared,
As one that Man does night and day pursue;
His wounds (when made) not felt, his voice not heard.
He baits his hooks with pride, with gold, with treasure.
A thousand ginnes are for our footsteps laid;
Bird-lime he has, and that is when above measure
We dote on things by which we are betrayed,
Self-loue, Vainglory, fleshly Lusts, Ambition,
All his mere trains to bring us to perdition.
IV.
If I be ignorant, he prompts me then Temptations of Ignorance.

To dote on Folly, Wisdom to despise,
To prefer Idiots before Learned men,
And strive to be sequestered from the Wise.
Or if that I in reading take delight,
(At sorted leisure my spare hours to spend)
The Legend of some strange aduenturous Knight,
Or fabulous Toy, he will to my view commend.
But from mine eye the sacred Scriptures keep,
Persuading the are too plain, or else to deep.
V.
Or if I after Learning shall enquire, Temptation in Learning.

And to the least perfection can attain;
Either he makes me mine own Gifts admire,
Or others of less knowledge to disdain.
Or if my Talent to my self conceal,
Then to search out things mystical and hid,
Such as God had no purpose to reveal,
But in his secret Counsels has forbid.
Assured, That amongst his other trains and baits,
None more than Curiosity God hates.
VI.
If I be held a famous Rhetorician, In Rhetoric.

Able to equal Herod in his phrase;
Then am I puffed up with that proud ambition,
Preferring before Gods honor, mine own praise.
If a good Disputant, then in the stead In Lodgick.

Of finding out the Truth, with Truth I wrangle;
And trouble with dark Sillogismes my head,
What else might seem apparent to entangle.
Or if into Arithmeticke incline, In Arithmetik

In studying Number, I ferget the Trine.
VII.
Or if Theology, (although the best
And choice of Studies) yet is that not free, In Divinity.

Nor can claim privilege above the rest:
Therein he rather most insnareth me.
As when I, more than Matter, seek to please,
With curious language or affected strain,
Sow to men's elbowes pillowes for their ease,
More than Gods honor; covet Place, or Gain:
When I for fear or favor their sins smother,
Or be in the Pulpit one, abroad, another.
VIII.
Or when Gods mercies to that height I stretch,
That Men thereby the more presumptuous are;
Or on the contrary, his judgment preach
So far, as that it puts them in despair.
Or when I shall exceed my strict Commission,
By adding or detracting from the Letter:
Or when I make too narrow inquisition,
And, than mine own opinion, think none better.
Or in the Church pretending reformation,
I make my Zeal a cloak to Innovation.
IX.
In Philosophy
Or if Philosophy? the more I strive
Of things the natural causes to find out,
I bring the sweeter honey to his Hive;
For of my God he makes me stand in doubt.
And then a thousand arguments he has,
And every of them powerful to persuade
(Hoping by Reason to confound my Faith)
And prove that all things were by Nature made:
And bids my weakness no belief to lend
To any thing that Reason shall transcend.
X.
He tells me, The Philosophers were wise,
And that by search they all things needful knew;
Their moral virtues sets before mine eyes,
Says, They in act and word were just and true:
With their uprightness bids me then compare
Our lives that Christianity profess;
Consider but how different they are,
And how we more believe, and practice less.
Then, whither has to heaven nearer affinity,
Morality in them, or our Divinity?
XI.
Or if he prove this stratagem too weak,
He wills us after secret things enquire,
Into the cabinet of Nature break, In Magic.

And there to find what is worthy to admire.
For there is twofold Magic, Black and White,
Studies at first ordained to beget wonder;
Such as at once both profit and delight,
Amase the gods, and keep the Furies under:
Thus lulls man's Senses in a pleasing dream,
Till he be made his Maker to blaspheme.
XII.
His darts and arrows are Lust, Envy, Wrath,
Whose poisonous heads are dipped in Stygian fire,
And more of that corrupted Nature has,
T'enflame the Spleen, and poison the Desire,
Mortiferous all. Then what shall me betide,
Poor wretched Man? or which way shall I turn?
Thus hedged, thus guirt, thus ambusht on each side,
Immured with hooks, with lime-twigs, darts that burn;
When Sorrow, Joy, Sour, Sweet, alike appear,
To be but the just causes of my fear?
XIII.
I am jealous both of Hunger and Repast,
Of Sleep, of Watch, of Labor, and of Ease:
Nor know in which I more secure am placed,
Because I am hourly tempted in all these.
My Jesting, as my Anger I suspect,
Lest in my mirth I might some one abuse,
Or speak what might to his disgrace reflect,
And that is a sin I know not how to excuse.
Thought' offend in Wrath be greater far,
Yet from the first it does not take the skar.
XIV.
Prosperity I fear, as things adverse:
For as the one by sweetning often deceiues,
So when the other has with us converse,
Despair or Murmuring it behind it leaves.
Of sins in secret I am more afraid
Than those in public, because that is unseen
(Being unknown) does all reproof evade:
Secure, we think them hid behind a skreene.
And when Security lulls fast asleep,
The Tempter shoots his arrows, and strikes deep.
XV.
The Flesh, in Delicacie does suggest;
The World, in Vanity; the Devil, he
In better things; for when I am possessed
With carnal thoughts, the Flesh then speaks to me,
Either importuning to lust or sleep,
To idleness, to pleasure, or to play,
TO excess, by feeding high, and drinking deep.
When as the World assaults another way,
By Arrogance, Ambition, and Vainglory,
Tumor of heart, and things like-transitorie.
XVI.
When Ire and Wrath, and bitterness of Spleen
Prouokes us unto mischief, blood, and strage;
The Devil then has made his arrows keen,
And in such passions he does rore and rage.
When I shall feel such in my breast arise,
Let me assure my self the Tempter's there:
Therefore at that time ought I to be wise
And valiant, to oppose him without fear.
His study is to compass and invade;
We ought to watch there be no entry made.
XVII.
As often as we resist, we do subdue
The great Seducer. Then the Angels sing,
And Saints rejoice (those that are still in view
Of the Creator, Heavens almighty King.)
That GOD who to this Battle does persuade us,
And looks upon us when we enter list,
Still as he spurs us on, does likewise aid us
Against that old and crafty Pannurgist:
Supports the Weak, the Willing does defend,
And crowns such as continue to the end.
XVIII.
O give me courage then, make strong my hand,
Thou that do teach my fingers how to fight;
And lend me power their fury to withstand,
Who would deprive me of thy glorious Light,
That I, who all my life time have opposed
My self (...) my self, and against Thee,
May by thy tender mercies he enclosed,
And so be (...) they shall not ruin me.
That (...) ^is Body is confined to Dust,
My (...) yet find place among the Just.
Vt Pila concussus, resurge^.
S. MICHAEL ARCHANGEL
Ex Sumptib Harbottel Grimstone Armig: Ia droeshe^t sculpt



THE ARGUMENT of the eighth Tractat.
OF Satan's Wiles and Feats praestigious,
Appearing wondrous and prodigious,
Confirmed by Histories far sought.
Of Novels by bad Demons wrought:
And first of such is made expression,
That still with Mankind seek congression,
(To whose Fall they themselves apply)
Called Succubae and Incubi.
To find those further we desire,
Of Water, Earth, the Air, and Fire;
And what their workings be to know,
As well above, as here below.
How Authors amongst themselves agree,
What Genij and Spectars be.
Faunes, Syluanes, and Alastores,
Satyrs, with others like to these.
With Stories mixed, that grace may win
From such as are not verst therein.
The second Argument.
MIchael, whom Satan durst oppose,
Can guard us from inferior Foes.
The Arch-Angell.
THose Spirits called Demons, some have apprehended, Lucius Apul. de Deo
sacrat. ex Beat Thom. part. 1. G. 41. Art. 1.

Are with men's injuries often times offended;
And when again they humbly shall submit,
They are soon pleased all quarrels to forget.
They after Divine worship are ambitious,
And when fond Men grow vainly superstitious,
(As thereto by their ignorance accited)
In their idolatrous Rites the are much delighted.
To them belongs the Augurs Divination,
And such conjectures as by the immolation
Of Beasts are made: whateuer did proceed
From Pythia's raptures, or has been agreed
To issue from vain Dreams; all Calculation
By such like signs, came first by the instigation
Homer.
Of Demons. Homer therefore gave them style
Of gods; nor doubted in the self same file
To number Jupiter. But we, whose faith
On Gods known works more firm assurance has,
By sacred Scriptures, title Demons those
Who (by him first created) dared to oppose
His Divine Will, and being ill affected,
Were for their Pride headlong from heaven dejected.
Some in their fall still hanging in the air,
And there imprisoned, till they make repair
To the last dreadful doom; and such await
Man's frailties hourly to insidiate:
Prone to his hurt, with tympanous pride inflamed,
Burning with Envy not to be reclaimed;
Deceitful, from bad purpose never changed,
Impious, and from all justice quite estranged;
And with the inueterat malice in them bred,
Inuading Bodies both alive and dead.
Arnob. in Ps. 36
But whatsoever war they shall commence
Against us, whether under fair pretense,
Or hostile menace, do well, and not fear;
He that the Soul created, will appear
In it is defense, and if we boldly fight,
Put their strong forces and themselves to flight.
Plato, acknowledged one God alone;
The rest, whom others in the heavens inthrone,
Hermes Thermegistus.
He Demons calls, and Angels. Thermegist
Does likewise on one Deity insist;
And him he names Great, beyond all extension,
Ineffable, not within comprehension.
The other Spirits lie under Statues hid,
Cipr. de Idoler vanitat.
And Images, whose worship is forbid:
And these the breasts of living Priests inspire,
And from the Intrals (e're they touch the fire)
Pronounce strange Omens. These the Birds flights guide,
And manage such things as by Lots are try'de:
The doubtful Oracles they lend a tongue,
Prounouncing Truths with Lies, Lies Truths among,
Confounding them: all things obvolved leave,
(Deceived themselves, they others would deceive.)
They waking trouble us, molest our sleep;
And if upon our selves no watch we keep,
Our bodies enter, then distract our brain,
They crampe ou^ members, make us to complain
Of sickness or disease, and in strange fashion
They cause us to exceed in Joy or Passion:
And making us one universal wound,
Pretend to loose what they before had bound;
When as the wonder-seeming remedy
Is only their surcease from injury.
For all their study, practice, and delight,
Is but to move us to prove opposite
To the Creator, as themselves have bin,
That, guilty of the same rebellious sin,
By their accitements being made impure,
We with them might like punishment endure.
Let Us hear how Apulcius does define them; Div. Thom. 3. Met. lib. 12. Tex. 10.

(Says he) these proper adjuncts we assign them,
Of a thin Airy body they exist,
And therefore can shift places as they list;
Of rational apprehension^ passive mind,
Eternal, and no end can therefore find.
Another writes, Dr. Stroz^ l. de Spir. and lucant.
These Spirits are much joy'd
At Bloodshed, when man is by man destroyed.
At riotous Feasts they 'bout the tables stalk,
Provoking to vain words and obseene talk,
Persuading Man in his own strength to trust;
Devise Confections that stir up to lust:
And when their power on any Wretch has seized,
Persuade, That with the sin God 's not displeased.
The assume the shape of such as are deceast,
And covet to be counted gods at least.
Surcharged with joy these are not, to behold
When troubles and afflictions manifold
Pursue the Saints of God, and his Elect;
As having in themselves a clear inspect,
By persecution, such, and tribulation,
Are laboring in the path to their salvation.
But when they find our hearts obdure and hard,
To Piety and Goodness vnprepar'd;
Or when they see us deviat and err,
And before Virtue, Vanity prefer,
Then are they merry, they clap hands and shout,
As having then their purpose brought about.
The Hunter having caught us in the Toil,
Seiseth his prey, and triumphs in the spoil.
We do not read, That Satan did once boast
Job. cap. 1.
When patient Job had all his substance lost,
Nor seeing (by the advantage he had taken)
His Sons and Daughters by a Whirle-winde slain;
When having lost all, he could lose no more,
And now from head to heel was but one fore:
Not all this moved him. Had he made reply
Meaning his Wife, whom some Rabbis think^ to be Dinab, the Daughter of Jacob,
ravished by Sychem, etc
To her that bad him to curse God and dye,
By vtt'ring any syllable profane,
Then he and his would have rejoc'd amain.
Nor in Paul's thirst or hunger was he pleased,
Nor when he was by cruel Lictors seized,
And hurried to the Jail, (there gyv'd and bound)
Or shipwrackt, in great peril to be drowned,
The Bark beneath him bee'ng in pieces torn;
Acts. Apost.
Nor when the bloody Jews his death had sworn,
Scourged, buffetted, and bandied up and down:
They knew this was the way to gain a Crown;
To them 't was rather torment worse than Hell,
That in these conflicts he had fought so well.
Who gladly had exulted in the air,
If they could once have brought him to despair.
Eustr. ^. 1. moral.
Some Sophists held Demon the part to be
Of the Souls intellectual Faculty.
1. Cor. c. 2. v. 7 8
We read the Apostle thus: The Wisdom we
Of God, speak to you in a Mystery:
Even the hid Wisdom which to our salvation
He did ordain before the Worlds creation.
But to the Princes of this world not shown,
As left to them mere doubtful and unknown:
Which had it been revealed to them, they than
Would not have crucified that God and Man,
Ambr. sup. Cor. cap. 2.
The Lord of Glory. Some this Text expound.
(Building it seems on no uncertain ground)
That by the Princes of this World, he meant
The Demons, who of the Air have government,
Called Powers and Potestats. It cannot stand
With reason, That the Jews (without command
Or power within themselves) so styled should be,
Bee'ng subjects to the Roman Monarchy.
Neither can properly we make restriction
To Pilat, who had then the jurisdiction
Of Rome in his own hand, because that he
Labored in all he could to set him free;
Said, he could find no fault with him. And when,
At the instance of those bloody minded men,
He spoke that Sentence, (which he would have stayed)
He called for water, and in washing said
Unto all those that then about him stood,
Lo, I am guiltless of this just Man's blood.
These were the Princes, Meaning the Demons or Potestats of the Air.
by whose ignorant pride
The Lord of Glory was condemned, and died.
They knew him to be Man, clean, without spot;
But for the Son of God they knew him not.
Had they but known his innocent Blood was shed
To revive those who in their Sins lay dead^
And ransom them from their insidiation,
(As being the sole means of our Salvation)
Satan then durst not boldly to have venter'd,
And into Judas (called Iscariot) entered:
For he by finding that, might easily know
'T would be of his own Kingdometh' overthrow.
Let Us hear Prudentius: Simplicis ergo viae, Dux est Deus. Ille per vnum: Ire
jubet mortale genus quam dirigit Ipse, etc. Lib. 2. Cont, Symach.
Of the sincere way,
We may presume God is the Guide and Stay:
There Is but one path, through which, whom he electeth,
(Lest they should wander) he himself directs.
It lies up a steep hill that is hard to clime,
And the more difficult, the more sublime.
At the first entrance nothing does appear
But what is intricate, horrid, austere,
Sad, and still threatening danger: when thy feet
Has measured it to the end, thou then shall meet
With all things sweet and pleasant, sights excelling,
And precious Riches with abundance swelling.
All objects then shall show both clear and bright,
As being luster'd by eternal Light:
Then nothing shall seem difficult or hard,
But of thy labor thou shall reap reward.
Yet in thy travel up this craggy Hill
Thou shall find Satan at thine elbow still,
Persuading thee a smoother Road to tread,
To which a thousand paths and by-ways lead;
Through which the bearded Sophist he mis-guides:
The Usurer there, with unsuspected strides
Walks merrily; and he whom Honor blindes,
A pleasant journey to destruction finds.
Some by the tongues of Birds he does allure,
And others by vain Auguries assure,
By trusting too much to vain Prophesies,
And the mad Sibils trifling Ambages.
Some he by Magic spells does headlong drive;
Others by Knowledge, though demonstratiue.
But take thou heed of this sweet erring way,
In which by thousand turnings thou may stray;
Having a Guide that teaches Diuiation,
And turns thee from the path of thy salvation.
Incredible it seems, believed by few,
And yet by autient Writers held for true,
That the bad Spirits at their pleasure can
Assume the shape of Woman or of Man,
And with each Sex carnal commixtion use,
Frail Mankind to dishonor and abuse.
Those that in masculine shape with women trade,
Spirits called Incubi.
Called Incubi: the other that are said
To put on foeminine feature, and so lie
Succubae.
Prostrat to man^ are called Succubae.
Nor do they use such damned copulation
Because in it they take least delectation:
But rather by such devilish commission,
To draw men headlong with them to perdition.
The substance by the which they generat, and
How't is transfused, whosoever would understand,
Scotus.
Let them the books of Scotus well peruse;
It is no subject for my modest Muse.
Yet that such are, (though I should silent be)
Hear what Saint Austin says; 'T is told to me,
(By men of worth, whose faith I cannot blame,
And such as were eyewitness of the same)
The Faunes and other Sylvan beasts most rude,
Gotish in act, and by the multitude
Called Incubi, insidiat by the way
Women, to make of them their lustful prey.
These were Henricus Iustitor, and Iacobus Sprangerus.
All Germany with Witches much annoyd,
Two grave and learned men, before employed
In many Causes both of depth and weight)
Were chosen by Pope Innocent the eight,
And a large Patent granted therewithal,
T'extirp the Witches thence in general.
These two affirm, They oftentimes have been
Where such old Crones and Beldams they have seen
Flat on their backs, using the immodest fashion,
As in the very act of generation,
Moving their bodies; yet to the outward eye
No Sp'rit perceived of any stander by.
But the foul act imagined to be past,
A filthy noisome Vapor rose at last,
(In bigness of a man) from her embrace,
And at the instant vanished from the place.
In their large stories it is likewise read,
Husbands have took these Incubi in bed
With their fair wives, their figures by them stretched:
Which seeing they have run and weapons fetched.
But the one soon vanished from their soft embraces;
The other called jealous fools, unto their faces.
Not far from Rotemburch this chance befell: Rottemb. a Town in upper Germany^
A History of an Incubus.

One of these Spirits (it seems new raised from Hell)
Makes himself suitor to a Maid, young, fair,
Lovely, well featured, and a Great man's heir:
He haunts the house, makes show of mighty treasure,
But, more than all, to love her above measure:
Yet that his Living lies far off, pretends.
His noble Host inuites him, with his friends,
To diverse feasts and banquets. My brave Wooer
Before he comes, rich Presents sends unto her:
To make his way, the Servants he bribes round,
Bespeaks the rarest music can be found;
The night he revels, and he sports the day,
And all in hope to bear the Wench away:
His prodigal expenses grow so hye,
His Host suspects whence he should have supply,
Especially his land lying so remote.
Mean time the Maid from liking grows to dote,
Thinking to have her fortunes much encreast,
And she be made a Princess at the least.
But e're the Contract, the good man in fear
He might be other than he did appear,
Inuites one day, together with his Ghest,
A retired man that devout life professed,
And was of most religious conversation.
He at the table frames a disputation
Concerning Sanctity and holy things,
And still for every proof he Scripture brings.
At which my lusty Lover alters face,
And says, That a full table is no place
For such discourse, but sportiue jests are best,
And pleasant talk, to make the meat digest.
The good old man perceiving by his look
And change of cheer, he Gospel could not brook,
Rose at the table, and cried out amain,
Auaunt thou Fiend, with thy infernal train;
Thou have no power (howeuer thus disguised)
Over them who in Christ's name have been baptized:
The roaring Lion shall not us devour,
That in his blood are ransomed from thy power.
These words, with such like, were no sooner spoke,
But he with all his train vanished like smoke,
And of his people they no more could find,
Saving three ougly bodies left behind,
(With a foul stench) and they were known to be
Felons before-time strangled on a tree.
Vincent. lib. 3. Hist.
Now of those Spirits whom Succubae we call,
An History of a Succubus.
I read what in Sicilia did befall:
Rogero reigning there, a young man much
Practiced in swimming (for his skill was such
That few could equal him,) one night bee'ng late
Sporting in the sea, and thinking then his Mate
Had been before him, caught him by the hair,
To drag him to the shore; when one most fair
Appeared to him, of a most sweet aspect,
Such, a censorious Cynicke might affect,
Though he had promised abstinence. Her head
Seemed as in golden wires apparelled;
And lo, quite naked she is before him found,
Save that her modest hair does cloth her round.
Astonished first to see so rare a Creature,
Richly accomplished both in face and feature,
He viewes her still, and is surprised at last;
And over her his upper garment cast,
So, closely brought her home, and then conveyed
Her to his private chamber, where she stayed
So long with him, that he with her had won
Such grace, she was delivered of a Son
Within some forty weeks. But all this while,
Though she had lent him many a pleasant smile,
(Not making anything betwixt them strange,
That wife might with her husband interchange)
She never spoke, nor one word could he hear
Proceed from her; which did ^o him appear
Something prodigious. Besides, it being known
How this fair sea^ borne Venus first was grown
In his acquaintance: Next, how his strange suit
Came first, and that she still continued mute;
A friend of his that had a seeming care
Both of his body and his souls welfare,
Told him in plain terms, he was much misled,
To entertain a Spectar in his bed. Of that kind of Spirits you shall read in
the Sequel

At which words both affrighted and enraged,
To think how desp'ratly he had engaged
Both soul and body; home he posts with speed,
And having something in himself decreed,
First mildely treats with her, and after breaks
Into loud terms, yet still she nothing speaks.
At this more angry, to have no reply,
He takes his sword, and son, (then standing by)
And vows by all the oaths a man can swear,
Unless she instantly deliver there,
Both what she is? how bred? and whence she came?
And unto these, particular answer frame;
His purpose is (receive it how she will)
The pretty Babe (betwixt them got) to kill.
After some pause, the Succubus replied,
Thou only seek'st to know what I would hide:
Never did Husband to himself more wrong,
Than thou in this, to make me use my tongue.
After which words she vanished, and no more
Was thenceforth seen. The child (threatened before)
Some few years after swimming in the place
Where first the father saw the mothers face,
Was from his fellows snatched away and drowned
By the same Sp'rit; his body no where found.
Besides these, Several kinds of Spirits according to Marc. sup. Psel.
Marcus upon Psellius, finds
To be of malign Spirits sundry kinds,
That bear in the four elements chief sway:
Some Fiery, and AEtherial are, and they
Have the first place. Next, Spectars of the Air,
Water, and Earth, (but none of them that dare
Beyond their bounds) Others that all light fly,
And called Subterren, or Lucifugi.
Spirits of Fire.
Unto the first, those prodigies of Fire
Falling from heaven (which men so much admire)
The Learned ascribe: As when a burning stone
Dropped from the Sky into swi^t AEgion.
A Flood in Persia, in Darius days:
Three Moons seen at once with a bearded Comet.
As when three Moons at once in splendant rays
(With a huge bearded Comet) did appear
To all men's wonder, in the self same year
Pope John, the two and twentieth, by his power
Cursed Lewis Bavarus then Emperor,
Because he cherishr in litigious hope,
Petrus Carbariensis, Antipope.
This appeared Ann^, 1514. A strange History of fiery Spirits, Anno 1536. Mar.
21.
As when three Suns at once sho^ in the Sky,
Of equal sise, to all apparently.
Near to the Village called Taurometane
In Sicily, a Merchant bred in Spain,
Coasting that way, sees where before him stand
Ten Smiths, and each a hammer in his hand,
About them leatherne aprons: and before
He can advise well, he espies ten more;
And one above them all (like Vulcan) lame,
So shapt, that you would take him for the same
Described in Homer. Him the Merchant asks,
To what place they were bound? About out tasks,
Vulcan replies: Is it to thee unknown,
How famous we are late in AEtna grown?
Which if it be, lag but a while behind,
And see what thou with thousands more shall find.
To whom the Merchant; What work can there be
For men of your profession, where we see
This happened after the mountain had lest burning.
Nothing but drifts of snow, the mountains clad
In Winters cold, where no fire can be had?
That shall be tried (said Vulcan once again)
And with that word he vanished with his train.
At which the Merchant with such fear was struck,
That all his limbs and joints were Ague-shooke:
To the next house his faint steps he applies,
And had no sooner told this but he dies.
His life set with the Sun. E're midnight came,
The vast Sicilian Mount was all on flame,
Belching forth fire and cinders, and withal,
Such horrid cracks as if the rocks would fall,
And tumble from their height, into the Plain,
Mixed with such tempests both of Hail and Rain,
Such bellowing shriekes, and such a sulphur smell,
As had it been the local place of Hell.
This dismal night so dreadful did appear
Unto all such as did inhabit near,
They left their houses, to seek dens and caves,
Thinking no place so safe then as their graves.
And of this nature are those fires often seen
Near Sepulchers, by which many have been
Deluded much, in Churchyards and such places,
Where the faint-hearted scarce dare show their faces.
Such are the Ignes Fatui that appear Ignes Fatui, or Ambulones.

To skip and dance before us every where.
Some call them Ambulones, for they walk
Sometimes before us, and then after stalk.
Some call them leaping Goats; and these we find
All to be most malicious in their kind,
By leading Travelers out of their way,
Else causing them among thieves or pit-falls stray;
And such are Sulphur-colour'd: others, white,
And these haunt ships and Seamen in the night,
And that most frequent when a tempest 's past,
And then they cleave and cling close to the mast.
They call it Helena if one appear, Helena.

And then presage there 's some disaster near.
If they spy two, they judge good shall befall them,
And these (thus seen) Castor and Pollux call them. Castor and Pollux.

And from that kind of Spirits the Divination
Held in fore-times in such great adoration,
Okumanteia called, Okumant^ia.
seems to have sprung;
As likewise those by th'antient Magi sung,
Onichomanteia, Onichomanteia Libonomantia,
Libonomantia,
Capnomantia, Piromantia, Capnomantia, Pyromantia.

And Thurifumia. Thurifumia.
But I cannot dwell
On circumstance, their several Rites to tell.
Spirits of the Air are bold, proud, and ambitious, Of the Spirits of the Air.

Envious towered Mankind, Spleenfull, and malicious:
And these (by Gods permission) not alone
Have the clear subtle air to work upon,
By causing thunders and tempestuous showr's,
With harmefull winds: it is also in their powers
TO affright the earth with strange prodigious things,
And what is our hurt, to them great pleasure brings.
Of their so rare effects Stories are full;
Wool tained.
Amongst the Attribates, it rained wool.
In good Saint Ambrose time two armies ^ought
This happened Anno 931.
In the aires Region, and great terror brought
Unto all France; Hugh Capet making claim
Unto the Crown, (if we may credit Fame,
Fish and Grain fell from the air.
And Histories, which are not writ in vain)
There fell from heaven great store of Fish and Grain.
Philostratus (in whom was found no flaw)
Two strange Tombs.
Writes, Apollonius amongst the Brachmans saw
Two Tombs, which opened, winds disturbed the air;
But shut, the sky was calm, the season fair.
Of Sepater the Magitian.
Eunapius and Suidas both record,
How Sepater could with one Magic word
Command the Winds; and was adiudg'd to dye,
Because he kept them fast, when as supplye
Of corn unto Byzantium should be brought.
But (to spare these) had we no further sought
Job cap. 1.
Than sacred History; In Job we find,
How Satan did stir up a mighty wind,
Which where his sons and daughters feasting were,
Did the whole house demolish, rend and tear.
Of the Finnes and Laplands.
The Finnes and Laplands are acquainted well
With such like Spirits, and Winds to Merchants fell,
Making their covenant, When and how they please
They may with prosperous weather cross the feas.
As thus; They in an hand-kerchiefe fast ty
Three knots: unloose the first, and by and by
You find a gentle gale blow from the shore.
Open the second, it increases more,
Fo fill your sails. When you the third untie,
The intemperat gusts grow vehement and hye.
Ericus King of the Goathes.
Of Ericus the King of Goths it is said,
That as he turned his hat, the wind he stayed:
Nor did there ever any near him know
The piercing air upon his face to blow.
Of the Archimage Zo^oaster
It is reported of learned Zoroaster,
(Who of art Magic was the first Art-master)
That by such Spirits, in a stormy day,
And might whirle-winde, he was borne away.
And from this kind that divination springs
AEromantia.
Called AEromantia; by which thousand things
Have been conjectured from the conjured Air.
When mustring Armies in the clouds repair.
Chariots, and such; to judge what shall befall
From them, they Terotoscopeia call. Terotoscopeia.

A third there is, (I almost had forgot)
Ornithomanteia, when by Birds they wot. Ornithoma^tea.

Spirits that have over Water government, Of the Spirits of the Water.

Are to Mankind alike maleuolent:
They trouble Seas, Floods, Rivers, Brooks, and Wels,
Meeres, Lakes, and love to enhabit watery Cells;
Thence noisome and pestiferous vapors raise.
Besides, they Man encounter diverse ways;
At wrackes some present are; another sort
Ready to crampe their joints that swim for sport.
One kind of these the Italians Fatae name; Fatae, Fee: Sybils, white Nymphs.

Fee the French; We, Sibils; and the same
Others, White Nymphs; and those that have them seen,
Night-Ladies, some, of which Habundia Queen. Night-Ladies.

And of this sort are those of which discuss
Plutarch and (out of him) Sabellicus.
Numa Pompilius, who did often inuit The Feasts of Numa Pompil.

The best of Rome to feast with him by night,
Never made use of market to afford
Rich choice of dainties to his sumptuous board;
Each tastefull Delicat that could be thought,
Without all cat'ring, or providing ought,
Did of their own accord themselves present,
To give the invited ghests their full content,
To all their admiration: Which is said
Was only by the Nymph Egeria's aid, The Nymphe AEgaerea.

With whom he had converse; and she we find,
Of force must be a Spirit of this kind.
Scotus Parmensis but few years ago, The Feasts of Scotus Parmensis.

(As some report) his Magic Art to show,
Practiced the like, invited mighty States,
And feasted them with princely Delicates:
And yet these seeming viands were of all
That tasted them, merely fantastical.
Though they rose sated, yet no sooner thence
Departed, but they had no feeling sense
Of feeding Hunger, or of quenching thirst,
But found themselves more empty than at first.
And with such banquets (as Philostratus The Feast of the Brackmana and of Pet:
Albanus and Pasaetis, two famous Magitians.

Writes) was Apollonius Tyanaeus
Received by the Brachmans. With like cheer,
Petrus Albanus and Pasaetis were
Custom'd to feast their Ghests. And of this sort
(Namely White Nymphs) Boethius makes report,
In his Scotch History: Two Noblemen,
A strange hist. of two Scotch Noblemen, Mackbeth and Banco Stuart.
Mackbeth and Banco-Stuart, passing then
Unto the Palace where King Duncan lay;
Riding alone, encountered on the way
(In a dark Grove) three Virgins wondrous fair,
As well in habit as in feature rare.
The first of them did curtsie low, her veil
Vnpinn'd, and with obeisance said, All hail
These were Names of Honor which Mackbeth had before received.
Mackbeth Thane Gl^vius. The next said,
All hail Caldarius Thane. The third Maid,
Not the least honor unto thee I bring,
Mackbeth all hail, that shortly must be King.
These spoke no more. When Banco thus reply'de,
Ill have ye done, fair Ladies, to divide
Me from all honors: How comes he thus grown
In your great grace, to promise him a Crown?
And I his sole companion, as you see,
Yet you in nothing daigne to guerdon me.
To whom the first made answer, Yes, we bring
To thee much happier Fate; for though a King
Mackbeth shall be, yet shall he reign alone,
And leave no issue to succeed his Throne.
But thou o Banco, though thou do not sway
Thy self a Scepter, yet thine Issue may,
And so it shall; thine Issue (do not fear)
Shall govern Scotland many an happy year.
This spoke, all vanished. They at first amas'd
At the strange Novel, each on other gas'd;
Then on they road, accounting all mere fictions,
And they vain Spectars, false in their predictions:
And sporting by the way, one jeasted thus,
Hail King of Scotland, that must govern us.
To whom the other, Like salutes to thee,
Who must of many Kings the Grandsire be.
Yet thus it happened after; Duncan slain
By Mackbeth, he usurped and 'gan to reign,
Though the dead King had left two sons behind.
More seriously then pondring in his mind
The former apparition, casts about,
How Banco (of the Scotch Peers the most stout)
Might be cut off, does solemnly inuit
Him and his son Fleanchus one sad night
Unto a banquet, where the Father dies; Banco Stuart slain by Makb.

But shadowed by the darkness, the Son flies.
Now the small sand of Mackbeths glass bee'ng run,
(For he was slain by Malcolme, Duncans son)
In process, the Crown lineally descended
To Banco's Issue; and is yet extended
In ample genealogy, remaining
In most renowned CHARLES, amongst us reigning.
My promised brevitie be mine excuse,
Else many stories I could here produce
Of the like nature, purport, and condition.
For we may read Ollarus the Magition Ollarus, the Magitian.

Commanded like Familiars; who it is sed,
With his enchanted shoes could water tred,
And never hasard drowning. The like fame
Another, that Othimius had to name,
Behind him left. Hadingus King of Danes, Othim. Magus.

Mounted upon a good Steed, by the raines
The Inchanter took, and cross the main sea brought him
Safe, whilst in vain the hot pursuer sought him.
Oddo the Danish Pyrat, by the aid Oddo Magus.

Of the like Spirits, whole Nauies durst invade,
And with his Magic Charms could when he please
Raise mighty storms, and drown them in the seas.
At length by one of greater practice found,
Aiming at others Wrack, himself was drowned.
Some Authors, unto this accursed Tribe Spirits the cause of Deluges.

Of watery Demons, Deluges ascribe,
And flux of waters. Such we read were known
Whilst Damasus was Pope, when overthrown
Were many cities in Sicilia. And
By Historiographers we understand,
The like chanced in Pope Alexanders days Alex. the 7

In Italy, afflicting diverse ways.
Both loss of beasts, and great depopulation
In Charles the fifts time, by an Inundation
Happend in Holland, Zeeland, Friseland, these
Had their maritime shores drowned by the seas.
In Poland, near Cracovia, chanced the same:
And in one year (if we may credit Fame)
In Europ, besides Towns and Cities, then
Perished above five hundred thousand men. This happened anno, 1515.

To these belong what we call Hydromantia,
Gastromantia, Lacomantia, Pagomantia.
Of the Spirits of the Earth.
Touching the Spirits of the Earth, there be
Of diverse sorts, each known in his degree,
As Genij, the Domesticke gods, and those
They Lares call, Spectars, Alastores,
Larvae, Noone-Diuels, Syluanes, Satyrs, Fawnes,
And they frequ^nt the Forests, Groves, and Lawnes.
Others, the Italians F'oletti call.
Paredrij there are too; yet these not all.
The Spirits called Genij.
Now what these Genij are, Philostratus,
Eunapius, Athenaeus, Maximus,
With all the other Platonicks, professed
Them to be Spirits of men before deceast;
Who had they lived a good life, and unstained,
By license of the Infernal Powers obtained,
In their own houses to inhabit still,
And their posterity to guard from ill;
Lares Familiars.
Such they called Lares. But all those that lead
Lives wicked and debosht, they being dead,
Wandered about the earth as Ghosts exiled,
Larvae or Lemures.
Doing all mischief: such they Larvae styled.
And of this kind, that Spirit we may guess
The Hist. of an evil Genius.
Remembered in the book of Socrates;
Who in the shape o^ Moses did appear
The space togethe^ of one complete year
In The Isle of Creet; persuading with the Jews
There living, That he such a means would use,
That if they met at a fixed day, with ease
He would traject them dry-foot through the seas.
To which they trusting, by appointment meet,
All, who that time were resident in Creet,
And follow their false Captain, less and more,
Even to the very margent of the shore.
Then turning toward them, in a short oration
Bespeaks them thus; O you the chosen nation,
Behold as great a wonder from my hand,
As your forefathers did from Moses Wand.
Then with his finger points unto a place
'Twixt them and which a Creek ran, (no great space,
And seeming shallow) All of you now fling
Your selves (says he) and follow me your King,
Into this sea; swim but to yonder strand,
And you shall then arrive upon a land,
From whence I will conduct you every man
Dry-foot into a second Canaan.
He plungeth first, they follow with one mind,
In hope a second Palestine to find.
But having past their depths, the rough winds blew,
When this Seducer straight himself withdrew,
Leaves them to ruin, most of them bee'ng drowned,
Some few by fish-boats saved, he no where found.
With these the Spectars in some points assent, Spirits called Spectars.

Bee'ng toward Mankind alike maleuolent:
Whose in-nate malice nothing can assuage,
Authors of death, depopulation, strage.
By Origin they are Alastares named: Origin apud Celsum.

By Zoroaster, bloody, and untamed.
Concerning which, the learned men's opinion
Is, That Abaddon has of them dominion.
What time Justinian did the Empire sway,
Many of these did show themselves by day,
To sundry men both of good brain and sense;
After which followed a great Pestilence,
For to all such those Spectars did appear, The History of a Spectar.

It was a certain sign their death drew near.
King Alexander, of that name the third Card. ex Boeth.

That reigned in Scotland (if Boethius word
May be believed) by match himself ally'de
With England, took Ioanna to his Bride,
Sister to the third Henry. She bee'ng dead,
(And issuelesse) he after married
Marg'ret his daughter; Did on her beget
Prince Alexander, David, Margaret.
These dying in their nonage, and she too,
(With sorrow as most think) the King does woo
Iolanta the fair daughter (as some say)
Unto the great Earl of Campania:
Being (as 't seems) most ardently inclined,
After his death to leave some heir behind.
In the mid Revels the first ominous night
Of their espousals, when the room shone bright
With lighted tapers; the King and the Queen leading
The curious Measures, Lords and Ladies treading
The self same strains; the King looks back by chance,
And spies a strange intruder fill the dance;
Namely a mere Anatomy quite bare,
His naked limbs both without flesh and hair,
(As we decipher Death) who stalks about,
Keeping true measure till the dance was out.
The King with all the rest afrighted stand;
The Spectar vanished, and then strict command
Was given to break up revels, each 'gan fear
This Omen, and presage disaster near.
If any ask, What did of this succeed?
The King soon after falling from his Steed,
Unhappily died. After whose death, ensuing
Was to the land sedition, wrack, and ruin.
The Syluanes, Fawnes, and Satyrs are the same
The Greeks Paredrij call, the Latins name
Spiritus familiores.
Familiar Spirits; who though in outward show
They threat no harm, but seem all good to owe
Poor ambusht mankind; though their crafty Mines
And snares do not appear by ev'dent signs,
Yet with malicious hate they are infected,
And all their deeds and counsels are directed
To make a fair and flattering preparation
Unto the bodies death, and souls damnation.
Macr. de satur.
And of these Spirits (as Macrobius says)
The mount Pernassus in abundance has,
Olaus Magu.
Near to mount Hecta. And Olaus writes,
The like appear most frequently by nights,
And verbally deliver kind commends
To men; from their deceast and shipwrackt friends.
A pleasant History of John Teutonicus.
Using their help, one John Teutonicus
By Acromaticke Magic sported thus.
This John was known a bastard, and yet had
A place in high Germany.
Great fame for learning: who in Halberstad
Had for his worth admittance to a place
Where none but the Nobility had grace
To be in Commons; yet it seems, so great
Was his repute, with them he sat and eat.
But yet with small content; the young men proud
Of their high noble births, much disallowed
His company, and took it in great scorn
To sit with one, though learned, yet basely borne;
And whether they were served with flesh or fish,
His bastardy was sauce still in his dish.
But skilled in hidden Arts, I will (thought he)
Some sudden means device, henceforth to free
My self from all their scoffs and taunts. He then
Inuites unto his chamber those young men
Who most seemed to oppose him; feasts them there,
Where seems no want of welcome or of cheer.
The table drawn, and their discourse now free,
John asks of them, if they could wish to see
Their fathers present, they desire him to it,
Proving to find if he by Art can do it.
He bids them to sit silent: all are mute,
When suddenly one enters in a su^e
Greasy, before him a white apron ty'de,
His linen sleeves tuckt up, both elbowes hide;
He stands and eyes them round, and by his look
None there but needs must guess him for a Cook.
Which of you know this fellow now? (says John)
What say you Sir, whom he so gaseth on?
He soon reply'de on whom he fixed his eye,
Ask you who knows him? Mary that do I,
He Is of my fathers kitchen. Nay Si^ rather
( John answered him) this is your own dear father:
For when that noble Sir whose name you bear,
Was trauel'd on some great affair elsewhere.
This well fed Groom, to whom you ought to kneel,
Begot you then all over, head to heel.
It seems your mother knew not dross from Bullion,
That in a great Lords stead embraced a Scullion.
He chases, the Sp'rit does vanish in the while;
The rest seem pleased, and in the interim smile.
When suddenly in middle of the room
Is seen a tall and lusty stable-Groome.
A frocke upon him, and in his left hand
A Curri-combe, the other grasps a wand,
And looks upon a second. Here I show him
Amongst you all (says John) does any know him?
I must (says one) acknowledge him of force,
His name is Ralfe, and keeps my fathers horse.
And kept your mother warm too, doubt it not, Iobus Reply.

The very morning that you were begot,
Her husband bee'ng a hunting. The Youth blushed.
The rest (afraid now) were with silence hushed.
Then to the third he brought a Butler in,
And proved him guilty of his mothers sin.
A Tailor to the fourth. So of the rest,
Till all of them were with like shame oppressed.
Teutonicus this seeing; Nay, (quoth he)
Since I am likewise stained with bastardie,
You shall behold my father. Soon appears
A well-flesht man, aged some forty years,
Of grave aspect, in a long Church-man's gown,
Red cheekt, and shaven both his beard and crown:
By his formalities it might be guest
He must be a Lord Abbot at the least.
Who disappearing; This man (I confess)
Begot me of his smooth faced Landeresse,
(Says John) and somewhat to abate your pride,
Judge now who is best man by the fathers side.
Some vexed, and other turned the jest to laughter;
But with his birth did never taunt him after.
Of many such like things Authors discuss,
Not only sportiue but miraculous.
This was done Anno, 1612.
We read of one in Creucemacon dwelling,
In this prestigious kind of Art excelling:
Who by such Spirits help could in the air
Appear an Huntsman, and there chase the Hare
With a full pack of dogs. Meaning to dine,
A teeme of horse, and cart laden with wine
He eat up at one meal; and having fed,
With a sharp sword cut off his servants head;
Then set it on his shoulders firm, and so
As he was no whit dammag'd by the blow.
In Saxony, not from Torgauia far,
A strange History of one of these familiar Spirits.
A Nobleman for raising civil war
Had been confined, and forfeiting his wealth,
Was forced to live by rapine and by stealth.
He riding on the way, does meet by chance
One of these Spirits, submisse in countenance,
In habit of a Groom; who much desires
To Attend his Lordship. Who again requires,
What service he can do? I can (quoth he)
Keep an horse well, nothing does want in me
Belonging to a stable: I for need
Can play the Farrier too. So both agreed;
And as they rode together, above the rest,
His Lord gives him great charge of one choice beast,
To tender him as the apple of his eye:
He vows to do it, or else bids let him dye.
Next day his Lord rides forth on some affair;
His new-come servant then to show his care,
This much loved Iennet from the stable shifts,
And to a room four stories high him lifts;
There leaves him safe. The Lord comes home at night;
The Horse of his known Master having sight,
Neighs from above: The Owner much amas'd,
Knowing the sound, up towered the casement gas'd,
Calls his new servant, and with looks austere
Asks him, by what means his good Steed came there?
Who answers, Bee'ng your servant, I at large
Desirous was to execute your charge,
Touching your horse; for since you so well like him,
Loath any of the rest should kick or strike him,
I yonder lodged him safe. But little said
The Nobleman; and by his neighbors aid
(For to his house he now must join the town)
With cords and pullies he conuey'd him down.
This Lord for some direptions being cast
Into close prison, and with gyues bound fast;
In (unexpected) comes his Groom to see him,
And on condition promises to free him,
If he forbear to sign him with the Cross,
Which can (says he) be to you no great loss:
Likewise refrain to inuoke the name of God,
And you shall here no longer make abode.
This bee'ng agreed, he takes upon his back,
(Gyv'd as he was, and chained, nothing does lack)
His noble master, bears him through the air:
Who terrify'de, and almost in despair,
Cries out, Good God, o whether am I bound.
Which spoke, he dropped the prisoner to the ground,
Even in an instant: but by Gods good grace
He light upon a soft and sedgy place,
And broke no limb. Home straight the servant hyes,
And tells them in what place his Master lies:
They to his Castle bear him thence forth-right,
Which done, this servant bids them all Good night.
Arlunus a more serious tale relates; Barn. Arlun. sec. 1. Hist. Med.

Two noble Merchants, both of great estates,
From Italy towered France riding in post,
Observe a stern black man them to accost,
Of more than common stature; who thus spoke,
If to Mediolanum you your journey take,
Unto my brother Lewis Sforza go,
And unto him from me this Letter show.
They, terror'd with these words, demand his name,
Both what to call him, and from whence he came.
I Galeatius Sforza am, (says he)
And to the Duke deliver this from me.
So vanished. They accordingly present
The Letter to the Prince. The argument
The Letter.
Was this; O Lewis, of thy self have care,
The French and the Venetian both prepare
TO invade thy Dukedom, and within short space,
From Millan to extirpe thee and thy Race.
But to my charge deliver, truly told,
Three thousand Florens of good current gold,
I Will try if I the Spirits can atone,
To keep thee still invested in thy Throne.
Farewell. The Letter was subscribed thus,
The Ghost of'thy brother Galcatius.
This, though it seemed a fantasy vnminded,
With self-conceit Prince Lewis Sforza blinded,
Soon after was by all his friends forsaken,
His City spoiled, himself surprised and taken.
One other to your patience I commend,
And with the close thereof this Tractat end.
Gilbert Cogn. lib. 8. Narrat.
A Youth of Lotharinge, not meanly bred,
Who was by too much liberty misled,
His boundless prodigality was such,
His exhibition he exceeded much:
And when his money was exhausted clean,
His credit flaw'd, and there remained no mean
Either to score or pawn; he walks alone,
And fetching many a deep suspire and groan,
His melanch'ly grew almost to despair:
Now, as we find, the Devils ready are
And pressed at such occasions; even so than
One of these Spirits in semblance of a man
Appears, and of his sadness does demand
The cause: Which when he seemed to understand,
He makes free protestation, That with ease
He can supply him with what Coin he please.
Then from his bosom draws a Book, and it
Presents the Youth, and says, If all that is writ
Within these leaves thou giv'st belief to, I
Will furnish all thy wants, and instantly;
Upon condition thou shall never look
On any page, or once unclasp the book.
The young man's pleased, the contract he allows,
And punctually to keep it sweates and vows.
Now (says the Spectar) note and understand
What thou see done: Then holds in his left hand
The fast-shut book; his right he casts about,
Then with his thumb and finger stretched out,
(Meaning the middle of that hand) holds fast
The charmed Volume, speaking thus at last,
Natat as saliat Aurum: and instantly
Six hundred Crowns into his pocket fly.
This showed and done, he stands himself aloof,
Gives him the Book, and bids the Youth make proof
As he before did. The same order kept,
The self same sum into his bosom leapt.
They part; the youthful Scholar is surprised
With joys incredible: and well advised
Within himself, thinks he, How should I curse,
To lose this, (more than Fortunatus Purse.)
Which to prevent, the surest way I Will choose,
Transcribiug it, lest I perchance might loose
Th'originalll copy. Then down close he sits,
Shuts fast his door, and summons all his wits,
From hand to hand the Book he moves and heaues,
Weighing and poising the enchanted leaves;
Then lays it open. But in the stead of Histories
Or Poems, he spies naught save Magic mysteries.
First page by page he turns it over all,
Save Characters most diabolical,
He nothing sees: then pausing a good space,
His eye by chance insists upon a place,
At which he wonders; namely'a circle that
Is filled with confused lines, he knows not what
Their meaning is; and from the Center rises
A Crucifix which the Cross much disguiseth,
Clov'n through the midst, and quite throughout dissect,
Above, an head of horrible aspect,
Resembling the great Devils, ougly foul,
Which seems on his rash enterprise to scoule.
On the right side two Crosses more appear,
That after a strange guise conjoined were;
And these are interchangeably commixt,
And upon each a Caca-Damon fixed.
Upon the left, that part exposed wide,
Which modest women most desire to hide.
Opposed, as even as just proportion can,
Was placed the erected virile part of man.
At these much wondering, and ashamed withal,
He feels a sudden fear upon him fall,
Which Fever shakes him, his eye's dull and dead,
And a strange megrim toxicates his head,
Imagining behind him one to reach,
Ready to arrest him for his promise-breach.
He calls aloud, his Tutor is by chance
At hand, beats open the door, and half in ^^ance
He finds his Pupil, and before him spies
This book of most abhorrid blasphemies:
And questions, how it came there? He tells truth.
Then he in stead of chiding, cheares the Youth:
And having caused a great fire to be made,
Now sacrifice this cursed Book, he said.
The Pupil yields, the flame about it flashes,
Yet scarce in a full hour it is burnt to ashes,
Though it were writ in paper. Thus we see,
Though these Familiar Spirits seeming be
Man's professed friends, their love's but an induction
Both to the Bodies and the Souls destruction.
Explicit Metrum Tractatus octavi.
Theological, Philosphicall, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierogliphicall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractat.
PRide was the first sin, Of Pride.
and therefore the greatest. It was the Fall of Angels; and is that folly in
Man to bring him to perdition. It strives to have a hand in every noble
Virtue, as it has an interest in every detestable Vice. The Valiant it swells
with vainglory, the Learned with selfeconceit. Nay further, it has been
known, That men of most submissiue spirits have gloried, That they could so
far humble themselves, as being proud, that they have not been more proud. It
has made zealous men presume of their merit, wretched men to boast of their
misery. Come to the Deadly sins; It is Pride in the Envious man, to malign the
prosperity of his neighbor; in the Wrathful man, to triumph in the slaughter
of his enemy; in the Luxurious man to trick himself up, and glory in the
spoil of his Mistress: in the Sloathfull, to scorn labor, and delight in
his ease: in the Auaritious, to despise the Poor, and trust in his abundance.
According to that of Ovid, in the fifth book of his Metamorph.

Sum foelix, quis enim neg at hoc? foelixque manebo.
Hoc quoque quis dubitat? tutum me copia fecit.
Happy I am, for who can that deny?
And happy will remain perpetually.
For who shall doubt it? Plenty makes me such,
Bee'ng made so great that Fortune dares not touch.
Pride (says Isiodor) est amor propriae excellentiae, Isiod. l. Etimol^ Epist.
ad Dios^.
It is a love of our proper excellency. Saint Augustine tells us, That all
other vices are to be feared in evil deeds; but Pride is not to be trusted
even in good actions, lest those things which be laudibly done, and
praiseworthy, be smothered and lost in too much desire of Praise. Humility
makes men like Angels, but Pride has made Angels Devils. It is the beginning,
the end, and cause of all other evils; for it is not only a sin in it
self, but so great an one, Aug in Reg.
that no other sin can subsist without it. All other iniquities are exercised
in bad deeds, that they may be done; but Pride in good deeds, that they may be
left undone. Pride, says Hieron. was borne in heaven, still striving to
possess and infect the sublimest minds: and as if it coueted still to soar
up to the place from whence it fell, it strives to make irruption and break
into the glory and power of men, which first broke out from the glory and power
of Angels; that whom it found Copartners in nature, Hug. lib. ^. de Anim.
it might leave Companions in ruin. From heaven it fell, (says Hugo) but by
the suddenness of the fall, having forgot the way by which it fell, though
thither it aim, it can never attain. All other Vices seek only to hinder
those Virtues by which they are restrained and brideled, as Wantonness
Chastity, Wrath Patience, and Avarice Bounty, etc. Pride only aduanceth it
self against all the Virtues of the mind, and as a general and pestiferous
disease, labors universally to corrupt them. Now the signs by which Pride
is discovered and known, are, Loquac^ty and clamor in speech, bitterness in
silence, dissoluteness in mirth, impatience in sadness, honesty in show,
dishonestie in action, rancor in reprehension, etc.

Prides Chariot is drawn with four horses, Ambition after Power, the Love of
our own Praise, Contempt of others, Disobedience in our selves. The Wheels
are, the Boasting of the mind, Arrogance, Verbositie, and Lightness. The
Charioter is the Spirit of Pride. Those which are drawn therein, are the
Lovers of this world. The Horses untamed, the Wheels uncertain, the Coachman
perverse, Cass. supr. Ps. 18.
those drawn, infirm. The Humble are taken up into heaven, the Proud are
thrown down upon the earth; so that by an interchangeable permutation, the
Proud fall on the place from whence the Humble are exalted: And from whence
satan (puffed up) fell, the Faithful man plucked up, ascend. Iunius, de Vilitate
Condition. Human. uses these words; Pride overthrew the Tower of Babel,
confounded the Tongues, prostrated Goliath, hanged Hamon, killed Nicanor, slew
Antiochus, drowned Pharaoh, destroyed Senacharib. God destroyed the place of
the proud Dukes, and eradicated the arrogant Gentiles. Every vicious man for
the most part loves and delights in his Like; only the Proud hates the
Proud, and they are never at peace.

Philosophical Sentences, Artabanus to Xerxes.
The sentences of the Philosophers and Historiographers are diverse and many.
Thou see (says Herodotus, lib. 7. speaking of Artabanus) how God strikes
the Greatest, to humble them, lest they should grow insolent, when he spares
and cherishes the Less. Thou see likewise, how often, lofty Towers, eminent
Buildings, and procerous Trees are blasted by Lightening, and torn by Thunder.
For God hates the Ambitious and Proud, as delighting to depresse all things
that swell above Nature or Custom. Hence it comes that mighty Armies are
discomfited by small Hosts, either by striking them with fear, or submitting
them to disadvantage: For God will not suffer any to think magnificently and
gloriously of their own power, save himself, Thucid. lib. 2. uses these
words, Etiam cum innoxia est superbia, molesta esse non desinit, etc. i. Pride
even when it seems to be most harmless, yet even then it does not cease to be
troublesome. And another writes, Signum secuturae ruinae est insignis
insolentia. Notorious Insolence is a sure token of succeeding ruin. Plato, de
Leg. says, The Proud man is forsaken of God, and he that is so left,
troubles all things in which he intermedleth, and soon after suffers the
punishment due unto his insolence; and many times not in himself and his
family only, but even unto the public weal it self brings desolation and
ruin. Ambition (says Bernard) is a foolish evil, a secret poison, a hidden
pest, an artificial deceit, the mother of hypocrisy, the father of spleen,
the fountain of vice, the worm of sanctity, the hearts infirmity, creating
diseases out of remedies, and generating languishing out of medicine. Innocent,
De Vil. cond. humanae vitae, writes, That the ambitious man is no sooner
promoted to honor, but he instantly grows proud, non curans prodesse, sed
gloriatur prae esse; Not caring for the profit of others, but glorying in his
own precedence, presuming he is the better because he is great: his former
friends he disdaines, those present he despises, his countenance he
contorteth, his neck he stiffeneth, his pride appears in speaking loud, and
meditating things lofty; to follow he scorneth, to lead he strives; to his
inferiors he is burdensome, to all troublesome, as being headstrong,
selfe-conceited, arrogant, intolerable, etc.

Joan. a Chotier, in Thesaur. Pol. Aphor. lib. 1. cap. 3. ^aith, That nothing
more mortiferous can happen unto a Prince than Pride, if it once takes root in
his breast; for what thing so holy which he contemns not? or what so just
which he does not violate? For Pride extinguisheth both the light of Reason
and Wisdom: which no sooner has usurped upon any temperat and gentle
condition, but it alienateth it from all humanity, inciting it to combustion,
spoil, and violence; and then God giving him over to his own insolence, he
praecipitateth himself into a world of miseries.

Laert. lib. 7. cap. 1. records of Zeno Citicus, Apothegmes.
That he observing a young man extraordinary gay and gaudy in his attire (still
looking on himself where he was most brave) and passing a durty kennel,
treading with great care and fear, lest he should spot or bewray his shoes;
he said to others who likewise took notice of his trimnesse, See how timorous
and suspicious yon fellow is of the mire, because he cannot see himself so
plain in it as in his glass. And Antonius in M^liss. Part. 2. Sermon. 24.
reports of Aristotle, That he seeing a supercilious young man very proud, but
unlearned, called unto him and said, My friend, I wish that I were such as thou
think thy self to be: but to be truly such an one as I see thou art, I wish
it to my greatest enemy. Bruson. lib. 6. cap. 4. ex Stobae. tells us, That
AEsop being demanded, What he thought Jupiter was at that time doing? he made
answer, He was then depressing the Proud, and exalting the Humble. Anton.
Sermon. de Superbis remembers of Philistion, who was wont to say, That a
wicked man advanced unto high place and dignity, and exulting in his wealth
and fortune, a sudden change of him was to be expected, as being raised the
higher, that he should fall so much the lower. Pambo.
We read in the Ecclesiastical History, of one Pambo, That being with
Athanasius in the city of Alexandria, and seeing a proud woman attyred in most
sumptuous and gorgeous apparel, wept grievously: And being demanded the reason
of his sudden passion; he made answer, That two causes moved him thereunto: The
first was, That the woman's pride was her own perdition; and the second, That
he himself had never so much studied to please God in his innocent life, being
a professed Christian, as she did hourly endeavor to give content unto wicked
men, in her loose and dishonest carriage. For as Thriver. says, As a little
quantity of gall put into the sweetest sauce, makes the whole taste bitter; so
the smallest Pride spotteth and corrupts the greatest virtue.

Diverse amongst the Historiographers are remarked for their pride: The Pride of
Domitian Caesar.
as Domitian, who boasted in the Senate, That he had first given the Empire to
his father and his brother, and after received it from them. He, as Eusebius
relates, was the first Emperor that would be styled Dominus and Deus, Lord and
God. From whence grew that of the flattering Poet; Edictum Domini Deique nostri,
Quo subsellia certiora fiunt, etc.


It was likewise enjoined by him, That in no writing or speech he should be
otherwise called. He suffered none of his statues to be admitted into the
Capitol, but such as were of pure gold, or silver at least. He also
trans-nominated the two months of September and October, to Germanicus and
Domitian; because in the one he was crowned, and in the other he was borne, etc.

Sabor King of Persia styled himself, Of Sabor K. of Persia.
the King of Kings, a Partner with the Stars, and Brother to the Sun and
Moon: for so Herodotus writes, Lib. 2. Historiar.

Let us now hear the Poets concerning Pride. Claud. 4. De Honors Consol.
says, Inquinat egregios adjuncta superbia mores.
The best Indowments known and tryde,
Are spotted, if commixt with Pride.


And Seneca, in Herc. Furent.

Sequitur superbos victor a tergo Deus.
God as a Victor does not slack,
But still is at the proud man's back.
Menander in Gubernat.

O miserum terque quaterque
Omnes qui de se magnifice sentiunt inflat:
Ignorant enim illi hominis conditionem, etc.
O miserable thrice and four times told,
Are all who in their insolence are bold,
To vant themselves too high, whilst their ambition
Does make them to forget man's frail condition.
For none but such whose sense has them forsaken,
By Arrogance and vain Applause are taken.
Eurip. in Glauco: Cum videris in sublime quenquam elatum,
Splendidius gloriantem opibus and genere, etc.
When thou behold'st a proud man others scorn,
Because he is rich himself, or nobly borne,
And therefore casts on them a scornful eye;
Imagine that from heaven his judgement's nigh.


Sophocles, in Aiace. Flagif.

Video nos nihil aliud esse praeter,
Simulacra quaedam quotquot viuimus
Aut vmbram levem, -- etc.
I see that we whose minds so lofty soar,
Are Images, light Shadows, and no more.
Consider this, o Man, thou shall not break
Into vain fury, nor a proud word speak
Against thy God; though others thou exceed
In Power, in wealth, or any noble deed.
We read Socrat. Com. Athen. thus: Quamvis Rex na^us fueris audi tamen vt
mortalis, etc.
Though thou art borne a King in thy degree,
Yet know thou can no more than mortal be:
Thy time's uncertain, and thy life a dream,
What thou in scorn spitst from thee is but phlegm,
And bred from corrupt nature. Do thou wear
A costly robe? that first the Sheep did bear,
Before it decked thy shoulders. Is thy chest
Crammed full of gold? it is Fortunes spoil at best.
Or art thou rich, of potencie and power?
Yet are not these assured thee for an how'r.
Or art thou proud? That Is folly above all;
Possessing nothing thou thine own can call.
Seek Temperance, for that is a divine treasure,
Which thou shall find if thou thy self can measure.


Mortales cum sitis (says Demosthenes) ne supra Deum vos erexeritis: i.
Knowing your selves to be but mortal, seek not to be advanced above God.

And we find it thus in the excellent Poet Simon Nauquerius: Quod juvat
homines tanto turgescere fasti^,
Non certe heroes semi-dijque sumus, etc.
What helps it you, o men, to be so proud?
For Heroes or halfe-gods y' are not allowed.
Came not our substance from the earth below?
And from above naught save the breath we blow?
Is not our flesh, nay bones, from dust create?
And we the subjects of inconstant Fate?
What Is in grown man? What Is all his strength within,
More than the earths bowels wrapped up in soft skin?
Even from our parents dregs conceived at first,
Naked and weeping borne, then swathed and nursed.
Think only of thy ruin, wretched Man,
And that, than thy corrupt flesh, nothing can
Be thought more vile. The Trees and Plants we see
Bear pleasant fruits, Beasts bring that which feeds thee.
When from thy body nothing can proceed
But what is foul and nasty, and does breed
Loathsomeness to thy self, diseases, sores,
And excrements by all thy vents and pores.
Behold how faint, how weak, how poor thou grow'st,
That not one safe hour in thy life time know,
Of which thou can presume; and art indeed
Naught but a putrid Coarse, the Worms to feed.


To this Pride (which was the sin of the Angels, and therefore the cause that
they were precipitated from heaven into hell) we may add their Ingratitude,
who notwithstanding the dignity of their Divine nature, durst oppose themselves
against Him who had created them of such excellence. How heinous may we imagine
that offense was in Angels toward their God; when it is held so odious and
abominable (for any benefit received) in one man toward another? Saint
Augustine, in lib. de Poenitentia; In hoc quisque peccato fit culpabilior, quo
est Deo acceptior, etc. In this every Sinner is made more culpable, in that to
God he is more acceptable: and therefore Adams sin was the greater, in
regard that in his creation he was the purer. And Bernard, Sermon. 1. in Epiphan.
Domin. Acknowledge how much God has esteemed thee, by those benefits he has
bestowed upon thee, and what he has done for thee; that unto thee his
benignity may the better appear in taking upon him humanity. For the less
he made himself in his Incarnation, the greater appeared his goodness for thy
salvation. By how much for me he was the viler, by so much to me he shall be
the dearer. And therefore observe, o Man, because thou art but dust and earth,
be not proud; and being joined unto God, be not Ungrateful.

Of the general Ingratitude of men, Lib. 2. cap. 1. de devin. Institut.
advers. gentes.
Lactantius Firmianus thus justly complains: If any necessity oppresses us,
then God is remembered: if the terror of war threatens us, if any sickness
afflicts us, dearth and scarcity punishes us, if storms or tempests
trouble us; then we fly unto God, then we desire his help, then we offer our
fervent prayers unto him. If any be in a storm, or distressed at sea, then he
invoketh him. If any violence or oppression be offered, he imploreth him. If he
be driven to poverty, then he seeks unto him. Or if forced to beg, he craves
the peoples charity only for his sake, and in his name. But save in their
adversity they never remember him; after the fear is past, and that the
danger is blown over, him whose assistance they implored in their want, they
forget in their fullness; and whom they sought after in their penury, they now
fly in their plenty. O fearful ingratitude! for then men most forget God,
when enjoying his blessings and benefits, they have cause to be thankful unto
him. Prove. 17.
For then, He that returns evil for good, evil shall not depart from his
house, says Solomon. And therefore, Bless God, Psalm. 102.
o my Soul (says the Psalmist) and forget not his great benefits.

The ungrateful man (or rather Monster) is by the Ethnycke Authors diversely
branded. One writes thus: Ingratus qui beneficium accepisse, negat quid
accepit, ingratus qui id dissimulat, etc. He is called an ungrateful man, who
having received a benefit, yet denies to have received it: he is so called
that dissemblerh it: he likewise incurreth the same aspersion that requiteth it
not: but above all, that character is most justly conferred upon him that
forgets it. It is a sin that walks hand in hand with Insolence and
brasen-fronted Impudence, says Stobaeus. And according to Theophrastus, it
arises either from covetousness, or suspect. Archimides says, Benefits well
and carefully conferred, strengthen and establish a Kingdom: but service
unrewarded, and gifts unworthily bestowed, weaken and dishonor it. Old
kindnesses (says Pindarus the excellent Greek Poet) are apoplexed and cast
asleep, as void of all sense; and all men, as stupefied, are turned
ungrateful. For according to the Cynicke Diogenes, Nothing so soon waxes old
and out of date, as a courtesy received. Quintilian is of opinion, That all
such as receive gifts, courtesies, or good turns from others, should not only
frequently remember them, but liberally requite them: thereby imitating our
Mother Earth, which still returns more fruit than it receives seed. Socrates
affirmed all such as were unthankful, to have in them neither nobility nor
justice. According to that saying of Stobaeus, Gratitude consists in Truth
and Justice; Truth, in acknowledging what was received; and Justice, in
repaying it. The Laws of Persia, Macedonia, Athens, etc. punished Ingratitude
with death. And Plato can teach us, That all humane things quickly grow old
and hasten to their period, only that sin excepted: and he gives this reason,
Because that the greater increase there is of men, the more Ingratitude
abounds. The Ungrateful is held to be of worse condition than the Serpent, who
reserueth venom and poison to hurt others, but keeps none to harm himself.
I conclude with Seneca the Philosopher; If we be naturally inclined to observe,
and to offer all our service to such from whom we but expect a benefit; how
much more then are we obliged to such from whom we have already received it? I
come now unto the Poets.

Seneca, in Aiace Flagell. we read thus: Qui autem obliviscitur beneficijs
affectus,
Nunquam vtique esset hic generosus vir.
Amongst the Generous he can claim no place,
That good turns done, out of his thoughts does raze.


Plautus, in Persa, speaks thus: Nam improbus est homo
Qui beneficium scit sumere, and reddere nescit.
Nil amas, si ingratum amas.
Bad is that man, and worthy blame,
That can good turns from others claim,
But naught returns back. He than
Naught loves, that loves a thank less Man.


Cornarius writes thus: Pertusum vas est ingratus Homnucio, semper
Omne quod infundis perfluis in nihilum.
In vain the Ungrateful man with gifts thou fill'st:
In broken Tuns, what thou pour'st in thou spill'st,


And much to the same purpose (almost the same sense) the Poet Luscinius
expresses himself, in this Distich following, speaking of the unthankful man:
Rimarum plenus perdit tua dona scoelestus,
Si sapis integro vina reconde cado.
A leaking Vessel, and consumes what is thine,
But thou for a sound Tun reserve thy Wine.


Ausonius in one of his Epigrams says, Ingrato homine terra pejus nil creat.
There Is nothing worse that the earth can
Breed, than an Ungrateful man.


And Iuvenal, Satyr 11.

-- Ingratus ante omnia pone sodales.
Above all others, see thou hate
Thy fellows, such as prove ingrate.
Valor. lib. 5. de I^gratis.
One Michael Traulus slew his master the Emperor Leo, who had raised him to many
eminent honors and dignities. Phraates slew his father Orodes King of the
Parthians. Romanus junior rejected his natural mother; at which she conceived
such hearts grief, that she soon after expired. Alphonsus Primus King of
Lusitania cast his mother into Prison. The like Henry the Emperor, fifth of that
name, to his father Henry. Darius took counsel to kill his father Artaxerxes,
by whom he was before made King. And Lucius Ostius, in the time of the Civil
wars, when his father Armalius was proscribed, and the Triumvirat prosecuted
his life, he his son betrayed him to the Lictors, and brought them to the place
where he then lay concealed; for no other cause, but that he might enjoy his
possessions. Marcus Cicero, at the command of M. Anthonius one of the
Triumvirat, was slain by Pompilius Lemates, whose life he had before defended,
and acquitted from the strict penalty of the Law. Alexander the Great,
forgetful of his Nurse Hellonice, from whom he had received his first milk,
caused her brother Clitus afterward to be slain. Anthonius Caracalla being
advanced to the Roman Empire, amongst many others whom he caused innocently to
be butchered, he spared not Cilones his tutor, by whom he was first instructed,
notwithstanding he had been a Counselor to his father, and a man notable for
his wisdom and temperance. No less was the ingratitude of the Senate of Rome
unto Scipio Africanus, who notwithstanding that he had subdued Carthage, the
only City that durst affront or contest with Rome through the whole world; yet
being accused by Petilius, they arraigned him in open Court, and proscribed
him, because that all the treasure which he had won in Asia, he had not
brought into the Treasury of Rome. But of all the rest, that to me is most
remarkable recorded by Zonarus and Cedrenus, of the emperor Basil. Macedo, who
being hunting (as he much delighted in that exercise) a great stag incountring
him, fastened one of the brouches of his horns into the Emperors girdle, and
lifting him from his horse, bare him a distance off, to the great indangering
of his life. Which a Gentleman in the train espying, drew out his sword and
cut the Emperors girdle, by which means he was preserved, and had no hurt at
all. But note his reward; The Gentleman for this act was questioned, and
adjudged to have his head struck off, because he dared to expose his sword so
near the Emperors person: and suffered according to his sentence.

Infinite are the histories to this purpose, which for breuities fake I omit;
shutting up this argument with that out of Petrus Crinitus, Lib. 2. Poemat. de
Fugiendis ingratis: Ingratus est vitandus vt dirum scoelus,
Nil cogitari pestilentius potest,
Nec esse portentiosius quicquam puto, etc.
Ingratitude I wish thee shun,
As the worst deed that can be done.
Nothing more pestilentiall can
Enter into the thoughts of man.
The Ungrateful man 's prodigious, who,
If his bad acts he cannot show,
Yet studies ill: himself he spares,
But against others all things dares.
He hates all; but those men most,
Who justly may their good deeds boast:
The reason may be understood,
As bee'ng sequestered from the Good.
He 's bold and wicked, drawn with ease
To what is bad (which best does please.)
What of it self is good, he still
Does labor how to turn to ill.
As he 's covetous, so he 's proud,
And with no honest gift endowed.
There 's only one good thing he can,
Well pleasing both to God and Man;
And which though he be sure to pay,
Yet whilst he can he will delay:
(And 't is against his will too then)
That 's, when he leaves the world and men.
No Monster from the earth created,
That is of God or Man more hated.


But amongst all the ungrateful people of the world, the stiff-necked nation
of the Jews appears unto me to be most remarkable: concerning whom you may
read Esdras, lib. 1. c. 5.23. to this purpose; and by me thus paraphrased: Now
of the Forest trees, all which are thine,
Thou Lord have chosen to thy self one Vine;
And out of all the spacious kingdoms known,
One Piece of earth, which thou do call thine own.
Of all the Summer flowers the earth does yield,
Picked out one Lilly 'midst of all thy Field.
From all the Seas that compass in the vast
And far-spread earth, one River took thou have.
Of all built Cities, in thy choice affection
Thou of one Sion have made free election.
Of all created Fowls, swift, or slow flighted,
Thou in one only Dove have been delighted.
Of all the Cattle that the pastures keep,
Thou have appointed to thy self one Sheep.
Out of all Nations under this vast Frame,
Culled one alone to call upon thy Name:
And to that People thou a Law have given,
Which from gross earth transcendeth them to heaven.


Notwithstanding these and the many glorious Miracles visible to the eyes of
their forefathers, (which were not only delivered unto their posterity by
tradition, but by the mouth and pen of the Holy Ghost, in the person of Moses
and many other Prophets) yet of their refractorie condition, stiff-necked
rebellion, their idolatries and utter falling off from their powerful and
mighty Preserver, numerous, nay almost infinite are the testimonies in
Holy-Writ.

Of Humility.
Opposite unto Pride is that most commendable Virtue of Humility, which Pontanus
calls the Sister of true Nobility. Blessed are the Poor in Spirit (says our
Savior) for theirs is the kingdom of God. Cap. 5.
And Prove. 16. It is better to be humble with the Meek, than to divide the
spoil with the Proud. Again says our blessed Savior, Suffer these little
Ones to have access unto me, Math. 18.19.
and forbid them not, for to such belong the Kingdom of Heaven. For whosoever
shall humble himself as one of these little ones, he shall be great in the
kingdom of heaven. Again, Judge. The prayers of the Humble and Gentle have
been ever pleasing unto thee. And Psalm. 112. Who is like the Lord our God, who
dwells in the most high place, and from thence regards the Humble both in
heaven and earth? lifting the Weak from the earth, and raising the Poor from
the Dunghill, that he may place him with Princes. And 1. Pet. 5. Be ye humbled
under the mighty hand of God, that ye may be exalted in the time of Visitation.

Saint Augustine, de Verb. Dom. says, Discite a me non Mundum fabricare, etc.
Learn of me, not how to build the world, nor create things visible or
invisible; not to work miracles, and raise the Dead unto life: but seek to
imitate me in my humility and lowliness of heart. If thou think in thine
heart to erect a building in great sublimitie, consider first the foundation
which is laid in humility. And of the same Virtue he thus proceeds; O
medicine unto us most profitable, all tumors repressing, all defects supplying,
all superfluities rejecting, all depraved things correcting. What Pride can be
cured, but by the Humility of the Son of God? What Covetousness healed, but by
the Poverty of the Son of God? What Wrath be appeased, but by the Wisdom of
the Son of God? Aug. ad Diosc.
Again, High is the country, but low is the way; and therefore let not him
that desires to travel thither, refuse the path which leads unto it. In
Sermon. de Superbia he uses these words: O holy and venerable Humility! Thou
causedst the Son of God to descend into the womb of the blessed Virgin Mary;
thou did wrap him in vile and contemptible garments, that he might adorn us
with the Ornaments of Virtue: Thou did circumcise him in the flesh, that he
might circumcise us in the Spirit: Thou made him to be corporeally scourged,
that he might deliver us from those scourges due unto us for our sins: Thou
did crown him with Thorns, that he might crown us with his eternal Roses:
Thou made him to be feeble and weak, who was the Physician of us all, etc.

Greg. in Explic. 3. Psalm. Poeniten. says, That he which gathers Virtues
without Humility, is like one that carries dust in the wind. And Saint
Bernard, Lib. de Consider. Stable and permanent is the foundation of Virtue, if
laid upon Humility; otherwise the whole building is nothing but ruin. Leo, in
Sermon. de Nativ. Christ. says, In vain are we called Christians, if we be not
Imitators of Christ; who therefore named himself the Way, That the
conversation of the Master might be a president unto the Disciple; that the
Servant might choose that humility which the Master followed, who is Christ. Lib
3.
Hugo, de Claus. Animae, tells us, That in the spiritual Building, the
foundation below is placed in Humility, the breadth thereof is disposed in
Charity, the height thereof is erected in Good-workes; it is tiled and covered
by Divine protection, and perfected in the length of Patience.

Bernard, in Vita Laurent. Iustiniani, Similitudines.
compares Humility to a Torrent; which as in the Summer it is temperat and
shallow, but in the Spring and Winter inundant and raging: so Humility in
prosperity is mild and gentle, but in adversity bold and magnanimious.
Chronatus Episcop. de octo Beatitud. says, That as it is not possible in any
ascent, to attain unto the second step or staire, before thou have passed the
first; so no man can attain unto Humility and gentleness, till he be first
poor in spirit. Thriverus in Apothegm. 200. uses these words: As the deeper a
Vessel is, the more it receives; so every man is capable of so much grace, as
he is before possessed of Humility.

The Hierogliphycke of this Cardinal Virtue, according to Pierius Valerius,
Lib. 35. is a Bended Knee: borrowed it seems from that of Horrace, Ius
imperiaque Phraates,
Caesaris accepit genibus minor.


A Fable to this purpose I have read, and not altogether improper to be here
inserted. Amongst a many tall straight fair and well grown trees, there was
one low, crooked, and not a little deformed; which was hourly derided by the
rest, insomuch that it grew weary both of it is place and life. But not long
after, the Lord of the soil having occasion to build, he caused all those
goodly Timbers to be felld and laid prostrat on the earth; which being soon
after removed, this despised and dejected shrub, as a thing held merely
unserviceable, was left standing alone, neither obscured from the comfortable
beams of the Sun, nor covered from the cheerful and tempestiue showers of
the Heavens. At which she began to acknowledge the happiness of her humility,
since that which she apprehended to be her grief and misery, returned in the
end to be the sole means of her preservation and safety.

Not much foreign unto this, is that counsel which Ovid gave his Friend,
Trist. lib. 3. Eleg. 4.

Vsibus edocto, si quicquid credis Amico:
Vive tibi, and long, nomina magna vita;
Vive tibi, quantumque potes perlustria vita.
Saevum praelustri, fulmen ab Arce venit, etc.
If to thy Friend least credit thou dare give,
Fly swelling titles, to thine own self live:
Live to thy self, pursue not after Fame;
Thunders at the sublimest buildings aim.
No folded Sail the Winters storm need fear,
But such as brave their gusts, they rend and tear.
Light Vessels swim above and dread no ground,
When those surcharged with their own weight are drowned.
And Horace, 3. Carmin. 4. uses these words: Vim temperatam dij quoque
provehunt,
In majus: ijdem odere vires.
Omne nefas animi moventes, etc.


Which I give you thus interpreted: A temp'rat course the gods protect,
And will produce it to effect.
But when it grows to spleen and hate,
The power thereof th'anticipate.
The hundr'd handed Giant, he
Can of my sentence witness be.
So stern Orion, who did prove
Diana in illicit love:
Who being shot by her chaste arrow,
Was pierced into the bones and marrow.
And now the earth laments at last,
Her monstrous brood, upon her cast:
Who because they with pride did swell,
Were with swift thunder struck to hell.


Claudian writing, de Sepulchro specioso, uses these words: Magna repent
ruunt, summa cadunt subito.
Great things even in an instant quail,
And high things in a moment fail.


To this that sentence of Seneca, in Thieste, may seem to give a correspondent
answer: Laus vera humili saepe coutingit viro.
The merited praise (deny 't who can)
Often falls unto the humbled man.


I take leave of this common place, with that of Jacob. Bill. Antholog. sacr.
de vi humilitatis: whom we read thus: o Deus, o quantis vita est humanae
periclis.
Subdita? quis tali vitet ab hostenecem? etc.
To what great dangers in the life of man
Subject, (o thou my God?) who is he can
Evade sad Death by such a foe in chase?
Which way soever I shall turn my face,
I spy a thousand perils guirt me round,
As many snares my poor soul to confound.
Whether I drink or eat, or laugh, or mourn,
Or lie to sleep; which way soever I turn,
Or in what course soever I persist,
I am pursued by my Antagonist.
O thou my God, who can these ne^s efchew?
He, and he only, that Pride never knew.


Of Gratitude.
True humility cannot subsist without Gratitude; for it is an undeniable
consequence, That if the refractorie and disobedient Angels that fell, had not
been proud, they could never have been ungrateful. Lib. 7. cap. 3.
Gratitude is a most commendable virtue, (says Sabellicus) acceptable both to
God and man. It is to confess both by heart and voice, that neither by
accident no^ by second causes only, as well external as internal good things
are conferred upon us; much less, that Summum Bonum which is chief, the
Savior of the World: But because God the Father, by and for his only Son
Jesus sake, is the Author of all those blessings and benefits we do enjoy, we
ought not only to confess it our selves, but to inuit others also to the
acknowledgement thereof, and to the invocation of the name of the true God;
that they likewise may be confident, that God has a care of the Godly, not
only to hear them when they pray, but to keep them that they may be
preferued to all eternity, etc.

What is it (says Saint Augustine, upon the Psalm Tota die os meum repletum
laud, etc.) all the day, that is without intermission to praise thee; in
prosperity, because thou comfortest us; in adversity, because thou correctest
us: before I was, because thou createdst me; after I was, because thou
preseruedst me; when I offended, because thou did pardon me; when I was
converted, because thou did assist me; when I did continue, because thou
did crown me. And in his Epistle to Marcellinus; What better thing can we
bear in mind, or pronounce with tongue, or express with pen, than thanks
unto God, than which nothing can be spoke more succinctly, or heard more
joyfully, or understood more gracefully, or practiced more fruitfully?

Ambrose in his fifth Sermon upon Luc. has these words: There is nothing which
we can return him worthy, for taking flesh in the Virgin. In what then shall
we repay him for his buffets? what for his Cross? what for his burial? Shall
we give him Cross for Cross? and a Grave for a Sepulcher? Can we give him
any thing? when of him, by him, and in him we have all things. Let us therefore
repay him Love for Debt, Charity for Gift, Thanks for Blood, and Alms for
Reward. Chrysostom, in Tract. de Symbol. I admonish you, that you always
bless the Lord: if Adversity come, bless him, that your miseries may be
taken from you: if prosperity happen unto you bless him likewise, that his
benefits may be continued.

Apothegmes.
We read sundry Apothegmes to this purpose. Erasm. Apoth. Lib. 6. ex Plutar.
tells us, That Python having done many notable services for the Athenians,
amongst others, he slew the king Cotyn in battle: and they willing to publish
his merits, not only by the common Crier, but in stately Shows and Triumphs;
he refused all those Honors, saying, All praise and thanks are to be rendered
unto the gods, by whose help and favor these things are done: For mine own
part, I only lent my will and hand, but the event of all excellent actions are
in the higher Powers, to whom, if any thing has suceeded happily, belongs
all thanksgiving: I only in these things was their minister and servant. Lib.
12. cap. 24.
Nicephorus Calistratus tells us, That Platilla the wife to the Emperor
Theodosius, when she perceived he loved to deviat something from justice and
Religion, more than became one of his high place and calling; she said unto
him, Sweet and dear Lord, consider with your self what you before were, and
whose Deputy you now are: If you remember him who has placed you in this
eminent Throne, how can you prove ungrateful unto him, for so great a benefit
received? Most requisite therefore it is, that you give a thankful account
unto him, who preferred you before all others unto so great a charge.

Chilon was wont to say, That it is commendable in men to forget bad turns
done, but to be mindful of courtesies received: yet the Vulgar practice the
contrary; for where they confer a benefit, they never cease, not only to
remember it, but to proclaim and publish it: but when any benefit is bestowed
upon them, they either forget, dissemble, or undervalue it.

AElianus tells us, De v^ria Hist. lib. 4.
That Diogenes having received some pieces of money from one Diotimus Carisius,
to supply his necessary wants, and knowing himself altogether unable to
requite his present courtesy; he looking upon him, with a loud acclamation
cried out, The gods requite thee, o Diotimus, even so much as thou can think
in thy mind, or desire in thy heart.

Numerous are the histories extolling this most imitable Virtue: amongst which
I remember you of some few. Sabell Exemp. lib. 7. cap. 1.
Cirus Major having read in the book of the Prophet Esaias, his name inserted
there two hundred years and more before he came to the Crown; looking upon that
place where it is said, I will that Cyrus whom I have made King over many and
great Nations, shall send my People into their own Country, there to rebuild
my Temple: he (I say) as ouerjoyed with this Prophetical prediction, witnessed
by his Edict, That he would send them freely into Iudaea, there to erect a
Temple unto the Great God, by whose mighty providence he was appointed to be a
King so many Ages before he was borne. The like is recorded of Alexander
Macedo, who being at Jerusalem, and there instructed by the Prophecy of
Daniel, That it should come to pass that a King of Greece should utterly
subvert the Persians, and after enjoy their sovereignty and estate; building
from thence a certain confidence of his future victory, he presented Iaddus
and the rest of the Priests (from whom he received that light of the
Prophecy) with many and rich gifts, and moreover gave them not only free
liberty to use their own Laws and Religion, but released them from a seven
years tribute.

Panormitan. lib. 1. de Dictis and Factis Alphons. reports, That Alphonsus
King of Arragon and Sicilie never suffered any man to exceed him in bounty and
gratitude. And Herodotus, lib. 1. tells us, That though Cyrus knew himself
to be the son of Cambyses King of Persia, and Mandanes daughter to Astiages
King of the Medes; yet his Nurse Spaco (which the Greeks call Cino, from
whence grew the Fable, That he was nursed by a Bitch) who was wife to the
Herdsman of King Mithridates, he held in such great honor, that no day passed
him in which he had not the name of Cino in his mouth. Hence comes it,
according to Hect. Boeth. lib. 2. That the nurse-children of the most noble
Scots affect those of whose milk they have sucked, and title them by the name
of Foster-brothers. Plutarch speaks of Pyrrhus King of the Epyrots, That he
was humane and gentle unto his familiar friends, and ever ready to requite any
courtesy done unto him. And Caspinus reports of Henry the second, Emperor,
That only because he was instructed in learning and Arts in a town of Saxony
called Hildescheim, he for that cause made it an Episcopal See, and endowed it
with many fair and rich Revenues.

It is reported by Plutarch, of Philip King of Macedon, the Father of Alexander
the Great, That when his great friend Eparchus Embricus was dead, he mourned
and lamented exceedingly; but when one came to comfort him, and said, There was
no occasion of this his so great sorrow, in regard he died well, and in a full
and mature age; he made answer, Indeed he died so to himself, but to me most
immaturely, in regard death did anticipate him before I had requited his many
courtesies to the full.

Hierogliphick.
Per Cucupham avem, says Pierius Valerius (which I understand to be the
Storke) the Egyptians hierogliphycally signify paternall and filial
gratitude: for as Philippus Phiropollines testates, Above all other birds, they
repay unto their parents being old, those benefits which they reciued from them
being young. For in the same place where they were first hatched, being grown
to ripeness, they prepare a new nest for their Dams, where they cherish them
in their age, bring them meat, pluck away the incommodious and unprofitable
feathers, and if they be unable to fly, support them upon their more able
wings. We read his thirtieth Emblem, Emblem.
ad Gratiam referendam, thus: Aerio insignis pietate Ciconia nido,
Implumis pullos pectore grata fovet, etc.
The indulgent Storke, who builds her nest on hye,
(Observed for her alternat piety)
Does cherish her vnfeather'd Young, and feed them,
And looks from them the like, when she should need them,
(That Is when she grows decrepit, old, and weak.)
Nor does her pious Issue covenant break:
For unto her bee'ng hungry, food she brings,
And being weak, supports her on her wings.


Saint Bernard, super Cantic. says, Disce in ferendo gratias non esse tardus,
non segnis, etc. Learn in thy thankfulness not to be slack nor slow, but for
every singular courtesy to be particularly grateful. And in his first Sermon
upon the same, he uses these words, As often as Temptation is overcome, or
Sin subdued, or imminent Peril escaped, or the Snare of the Adversary
avoided, or any old and inueterat disease of the Mind healed, or any
long-wished and oft-deferred Virtue obtained, by the great grace and gift of
God; so often ought laud and praise, with thanksgiving be rendered unto him.
For in every particular benefit bestowed upon us, God ought to be particularly
blessed; otherwise, that man shall be reputed Ungrateful, who when he shall
be called to an account before God, cannot say, Cantabiles mihi erant
iustificationes tuae.

Let us now hear what the Poets say concerning Gratitude.

We read Ovid, 4. de Ponte, thus: Pro quibus, vt meritis referentur gratia,
jurat
Se fore mancipium, tempus in omne tuum, etc.
For which, that due thanks may be given, he swears
Himself thy slave to infinites of years.
First shall the mountains of their trees be bare,
And on the Seas sail neither Ship nor Crare,
And floods unto their fountains backward fly,
Than of thy love shall fail my memory.


As also Virgill, AEnead. lib. 2.

Dij (si quaest Coelo pietas quae talia curet)
Persolvant grates dignas and proemia reddant
Debita. --
The gods themselves (if in the heavens there be
Which shall of these take charge) that piety
Return thee merited thanks, and such a meed
As is behoofefull for thy grateful deed.
Sophocles, in Oedipo, says, Gratiam adfert gratia, and beneficium semper
beneficium parit: Thanks begets thanks, and one benefit plucks on another.
Says Seneca; En, est gratum opus si vltro offeras: Behold, that is a grateful
work which comes freely and of thine own accord. And in another place,
Beneficium dare qui nescit, injuste petit: He that knows not how to do a
courtesy, with no justice can expect any. Again, Beneficium accipere, est
libertatem vendere: To receive a benefit, is to sell thy liberty. These with
many others are Maxims of the Tragic Poet Seneca. Statius, lib. 7. Thebaidum
says, Nec la^dare satis, dignasque reperdene grates
Sufficient, referant superi --
Praise thee enough, or enough thank thee, I
Cannot: but where I want, the gods supply.


Ovid, 1. de Tristibus, thus writes unto a friend of his, whom he had found
constant unto him in all his troubles and adverse fortunes: Haec mihi semper
erint, imis infixa medullas
Perpetuusque animae debtor hujus ero.
These courtesies have pierced my marrow, and
My life and soul at all times shall command.
First shall this Sp'rit into the air expire,
And these my bones be burnt in fun'rall fire,
Than that the least oblivion shall once stain
This memory, which lasting shall remain.


I conclude this Theme of Gratitude, with that extracted out of Vrsinus Velius:
his words be these: Capturus pisces hamata in littore seta,
Na^fraga forte hominis calva prehensa fuit, etc.
A Fisher angling in a Brook,
With a strong line, and baited hook;
When he for his wished prey did pull,
It happened he brought up a skull
Of one before drowned. Which impressed
A pious motion in his breast.
Thinks he, Since I such leisure have,
Upon it I Will bestow a grave:
For what did unto it befall,
May chance to any of us all.
He takes it, wraps it in his coat,
And bears it to a place remoat,
To bury it; and then digs deep,
Because the earth it safe should keep.
But lo, in digging he espies
Where a great heap of treasure lies.
The gods do never prove ingrate
To such as others shall commiserate.


These are Arguments so spacious, that to handle them unto the full, would ask
of themselves a voluminous Tractat, and rather tire and dull the Reader, than
otherwise. But for mine own part, in all my discourses I study as far as I
can, to shun prolixity. Omitting therefore all impertinent Circumstances, I
come to the maine subject intended.

Now to prove that there are such Spirits as we call Incubi and Succubae, there
are histories both many and miraculous; of which I will instance only some
few. D. Strozza.
Henricus Institor and Jacob. Sprangerus report, That a young Votaresse had
entertained carnal congression with one of these Demons; which though at the
first it seemed pleasing unto her, yet in continuance of time growing irksome
and distastefull, she knew no means how to be rid of this loathsome and
abominable society: but long considering with her self, she thought it the
best course to reveal the secret to some one or other; and long doubting to
whom she might tell it, and her reputation (which she held dear) still
preserved, she bethought her self of one of the same Sisterhood, her choice
and bosom companion, (whose name was Christiana) and at a convenient leisure
sorted to the purpose, told her of all the proceedings as they happened from the
beginning, not leaving any particular circumstance intermitted. The other being
of a mild nature, and gentle disposition, gave a courteous and friendly ear
unto whatsoever was related, and withal bad her be of good comfort and not to
despair; for in this one thing she would declare her long protested
fidelity, not only to conceal whatsoever she had delivered unto her, but to
engage her own person for her future content and safety: and withal trusting
in her own innocence and integrity, she offered to change lodgings and beds
for the next succeeding night; for she would for her sake stand the danger at
all adventures. This being betwixt them agreed and fully concluded upon, the
time came, and Christiana was no sooner warm in her bed, but the Spirit entered
the chamber, and opening the sheets, began to tempt her with such importunity
and petulancy, that she was forced to fly out of the bed, and humbling her
self upon her knees, devoutly to betake her self to her prayers.
Notwithstanding which, she was so vexed and beaten all the whole night after,
that meeting with her friend next morning, she showed her the marks of her
stripes, and vowed from thenceforth never to attempt so dangerous an
undertaking; affirming, that with much difficulty she avoided his temptation,
and with great peril of life.

In vitis Patr.
We read also in the Lives of the Fathers, of a woman who for the space of six
whole years together had nightly intercourse with a like unclean Spirit, from
whom she upon great repentance was after delivered by the prayers of Saint
Bernard. Caesarius Colonensis writes of a Priests daughter, who was so
incessantly importuned by one of these Incubi, that her father was forced to
send her beyond the Rhine, thinking by that means to free her from his
libidinous assaults. But the Devil missing her in her accustomed place, fell
violently upon the Father, and so beat and buffetted him, that he died within
thirty three days after. Merlin the great Magition of Britain, is reported to
be the son of an Incubus, begot upon a Kings daughter, who had taken upon her
a sequestered life. In which solitude he appeared unto her like a fair young
man, and never left her society till he had made her a teeming woman.

Of these Incubi and Succubae are said to be borne those whom the Mahumetans
call Neffe Soglij; an impious and accursed generation, to whom the Turks
attribute such honor, that they hold it a blessedness but to touch their
garments. They say their heirs are of such virtue, that they expel all
infirmities and diseases: therefore that barbarous people hold them as
demy-gods; and though their prestigious acts be the mere illusions of the
Devil, yet do these miscreants hold them in great adoration and reverence.

A Woman of Constance.
Iacobus Rufus writes of a woman who had congresse with one of these Spirits;
and when her time of childing came, after infinite pangs and throws,
Miraculous Stories.
she was delivered of nothing save keys, chips, pieces of iron, and fragments
of old leather. Another thing much more admirable happened (says he) in the
Diocese of Cullein. Diverse Princes and Noblemen, being assembled in a
beautiful and fair Palace which was situate upon the River Rhine, they
beheld a boat or small barge make toward the shore, drawn by a Swan in a
silver chain, the one end fastened about her neck; the other to the Vessel;
and in it an unknown soldier, a man of a comely personage, and graceful
presence, who stepped upon the shore: which done, the boat guided by the Swan,
left him and floted down the River. This man fell afterward in league with a
fair gentlewoman, married her, and by her had many children. After some years,
the same Swanne came with the same barge unto the same place; the soldier
entering into it, was carried thence the way he came, after disappeared, left
wife, children, and family, and was never seen amongst them after. Now who can
judge this to be other than one of those Spirits that are named Incubi.

In Brasilia, A strange and miraculous Birth.
a barbarous woman by accompanying with one of these Demons, brought forth a
Monster, which in a few hours grew to be sixteen handfuls high, whose back
was covered with the skin of a Lisard, with big and swollen breasts; his hands
like the paws of a Lion, with eyes staring, and seeming to sparkle fire; all
his other members being deformed and horrible to behold. Alexander remembers
us of a woman called Alcippe, Alcippe.
who in the time of the Marsicke war, by companying with an Incubus brought
forth an Elephant. Aumosius writes, That in Heluetia, in the year 1278, a
woman brought forth a Lion. In Ficinum, Anno 1370, a woman was delivered of
Cats. And at Brixium, another of a Dog. Licosthenes writes of one at Augusta,
who was first delivered of a man's head wrapped up in skins and parchment, then
of a Serpent with two feet, last of an Hog; and all at one birth, etc.

Hector Boethius writes, Hist. Scotia l. 8. A strange History of a Scotch Lady.
That in Scotland in the County of Mar, a Maid of a noble Family, of great
beauty, but altogether auerse from marriage was found with child. At which the
Parents much grieved, were importunat to know by whom she was vitiated. To whom
she ingeniously confessed, That a beautiful young man had nightly conversation
and company with her, but from whence he was she was altogether ignorant. They,
though they held this answer to be but an excuse, and therefore gave small
credit unto it, yet because she told them, the third night after, he had
appointed to lodge with her, kept the hour, and with swords candles, and
torches, brake open the doors of her chamber, where they might espy an hideous
Monster, and (beyond humane capacity) terrible, in the close embraces of their
daughter. They stand stupefied, fear makes them almost without motion: The
clamor flies abroad, the neighbors come in to be spectators of the wonderment,
and amongst them the Parson of the parish, who was a Scholar, and a man of
unblemished life and conversation; who seeing this prodigious spectacle, broke
out into those words of Saint John the Evangelist, Et Verbum Caro factum est,
And the Word was made Flesh: which was no sooner spoke, but the Devil arose,
and suddenly vanished in a terrible storm, carrying with him the roof of the
chamber, and setting fire on the bed wherein he had lien, which was in a moment
burned to ashes. She was within three days after delivered of a Monster, such
as the Father appeared unto them; of so odible an aspect, that the Midwiues
caused it instantly to be burnt, lest the infamy of the daughter might too much
reflect upon the innocence of the Noble Parents.

Anno 1586. A strange thing of a woman at Sea.
The same Author records the like wonderment in a Ship of passengers, who
took in their lading at Fortha, to land in the Low Countries: which being in
the midst of Summer, there grew so sudden a storm, that the mainmast was
split, the sails rent, the Tacles torn in pieces, and nothing but imminent
shipwreck was expected. The Pilot cries out, (in regard the storm was
intempestiue, it being then the Summer Solstice, when the Seas are for the most
part temperat and calm) that it must needs be the work of the Devil. When
suddenly was heard a lamentable complaint of a woman passenger below the Deck,
confessing that all this disaster was for her sake, for having often carnal
company with the devil, he at that time was tempting her to that abominable
act: which a Priest (a passenger then among them) hearing, persuaded her to
repentance, and not to despair, but to call upon God for mercy: which she did,
with many sighs and tears; when presently they might espy a cloud or dark
shadow in the shape of a man, to ascend from the Hold of the ship, with a great
sound, fire, smoke, and stench, to vanish: after which the tempest ceased, and
they in a calm sea arrived safe at their expected Harbor.

Of the Spirits called Succubi.
From the Incubi I come to the Succubae. I have read of a French man of a Noble
Family, who being given over to all voluptuousness, and walking one night
somewhat late in the streets of Paris, A strange thing of a French Gentleman.
at the corner of a Lane he espied a very handsome Creature, whom presently he
began to court; and finding her tractable, they agreed, that she should pass
that night with him in his Lodging. To which he brought her privately; for it
was a chamber which he had took of purpose for such retyrements. To bed they
go, and he when he had sated himself sufficiently, grew weary, and fell fast
asleep. But in the morning when he put his arm over his loving bedfellow,
he found her body to be as cold as lead, and without motion. When he perceived
her to be senseless and quite dead, (for with no jogging nor pinching she did
either move or stir) he instantly rose, and calling his Host and Hostess,
told them what a great disaster had happened him, to his utter disgrace and
ruin. They were as much perplexed, as not knowing how to dispose of the dead
body; all of them fearing to incur the strict censure of the Law. In this
their general distraction, the Hostess looking advisedly upon the face of the
dead Coarse, she first began to think that she had seen her before, and that
her countenance had been familiar unto her; then recollecting her self, she
seemed perfectly to know her, affirming her to be a Witch, who had two days
before suffered on the Gallows. This seemed first incredible: yet the present
necessity enforced them to make trial whether it were so or no; and therefore
making inquiry where the body of the Witch was buried, and not being found
there, it was afterward by all circumstance proved to be the same, which a
Succubus had entered. By the which probability the Gentleman and Host escaped
the imputation of murder, though not the disgrace of incontinencie and
Brothelrie.

Bonfinius and Iordanus Gothus testate, Bonfin^us.
that the Nation of the Hunnes came from the Incubi: Jordan Gothus.
For (say they) Filmerus King of the Goths, banished all the Whores and
Prostitutes out of his Army, into solitary and desert places, lest they should
effoeminate and weaken the bodies and minds of his soldiers. To these came
Devils, and had carnal society with them; from whom came the cruel and
barbarous nation of the Hunnes, whose manners and conditions are not only
alienate from all humanity, but even their language degenerat from all other
Tougues spoken by men.

Neither of the Heavens nor of the Stars have the Devils any power, Of the
Spirits of Fire.
because for their Pride and impious imaginations they are confined to eternal
torments, neither can they work any thing upon celestial Bodies, which are
merely simple, and thereforsubiect to no alteration. Of this opinion was Saint
Augustine, Aug. Cont. Manichees de Agon. Christ.
in his book against the Manichees; as also in that De Agone Christi, writing
thus: These things I have spoken, that no man may think the evil Spirits can
have ought to do where God has appointed the Sun, Moon, and Stars to have
their abode. To the which he adds, Neither let us think that the Devil can
have any power there, from whence he and his cursed Angels were precipitate
and fallen. Therefore they have no further dominion than within the compass of
the four Elements; but beyond them, to the superior heavens they cannot extend
their malice.

Deuination from Thunder and Lightning.
Yet the ancient Writers hold, That they (namely the fiery Spirits) have a kind
of operation in thunder and lightning. Of which Pliny gives an example: Before
the death of Augustus, a flash of lightning in Rome where his statue was set
up, from CAESAR took away the first letter C, and left the rest standing. The
Aruspices and Soothsayers consulted upon this, and concluded, that within an
hundred days Augustus should change this life: for AEsar in the Hetrurian
tongue signifies Deus, i. God; and the letter C. among the Romans stands for
an hundred; and therefore the hundredth day following, Caesar should die and be
made a god: which could not happen to any man whilst he was yet living.

Cardanus.
Cardanus speaking of fiery Spectars, amongst many others relates this story:
A strange tale of Spectars.
A friend of mine (says he) of approved faith and honesty, traveling one
night late, from Mediola to Gallerata, when the Sky was full of clouds, and the
weather inclining to rain; being within some four miles of his journies end,
he saw a light, and heard the voice (as he thought) of certain Cow-herds upon
his left hand, and presently (a hedge only being interposed) he saw a fiery
Chariot covered with flames, and out of it he might hear a voice crying aloud,
Cave, cave; Beware, beware. Being much terrified with this strange prodegie, he
put spurs to his horse, and whether he galloped or rid softly, the Chariot
was still before him. He then betook him to his orisons and supplications unto
God: at length after the space of a full hour, he came to a Temple dedicate
to the memory of Saint Lawrence, standing just without the gate, and there the
Chariot of fire, herdsmen and all, sunk into the earth, and was seen no more.
Cardanus having disputed something of the nature of this fire, adds, That the
Gallaterans suffered the same year not only a great plague, but diverse other
afflictions and disasters.

The manner of Deuination by Pyromancy.
To these Spirits of the fire is ascribed that divination by Pyromancie, which
some call Puroscopan. In which superstition old pitch was cast into the fire,
with the invocation of certain of these Spirits. Sometimes a Tead or Torch
dawbed over with pitch was lighted, and marked with certain characters. If the
flame of the Tead gathered it self into one, it was prosperous; if divided,
disastrous: if it arose tripartite, it presaged some glorious event; if it were
diversely dispersed, it diuined to a sick man death, to a sound man sickness;
if it made a sparkling noise, it was infortunat; if it was suddenly extinct, it
threatened great misfortune. So likewise in their sacrificing fires, Divination
by the sacrificing Fire.
if the flame went straight upward like a Pyramid, it was a sign of a good
omen; if it divided and dispersed, of a bad. There were diverse conjectures also
from the color, the brightness, the dullness, the ascent, the sparkling, etc.
and this kind of Magic was frequent amongst the Li^uanians, etc.

From the fiery, Of the Spirits of the Air.
I proceed to the Spirits of the Air. We read in the sacred Scriptures, Job.
1.
That Satan caused fire to fall from heaven, to devour and consume Jobs
servants and his cattle. As likewise he raised a vehement Whirle-winde and
tempest, which oppressed his sons and daughters, with the house where they
were then feasting, with a sudden ruin.

Remigius tells a story, Remigius.
which is likewise affirmed by Delrius; That a countryman of the province of
Triuere, Delrius.
setting some Plants in his garden, with a young maid his daughter; Of a
country Maid.
the father commended her for going so neatly and quickly about her business:
The Girl tells him, that she can do stranger things than these, and more
stupendous. The father demands, What? Withdraw your self but a little (says
she) and name but in what place of the garden a shower of rain shall fall and
water the earth, and in what not. The countryman curious of novelty,
withdrew himself, and bad her use her skill. She presently made an hole in
the ground, into which she poured her own water, and stirring it about with a
stick, murmuring certain magic words to her self, presently a shower fell,
watering only that part of the gronnd which he had named unto her, and in the
other fell not one drop of rain.

Gasper Spitellus writes, Gasp. Spitellus.
That some Indians have much familiarity with these Spirits. The Indian Magi.
For when they want rain, one of their Magic Priests with a shrill voice
makes an acclamation, That all the people shall assemble to such a mountain,
having first observed a Fast, which is, to abstain from the eating of salt,
pepper, or any thing that is boiled. That done, he lowdly calls upon the Stars,
and with devout Orisons entreats of them, that they would afford them
seasonable showers. Then they turn their eyes toward the lower grounds, upon
their fields and houses, taking in their hands a bowl full of charmed liquour,
which they receive from the hands of a young man of their most noble families;
which they have no sooner drunk, but they lie intranced without sense or
motion. After, being come to themselves, they commix honey, water, and Maiz
together, and with them sprinkle the air. The next day they choose out one of
the most eminent men of their Nation, both for nobility and age, and lay him
in a bed, with a soft fire under it, and when he begins to sweat, they wipe
off the moisture, and put in a basin, which they mingle with the blood of a
Goose, and sprinkling it again into the air, as if they meant it should touch
the clouds, they then solicit the Stars again, That by the virtue of the old
man's sweat, the blood of the goose, and the water before mixed, they may have
seasonable and temperat showers. Which if they have, according to their
desires, they give great thanks to the Stars and Planets, and the Priest from
the people is rewarded with rich gifts and presents.

Hier. Mengius.
Hieronimus Mengius writes, That a certain Magition in a field adjacent to
the tower or citadell of Bonnonia, showed two famous Generals, A prodigious
noise in the Air.
Johannes Bentivolus and Robertus Sanseverinus, a spectacle in the air, in
which was heard such a noise of drums, clangor of trumpets, clamor of men,
neighing of horses, and clashing of arms, that the Spectators were afraid lest
the heaven and the earth would have met at the instant: but in all the
inuironing grounds, save only in that place, the air was untroubled.

Diod. Sicul.
Diodorus Siculus reports also, That in the Syrtes of Lybia, the Spirits of
the air are oftentimes visible, in the shape of diverse birds and beasts, some
moving, some without motion, some running, some flying, others in other strange
postures. But, which is most miraculous, sometimes they will come behind men
as they are traveling, leap up and sit upon their shoulders; who may feel
them to be much colder than either snow or ice.

Olaus Magnus.
Olaus Magnus in his History remembers, That these airy Spirits have such a
predominance in the Circium sea, Their power in the Circiu^ sea.
and they continually do so exasperat, shake, and trouble it, that scarf any
ship can sail that way without wrack and foundring. In the Isle called
Island, under the dominion of the King of Denmark, there is a port called
Vestrabor, Vestrabor.
not far from which men are usually taken and wrapped up in whirl-winds, by the
power of these Spirits, and are hurried many furlongs off. Likewise in the
Western parts of Norway, Norway.
these spirits with their noxious and blasting touch, cause that neither grass
nor trees burgeon or bear fruit. Likewise upon the Bothnian continent, Bo^hnia.
the roofes are usually blown off from their houses, and carried a great
distance off. And in the fields of Bonaventum and Narbon, Bonauentum and Narbon.
(as Procopius writes) men armed, wagons laden, or whatsoever comes in the way,
are snatched up into the air, and whirled about like a feather, and after let
fall upon the earth, not only bruised, but broken to pieces. So that they do
not only uncover houses, demolish buildings, ruin turrets and towers, blow up
trees by the roots, snatch up men in whirl-winds, and prostrat whatsoever
stands before them; Vincentius.
but (as Vincentius witnesses) they tear up cities from their foundations
sometimes, and strew the fields adjacent with their ruins.

Vincentius.
In the Council of Basil certain learned men taking their journey through a
forest, one of these Spirits in the shape of a Nightingall uttered such
melodious tones and accents, that they were all amassed, and stayed their steps
to sit down and hear it. At length one of them, apprehending that it was not
possible that such rarietie of music could be in a bird, the like of which
he had never heard, demanded of it in the name of God, what or who it was. The
Bird presently answered, I am the Soul of one that is damned, and am enjoined
to sing thus till the last day of the great Judgment. Which said, with a
terrible shrieke which amassed them all, she flew away and soon vanished. The
event was, That all that heard those Syrenicall notes, presently fell into
grievous sicknesses, and soon after died.

Of this sort of Spirits was that no doubt of which Aventinus witnesses:
Auentinus. Bruno Bishop of Herbipol.
Bruno the Bishop of Herbipolitanum, sailing in the river of Danubius, with
Henry the third then Emperor; being not far from a place which the Germans
call ^en Strudel, or the devouring Gulf, (which is near unto Grinon a castle
in Austria) a Spirit was heard clamouring aloud, Ho, ho, Bishop Bruno, whether
art thou traveling? but dispose of thy self how thou please, thou shall be
my prey and spoil. At the hearing of these words they were all stupefied, and
the Bishop with the rest crossed and blessed themselves. The issue was, That within
a short time after, the Bishop feasting with the Emperor in a Castle belonging
to the Countess of Esburch, a rafre^ fell from the roof of the chamber
wherein they sat, and struck him dead at the table.

Of the Watery Spirits next, and of them some brief stories. Of the Spirits of
the Water.
The manner how the Duke of Venice yearly marries the Ocean with a Ring, and
the original thereof, though it have nothing in it belonging unto magic, yet
will it not much mis-become this place; therefore I begin first with that. The
Duke in the Feast of Christ's Ascension, comes to a place named Bucentaur,
without the two Apostle gates, ^eituate at the entrance of the Gulf; and
casts a rich Ring into the sea; which is no argument of superstition or
enchantment, but only a symbol or emblem of Domination and Rule, which by
this earnest the Senate of Venice makes a contract with the Ocean. The ground
and first beginning of this ceremony came from Pope Alex. the third, whom Otho
the soon of Frederick. AEn^barbus so persecuted, that he was forced to fly,
and to shelter himself in Venice, in the Monastery of Saint Charity, where
he lived for a time secretly and unknown. But after, notice being given to the
Venetians, what and who he was, they br^ught him thence with great honor and
observance. He also found both their land and sea Forces ready for the service
of him and the Church^ insomuch that in a great Na^all con^^ict Otho was by the
Venetians taken prisoner, and presented as a Vassal to the Pope. For which the
Pope took a Ring from his finger, and gave it to S^hastianus Zianus General
for the Fleet, speaking thus, By virtue of my authority, whilst thou keep
this Ring, thou shall be Lord and Husband of the Ocean; and annually thou and
thy posterity on this day, in which thou have obtained so glorious a victory
for the Church, shall espouse the Sea: that all men may know that the dominion
of the Sea is granted unto thee, because thou have so prosperously undertook
the study, care, and defense of the Sea Apostolic. And be this a presage of
thy benediction, Villamont. l. 1. Peregrin. c. 34. Sabel. Dec. ^. l. 7.
and thy happy success in the future for ever. Thus Villamontinus sets it
down, Lib. 1. Peregrinat. cap. 34. And Sabel. Dec. 1. lib. 7. out of whom the
former Author extracted it.

A strange History of Hotheru^ K. of Suetia and Dacia.
This following History you may reed in Olaus Magnus. Hotherus King of Suetia
and Dacia, being hunting, and by reason of a thick dampish fog wandered or
strayed from his company, he happened upon a Syluan den or cave; which entering,
he espied three fair and beautiful Virgins, who without blaming his
intrusion, called him by his name and ^ad him welcome; doing him that obeisance
and observance which his state required. At which he wondering, courteously
demanded of them what they were. To whom one replied, That they were Virgins,
into whose power all the Auspices and events of war were given, and they had
ability to dispose of them at their pleasure; and that they were present in
all conflicts and battles, (though unseen) to confer upon their friends
honor and victory, and to punish their enemies with disgrace and overthrow.
Exhorting him withal, that as he tendered their favors, he should by no
means trouble Balderus with war, who by his genealogy might claim alliance
with the gods. Which words were no sooner delivered, but the den and they
disappeared together, and he was left alo^^ in the open air without any
covering. Blame him not to be much amassed at this so unexpected and sudden a
prodigy, notwithstanding after some recollection, he winding his ^orne, his
servants came about him, by whom he was conducted to the Court, not revealing
this Vision to any. Some few years after, being vexed and prosecuted with
sharp and vnsuccessefull war, he was forced to wander through forests groves,
and thickets, and seek out by ways, and make untrodden paths, the better to
secure himself. At length he light upon another remote and desola^ Vault,
where sat three Virgins, who notwithstanding upon better aduisement he
presumed to be the same who at their last departure scattered a garment, which
he took up, and found by experience, that all the time he wore it his body was
invulnerable. They demand of him the cause of his coming thither? He presently
complains unto them of his infortunat events in war; adding withal, That all
things had happened unto him adverse to their promise. To whom they answered,
That he accused them unjustly; for though he seldom returned an absolute
Victor, yet in all his enterprises he did as much damage, and made as great
slaughter on his Enemies, as he had received strage or execution from them: and
bad him not to despair, for if he could by any exploit or stratagem prevent
the Enemy of any one dish of meat which was provided for his diet and table,
he should without question in his next expedition gain an assured and most
remarkable victory. Satisfied with this their liberal promise, he took his
leave, recollected his dispersed Troops, and took the field. The night before
the battle, being vigilant to survey his Enemies Tents, and see what watch
they kept, he espied three Damsels carrying up three dishes of mea^ into one of
the Tents: whom following apace (for he might easily trace them by their steps
in the dew) and having a Citharon about him, on which he played most curiously,
he received meat for his music, and returning the same way he came, the next
day he gave them a strong battle, in which the enemies were slain almost to
one man^

Pertinax, The Emperor Pertinax. S^he^. lib. ^. Zonarus.
as Sabellicus witnesses, a little before his death saw one of these Spectars
in a fish-poole, threatening him with a naked sword. Of the like nature was that
Bore which Zonarus speaks of, who meeting with Isaaccius Comnenes, Isaaccius
Comnenes.
who was hunting near unto Naples, and being pursued from a promontorie, cast
himself headlong into the sea, leaving the Emperor almost exanimate and
without life.

In Finland (which is under the dominion of the King of Sweden) there is a
castle which is called the New Rock, A strange Water in Finland.
moted about with a river of an unsounded depth, the water black, and the fish
therein very distastefull to the palate. In this are Spectars often seen, which
fore-shew either the death of the Governor, or some prime Officer belonging to
the place: and most commonly it appears in the shape of an Harper, sweetly
singing, and dallying and playing under the water.

There is a Lake near Cracovia in Poland, A Lake near Cracouia.
which in the year 1378 was much troubled with these Spirits; but at length by
the prayers of some devout Priests, the place was freed from their impostures.
The Fishermen casting their nets there, drew up a Fish with a Goats head and
horns, and the eyes flaming and sparkling like fire; with whose aspect, and
filthy stench that it brought with it, being terrified, they fled: and the
Monster making a fearful noise like the houling of a wolf, and troubling the
water, vanished.

Alex. ab Alex.
Alexander ab Alexandro makes mention of one Thomas a Monk, who in an evening
seeking an horse, and coming near unto the brinke of a Riue^, he espied a
country fellow, who of his voluntary free will offered to traject him over on
his shoulders. The Monk is glad of the motion, and mounts upon his back: but
when they were in the midst of the flood, Thomas casting his eye down, he
perceived his legs not to be humane, but goatish, and his feet cloven.
Therefore suspecting him to be one of these watery Devils, he commended
himself to God in his prayers: The Spirit then forsakes him, and leaves him
well washed in the middle of the River, to get unto the shore with no small
difficulty.

Sabell. lib. 7.
Sabellicus has left recorded, That when Julius Caesar with his army was to
pass the river Rubicon, to come into Italy, and to meet with Pompey; one of
these Spirits in the shape of a man, but greater than ordi^arie, sat piping
upon the bank of the River. Which one of Caesar's soldiers seeing, snatched
away his pipe and broke it: when the Spirit presently swimming the River,
being on the other side, sounded a shrill and terrible blast from a trumpet;
which Caesar interpreted to be a good and happy omen of his succeeding victory.

Of the Spirits of the earth.
Of the Spirits of the earth there are diverse sorts, and they have diverse names,
as Genij, Lares, Dij domestici, Spectra, Alastores, Daemonia meridiana; as
likewise Fauni Sylvani, Satyri folletti, Fatuelli Paredrij, Spiritus
Familiares, etc. Of some of these I have spoken in the preceding Tractat.

Man consisting of 3 parts
Servius Honoratus and Sabinus are of opinion, That Man consists of three
parts (but most ignorantly, and adverse to truth) of a Soul, a Body, and a
Shadow; and at his dissolution, the Soul ascends to heanen, the Body inclines
to the earth, and the Shadow descends ad Inferos, to hell. They hold the Shadow
is not a true body, but a corporeal Species, which cannot be touched or taken
hold of no more than the wind; and that this, as well as the Soul, does often
times appear unto men living; and the soul after it has left the body, is
called Genius, and the Shadow Larva, or the Shadow infernal. These Genij are
malicious Spirits of the earth, who when they most promise health and safety
unto mankind, do then most endeavor their utter ruin and destruction.

The Genius of Constantine Emperor,
Constantine the Emperor marching from Antiochia, said, That he often saw his
own Genius, and had conference with it; and when he at any time saw it pale and
troubled, (which he held to be the preserver and protector of health and
liuelyhood) he himself would much grieve and sorrow.

By the Spirits called Lares or Household gods, A strange History of a
Melancholy man.
many men have been driven into strange melancholies. Amongst others I will
cite you one least common: A young man had a strong imagination, that he was
dead; and did not only abstain from meat and drink, but importuned his
parents, that he might be carried unto his grave and buried before his flesh was
quite putrified. By the counsel of Physicians he was wrapped in a winding
sheet, and laid upon a Beer, and so carried toward the Church upon men's
shoulders. But by the way two or three pleasant fellows, suborned to that
purpose, meeting the Hearse, demanded aloud of them that followed it, Whose body
it was there coffined and carried to burial? They said it was such a young
man's, and told them his name. Surely (replied one of them) the world is very
well rid of him, for he was a man of a very bad and vicious life; and his
friends may rejoice, he has rather ended his days thus, than at the gallows.
Which the young man hearing, and vexed to be so injured, rowsed himself up upon
the Beer, and told them, That they were wicked men to do him that wrong, which
he had never deserved: and told them, That if he were alive, as he was not,
he would teach them to speak better of the Dead. But they proceeding to
deprave him and give him much more disgraceful and contemptible language, he
not able to endure it, leapt from the Hearse, and fell about their ears with
such rage and fury, that he ceased not buffetting with them, till quite
wearied, and by his violent agitation the humors of his body altered, he
awakened as out of a sleep or trance, A strange Disease, as stra^gely cured.
and being brought home and comforted with wholesome diet, he within few days
recovered both his pristine health, strength, and understanding.

But to return to our several kinds of Terrestrial Spirits; Noon-Diu^ls.
There are those that are called Spectra meridiana, or Noon-diuels. In the
Eastern parts of Russia, about harvest time, a Spirit was seen to walk at
midday like a sad mourning Widow; and whosoever she met, if they did not
instantly fall on their knees to adore her, they could not part from her
without a leg or an arm broken, or some other as great a mischief. Wherein
may be observed, That these Spirits, of what condition soever, above all things
aim at Divine worship, which is only due unto the Creator. Not that they are
ignorant, that it belongs solely to him; but that in their inexpressible
malice, knowing themselves to be Rebels, and quite excluded from Grace, they
would likewise draw Man to accompany them in eternal perdition. Therefore all
the Saints of God, since Christ established his Church here amongst the
Gentiles, have endeavored to draw the Nations from Idolatry. It is read of
Saint James, That when many Devils were sent unto him by one Hermogenes, to
assault him, he returned them bound and disarmed. S. Bartholmew.
That Saint Bartholmew destroyed the Idol of Asteroth, who was worshipped in
India; and showed moreover, that their great Alexikakon was a mere figment and
imposture. So the Apostles Simon and Jude struck dumb those Spirits that
spoke in the Oracle, Simon and Jude.
to Varada chief General over Xerxes his Army: and after, restoring to them
their liberty of speech, they caused that their deceit and vanity did easily
appear. For V^rada demanding of them, What the event of the war would prove?
they answered him, That it would be long and dangerous, and not only
unprofitable, but full of damage and great loss to both parties. On the
contrary, the Apostles deriding the vanity of the Idol, informed him, That
the Indian Ambassadors were upon the way, humbly to desire peace of him upon
any conditions whatsoever. Which finding ^o be true, Varada commanded those
lying and deceitful Images to be immediately cast into the fire and burned; and
had then slain an hundred and twenty of those idolatrous Priests, had not the
Apostles earnestly interceded for them. I could here cite many examples to the
like purpose, but let these suffice for the present.

Alastores.
The Alastores are called by Origin, (Contra Celsum) Azazel; by Zoroaster,
Carnifices, (or Butchers) and Alastares. No mischief is hid or concealed from
them: and these are never seen but they portend some strange disaster. As in
the time of the Emperor Justinian, such Spirits were seen openly in humane
shape to intrude into the society of men: after which a most fearful
pestilence followed, and whosoever was touched by any of them, most assuredly
died. By which contagious Pest, the great city Constantinople was almost
unpeopled: Pet. Diac. lib. 9. rerum Romanarum. and Egob. in Chronic.
and as Paulus Diacon. witnesses, the people saw an Angel in the dead of the
night go along with them, compassing the city, and walking from street to
street, and from door to door, and so many knocks as the Spectar (by the Angels
command) gave at the door of any house, so many persons of that family were
undoubtedly found dead in the next morning.

An Alaster like an old Woman.
Cardanus reports, That there is an ancient family in Parma, named Torrelli;
to whom an old Seat or Castle belongs, which for the space of an h^ndred years
together was haunred with one of these Alastores, who so often as any of the
household were to depart the world, would show it self in a chimny of the great
hall. A noble and illustrious Lady of the same Family reported, That a young
virgin lying dangerously sick in the same house, the Spectar according to
custom appeared: and when every one expected hourly the death of the Virgin,
she presently beyond all hope recovered, and a servant who was at that time
sound and in health, fell sick upon the sudden and died.

Some few days before the death of Henry the seventh, Apparitions before Henry
the 7. emperor.
Emperor, he being feasted in a castle at Mediolanum, belonging to one Viscont
Mathaeus; at midday there appeared before them a man armed, of a mighty
gyantly size, to the great amasement of them all: and three days after, in the
same place, and at the same hour, two armed champions on horseback, who
performed a brave combat for the space of an entire hour, and then suddenly
disappeared, to the wonder and terror of all the Spectators.

To Cassius Parmensis, Cassius Parm.
lying in his bed, appeared a man of an unusual stature, with staring hair,
and a rough and disordered beard, terrible in aspect: at the presence of which
being strangely troubled, he started out of his bed and asked him who he was?
Who answered, I am thy Malus Genius; and so vanished. Cassius knockes, calls to
his servants that attended without, asks them if they saw any to go in or come
out of his chamber: They protest, Not any. He museth to himself, and lies
down again. The Demon appears the second time, but with a countenance much
more horrible. Again he knockes, and commands his servants to bring lights.
They enter; nothing appears. The rest of the night he spends in doubtful and
sollicitous cogitations. The dawning of the day scarce appeared, when Lictors
were sent from Caesar, to apprehend him and take away his life.

Of the Lamiae or Larvae The Lamiae, or Laruae.
I guess that to be one which appeared to Dion of Syracu^a, Dion of Syracusa.
who looking out at his chamber window in the night, by reason of a noise he
heard, spied an old hag, habited and looked as the Poets describe the Eumenides
or Furies, with a great broom sweeping the Court. At which being wonder-strook,
he called up some of his household, and told them of the Vision, desiring them
to accompany him in his chamber the remainder of the night; which they did,
and neither saw nor heard any thing afterward. But ere the morning, one of
Dions sons cast himself out of a window, into the same court; who was so sore
bruised that he died of the fall: and he himself within few days after was
slain by Callippus.

Drusus being Consul, Drusus Consul of Rome
and making war in Germany, a seeming woman of extraordinary aspect met him one
day upon his march, and saluted him with these words; O insatiate Drusus,
whither art thou now going? and when do thou think thou shall return; since
thou art now at the period both of thy life and glory? Which fell out
accordingly, for within few days after, Brutus expired of an incurable disease.

Iacobus Donatus a Patrician of Venice (as Cardanus reports; Iacobus Donatus
Venetus:
from whose mouth he received this discourse) sleeping one night with his wife
in an upper bed, where two Nurses lay with a young child his sole heir in the
lower, which was not a full year old, he perceived the chamber door by
degrees, first to be unlocked, then vnbolted, and after vnhatcht, one thrust in
his head, and was plainly seen of them all, himself, his wife, and the
Nurses, but not known to any of them. Donatus with the rest being terrified at
this sight, arose from his bed, and snatching up a sword and a round buckler,
caused the Nurses to light either of them a taper, and searched narrowly all the
rooms and lodgings near, which he found to be barred and shut, and he could
not discover where any such intruder should have entrance. At which not a
little wonder-strooke, they all retired to their rests, letting the lights
still burn in the chamber. The next day the infant (who was then in health,
and slept soundly) died suddenly in the Nurses arms: and that was the success
of the Vision.

In the year 1567, in Trautonauia a town in Bohemia, one of the city died,
named Stephanus Hubnerus; Stephanus Hubnerus.
who in his life time had heaped together innumerable riches, and builded
sumptuous houses and palaces; every man wondering how he should attain to
that great mass of wealth. Presently after his decease (which was observed
with the celebration of a most costly funeral) his Spectar or shadow in the
same habit which he was known to wear being alive, was seen to walk in the
streets of the city: and so many of his acquaintance or others as he met, and
offered in the way of salutation to embrace, so many either died, or fell into
some grievous and dangerous disease immediately after.

Nider. lib. vltim. Formic.
Niderius tells this story: In the borders of the kingdom of Bohemia lies a
valley, in which diverse nights together was heard clattering of armor, and
clamors of men, as if two Armies had met in pitched battle. The desperate
adventure of two Knights of Bohemia.
Two Knights that inhabited near unto this prodigious place, agreed to arm
themselves, and discover the secrets of this invisible Army. The night was
appointed, and accommodated at all assayes they rode to the place, where they
might descry two battles ready ordered for present skirmish; they could easily
distinguish the Colors and prauant Liueries of every Company: but drawing
near, the one (whose courage began to relent) told the other, that he had
seen sufficient for his part, and thought it good not to dally with such
prodegies, wherefore further than he was he would not go. The other called him
Coward, and pricked on toward the Armies; from one of which an horseman came
forth, fought with him, and cut off his head. At which sight the other fled,
and told the news the next morning. A great confluence of people searching for
the body, found it in one place, the head in another, but neither could discern
the footing of horse or man; only the print of birds feet, and those in myrie
places, etc.

The Emblem.
A Visard, showed by an hand extended from the clouds: those children which
stand directly before it, and view the ouglinesse thereof, run away, as
affrighted with the vain shadow; but such as stand behind, looking only upon
the hollownesse, and perceiving the error, make it only their sport, deriding
those that are so simply terrified. Which agrees with that of Cassiodor, in
Psalm. Quis mortem temporalem metuat, cui aeterna vita promittitur? quis
labores carnis timeat, cum se in perpetua requie nouerit collocandum? What is
he that can fear a temporal death, to whom eternal life is promised? Or who
would be afraid of the pains belonging to the flesh, that knows they bring
him to everlasting rest. And we read, Phil. 1.24. For I am distressed betwixt
both, desiring to be loosed and to be with Christ, which is best of all, etc.
It is held to be a maxim, That no man dies more willingly, than he that has
lived most religiously; which the more fearfully we fly, the more earnestly
we follow; and by living to die, men dye to live. Saint Augustine tells us,
there be three sorts of death, The first the death of Sin; for every Soul
that sins shall die. The second a mystical death, that is, when we die to
sin, and live to God. The third is that death by which we fulfill the course
of nature. Nature has given to man no better thing than Death. Pliny.
Non deterret sapientem mors, quae propter incertos casus quotidie imminet; and
propter brevitatem vitae nunquam long potest abesse: i. Death cannot terrify
a wise man, which by reason of so many uncertain chances, is always imminent;
and in regard of the shortness of his life, can never be long absent. The
Motto given by Catsius to this Emblem, is, Mors Larvae similis, tremor hinc,
nihil inde maligni.


And his Conceit hereupon as follows: Id mors est homini trepidis quod Larva
puellis
Excitat ingentes frons vtriusque metus.
Larva fugat pueros, frontem, non terga videntes
Ast alijs risum posteriora movent
Sensibus incurrit, cum lurida mortis imag^
(Hei mihi) quam multis spes animusque cadit:
At cui terga necis melior doctrina revelat,
Clamat, ades vitae mors melioris iter.


Thus paraphrased: Death is to Man, as Visards to Girls show,
Who frighted run from what they do not know.
Behold the forehead, and the aspect affrights:
View it behind, and the mistake delights.
So when Deaths pallid image is presented,
How many men grow strangely discontented.
Who better counseled, on his back parts look,
And cry out, welcome Death; we have mis-tooke.


A moral interpretation (the Motto being, Pessimus interpres rerum metus) may
be gathered from Plutarch, in Moral. where he says, Degeneres Animos timor
arguit. Virg. AEnead. lib. 4.
Terror absentium rerum ipsa novitate falso angetur, consuetudo tamen, and
ratio efficit, vt ea etiam quae horrenda sunt natura, terrendi vim amittant: i.
The terror of things absent is increased falsely by the nouelty thereof: but
Custom and Reason so bring to pass, that even those things which are
naturally horrid, come to lose the power of their terror. Fear is said to be
the companion of a guilty conscience; neither can there be any greater folly,
than for a man to fear that which he cannot shun. Quantumquisque timet, tantum
f^git. Petr. Arbit. Satyr.
Daily experience has brought it within the compass of a proverb, That he
that fears every tempest can never make a good traveler. Viget. says, It
becomes a man to be careful, but not fearful; because it often happens,
That servile fear brings sudden danger. Ovid tells us, Epist. Her. 13. Nos
sumus incerta, nos anxius omnia cogit,
Quae possunt fieri facta putare, Timor.
i. We are incertaine of our selves, Tunc plurima versat. Pessimus in dubijs,
Augur, Timor. Stat. lib. 3. Theban.
and there is nothing possible to be done, but Fear persuades us to be already
done.

Fear is defined to be twofold; good and commendable Fear, grounded upon
Reason and Judgment, which is awed more by reproach and dishonor, than by
death or disaster: And evil Fear, which is destitute of Reason, and may be
called Pusillanimitie, or Cowardice; always attended on by two perturbations
of the Soul, Doubt and Sadness. Which may be also called the defect of
Fortitude: Upon which the Emblematist writes in these words: Horrendo pavidas
hinc territat ore puellas,
Inde cavo risum cortice larva movet.
Deterior vero rerum succurrit imago,
Et falsa miseros anxietate premit.
Auget homo proprios animo plerumque dolores
Inque fuam meus est ingeniofa necem
Eia age, terribilem rebus miser arripe larvam.
Ludicr^s, error crit, quod modo terror erat.


Thus paraphrased.

Look forward; to faint Girls it terror breeds: Miserim^m est timere, cum
Speres nihil. Seneca in Troad.

View it behind, and laughter thence proceeds.
When Fortune looks upon us with a frown,
We (in our own fears wretched) are cast down.
Man for the most part does his own grief cherish,
And in his mind grows witty how to perish.
But (Wretch) remove the Visard, and that terror
(Before so horrid) thou shall find vain error.
A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
TO rip up Gods great Counsels who shall strive,
Or search how far his hidden works extend?
Into the treasure of his wonders diue,
Or think his Majesty to comprehend?
These things are granted unto none alive.
For how can such as know not their own end,
Nor can of their beginning, reason show,
Presume his Power and Might unspeakable to know?
II.
If He should say, Weigh me the weight of Fire?
Or strive to call back Yesterday that is past?
To measure out the Winds I thee desire,
Or search the dwellings of the Ocean Vast?
How the Seas flow, or how their Ebbes retire,
Or in what moulds the Sun and Moon were cast?
Whence thou had life and fashion in the womb,
Or wherefore (born thence) now to seek a second tomb?
III.
Sure thou would answer, Fire cannot be weighed.
Or if? What balance can the heat sustain?
And of the Winds what measure can be made?
For I shall strive to imprison them in vain.
And how the chambers of the Depth are laid?
Which none has seen that has returned again.
Or who the Hours already past can sum?
Or by his art prevent those seasons are to come?
IV.
How should I frame a Model so capatious,
In which to cast the body of the Sun?
Or of the Moon? (so infinitely spacious)
Or truly tell the courses that they run?
Neither can humane wit prove so audatious,
To question of his end e're he begun.
Neither with our weak sense does it agree,
To find, how mere from nothing we first came to be.
V.
If of the Fire, which thou do hourly try?
If of the Wind, which blows upon thy face?
If of the Day, which daily passes by?
(And what is now, to morrow has no place)
Or those bright Planets moving in the sky,
Which have The Hours:
Times Daughters in perpetual chase.
Or if the Seas abisse thou can not sound?
To search whose channels yet there never line was found.
VI.
If of thy self thou can no reason show,
By all the understanding thou can claim?
How in the womb thou first beganst to grow?
Or how thy life into thy body came?
Yet all these things, to be, we see and know,
They lie before us, and we give them name.
But if we cannot show the reason why,
How can we search the mysteries of the most Hye?
VII.
Number we may as well the things to come,
Gather the scattered drops of the last rain,
The sands that are upon the shore to sum,
Or make the withered Flowers grow fresh again;
Give the Mole eyes, or speech unto the Dumb,
Or with small Vessels the Ocean strive to d^aine:
Tell all the glorious stars that shine by night,
Or make a Sound or Voice apparent to the sight.
VIII.
The Forest of it is lofty Cedars proud,
Whose spacious boughs extended near and far,
And from the earth the Sun aid seem to cloud.
Much glorying in it is strength, thinks none should bar
His circumscribed limits; therefore vowed
Against the mighty Ocean to make war,
Calling a Council of each aged Tree,
Who with unanimous consent thereto agree.
IX.
Like counsel did the curled Ocean take,
And said, Let us rise up against the Land,
Let Us these our spacious borders larger make,
Nor suffer one tree in his place to stand:
The Earths foundations we have power to shake,
And all their lofty mountains countermand.
Much honor by this conflict may be had,
If we to these our bounds can a new Country add.
X.
Yet was the purpose of the Forest vain,
For a Fire came, and all the Woods destroyed:
And against the raging practice of the Maine,
Sands interposed, and it is swift course annoyed.
Some Power there was which did their spleens restrain:
For neither of them their intents enjoyed.
'Twixt these I make thee Vmpire, use thy skill;
Which can thou say did well, or which of the^ did ill?
XI.
Both their intents were idle, thou will say,
And against Nature that they did devise:
The Woods were made within their bounds to stay,
And therefore to transgress them were unwise.
The Seas that quiet in their channels lay,
And would so proud an action enterprise:
Be thou the judge between each undertaker,
Whether they both rebelled not against their Maker.
XII.
For as the Earth is for the Woods ordained,
Fixed there, not to remove their settled station:
And as the Floods are in their shores restrained,
But neither to exceed their ordination;
So must all Flesh in frailty be contained,
(For so it has been from the first Creation)
And only the things heavenly understand,
Who are in heaven, and pressed at Gods almighty hand.
XIII.
If then things supernatural we find,
The depth whereof we cannot well conceive;
So abdite and retruse from Man's weak mind,
Them we into our frailty cannot weave:
(As what is above Capacity assigned)
Those to the first Disposer let us leave.
What Is common amongst men is known to all;
But we may fail in those things metaphysicall.
XIV.
But be it ever our devout intention,
To be so far remote from all ambition,
That whatsoeuer's above apprehension,
(If it be true, and of Divine condition)
To quarrel with it in no vain dissension,
But rather yield hereto with all submission.
Man, made of earth, to Earth God did confine;
Grace from above is the free gift of Power Divine.
XV.
This Grace is the third Person in the Trinity:
The second, Wisdom; and the first, all Power.
To whom that we may have more free affinity,
Let us submit us henceforth from this hour:
And that we may attain to true Divinity,
Pray, That they will their mercies on us shower;
Here in this life, from Satan us defend,
And after bring us to that joy which has no end.
Crux pendentis est Cathedra docentis.

S. Augustine.
THE ANGEL
Thom: Hammon Armig: Rich: Gethinge M of ye pen.



THE ARGUMENT of the ninth Tractat.
TO Spirits called Lucifugi
(From shunning Light) I next apply
My neere-tyr'd Pen; of which be store
In Mines where workmen dig for Oar.
Of Robin Good Fellow, and of Fairies,
With many other strange Vagaries
Done by Hob-goblins. I next write
Of a Noone-Diuell and a Buttry-Sprite,
Of grave Philosophers who treat
Of the Souls essence and her seat.
The strange and horrid deaths related
Of learned Magitians, animated
By Satan, the known truth t'abiure,
And study Arts black and impure.
Of Curious Science (last) the vanity,
Grounded on nothing but incertainty.
And that no Knowledge can abide the Test
Like that in Sacred Scripture is expressed.
The second Argument.
THe Angel, unto Man known best,
As last of Nine concludes the rest.
The Angel.
THree Yong-men of Darius Court contend
What thing should strongest be? One does commend 1. Esdr. c. 3. v. 10.

Wine to have chief dominion. The other says
The King has prime place. And the third does praise
The power of Women to make others thrall;
But (above these) that Truth transcendeth all.
The King's enthroned, his Peers about him stated,
To hear this strife betwixt them three debated.
The Power and Strength of Wine.
The first begins; O men who can define
Unto the full, the power and strength of Wine?
For needs must that be said to tyrannise,
Which tames the Strong, and does deceive the Wise.
The mind it alters, and it is that alone
That makes the Scepter and the Sheep-hooke one:
For you in Wine no difference can see
Betwixt the Poor and Rich, the Bond and Free.
It glads the heart, and makes the thoughts forget
Trouble and sorrow, servitude and debt.
It does enrich the mind in every thing,
That it remembers Governor nor King;
And causes those who are in state most weak,
(Not thinking of their wants) of Talents speak.
It puts a daring in the cowards breast,
To love those Arms he did before detest;
To draw his sword in fury, and to strike,
Opposing his best friends and foes alike:
But from the Wine, and when the tempest 's over,
He soon forgets all that had past before.
Then o you men (for I Will not hold you long)
Think Wine, that can do these things, is most strong.
He ceast; the next began, (and thus) O men,
Are not you strongest, first by land, and then
By sea? Are not all things in them contained,
Yours, as at first unto your use ordained?
The Power and Strength of the King.
But yet the King is greater, he rules all,
And is the Lord of these in general:
Such as negotiate by sea or land,
Are but mere Vassals, and at his command.
If he shall bid them war, with least facility
They take up arms, and run into hostility.
And if he send them against foreign Powers,
They break down Citadels, demolish Towers:
Mountains they with the valleys shall make even,
Or in the dales raise structures to brave heaven;
They kill, or they are slain, in every thing
They do not pass the precept of the King:
And if they overcome, by right or wtong,
The spoil and honor does to him belong.
Nay, those which do not to the battle go,
But stay at home to plow, to till, to sow,
The fruits of all their labors and increase
They bring unto the King, to keep their peace;
Yet he is but one man. If he bid kill,
There is no saving, (then much blood they spill:)
But if the word pass from him, they shall spare;
To shed least blood who is he so bold that dare?
If he bid smite, the smite: or if he frown,
And bid demolish, all things are torn down.
If he say Build, they build; or if destroy,
All goes to havoc: and yet he in joy
Mean time sits down, does eat, does drink, does sleep,
And all the rest a watch about him keep;
Neither can any tend his own affairs,
But the Kings only, every man prepares
To do him service, (reason too) for they
Dare not but his great potencie obey.
Then above others is not he most strong?
This having said, the second held his tongue.
The third replied, O men, neither confine
Strength to the potent Monarch, nor to Wine,
Nor to the Multitude: against their opinion,
Has not the Woman over these dominion? The Power and Strength of Women.

Woman into the World the King has brought,
And all such people as have Empire sought
By land or sea, from them had Being first,
Bred from their wombes, and on their soft knees nursed.
Those that did plant the Vine, and press the juice,
Before that they could taste it to their use,
Had from them their conception; they spin, they weaue
Garments for men, and they from them receive
Worship and honor: needful the are, no doubt,
As being such men cannot live without.
If he has gathered silver, or got gold,
Or found out ought that 's precious to behold;
Does he not bring it to his choice Delight,
Her that is fair and precious in his sight?
Leaves he not all his business and affair,
To gaze upon her eyes, play with her hair?
Is he not wholly hers? does he not bring
Gold to her, silver, and each precious thing?
Man leaves his Father, Mother, Country, all,
(What he esteems most dear) to become thrall,
In voluntary bondage with his Wife,
To lead a private and contented life:
Which life for her he hasardeth, and her
Before Father, Mother, Country, does prefer.
Therefore by these you may perceive and know,
Woman, to whom Man does such service owe,
Bears rule over you: Do you not travel, sweat,
And toil, that of your labors they may eat?
Man takes his sword, (regardlesse of his weal)
And (Madman-like) goes forth to rob and steal;
He sails the seas, sounds Rivers, (nothing fears)
He meets a Lion, and his way he steares
Through darkness, and what purchase, spoil, or boot
Is got, he prostrats at his mistress foot.
This shows, his Woman is to him more dear
Than he that got, or she that did him bear.
Some have run mad; some, Slaves to them have bin;
Others have erred, and perished in their sin.
Do I not grant, the King in power is great,
And that all Nations homage to his seat?
Yet I have seen Apame her arms twine
About his neck, the Kings loved Concubine,
And daughter to the famous Bartacus;
I have beheld her often times use him thus,
From the Kings head to snatch the Royal Crown,
And smiling on him, place it on her own;
Then with her left hand on the cheek him smite:
Yet he has gaped and laughed, and took delight
To see himself so used. If she but smiled,
(As if all power from him were quite exiled)
He laughed on her. If angry, he was feign
To flatter her, till she was pleased again.
It Is you, o men, whom I appeal unto;
Are they not strongest then, who this can do?
At this the King and Princes in amase,
Began each one on others face to gase.
When he proceeded thus; Say, o you men,
Resolve me, Are not Women strongest then?
The Earth is spacious, and the Heaven is hye,
And the Sun swiftly in his course does fly;
For in one day the Globe he wheeleth round,
And the next morning in his place is found.
The Power and Strength of Truth above all things.
Him that made these things must we not then call
Great? and Truth therefore great'st and strong'st of all?
All the Earth calls for Truth; Heaven does proclaim
Her blessed; all things tremble at her name.
For Truth no unjust thing at all can do:
The Wine is wicked, so the King is too,
Women are wicked, all the sons of men
Most wicked are, and such must needs be then
Their wicked works, there is no Truth therein,
And wanting Truth, they perish in their sin.
But Truth shall abide strong, and still persevere,
For it shall live and reign ever and ever.
With her, of persons there is no respect,
She does to this way nor to that reflect:
She knows no diffrence; what is just she loves,
But what is impure and sinful she reproues.
And all men favor her good works, because
Her judgments are upright, and just her laws.
She Is the Strength, Kingdom, Power, Dignity,
And of all Ages Sov'raigne Majesty:
Blessed be the GOD of Truth. At this he stayed.
Then all the people cried aloud and said,
(With public suffrage) Truth is great'st and strongest,
Which (as it was at first) shall endure longest.
This is that Truth in quest of which we trade,
And which, without invoking Divine aid,
Is never to be found. Now lest we err
Concerning Spirits, it is fit that we confer
With sacred Story. Thus then we may read,
(Where of the fall of Babell it is decreed)
Says Esaias, Esaias 13.21.
Thenceforth Zijm shall lodge there,
And O him in their desolate roofes appear:
The Ostriches their houses shall possess,
And Satyrs dance there: Ijim shall no less
Howl in their empty Palaces, and cry,
And Dragons in their forlorn places fly.
Again: Cap. 34.11.
The Zijm shall with Ijim meet,
And the wild Satyr with his parted feet
Call to his fellow. There shall likewise rest
The Scritch-Owle, and in safety build her nest.
The Owl shall lodge there, lay and hatch her brood;
And there the Valtures, greedy after food,
All other desolate places shall forsake,
And each one there be gathered to his Make.
This is a Marginall note in the Geneua translation. Zijm, Iijm, Okim, etc.
Some modern Writers speaking of this Text,
Because that they would leave it vnperplext,
Say, That by these strange names be either meant
Misshapen Fowls, or else it has extent
Further, to wicked Spirits, such as we call
Hob-goblins, Fairies, Satyrs, and those all
Satan by strange illusions does employ,
How Mankind to insidiate and destroy.
Of which accursed rank the appear to be
Which succeed next in this our History.
Subterren Spirits.
Subterren Spirits they are therefore flyl'd,
Because that bee'ng the upper earth exyl'd,
Their habitations and aboads they keep
In Con-caues, Pits, Vaults, Dens, and Cauernes deep;
And these Trithemius does hold argument
To be of all the rest most pestilent:
And that such Demons commonly invade
Those chiefly that in Mines and Metals trade;
Either by sudden putting out their lamps,
Or else by raising suffocating damps,
Whose deadly vapors stifle laboring men:
And such were often known in Trophonius den.
Likewise in Nicaragua, a rich Mine
In the West Indies; for which it has ly'ne
Olaus Magnus lib. ^. cap. 10.
Long time forsaken. Great Olaus writes,
The parts Septentrionall are with these Sp'ryts
Much haunted, where are seen an infinite store
About the places where they dig for Oar.
The Greeks and Germans call them Cobali.
Cobali.
Others (because not full three hand-fulls hye)
Nickname them Mountaine-Dwarfes; who often stand
Officious by the Treasure-deluers hand,
Seeming most busy, infinite pains to take,
And in the hard rocks deep incision make,
To search the metals veins, the ropes to fit,
Turn round the wheels, and nothing pretermit
To help their labor; up or down to wind
The full or empty basket: when they find
The least Oar scattered, then they skip and leap,
To gather't thriftily into one heap.
Yet of that work though they have seeming care,
They in effect bring all things out of square,
They break the ladders, and the cords untwist,
Stealing the workmens tools, and where they list
Hide them, with mighty stones the pits mouth stop,
And (as below the earth they underprop)
The Timber to remove they force and strive,
With full intent to bury them alive;
Raise stinking fogs, and with pretense to further
The poor men's task, aim at their wrack and murder.
Or if they fail in that, they further aim,
(By crossing them and bringing out of frame
Their so much studied labor) so extreme
Their malice is, to cause them to blaspheme,
Profane and curse: the sequel then ensuing,
The body saved, to bring the soul to ruin.
Of these, that to man's hurt themselves apply,
Munsterus writes in his Cosmography.
Such was the Demon Annebergius, The devil called Anneberg.
who
Twelve laboring men at once did overthrow
In that rich silver Mine, called to this day
By Wtiters, Corona Rosaica.
The like (where choicest metals they refine) The Devil Snebergius.

Snebergius did in the Georgian Mine.
These are the cause the earth does often cleave,
And by forced crannies and deep rifts receive
Robustious winds, her empty cavernes filling:
Which being there imprisoned, and unwilling
To be so goald, struggle, and wanting vent,
Earthquakes thereby are caused incontinent, Spirits the cause of earthquakes.

Such as remove huge mountains from their site,
And Turrets, Towers, and Towns demolish quite.
In Arragon (Alpho^sus) bearing sway
In Brixim, Apulia, and Campania,
Happened the like. Strange earthquakes.
So great an earthquake chanced
(When Bajazet was to the Throne advanced)
In Constantines great City, that of men
Full thirty thousand in one moment then In Constant.

Perished, the Imperial palace quite destroyed.
In the same kind Dyrrachium was annoyed In Dyrrachiu^. In Rome.

Under Pope Foelix; and great Rome together
Three days, so shook, the people knew not whether
The latest day was come. Anno, 361. In the Eastern parts.
Like terror struck
The World, when most part of the East was shook,
In Hadrians reign. Like terror did encroch
Upon the famous city Antioch, In Antioch.

When Valentinian and Valens bore
Joint scepter; what was never known before
Then happened: for by an earths mighty motion
The waters were divided in the Ocean,
And those concealed channels appeared bare,
Which till then never saw the Sun nor Air.
Ships riding then in Alexandria's Bay,
Are tossed on tops of houses, and there stay;
With as much swiftness bandied from the seas,
As balls at Tennis played, and with like ease.
In Illiria, Pannonia, Dalmatia, Morauia, Bauaria, Dacia.
Illyria, Pannonia, and Dalmatia,
Morauia, Bauaria, and Dacia,
Were with the earths like-horrid fevers shaken,
And many towns and cities quite forsaken.
Auentinus reports this of Bauaria superior.
But in Bauaria (as my Author says)
One of these Tremors lasted forty days,
When six and twenty towers and castles fell,
Temples and Palaces, supported well;
Two great united hills parted in twain,
And made between them a large leuel'd plain:
It, beasts and men in the mid fields or'ethrew.
But that which above all things seemed most new,
Of bodies fifty, not inhumated,
Were to man's sight miraculously translated
To statues of white salt. Then dwelling near,
Of this strange prodegie eyewitness were
Conrad Medenb. Philos. and Mathem.
Conrad of Medenberch, a Philosopher,
And the great Austria's Archdukes Chancellor.
These Spirits likewise have the power to show
Of Treasure hid in the Earth and kept by Spirits.
Treasures that have been buried long below:
By Gods permission, all the veins conceald,
Of gold or silver, are to them reueald.
Of Unions, Stones, and Gems esteemed high,
These know the place and beds wherein they ly;
Nay every casket and rich cabinet
Of that vnrifled rock wherein the are set.
As Psellius.
But to dispose these, some are of opinion
It lies not in their absolute dominion:
For God will not permit it, as fore-knowing
Such auaritious thoughts in mansheart growing,
His corrupt nature would to Mammon bow,
And his Creator leave he cared not how.
As Laureat. Ananias.
Others yield other reasons: Every self-
Spirit is so opinion'd of this pelf,
(I mean those servants of God Plutus) that
The least they will not part with, no not what
They might with ease spare. Some think they persist
To keep't to the behoof of Antichrist,
Inprejudice and damage of the Elect.
Nay, to their own sons whom they most affect,
Either their bounty is exceeding small, This is the opinion of D. Vlatius
Treuirensis.

Or else the substance mere fantastical.
Stumpsius recites this story, which ('t m' appear
By computation) happened in the year A strange attempt of a Botcher.

One thousand five hundred twenty: There Is a place
Near Basil, which has entrance by a space This place is called Angusta
Raura Cora.

Narrow and strait, but is within capatious,
And (as fame goes) possessed with Spirits ungracious.
The like is in our Peke-hills to be seen, Peke-hils in Darby-shire.

Where many men for nouel-sake have been.
Another that is called Ouky hole, near Wells; Ouky hole in Summerset shire.

All under earth, and full of spacious cells,
Both wondrous caves. Nor cannot be truly said,
Whether by Art or Nature they were made.
But to the first; A Botcher of that town,
Rude of behauior, almost a mere clown,
Yet bold and blunt, incapable of dread,
Especially when wine was in his head;
Into that Cave this Groom presumed to enter
Further than any man till then durst venture.
He lights a waxen taper, which before
Was consecrate, then enters at a door
Of sollid iron, which difficultly past;
Then chamber after chamber, comes at last
To a fresh fragrant garden, every thing
Seeming as if there had been lasting Spring.
In midst of which a goodly Palace stands,
The frame appears not built by mortal hands,
So curious was the structure, no invention
There, but exceeding humane apprehension.
When entering the great Hall, he may espy
Upon a throne magnificent and hye,
A Virgin of surpassing beauty placed,
(Incomparable upward from the wast)
Her golden hairs about her shoulders hung,
Smooth brow'd, clear eyed, her visage fresh and young:
But all below the girdle seemed to twine
About the chair, and was mere serpentine.
Before her stood an huge great brazen chest,
Crosse-barr'd and double locked, it seems possessed
Of mighty treasure, and at either end
A black fierce ban-Dog couched, to defend
That Magosin; for such as approach near,
With their sharp phangs they threat to rend and tear.
She checks their fury, makes them stoop and lie
Flat on their bellies: She does next untie
A strong and double-warded Key that hung
About her neck, (in a silk Ribbond strung.)
The Chest she first unlocks, then heaues the lid.
And shows the Aduent'rer what was therein hid
Gold of all stamps, and silver in great store,
( Midas it seems of Bacchus asked no more)
A small piece of each Coin to him she gives,
Desiring him to keep it whilst he lives;
(Her bounty stretched but to an easy load)
All that he got he after showed abroad.
And when she gave it, thus she him bespake;
A Princess see, who for a step-dames sake
Am thus transformed, my fortunes overthrown,
And I despoyl'd both of my state and Crown.
But were I by a young man three times kissed,
Who from his childe-hood ever did persist
In modesty, and never stepped astray,
I by his means should be removed away;
And as his virtues guerdon, for a dower,
He should receive this mass, now in my power.
Twice (as he said) he strove her lips to touch;
But in the attempt her gesture appeared such,
Her face so altered, her aspect so grim,
Her chattring teeth so gnashing, as if him
She would have instantly devoured; it seemed,
'Twixt hope and fear to be as then redeemed.
But yet so terrible his offer was,
That for the worlds wealth added to that mass,
He durst not on the like exploit be sent,
But turned thence by the same way he went.
Yet by this strange relation, after moved
(By some of his Allies whom he best loved)
To second his attempt, he never more
Could find the way back to that charmed door.
Not many years ensuing this, another
Of the same town, a kinsman or a brother
Hoping thereby a desp'rat state to raise,
By his direction had made often essays,
This strange enchanted Palace to discover,
And to that Queen to be a constant Lover.
At length he entered, but there nothing found
Save bones and skulls, and Coarses under ground:
But was withal so far distract in sense,
He died some three days after parting thence.
The like vain hope did Apollonius blind;
Who though he studied by his Art to find
Hid gold, and wholly gave his mind unto 't,
His fare thereby not bettered by a root,
(For so mine Authors say) The great Magition So reported by Luciginus and
Philostratus.

Agrippa minding to make inquisition
By Magicks help, and search for treasures hidden;
Not only by the Emp'ror was forbidden,
Carolus the fifth; but histories report,
He for that notion banished was the Court.
Andrew Theuerus tells us, One Macrine And. Theuerus.

A Greek, labored the earth to undermine,
In Paros Isle, and in that hope resolved,
Him suddenly the earth quite circumvolv'd.
Of Cabades the mighty Persian King, A strange History of Cabades King of
Persia.

Two Authors, Glycas and Cedrenius, bring
This History to light: 'Twixt the confines
Of Persia and of India, there be Mines
In Mount Zudaderin, of stones and gems,
Some valued at no less than Diadems:
But how to compass them was found no mean,
The passage being kept by Spirits unclean.
The ambitious King, for such a mass of pelf
Daring to tug with Lucifer himself,
Brings thither an huge army, sundry ways
Assaults the mountain: still the Devils raise
Tempests of fire and thunder to their wrack,
And maugre opposition force them back.
After retreat, the covetous King persists
In his attempt, and of the Cabalists
And Magi calls a Council, and of them
Demands, By what unheard of stratagem
This Treasure may be compast. They agree,
It by one only means achieved may be;
Namely, That in his provinces reside
A Sect of Christians, at that time deny'de
Their liberty of conscience: now if they
Will to that God they serve devoutly pray,
Their Orisons have sole power to withstand
The force and fury of that hellish Band.
By one of his great Princes the King
Unto the Patriarch many kind commends;
Of him desiring their spiritual aid,
Those damned Caca^daemons to invade.
The Bishop grants, proclaims a general Fast,
All shrieue them of their sins; which done, at last,
Betwixt the Mountain and the Camp they bend
Their humble knees, and in their prayers commend
The Sultans safety. This no sooner done,
But these infernal Fiends afrighted run,
With horrid cries and yells the air they fill,
And leave to him the conquest of the hill.
D. Faustus and Cornel. Agrip.
Of Faustus and Agrippa it is told,
That in their travels they bare seeming gold
Which would abide the touch; and by the way,
In all their Hostries they would freely pay.
But parted thence, mine Host thinking to find
Those glorious Pieces they had left behind,
Safe in his bag, sees nothing, save together
Round scutes of horn, and pieces of old leather.
Of such I could cite many, but I Will hye
Of spirits called Lucifugi.
From them, to those we call Lucifugi.
These in obscurest Vaults themselves inuest,
And above all things, Light and Day detest.
John Milesius.
In John Milesius any man may read
Of Devils in Sarmatia honored,
Called Kottri, or Kibaldi; such as we
Pugs, Hobgoblins.
Pugs and Hob-goblins call. Their dwellings be
In corners of old houses least frequented,
Or beneath stacks of wood: and these conuented,
Make fearful noise in Buttries and in Dairies;
Robin good fellow, Fairies.
Robin good-fellowes some, some call them Fairies.
In solitary rooms These vprores keep,
And beat at doors to wake men from their sleepe^
Seeming to force locks, be they never so strong,
And keeping Christmasse gambols all night long.
Pots, glasses, trenchers, dishes, pannes, and kettles
They will make dance about the shelues and settles,
As if about the Kitchen tossed and cast,
Yet in the moruing nothing found misplac't.
Others such houses to their use have fitted,
In which base murders have been once committed.
Some have their fearful habitations taken
In desolat houses, ruined, and forsaken.
Examples fail not to make these more plain; Reported by Sueton. Tranq.

The house wherein Caligula was slain,
To enter which none ever durst aspire
After his death, till 'twas consumed by fire.
The like in Athens; Plin. in Epist. A strange story reported by Fincelius.
of which Pliny writes
In his Epistles. As Facetius cites,
In Halberstad (says he) there is a Dwelling
Of great remarke, the neighbor roofes excelling
For architecture; in which made abode
A mighty rich man, and a belly-god.
After whose death (his soul gone Heaven knows whither)
Not one night failed for many months together,
But all the rooms with lighted tapers shone
As if the darkness had been chac't and gone,
And Day there only for his pleasure stayed.
In the great chamber where before were made
His riotous feasts, (the casements standing wide)
Clearly through that transparance is espy'de
This Glutton, whom they by his habit knew,
At the boords end, feasting a frolic crew
Of lusty stomachs that about him sat,
Served in with many a costly delicate,
Course after Course, and every Charger full:
Neat Seruitors attended, not one dull,
But ready to shift trenchers^ and fill wine
In gilded bowls; for all with plate does shine:
And amongst them you could not spy a guest,
But seemed some one he in his life did feast.
At this high rate they seemed to spend the night,
But all were vanished still before day light.
Of Bishop Datius a learned Clerk thus says; Georg. Tauronensis of Datius
Bishop of Mediolanum.

He for the true profession of his Faith,
Sent into exile, in his difficult way
Oppressed with penury, was forced to stay
In Corinth: nor there lodging could he have
In any Inn or place convenient, save
A corner house, supposed to be enchanted,
And at that time with sundry Devils haunted.
There taking up his lodging, and alone,
He soundly slept till betwixt twelve and one:
When suddenly (he knew not by what cranny,
The doors bee'ng fast shut to him) came a many
Of Devils thronging, decked in sundry shapes,
Like Badgers, Foxes, Hedge-hogs, Hares, and Apes.
Others more terrible, like Lions rore:
Some grunt like hogs, the like never heard before.
Like Bulls these bellow, those like Asses bray;
Some bark like ban-dogs, some like horses ney:
Some howl like Wolves, others like Furies yell,
Scarce that black Santus could be matched in hell.
At which up starts the noble Priest, and says,
O you accursed Fiends, Vassals of wrath,
That first had in the East your habitation,
Till you by pride did forfeit your salvation:
With the blessed Angels you had then your seat,
But by aspiring to be god-like great,
Behold your rashness punished in your features,
Being transhap'd into base abject creatures.
This having spoke, the Spirits disappeard,
The house of them for ever after cleared.
A strange History of one recovered to Life.
One thing, though out of course it may appear,
Yet I thought fit to be inserted here:
The rather too the Reader I prepare,
Because it may seem wonderful and rare.
Receive 't as you think good; or if you please
To believe Plutarch, then his words are these:
Enapius, remembered by Plutarch.
One called Enapius, a young man well bred,
By the Physicians was given out for dead,
And left to his last sheet. After some hours
He seemed to recollect his vital powers,
To live again, and speak: The reason why
Demanded of his strange recovery?
His answer was, That he was dead 'twas true,
And brought before the infernal Bar. They view
Him over and over, then call to them who'haue charge
The spirit from the body to enlarge:
Whom Pluto with the other Stygian Powers
Thus threat; Base Vassals can we think you ours,
Or worthy our employment, to mistake
In such a serious errand? Do we make
You Officers and Lictors to arrest
Such as are called to their eternal rest;
And when we send for one whose dismal fate
Proclaims him dead, you bring us one whose date
Is not yet summed, but of a virtue stronger,
As limited by us to live much longer.
We sent, that with Nicander you should meet,
A Currier that dwells in such a street:
And how have you mistook? This Soul dismiss,
And fetch his hither to our dark Abisse.
With that (says he) I wakened. His friends sent
Unto the Curriers house incontinent,
And found him at the very instant dead,
When he his former life recovered.
And though mere fabulous this seem to be,
Yet is it no impossibility
Fiends should delude the Ethnicks, and on them
Confer this as a cunning stratagem,
To make them think that he disposed man's breath,
And had the sole power over life and death.
At nothing more these auerse Spirits aim,
Than what is Gods, unto themselves to claim.
Others there are, A strange History of the Spirit of the Buttry.
as if destined by lot,
To have no power but over goods ill got.
For instance; One long with the world at strife,
Who had professed a strict religious life,
And taken holy Orders, at his book
Spending his spare hours; to a crafty Cook
Was near ally'de, and at his best vacation
Finds out a time to give him visitation;
And greets him with a blessing. The fat Host
Is glad to see his Uncle; Sod and Roast
He sets before him, there is nothing (fit
To bid him welcome) wanting: down they sit.
The good old man, after some small repast,
More apt to talk than eat, demands at last
Of his Lay Nephew, (since he toiles and strives
In this vain world to prosper) how he thriues?
The Cook first fetches a deep sigh; then says,
O Uncle, I have sought my state to raise
By every indirect and law less mean,
Yet still my covetous aims are frustrat clean.
I buy stale meat, and at the cheapest rate;
Then if my Guests complain I cog and prate,
Out-facing it for good. Sometimes I buy
Beeues (have been told me) of the murrain dye.
What course have I not took to compass riches?
Ventured on some have been found dead in ditches;
Baked dogs for Venison, put them in good paste,
And then with salt and pepper helped their taste.
Meat roasted twice, and twice boiled, I often sell,
Make pies of fly-blowne joints, and vent them well:
I froth my cannes, in every jug I cheat,
And nicke my Ghests in what they drink or eat:
And yet with these and more sleights, all I can,
Does not declare me for a thriuing man;
I pinch mine own guts, and from others gleane,
And yet (though I show fat) my stock is lean.
The good old man, though at his tale offended,
No interruption used till he had ended.
First having shook his head, then crossed his breast,
Cousin (said he) this lewd life I detest:
Let me advise you therefore to repent;
For know, ill-gotten goods are lewdly spent.
Pray let me see your Buttry. Turn your face
(Says the Cook) that way, you may view the place,
That casement shows it. Well done, (says the Priest)
Now look with me, and tell me what thou see?
When presently appears to them a Ghost,
Swolne-cheekt, gor-bellied, plumper than mine Host;
His legs with dropsy swelled, gouty his thighs,
And able scarce to look out with his eyes,
Feeding with greediness on every dish,
For nothing could escape him, flesh or fish:
Then with the empty jugges he seems to quarrel,
And sets his mouth to the bung hole of a barrel,
(Less compast than his belly) at one draught
He seems to quaffe half off, then smiled and laughed,
When jogging it he found it somewhat shallow:
So parted thence as full as he could wallow.
Mine Host amas'd, desires him to unfold
What Monster 'twas made with his house so bold.
To whom his Uncle; Have thou not heard tell
Of Buttry-Sp'rits, who in those places dwell
Where cous'nage is professed? Needs must you waine
In your estate, when such devour your gain.
"All such as study fraud, and practice evil,
"Do only starve themselves, to plumpe the Devil.
The Cook replies, What course (good Uncle) than
Had I best take, that am (you know) a man
Would prosper gladly, and my fortunes raise,
Which I have toiled and labored diverse ways?
He mildely answers, Be advised by me,
Serve God, thy neighbor love, use charity,
Frequent the Church, be often deuou^ in prayer,
Keep a good conscience, cast away all care
Of this worlds pelf, cheat none, be just to all,
So shall thou thrive although thy gain be small;
For then no such bad Spirit shall have power
Thy goods directly gotten to devour.
This said, he left him. Who now better taught,
Begins to love what is good, and hate what is naught;
He only now an honest course affects,
And all bad dealing in his trade corrects.
Some few years after, the good man again
Forsakes his cloister, and with no small pain
Travels to see his Kinsman, in whom now
He finds a change both in his shape and brow;
He Is grown a Bourger, offices has past,
And hopes (by changing copy) at the last
To prove chief Alderman, wealth upon him flows,
And day by day both gain and credit grows.
Most gravely now he entertaines his Ghest,
And leads him in the former room to feast.
Some conf'rence past betwixt them two at meat,
The Cook spoke much, the Churchman little ^at;
But finds by many a thankful protestation,
How he has thrived since his last visitation.
The table drawn, the Ghests retired aside,
He bids him once more open the casement wide
That looks into the Larder: where he spies
The selfsame Sp'rit with wan cheeks and sunk eyes,
His aspect meagre, his lips thin and pale,
(As if his legs would at that instant fail)
Leaning upon a staff, quite clung his belly,
And all his flesh as it were turned to gelly.
Full platters round about the dresser stood,
Upon the shelues too, and the meat all good;
At which he snatched and caught, but naught prevailed,
Still as he reached his arm forth, his strength failed;
And though his greedy appetite was much,
There was no dish that he had power to touch.
He craules then to a barrel, one would think,
That wanting meat, he had a will to drink:
The Vessels furnished and full gagged he saw,
But had not strength the spigot forth to draw;
He lifts at juggs and pots, and cannes, but they
Had been so well filled, that he vnneths may
Advance them (though now empty) half so hy
As to his head, to gain one snuff thereby.
Thus he that on ill gotten goods presumed,
Parts hunger-starved, and more than half consumed.
In this discourse far be it we should mean,
Spirits by meat are fatted or made lean:
Yet certain it is, by Gods permission they
May over goods extorted bear like sway.
'T were not amiss if we some counsel had,
Certain marks by which good Spirits are distinguished from the bad.
How to discern good Spirits from the bad,
Who since they can assume the shape of light,
In their discov'ry needful is foresight.
In one respect the agree; for both can take
Bodies on them, and when they please forsake
Their shapes and figures: but if we compare
By circumstance, their change, they diffrent are;
As in their true proportion^ operation,
Language, and purpose of their transmutation.
Good Angels, though undoubtedly they can
Put on all forms, still take the shape of Man.
But the bad Demons, not with that content,
When they on their cursed embassies are sent,
In figures more contemptible appear,
One like a Wolf, another like a Bear:
Others resembling Dogs, Apes, Monkies, Cats,
What shapes devils may assume and what they cannot.
And sometimes Birds, as Crows, Pies, Owls, and Bats.
But never has it yet been read or told,
That ever cursed Sp'rit should be so bold
To show his damned head (amongst them all)
In the innocent Lambs, or Doves that have no gall.
Some give this reason; God would not permit,
Since by the Lamb his dear Son thought it fit
Himself to shadow, and the Holy Ghost
(As in that Bird whom he delighted most)
T'assume her figure in his apparition,
That Fiends should in these shapes show any vision.
Their actions.
Whosoever will sift their actions, he shall find
(By their success, if well or ill inclined)
The one from other; for the blessed still
Square all their actions to the Almighties will,
And to man's profit: neither more nor less,
The limit that is prescribed them they transgress.
The Cacadaemons labor all they can
Against Gods honor and the good of man:
Therefore the end of all their apparitions
Are mere idolatrous lies and superstitions:
They to our frailties all gross sins impute,
That may the body stain, or soul pollute;
And when they aim against us their chief batteries,
They bait their deadly hooks in candy'd flatteries,
In golden bowls they poisonous dregs present,
Make show to cure, but kill incontinent;
And therefore it behooues man to have care,
Whom thousand ways they labor to ensnare.
Take Saint John's counsel; Be not you (says he)
Deceived by your too much credulity:
Believe not every Spirit, but first try
Whether he does proceed from God on hy.
Examine every good thing they pretend,
Whether they likewise do it to a good end.
To diverse maladies they can give ease,
Comfort and help, vprores sometimes appease,
Predict mischances, teach men to eschew
Mischiefs which they prepared as well as knew.
In all their speech Gods name they never use,
Unless it to dishhonour and abuse.
Another special sign they cannot escape,
Namely, That when they put on humane shape,
To give man just occasion to misdoubt them,
Some strange prodigious mark they bear about them A special mark to know
evil Spirits by.

In one deficient member. These be notes
To find them out, either the feet of Goats,
Foreheads of Satyrs, nails deformed and crooked,
Eyes broad and flaming, noses long and hooked,
Hands grown with hair, and nosthrils broad and wide,
Teeth gagged, and larger than their lips can hide.
The Crosses sign (says Athanasius) they Athanasius.

Cannot endure, it puts them to dismay.
Lactantius tells us, When upon a season Lactantius.

An Emp'ror of his Idol asked the reason
Of some doubt that perplexed him, a long space
He answered not: the cause was, that in place
A Christian then was present at that time
Who had new blessed him with the Crosses sign.
Good Angels when to man they first appear,
Although they strike him with amase and fear,
Their em affies bee'ng done, before they part,
They leave him with great joy and cheer of heart.
As he at whose dread presence Daniel shook;
As the Angel Gabriel, whom the Holy-Booke
Makes mention of, who when he came to bring
To the blessed Maid a message from heavens King,
Frightfull at first appeared his salutation,
But the end thereof was full of consolation.
But the bad Spirits bringing seeming joy,
The end thereof's disaster and annoy.
From circumstance might many more arise,
But these for this place at this time suffice.
Be it held no digression to look back
From whence I came, inquiring if I lack
No fit accoutrement that may be found
Behoofull for the journey I am bound.
Of Music.
Something I had forgot in my great speed:
A Coelo Symphonia.
Of Music then, e're further I proceed;
I must derive it from the first of days.
The Spheres chime Music to their Makers praise.
In the worlds first Creation it begun,
From the word Fiat spoke, and it was done,
Was sound and sweetness, voice, and symphonie,
Concord, Consent, and heavenly harmony.
The three great Orders of the Hierarchy,
Servants unto the eternal Majesty,
In their degrees of Ternions hourly sing
Loud Haleluiahs to the Almighty King.
The Seraphins, the Cherubins, and Thrones,
Potestates, Virtues, Dominations,
The Principats, Archangels, Angels, all
Resound his praise in accents musical:
The velocitie of the heavens and planets.
So do the Heavens and Planets, much below them.
Touching the first, those that seem best to know them,
Thus of their quick velocitie relate:
As the supreme and highest, agitate
Their wheels with swiftest motion, so conclude,
The lowest finish their vicissitude:
That is, their natural courses much more soon.
As first, in nine and twenty days the Moon,
The Sun and Venus in one twelue-month theirs,
And Saturn his in thirty complete years;
But many thousands must be fully done,
Before the starry heavens their course have run.
The ambition of Man to search into hidden Arts.
Such and so great is man's innate ambition,
Into all knowledge to make inquisition,
The depth of Natures hidden ways to sound,
Mystries to search, and diue in arts profound.
As if we look into the first of Time,
When as the World was in it is youth and prime,
Even to this latest Age, those much commended
For deep conceptions, greatly have contended
(Almost above capacity indeed)
Laboriously, each other to exceed.
But as the Fable of Ixion proud
Says, he in Juno's stead embraced a Cloud:
So for the most part those of wits refined,
Building upon their amplitude of mind,
And by their own vain apprehensions swayed,
In their maine course erroneously have strayed;
Either in all mistaking, or some part,
Error for Truth, and Ignorance for Art.
The reason is, That in things undecided,
By self-conceit bee'ng obstinatly guided,
And not acquiring out the perfect ground,
What Is finite they with infinite confound;
What Is humane, with divine; what is wrong, with right,
As out of darkness striving to draw light.
Hence comes so many Sects and Schools to arise
Amongst the Sophists, thinking themselves wise;
As Py^hagorians, Epicures, Platonicks,
Pythonicks, Scepticks, and Academicks,
Eleaticks, Perepateticks, Stoics too,
With others more: And all these as they do
Differ in names, so in opinions, and
Upon diversity of judgments stand.
For instance; First, as touching the foundation
Of things that since the Chaos had creation,
And cause efficient; some hold Earth, some Fire,
Some Water, others Air: some Sects conspire
Upon the full four Elements to impose it.
One names the Heavens; another says (he knows it)
The Stars were workers^ Atoms this man names;
Another, Number; and the former blames;
Some, Musical consent drawn from the Spheres;
Some Full, Plen^i and v^cu^^
some Empty: by all which appears,
Those things are only quarreled with, not proved;
For nothing's constant, sollid, or immov'd,
In all their doctrines each with other jar,
And are indeed still in seditious war.
Job cap. 38.
And therefore God reproues Job for aspiring,
And to his hidden ways too deep inquiring:
Thus saying, Who is he that does obscure
Knowledge with words imperfect and impure?
Gird up thy loins, thee like a man prepare,
I will demand, and thou to me declare;
Where wast thou when I laid the earths foundation?
If thou have knowledge, give me true narration?
Who measured it? now (if thou can) divine:
Or over it what is he has stretched the line?
Upon what are the solid Bases made?
Or who the corner stone thereof first laid?
When all the Morning Stars (as but one-voic't)
Praised me together: when all Saints reioyc't.
Who shut the Sea with doors up, when the same
As from the womb it self issued and came?
When for it I the Clouds a covering found,
And as in swathing ^ands, in darkness bound;
And said, Thou hitherto shall have free way,
No further, thou shall here thy proud waves stay.
And after this, the secrets does pursue
Of Snow, Hail, Tempests, with the Light and Dew,
Rain, Ice, Death, Darkness; and so further runs
To the Pleiades, Arcturus and his sons.
Says Paul, In this world none himself deceive,
Cor. cap. 3.16.
To think he is wise; but such vain pha^sies leave,
And let him be a fool, so to be wise.
For this worlds wisdom is a mere disguise
Of foolishness with God. Scriptures thus treat,
Job 5.13.
The Wise he catches in his own conceit.
In Esays Prophecy the words thus sound;
The wisdom of the Wise I will confound,
The prudence of the Prudent reprehend.
Where is the wise man? Where Is the Scribe now, or
He of this world the great Inquisitor?
Has not God made all the worlds Wisdom Folly?
Who then dares think himself or wise or holy.
What was it that to Socrates first gave
Wisdoms great attribute and honor, save
That he confessed, In all he did pursue,
He only knew this, That he nothing knew.
Eccles. 8.
What says the Preacher? When I did apply
My heart to search out Wisdom curiously,
And to behold on earth the secrets deep,
That day nor night the eyes of man take sleep;
Gods entire work before mine eyes I brought,
That Man could not find out the work he sought
Beneath the Sun: for which man's busy mind
Labors to search, but it can never find.
And though the Wise man think it to conceive,
He cannot do it without the Almighties leave.
When as the Academicks, The Academicks.
of the rest
Of all the Ethnycke Sophists were held best;
Yet in their then supreme authority
None durst contest and say, So this shall be.
The Pyrhonicks, The Pyrhonicks.
of no less approbation,
Would not of any thing make attestation;
But made a doubt in all, and held for true,
Whoeuer humane Science shall pursue,
No other base he has whereon to sit,
Saving the frail opinion of man's wit:
No certain principle at all the have lent,
Grounded on firm and sollid argument;
Which Principles no sooner are deny'de,
But all their doctrine 's ruined in it is pride.
Therefore these Academicks did inact
A Maxim, (held amongst themselves exact)
Let none dispute, Contra negantem principia non est disputandum, etc.
or into terms arise
With any that the Principles denies.
Observe but the Philosophers inventions,
And amongst them the Fencer-like contentions,
Concerning the Creator of us all^
The Angels, Diag. Milesius. Theod. Cyrenus.
and the Worlds original.
Some impiously and foolishly deny,
That there is to govern us ^ Deity.
Others that say there is a God, Epicurus.
there are,
But he of humane actions takes no care.
And some remain in doubt, Protagoras.
and will not know
(At least confess) there is a God or no.
Who in his best conceptions does not storm
At their Idaea's, Atoms, Matter, Form,
Full, Empty, Infinite, first Essence, Being,
With thousands more, and all these disagreeing.
Touching the Soul has been more strange opinions, Opinions concerning the
Soul.

Than now beneath the great Turk are dominions.
One, Cr^^es Theban.
That man has no Soul at all, will prove,
And that the Body of it self does move.
Hypocrates. Lysippus. Hipp^as. An^xag. Di^g. H^siodus. Epic. Boethius. Ant.
Cleant^es. Ze^^ Diarch. Galenus. Chrisip. Archel. Heraclitus. Thales.
Xenocrates.
Some grant a Soul, but curiously desire
To have th'essence thereof derived from Fire;
Of Water, some; others, of Air compound it;
And some as brain-sicke as the rest, would bound it
In Earthly humor: other Sectists dare
Affirm the substance to be Fire and Air.
One, Heat, or an hot constitution: he
Says (in 's great wisdom) it of force must be
Of the four Elements the pure complexion:
Others will have it Light, or Lights reflection.
One calls it restless Motion; he, a Number
Moving it self, etc. Thus one another cumber,
Warring with contradictions infinite.
Of the Seat of the Soul. Hippocrates. Hierophilus. Erasi^tratus. Diogen.
Chrisip. Cum Stoicis.
As vainly too of the Souls seat they write;
To the brains ventricle some one confines it:
Come to another censure, he assigns it
Unto the Epicranion: Amongst the rest,
Epicurus makes her mansion in the breast:
In the Hearts arteries some say it dwells;
Another, in the Heart, and nowhere else.
Emped. Arist. Plato.
Empedocles would have it understood,
The sole place she resides in, is the Blood.
In the whole Body others seek to place it,
And with no seeming arguments outface it.
Concerning the Immortality of the Soul.
Like diffrence has amongst them been to know
Whether the Soul immortal be or no.
Democritus and Epicurus they
Believed the Soul was mortal. Others (say,
Pythagoras. Plato.
And it seems better warranted) incline
To make the world believe it is Divine.
The Stoics.
The Stoics held opinion, with the breath,
All bad Souls are extinguished even in death:
But that the better are exalted hye
To place sublime, and never more to dye.
Aristotle.
Some so ambiguous in their censures were,
Nothing save doubt in all their Works appear.
Then to conclude, Studies that have foundation
Like these, upon man's mere imagination,
Than the Chamaelions are more variable,
Lighter than wind, than the sea more unstable,
Than the Elements they are at more deadly hate,
And than the Labyrinth more intricate;
Than the Moon more changing, Darkness more obscure,
Than Women more inconstant and unsure.
He then that in his best thoughts does desire, He that would find the truth,
let him search the Scriptures.

After the Truth ingeniously to inquire,
And to the perfect path to be conducted,
May it please that man to be thus instructed;
Seek not from Man, but God that can dispose,
Who all things, not from him that nothing, knows.
Of Truth the Scriptures plenally report,
Of which our weak and dull conceit comes short.
Note what our Savior says, (to end all strife)
I am the Way, I am the Truth and Life.
Again he says, Into the world I came
To declare truth, and testify the same.
No wonder then if even the Wisest dote,
Who from the Scriptures were so far remote;
And that the more they labored Truth to find,
The more they were made stupid, dull, and blind.
By muddy streams it is an easy thing
To know a troubled and unhealthful Spring:
By bright and Crystal rivelets we are sure
By consequence the fountains head is pure.
And in this water so refined and clear,
Our blessed Savior makes himself appear,
When he thus says (as John does plainly tell)
To the Samaritan at Jacobs Well,
Who so shall of the Water drink that I
Will give him, shall no more thirst till he dye:
The water that I give, in him shall be
A Well of water everlastingly,
Springing to life eternal. Now if any
Of the great Doctors differ, (as the are many)
Retire we to the Scriptures (the true test)
To know of their opinions which sounds best.
Nor let their works further authorized be,
Than punctually they with the Text agree:
Neither let any (of his knowledge proud)
Dare further search than is by them allowed.
From the wise men heavens secrets are concealed,
And unto Infants and to Babes revealed:
Therefore let Arrogance no man delude,
Whilst humbly with Saint Austin I conclude;
Whosoever shall read this Work, where he shall find Aug. de Trinitat. lib. 1.
cap. 3.

Truth certain, let him join with me in mind:
Where he shall doubt with me, I next desire,
That he with me will labor to enquire.
If he have erred in judgment, and find here
To be resolved, from hence his error clear.
If he my error find, (with some respect
Of my good meaning) let him mine correct.
Explicit Metrum Tractatus Noni.
Eatenus rationandum est, donec veritas invenitur. Cum inventa est Veritas, ibi
figendum est Iuditium; and in victoria Veritatis soli Veritatis inimici pereans.

S. Chrisost.
Theological, Philosophical, Poetical, Historical, Apothegmaticall,
Hierog^p^icall and Emblematicall Observations, touching the further
illustration of the former Tractat.
THese Spirits of the earth or under the earth, having charge of the Mines and
Treasures below, meethinkes should deter men from the base sin of Avarice.
Aurelius calls it the root of evil, Aurel. Imperat.
or a fountain of evils, whence, as from an inundant stream, Against
Covetousness.
flow injury, injustice, Briberie, Treason, Murder, depopulation, strage,
ruin of Commonweales, overthrows of Armies, Subversion of estates, wrack of
Societies, stain of conscience, breach of amity, confusion of mind, with a
thousand other strange enormities. The property of a covetous man (says
Archimides) is to live all his life time like a Beggar, that he may be said at
his death to die rich: who as he is good to no man, so is he the worst friend
to himself: and as he passes great trouble and travel in gathering riches,
so he purchases withal great danger in keeping them, much law in defending,
but most torment in departing from them; and in making his Will he for the
most part finds more trouble to please all, than he took pleasure to
possess all. In the purchasing of which (as one ingeniously said) he gets
carfulness to himself, envy from his neighbor, a prey for thieves, peril
for his person, damnation to his soul, curses for his children, and Law for
his heirs. Nay even in his life time he wants as well what he has, as what
he has not. Moreover, all euil-gotten gain brings with it contempt,
curses, and infamy. The Gluttons mind (says Saint Bernard) is of his belly,
the Lechers of his lust, and the Covetous man's of his gold. And Saint
Augustine, By Liberality men's vices are covered, but by Covetousness they are
laid open to the world. Ardua res haec est, opibus non tradere mores,
Et cum tot Croesos viceris esse Numam.
i. A difficult thing it is for any man that is rich, not to submit his mind
and affections unto his money; and passing many a Croesus in wealth, to bear a
modest temperature with Numa. It is better to be the Sheep than the Son of
an auaritious man, says Diegenes: the one he loves and tendreth for the
increase; the other he neglects and hates for the expense. Though (according
to Apollonius) the common excuse of the rich man is, That he gathers and
hoordeth for the use of his children; so insatiate is his desire, (as being
never satisfied) that the obtaining of what he would have, is but the beginning
to him of the desire of having. According to that of Boethius, The Poets of
Covetousness.
lib. 2. Metr. 2.

Si quantas rapidis flatibus incitus,
Pontus versat Arenas, etc.
If with so many sands as seas up cast,
When they are stirred with some tempestuous blast;
Or were thou furnished as the skies with stars,
When neither fog nor cloud their luster bars;
Or were thou by the abundant horn of Plenty
Supplied with all things, leaving no place empty:
Yet humane nature, covetous of gain,
Would not forbear to murmur and complain,
Although to it heavens liberal hand should lend
More gold than it could study how to spend.
Though Honor grace the name, and Pride the back,
'T will say all 's little, something yet does lack;
Gaping Desire, vncircumscrib'd by Laws,
Still yawnes with open and unsatiate jaws.
What bridle or what curb can we then find
To restrain this rapacitie of mind?
Whenas the more we drink, the more we thirst,
Our aim to get is greater than at first.
Such pest in man's unlimited nature breeds,
That still the more he has, the more he needs.
Avarice is defined to be a vice in the soul, much like unto a Dropsy in the
body; by which a man coueteth, per fas and nefas, to extort from others,
without right or reason. And again, violently and injustly it withholds
from others what truly belongs unto them, without equity or conscience. It
is also a penurious and niggardly sparing to give, but a readiness, nay
greediness to receive whatsoever is brought, never examining whether it be
well or ill attained. Usury and Extortion, bred from Avarice, (says one)
makes the Nobleman morgage his lands, the Lawyer pawn his Littleton, the
Physician sell his Galen, the Soldier his sword, the Merchant his Ship, and the
World it is peace. This hellish Vice in mine opinion is as bitterly reproved as
ingeniously observed by Petronius Arbiter, in one of his Satyrs. Part of his
words be these: Orbemjam totum victor Romanus habebat,
Qua mare, quaterrae, qua sidus currit vtrumque.
The Roman Victor had the whole world won,
As far as seas flow, or the earth does run,
Or either Pole could from above survey;
Yet with all this not sated was, but they
The Ocean must with burdened Ships oppress,
Wandering in toilesome search where they could guess
Any remote place was. If they were told
It yielded Mines, and they might fetch thence gold.
And now (although they were in league before)
Hostilitie's proclaimed, and for that Oar
Armed Vessels rigged, all dangers are held good,
To purchase wealth, howeuer bought with blood.
"Pleasures in use are slighted, (because known)
"We dote on foreign things, despise our own.


And in another place to the like purpose: Nor is less rapine in the camp,
for there
Generals when they of gain and profit hear,
Fly to the noise, and madly snatch at gold.
Nay even the Roman people's to be sold,
The very seats on which the Patriots sit
In open Court, are bought, nor can we quit
Old men from Avarice, since each one strives
Virtue (once free) to bind in golden gyues;
"Powers turn to prey, and Place to purchase pelf,
"There Is nothing free, scarce Majesty it self.


Covetousness robs a man of the title of Gentry, because it together
delights it self in sordid Ignobilitie. Usury, the eldest and most
fruitfull-breeding daughter of old Avarice, was so much at one time despised
and hated in Rome, that Appian in his first book of Civil wars
commemorateth unto us, That there was a great penalty imposed upon any noble
Citisen, who would show himself so degenerate as to contract her: for it is
said of her, That she brings forth her children before they be begotten:
besides, she is most hated of those whom she seems most to gratify. And
according to that of the Poet, -- Turpia Lucra
Faenoris, and velox Inopes vsura trucidat.
The filthy and base gain of Increase, and the swift return of Usury
murdereth the Poor and Needy. But I am confident, that whosoever he be that
shall grind the faces of the Poor in this world, the Devil shall grate upon
his bones in the world to come. O but (says one) Gold guides the globe of the
earth, and Covetousness runs round about the Center, Auri sacra fanes quid
non? This puts me in remembrance of the Poet Balbus, which lately came to my
hand, and I have read thus: Aurum cuncta movet, superi flectuntur ab Auro,
Gaudet and Aurato Jupiter ipse Thoro.


Which as near as I can I have thus faithfully rendered: Gold can do all
things, gods with it are fed,
And Jove himself lies in a golden bed.
With Gold the Temples shine, the Altars too:
In it men trust, for it can all things do.
Gold helps in Peace, is preualent in Wars,
It raises Armies, it compoundeth jarres.
The Romuleian Patriots redeemed
With Gold their Capitol, 'T is so esteemed,
And bears with it such potencie and sway,
That unto it Air, Earth, and Seas obey.
What other high Power need we love or fear?
Pallas away, and Juno come not near:
Mars hence^ Diana with thy modest look,
Come not in sight, thy presence we will not brook.
Gold only dwells in Temples, and does reign,
And at it is Altars are fat Offerings slain.
He that has Gold, the very Stars may buy,
And can the gods lead in captivity.
Gold raises War, and Discord can appease;
It plowes deep furrows in the unknown seas:
It breaks down Citadels, (such power it claims)
And folds up Cities in devouring flames.
Take Gold away, the young Maid would not be
So soon deprived of her Virginity.
Take Gold away, young men would be more stayed,
And their indulgent Parents more obeyed.
Take Gold away, sincere Faith would be vowed,
Young wives more chaste, and Matrons be less proud:
Youth would not be to Fashion so deuote,
Nor Age on Riches more than Virtue dote.
Yet has it a power op'ratiue to infuse
Raptures and Enthusiasma's to the Muse.
To give us Gold, would any be so kind,
A golden vein he in our Verse should find.


The excellent Greek Poet Hesiod gives Venus the Epithit Aurea. Some
questioning, With what propriety he could call her Golden Venus; she being in
her native disposition solely devoted to pleasure and sporting dalliance, but
no way tainted with the least as persion of gripple and vngenerous Avarice? one
among the rest, unwilling he should be taxed with the least ignorance or
mistake, thus answered in his behalf: Hesiodus pulchre quid sit Venus Aurea
Iusit,
Et peream si quid rectius esse potest, etc.
Hesiod said well, And let me die. But when
He called her Golden Venus, he did then
With rich conceit, because we now behold,
There is no Match that is not made with gold:
And Venus, changed to Vsus, Venerie
Is now converted to plain Usury.
This Saturnes son well knew, when bee'ng surprised
With Danaes love, he came to her disguised
In a rich golden Rain, and through the tiles,
Sent liquid drops, which she with graceful smiles
Spread her lap wide to take, not bee'ng content
To fold it up till the whole shower was spent.
He made the president: since when we find,
That whilst we give, out Sweet-hearts think us kind.
But if we nothing bring, Away, be gone,
Full pockets now are only looked upon.


He that trusts in his Riches (says Solomon) shall perish. Prove. cap. 11.
He troubles his own house that follows Avarice, Cap. 15.
but he that hates Covetousness shall live. He that hates Covetousness his
days shall be long, and he that hastneth to be rich shall not be innocent.
Cap. 28.
The Covetous man shall not be filled with money; Eccles cap. 5. Ibid. 14.
and he that loves Riches shall not receive the fruits thereof. He that
heapeth to himself unjustly, gathers for others, and another shall riot in
his riches. He that is wicked unto himself, to whom can he be good? in his
goods he shall take no pleasure.

We read, Ierem. cap. 6. From the less to the greater, all dote on Avarice:
from the Prophet to the Priest, all study deceit. Therefore I will deliver up
their Women to strangers, and make others heirs of their fields; because from
the least to the greatest, all follow Avarice; and from the Prophet to the
Priest all study Lies.

Covetousness is called the Service of Idols, Ephesians. 5.5. The Root of evils,
1. Tim. 6.10. And such as be therewith infected are called Despisers of Gods
Word, Mat. 6.24, etc. Cruel, Prove. 12.10. Idolaters, Coloss. 3.5. Miserable and
vain, Job 5.5. They are to be avoided, 1 Cor. 5.11. They shall not inherit the
kingdom of Heaven, Ibid. 6.10. Infinite are the Texts in Scripture, not only
bitterly reproving, but utterly condemning this base sin of Avarice: for
breuities sake I will shut them up with that godly admonition of the holy
Evangelist Saint Matthew, cap. 6. ver. 19. Lay not up treasures for your selves
upon the earth, where the Moth and Canker do corrupt, and where Thieves break
through and steal; but lay up treasures for your self in Heaven, where
neither the Moth nor Canker corrupts, and where Thieves neither dig through
nor steal: for where your treasure is, there will your hearts be also.

The Fathers, of Avarice.
Saint Augustine, De Verb. Domini, says, What is this aviditie of Concupiscence
in man, when even the beasts themselves retain a mediocritie? They are
ravenous when they be hungry, but when their appetites are sated, they spare to
prey. The avarice of Rich men is only insatiate, who always raueth; and is
never satisfied. He neither fears God, nor reuerenceth man^ he neither
spares father, nor acknowledges mother: his brother he forgetteh, and
falsifieth faith unto his friend: he oppresses the widow, inuadeth the Orphan;
those that are free he brings into bonds; nor makes he conscience to bear
false witness, etc. O what a madness is this in men! to despise life, and
desire death; to covet Gold, and to lose Heaven.

Observe what Saint Ambrose says in one of his Sermons: It is no less fault
in thee to take away from him that has, than when thou thy self art able, to
deny thy charity to such as want. It is the bread of the Hungry which thou
detainest, and the garment of the Naked which thou keep back; the money
which thou hoordest and hidest in the earth is the price and redemption of the
Captive and Miserable. Know that thou take away the goods of so many as thou
deniest to do good unto, when thou can and wilt not. Those are not a man's
riches which he cannot carry with him to the grave: Mercy only and Charity
are the inseparable companions of the Dead.

Hierome says, That when all other sins grow old in man, Avarice only
continues as youthful to the end as at the beginning. And in another of his
Sermons he says, A Covetous man is the Purse of Princes, a store house of
Thieves, the discord of Parents, and the hiss of men. Gregory, Moral. lib.
14. says, That the sin of Avarice so burdeneth and weighs down the mind
which it has once possessed, that it can never be raised to have a desire to
behold things sublime and high. Hugo, lib. de Clav. writes, In the goods and
riches which we possess there are four things to be observed; namely, That
things lawful to be sought, we seek not unjustly; and things unjustly sought,
we enjoy not unlawfully; that we possess not too much, though lawfully; nor
things lawfully possessed, we unlawfully defend: for either euilly to acquire,
or things euilly obtained, what was lawful makes to be unlawful. For a man
to possess much to himself, he comes near to covetousness; and
oftentimes it so falls out, that what is too much loved, is euilly defended.
S. Bernard, Sermon. 39. says, Avarice is drawn in a Chariot with four wheels,
and these are called Pusillanimitie, Inhumanitie, Contempt of God, and
Forgetfulness of Death. The beasts that draw it be two, Tenacitie and
Rapacitie: and these are guided and governed by one Chariotier, called a Greedy
Desire of Having. For Covetousness alone, because it will not be at the
charges of hiring more, is content with one servant.

The Emperor Nero was never known to give gift, Historical Examples.
or to bestow office upon any man, but he said unto him, Thou know what I
have need of? This we do, left any man what he has should call his own. Words
(says Suetonius and Bion, who report this of him) better becoming the mouth
of a Thief and Robber than of an Emperor. The Emperor Vespasian, when by
certain Embassies he understood, that a rich Statue was to be erected unto his
honor by the public Senate, which would cost an infinite mass of money; he
desired them to forbear: and showing the palm of his hand open, he said unto
the Ambassadors, Behold, here is a Base ready to receive it. Thereby
intimating, he had a hand to receive that money living, with which they
purposed to honor him being dead. Suet. in Vespas.

Marcus Crassus being on his journey to undertake the Parthian war; Brusonius
lib. 1. c. 1. ex Plut.
when in his way he found Deiotarus King of the Galathians in his old age
erecting a city; O King (said he) what business is this which thou
undertake, now that thou art in the twelfe hour of thy day? (meaning he was
then in the last part of his age.) To whom Deiotarus (knowing the extreme
covetousness of Crassus) smilingly answered, But thou o Emperor, when as it
appears thou art not in the morning of thy time, (for he was then threescore
years old) why do thou make such haste to war against the Parthians, in
hope to bring thence a rich and profitable booty? Plato to one who studied
nothing but Gain, Stob. sermon. 10.
said, O impious man, take not such care to augment thy substance, but rather
how to lessen thy desire of getting. Democritus was wont to say, That amongst
rich men there were more Procurators than Lords; for the Covetous man does not
possess, but is possessed by his Riches, of which he may deservedly be called
not the servant only, but the slave. Max. sermon. 12.
A plain Fellow came to the Emperor Vespasian, (who was much taxed of
Avarice) and desired to give him that freedom which belonged unto a Roman: but
because he came empty handed, being denied; he boldly said unto him aloud, The
Fox, o Caesar, changes his hai^es, but not his nature. In that reproving the
rapacitie of his gripple disposition, who denied that gratis, which he would
willingly have bestowed upon him for money.

AElianus in his book De Varia Historia reports of the Poet Simonides, That
when one came to entreat him to write an Enconomium, and in the stead of a
reward offered him nothing but thanks; he made answer unto him, That he had two
coffers at home, the one of Thanks, the other of Coin: the last when he
needed he still found furnished; the other when he wanted, was always empty.
He in his old age being taxed of Covetousness, made answer, I had rather dying
leave my substance and riches to those that live, than in my life time being in
want, beg it of others and be denied.

Caligula.
But above all others, the Emperor Caligula is most branded with this vice; who
after inimitable profuseness, (for his riots and brutish intemperance exceeded
all bounds of humanity) when he had wasted an infinite treasure upon Concubines
and Catamites, gave himself wholly to auaritious rapine; insomuch that he
caused many of the richest men in Rome to make their Wills, appointing him
their Executor and Heir. Who if they happened to live longer than he thought
fit, and that money began to fail, he caused them either to be poisoned, or
put to some other private death; alleging for his excuse, That it were
unnatural for men to live long, after they have disposed of their goods by
their last Will and Testament. Comnodus.
So Commodus the Emperor would for money pardon the life of any man who had
committed murder, though with the greatest inhumanitie; and bargain with them
before they enterprised the act. All criminal and capital crimes were to be
bought out, and judgment and Sentences in Court bought and sold as in the
open market.

Hierogliphick
The Hierogliphycke of Avarice Pierius Valerius makes, The left hand grasped
and clutcht: thereby intimating tenacitie and holding fast; because that hand
is the more slow and dull, and less capable of agilitie and dexterity than
the other, and therefore the more apt for retention.

You may read an Emblem in Alciatus to this purpose: Emblem. 85.
Septitius populos inter ditissimus omnes;
Arva senex nullus quo magis ampla tenet, etc.
Than old Septitius, for large grounds and fields
Well stockt, no one more rich the country yields;
Yet at a furnished table will not eat,
But starues his belly, to make roots his meat.
This man, whom Plenty makes so poor and bare,
(Wretched in wealth) to what may I compare?
To what more proper than an Ass? since he
Answers to him in all conformity;
Laden with choicest Cates that the earth breeds,
Whilst he himself on grass and thistles feeds.


And again to the like purpose, Emblem 89.

Heu miser in medijs sitiens stat Tantalus vndis.
In midst of water Tantalus is dry,
Starved, whilst ripe apples from his reaching fly.
The name but changed, 't is thou, o covetous Sot,
Who have thy goods so, as thou have them not.
Ioach. Camerarius, Apologus.
lib. Fabul. 1. in taxing some, who for money will not be ashamed to take other
men's griefs and calamities upon them; recites this fable: A rich man having two
daughters, the one dying, he hired diverse of his neighbors and friends of the
same sex to mourn and lament after her hearse; (and such the Latins call
Praeficae.) Whose miserable cries and ejulations the suruiuing sister hearing,
she spoke unto her mother and said, O what an infelicitie it is, that
strangers and such as are no way allied unto us, can so loudly mourn and
lament; when we whom so nearly it concerns, scarce breathe a sigh, or let
fall one tear. To whom the mother replied, Wonder not, my daughter, that these
should so weep and howl, since it is not for any love they bear unto her,
but for the money which they have received to do this funeral office.

To give the histories past the more credit, as also those which follow,
concerning Witches, Magitions, Circulators, juglers, etc. if we shall but cast
our eyes back upon our selves, The Witches of Warboys in Huntington shire.
and seek no further than the late times, and in them but examine our own
Nation, we shall undoubtedly find accidents as prodigious, horrid, and every
way wonderful, as in the other. Concerning which whosoever shall desire to be
more fully satisfied, I refer them to a Discourse published in English, Anno
1593. containing sundry remarkable pieces of Witchcraft, practiced by John
Samuel the father, Alice Samuel the wife and mother, and Agnes Samuel the
daughter, (commonly called The Witches of Warboys in the County of Huntingdon)
upon the five danghters of Mr. Robert Throgmorton Esquire, of the same town
and County, with diverse others in the same house, to the number of twelve; as
also the lady Cromwell by them bewitched to death. The names of the Spirits they
dealt with, Pluck, Catch, and White: The manner of their effacinations
strange; theit Confessions upon their examinations wondrous; their conviction
legal, their execution just and memorable.

Much more to the like purpose I might in this place allege, that not long
since happened; which by reason of the parties executed, the Jury who found
them guilty, and the reverend Judges who gave them sentence of condemnation, I
hold not so fit to be here inserted: And therefore conclude with that
Pannurgist Satan, the great red Dragon or roaring Lion; to whom not improperly
may be given these following characters: Fontem nosco boni bonus ipse creatus,
Factus at inde malus fons vocor ipse mali.
Of Goodness I the Fountain am,
Bee'ng good at first created;
But since made Evil, I the Well
Of Ill am nominated.
Sic velut in muros mures, in pectora demon;
Iuvenit occultas, aut facit ipse vias.
As Mice in walls, the Devil so
Into our breast does venture;
Where either he finds hidden paths,
Or makes new ways to enter.


Notwithstanding which, I propose one Distich more for our general comfort: Si
Sathanas Christi sine nutu invadere Porcam,
Non potis est Christi quomodo laedat Ovem.
If Satan without leave of Christ
A Swine could not invade,
How can a Sheep of Christ's own flock
By Satan be betrayed?


But as a remedy for these and the like temptations, let us hear that worthy
and learned Author Gregory Nazianzen. in Tetrasc.

Vinum, Libido, Liuor, and Demon pares:
Hos mente privant quos tenent; hos tu prece,
Medere fusis lachrimis, jejunio,
Medela morbis haec enim certa est meis.
Wine, Envy, Lust, the Devil, are alike:
These where they rule, the mind with madness strike.
Therefore to pray, to fast, to weep, be sure;
For These, of my Diseases are the cure.
Concerning those Demons we call Lucifugi, or flying light we may read
Prudentius Cathemerinon, Him. 1. thus: Ferunt vagantes Daemones
Laetos tenebris noctium;
Gallo canente exterritos,
Sparsim timere, and caedere, etc.
They say, The loose and wandering Spirits
Take pleasure in the shade of nights;
But when they hear the Cock to crow,
They Are frighted, and away they go:
The neerenesse of the light they fear,
And dare not stay till day appear.
Before the rising Sun they spy,
They into close dark cauerns fly.
Which is a sign they know the scope
And crown of our re-promis'd hope;
That when sleep has our eyes forsook,
We for Christ's coming wait and look.


Additions to the Premises.
OF the Sylvans, Faunes, Satyrs, Folletti, Paredrij, etc. all included within
the number of such as we call Familiar Spirits, there are diverse stories
extant; as, That they can assume the shapes and figures of men, and eat,
drink, sit at table, talk and discourse after the manner of our fellows; so
that they may be easily took for some friend or acquaintance. Macrob. lib. 1,
satur. cap. 18.
Macrobius writes, That in the mountain of Pernassus these Sylvans and Satyrs
yearly keep their Bacchanalian feasts, where they meet in great companies,
singing and dancing to rural music: which may be easily heard at the foot of
the mountain, and their trouping and skipping together easily discerned.

A strange story of a Noblema^ of Silesia.
In Silesia a Nobleman man having invited many Ghests to dinner, and prepared a
liberal and costly feast for their entertainment, when all things were in
great forwardness, in stead of his friends whom he expected, he only received
excuses from them, that they could not come: every one pretending some
business, or other occasion, that he could not keep appointment. Whereat the
Inuitor being horribly vexed, broke out into these words, saying, Since all
these men have thus failed me, I wish that so many Devils of hell would feast
with me to day, and eat up the victuals provided for them: And so in a great
rage left the house, and went to Church, where was that day a Sermon. His
attention to which having took away the greatest part of his choler, in the
interim there arrived at his house a great troop of horsemen, very black, and
of extraordinary aspect and stature: who alighting in the Court, called to a
Groom to take their horses; and bade another of the servants run presently to
his master, and tell him his Ghests were come. The servant amassed runs to
Church, and with that short breath and little sense he had left, delivers to
his master What had happened. The Lord calls to the Preacher, and desiring him
for that time to break off his Sermon, and advise him by his Ghostly counsel,
what was best to do in so strict an exigent: he persuades him, That all his
servants should with what speed they could depart the house. In the mean time
they with the whole congregation came within view of the Mansion: Of which all
his servants, as well men as maids, had with great affright cleared themselves,
and for haste forgot and left behind a young child, the Noblemans son,
sleeping in the cradle. By this the Devils were reuelling in the dining
chamber, making a great noise, as if they had saluted and welcomed one
another: and looked through the casements, one with the head of a Bear,
another a Wolf, a third a Cat, a fourth a Tygre, etc. taking bowls and
quaffing as if they had drunk to the Master of the house. By this time the
Nobleman seeing all his servants safe, began to remember his son, and asked
them What was become of the child? Those words were scarce spoke, when one of
the Devils had him in his arms, and showed him out of the window. The good man
of the house at this sight being almost without life, spying an old faithful
servant of his, fetched a deep sigh and said, O me, what shall become of the
Infant! The servant seeing his master in that sad ecstasy, replied, Sir, by
Gods help I will enter the house, and fetch the child out of the power of yon
Devil, or perish with him. To whom the master said, God prosper thy attempt,
and strengthen thee in thy purpose. When having taken a blessing from the
Priest, he enters the house, and coming into the next room where the Devils
were then rioting, he fell upon his knees, and commended himself to the
protection of Heaven. Then pressing in amongst them, he beheld them in their
horrible shapes, some sitting, some walking, some standing. Then they all came
about him at once, and asked him what business he had there? He in a great sweat
and agony (yet resolved in his purpose) came to that Spirit which held the
Infant, and said, In the name of God deliver this child to me. Who answered,
No, but let thy master come and fetch him, who has most interest in him. The
servant replied, I am come now to do that office and service to which God has
called me; by virtue of which, and by his power, lo, I seize upon the
Innocent. And snatching him from the Devil, took him in his arms, and
carried him out of the room. At which they clamored and called aloud after, Ho
thou Knave, ho thou Knave, leave the child to us or we will tear thee in
pieces. But he, vnterrified with their diabolical menaces, brought away the
Infant, and delivered it safe to the father. After some few days the Spirits
left the house, and the Lord reentred into his ancient possession. In this
discourse is to be observed, With what familiarity these Familiar Spirits are
ready to come, being invited,

Of the Sylvans, A strange Vision of Syluane Spirits.
Alexander de Alexandro makes this relation: A Friend of mine of approved
fidelity (says he) called Gordianus, traveling with a Neighbor of his
toward A retium, they lost their way, and fell into deserts and uninhabited
places, insomuch that the very solitude bred no small fear. The Sun being
set, and darkness growing on, they imagine they hear men talking; and hasting
that way, to enquire of them the readiest path to bring them out of that
Desert; they fixed their eyes upon three strange humane shapes, of a fearful
and unmeasurable stature, in long loose gowns, and habited after the manner of
Mourners, with black and grisly hair hanging over their shoulders, but of
countenance most terrible to behold. Who calling and beckoning to them both
with voice and gesture, and they not daring to approach them, they used such
indecent skipping and leaping, with such brutish and immodest gestures, that
half dead with fear, they were enforced to take them to their heels and
run, till at length they light upon a poor countrey-mans cottage, in which
they were relieved and comforted.

Sabell. lib. 1. c. 4. A stranhe History of a Syluane Spectar.
Sabellicus delivers this discourse: The father of Ludovicus Adolisius Lord
of Immola, not long after his decease appeared to a Secretary of his in his
journey, whom he had sent upon earnest business to Ferrara. The Spectar or
Sylvan Spirit being on horseback, attyred like an huntsman, with an Hawke
upon his fist: who saluted him by his name, and desired him to entreat his
son Lodowicke to meet him in that very place the next day at the same hour,
to whom he would discover certain things of no mean consequence, which much
concerned him and his estate. The Secretary returning, and revealing this to
his Lord, at first he would scarce give credit to his report; and jealous
withal, that it might be some train laid to entrap his life, he sent another
in his stead: to whom the same Spirit appeared in the shape aforesaid, and
seemed much to lament his sons diffidence, to whom if he had appeared in
person, he would have related strange things which threatened his estate, and
the means how to prevent them; Yet desired him to commend him to his son, and
tell him, That after two and twenty years, one month, and one day prefixed, he
should lose the government of that City which he then possessed. And so he
vanished. It happened just at the same time which the Spectar had predicted,
(notwithstanding his great care and providence) That Philip Duke of Mediolanum,
the same night besieged the City, and by the help of Ice (it being then a
great frost) past the Moat, and with ladders scaled the wall, surprised the
city, and took Lodowicke prisoner.

Another recorded by Fincelius.
Fincelius remembers unto us, That in the year 1532, a Nobleman of his
country had commanded a countreyman a Tenant of his with whom he was much
offended, either to bring home to his Manor house a mighty huge Oak which was
newly felld, betwixt that and Sunset, or he should forfeit his time, and the
next day be turned out of his cottage. The poor husbandman brings his cart
to the place, but looking upon the massy timber, and finding it a thing
impossible to be done, he sits down, wrings his hands, and falls into great
lamentation. When presently appeared before him one of these Spirits in the
shape of a laboring man, and demanding him the cause of his sorrow; he was no
sooner resolved, but, If that be all (says the Devil) follow me, and I will
save thee the forfeiture of thy Leaf. Which he no sooner said, but he took
the huge Oak, boughs, branches and all, and threw it upon his shoulder as
lightly, as if it had been a burden of Firres or Broom; and bearing it to
the house, cast it cross the gate which was the common entrance into the
house, and there left it. The Gentleman returning toward night with his
friends from hawking, spying the door barricadoed, commanded his servants to
remove the tree: But forcing themselves first to stir it, then to hew it with
axes, and lastly to set it on fire, and finding all to be in vain; the master
of the Manor was enforced to have another door cut out in the side of his
house, to let his Ghests in, for at the back gate he had vowed not to enter,
having before made a rash Oath to the contrary.

By the aid of these Spirits, Gaspin.
(as Caspinianus gives testimony) the Bulgarians gave the Romans a great
overthrow, in the time of the Emperor Anastasius. The like the Huns did to the
French King Sigebert, defeating him, notwithstanding the odds of his great and
puissant Army. Of this kind those were said to be, who when the Poet
Simonides was set at a great feast, came like two young men, and desired to
speak with him at the gate: Who rising in haste from the table to know their
business, was no sooner out of the room, but the roof of the hall fell
suddenly, and crushed all the rest to pieces, he only by this means escaping
the ruin.

Those Spirits which the Greeks call Paredrij, are such as haunt young men and
maids, and pretend to be greatly in love with them, yet many times to their
hurts and damage. Meng. in Compe^dio Mantuae.
Mengius speaks of a Youth about sixteen years of age, who was admitted
into the Order of Saint Francis; A young man beloved of a Spirit.
whom one of these Spirits did so assiduately haunt, that he scarce could
forbear his company one instant, but visibly he appeared to him, sometimes
like one of the Friars belonging to the house, sometimes one of the servants,
and sometimes again he would personate the Governor. Neither was he only
seen of the Youth himself, whom he pretended so much to love, but of diverse
of the Domestics also. One time the Youth sent this Spirit with a Present of
two Fishes unto a certain Monk; who delivered them to his own hands, and
brought him back a commendatorie answer.

The same Mengius in the self same book speaks likewise of a fair young
Virgin, A young Maid beloved of a Spirit.
that dwelt in a Noblemans house of Bonnonia, (and this, says he, happened in
the year 1579.) haunted with the like Spirit, who whithersoeuer she went or
came, stirred not from her, but attended on her as her Page or Lackey. And if
at any time upon any occasion her Lord or Lady had either chid or struck her,
he would revenge that injury done to her, upon them, with some knauish trick
or other. Upon a time, he pretending to be extremely angry with her, catched
her by the gown, and tore it from head to heel: which she seeming to take
ill at his hands, he in an instant sowed it up so workeman-like, that it was
not possible to discern in what place he had torn it. Again, she being sent
down into the cellar to draw wine, he snatched the candle out of her hand, and
cast it a great distance from her; by which occasion much of the wine was
spilt: and this he confessed he did only to be revenged on them who the same day
before threatened her. Neither could he by any exorcismes be forced to leave
her company, till at length she was persuaded to eat so often as she was
forced to do the necessities of nature: and thereby she was delivered from him.

Of another Maid of Bonnonia.
Another of these Paredrij haunted a Virgin of the same City, who was about the
age of fifteen years; who would do many tricks in the house, sometimes
merrily, and as often unhappily: for it would break stone vessel, and make
strange noise and uproar in the night time, as vntiling the house, and flinging
great stones in at the windows, whistling and hissing in the cellar and lower
rooms of the house. And though it did not endanger any ones life, yet
oftentimes it made them break their shinnes, faces, with other displeasures,
as flinging dishes and platters, and sometimes dogs end cats into the Well.
Neither could this Spectar be removed from the house, till the said Maid
changed her service.

To this kind of Spirits that superstitious kind of Divination is referred,
Onomonteia.
called Onomonteia, which is a conjecture made by anagrammatising the names of
those that come to ask counsel of the Magitian: by which they take upon them
to foretell either good or bad hap.

Arithmanteia.
There is a second kind of Divination called Arithmomanteia, and that is
twofold; one is, By considering the force and virtue of the Greek letters;
and in a combat to know who shall be Victor, by having the greater number of
letters in his name. By the which means they fable Hector to be subdued by
Achilles. The second is used by the Chaldaeans, who divide their Alphabet into
three Decads, and by the section of their names, and intermingled with some
letters out of one of these Decads, unto certain numbers, and then refer every
number to his Planet. Allied to this is a third, Stoicheiomanteia.
called Stoicheiomanteia; that is, When suddenly opening a book, we consider
the first verse or sentence that we cast our eye upon, and from that
conjecture some future event. So Socrates (it is said) predicted the day of his
own death. And so Gordianus, Claudius, Macrinus, and other Roman Emperors
calculated both of their empires and lives.

We shall not need to call in question, Whether Spirits can speak from the
mouths and tongues of others, seeing we have histories to the same purpose
many and frequent. Philostratus writes, That the head of Orpheus foretold to
Cyrus King of Persia, That he should die by the hands of a Woman. The head of a
Priest before dead (as Aristotle witnesses) discovered Cercydes the Homicide.

Phlegon Trallianus writes, That at the same time when the Consul Acilius
Glabrio overthrew Antiochus the King of Asia in battle, the Romans were
terrified and forewarned by the Oracle from entering into Asia any more: and
Publius Acil. Glabrio's head being left by a Wolf who had devoured his body,
as if re-animated, delivered to his Army in a long Oration, the discourse of a
great strage and slaughter which should shortly happen to the Romans. Valerius
Publicola being Consul, and warring upon the Veintans and Hetruscians; out of
the grove Arsya one of the Syluans was heard to clamor aloud, (whilst the
battle was yet doubtful) One more of the Hetruscians shall fall, and the Roman
Army shall be Victors. Valerius prevailed, and the slain of either part being
numbered, they found it to be just so as the Sylvan had predicted: as Valerius
Maximus reports. Who writes further, That the Image of Fortune in the Latin
street was heard to speak. So also an Infant of half a month old, in the
Ox-market. And an Ox at another time. All which were the presages of great
misfortunes.

It is reported, That a Spirit in the shape and habit of Policrates was created
Prince of AEtolia; This History I received from D. Strozza, lib. de Incant.
who took to wife a beautiful Lady of the Locrensians, and lay with her three
nights only, and then disappeared and was seen no more. He left her with
child, and when the time of her delivery came she brought forth an
Hermophrodite, of a monstrous and prodigious shape: at which the parents of the
Lady much astonished, calling the Senators together in the market place,
caused it there to be publicly shown, and then demanded of them, What should
be done with the Monster? Some gave their censure, That they should bury it
alive; others, That it should be consumed with fire: and some again, That the
mother with it should be banished and excluded the confines of AEtolia. Whilst
they were in this deliberation, Polycrates appears in the midst of them, in a
long black garment, and first with fair entreaties, and then with rough
menaces, demands of them his son. Whom they denying to surrender, he snatched
it from the arms of the Nurse which held it, and eat it up before them, all
save the head, and then instantly vanished. The AEtolians at this horrid
spectacle struck with fear and wonder, fell to a second Counsel amongst
them, to send to the Oracle to know what this portent might signify. When
suddenly the Infants head in the market place began to move and speak, and in
a grave sollid speech predicted a great slaughter to ensue. The which happened
not long after; in a great war continued betwixt the AEtolians and the
Acarnenses.

These questions have been diversely argued.
A Question may arise, Whether a Spirit has the power to take away a man's sense
of feeling, so that he shall not shrink at torture, but as it were sleep
upon the rack, etc. Or, Whether they have the power to cast men into long
sleeps? as we have read of some, who have not only slept months, but
years, and afterwaked.

Of the first there is no question; for many Witches and praestigious Magi have
endured torments beyond the sufferance of man, without the least sorrow or
complaint, sigh or groan. Some using natural Unguents and Oiles extracted from
Opium, Nightshade, and other herbs and mineralls of wonderful operation; by
which the humors are disturbed, sound sleep is begotten, the Senses stupefied,
and the feeling hindered. Some have this power from a Contract made with the
Devil, using medicines or applications made of the small bones, the ashes, or
fat of Infants, or of men slain or executed; or by swallowing a King of the
Bees, who is prime Ruler of the Hiue, and bigger than the rest: or by binding
about certain parts of their body scrolls of parchment inscribed with
diabolical characters; or by the muttering of some enchantment. Of which
diverse Writers have from their knowledge given sufficient testimony: as
Grillandus, Paris de Puteo, Hippolitus de Marseilis, Dodimus, etc.

Now concerning long sleep: and first of those seven brothers of Ephesinum,
commonly called the seven Sleepers. These under the Emperor Decius, in the
year 447, endured many and cruel torments for the profession of the Christian
Faith: Their names were Marcus, The names of the 7 sleepers.
Maximilianus, Martinianus, Dionysius, Johannes, Serapion, and Constantinus.
Who after examination and torment were shut into a dark cave there to be
famished: but having commended themselves in prayer unto God, they laid them
down to rest, and awaked not till two hundred years after. Which time being
expired, and the door of the Cave by Gods providence being opened, they waking
rose, and walking forth began to wonder at the change and alteration of things
(as not knowing any place or face they looked on) at length they were brought
before the Emperor Theodosius, and gave sufficient testimony of the
Resurrection to many Christians who in that point doubted.

Paulus Diac.
Somewhat like this is that which Paulus Diaconus writes, That in the utmost
parts of Germany, toward the North, and near to the sea side, there is a
great mountain, and beneath it a dark and obscure Cauerne; in which five men
were found sleeping, their bodies and garments in no part consumed, but sound
and whole as at the first, who by their habits appeared to be ancient Romans.
Certain of the inhabitants had often made attempt to waken them, but could
not. Upon a time, a wicked fellow purposing to dispoile and rob one of them of
his garment, he no sooner touched it, but his hand withered and dried up. Olaus
Magnus was of opinion, That they were confined thither to some strange purpose,
that when their trance was expired, they might either discover strange Visions
revealed unto them, or else they were to teach and preach the Christian Faith
to Infidels, who never knew the Evangelical Doctrine.

I spoke before of certain notes or indubitable marks by which the good
Spirits or Angels might be distinguished from the bad Genij or evil Demons.
It shall not be amiss to amplify that point somewhat more by Circumstance,
and illustrate it by History.

The good Angels are employed in nothing save the honor of God, and the profit
and preservation of good men. When on the contrary, the Caca-Daemons aim all
their enterprises and endeauours to derogate from Gods worship, and assume it
to themselves; and by their flattering deceptions and oily insinuations with
man, to work the utter subversion both of soul and body. For as Satan has
the power to transform himself from an ougly Devil to an Angel of Light;
therefore ought we to have the greater care, both to distinguish him in his
shape, and discover him in his nature. For all apparitions whatsoever, which
persuade to blasphemy, superstition, lying, manslaughter, luxury, or any
other thing execrable, do infallibly proceed only from the Devil.

Again, Necessary observations.
that Spirit that coueteth to be adored, or that prompts us to desire knowledge
in things curious and unnecessary, or that counterfeits it self to become a
subject or servant to man, by the virtue of any herb, stone, metal, wood, or
other creature, he is a Devil. Those also that put themselves under any
certain constellations, by which to beget rare and prodigious effects, whereby
the work is taken from the Creator, and attributed unto his creatures the
Stars; those are Devils. In brief, all those operations, Conjurations,
Incantations, Abjurations, Murmurations; all those Conuenticles and nightly
assemblies in places desert and remote, of Witches, Sorcerers, Magitions,
Conjurers, and such like, have the great Devil himself for their Author and
Abettor.

In a Chronicle belouging to the House of the Friar Minors in Auergne, D.
Strozza.
this history is related: This Covent having lived long in contented poverty
and peace of mind, as Saint Francis their Founder had left them; the Devil
envying theit abstinence and strictness of life, takes upon him the shape of a
servant, and insinuates himself into a Noblemans family, whose house was not
far from the Monastery; to whom he was so diligent, and appeared so obseruant
in all things, that he made him his Steward, committed all his affairs unto
his charge, and gave him the government of his whole house and family. Having
crept into this great credit and favor, and observing that his Lord and Master
was of a penurious and gripple condition, and although this poor religious
Brotherhood was placed near him, yet he never at any necessity relieved them
with any charitable largess or alms. Of whom when mention was made in any
discourse betwixt his Lord and him, this subtle Impostor began exceedingly to
commend their sanctity and asperitie of life; and persuaded his master, That
he could perform no one act so acceptable unto God, and profitable for his
souls health, as to relieve this Fraternity with a free and bo^ntifull hand.
His words proved so effectual with his Lord, that thinking to do a meritorious
act, he sent them daily full dishes from his table, upon the open days flesh
of all sorts, and upon their days of fast, of fish the most curious and
delicate that could be provided: so that in a short time the good Friars had
left the care of their books, to take charge of their bellies; and neglected
their devotions, to feed high, and drink hard. Which being observed by one of
the Seniors of the Society (who much grieved that they had fotsakeu their
former austeritie, to embrace such a dissolute life) and perceiving whence they
grew to be such Libertines, he took with him one of the same Fellowship, a man
of his own strict conversation, with purpose to give the Nobleman a visit. Who
making them friendly and courteous entertainment, this Friar amongst other
discourse, demanded of the Lord the reason why he, being so many years
together so sparing and close-handed toward his Brethten, was of late grown so
profusely bountiful? Who answered, That it was at the great intercession of
his just and faithful Steward, whom he much loved, and no less trusted. The
Religious man desired that he might be acquainted with this good seruanr. To
which motion the Nobleman was very willing, and caused him to be enquired for
and called into his presence. Who after much delay being forced to show
himself, the Devout man by some secret mark or other (before spoken of)
knowing him to be a wicked Spirit, he instantly disappeared and was no more
seen. Thus the Impostor being discovered, to the great wonder of the Nobleman;
the good Friar returning back to the Monastery, told to the Brotherhood what
had happened: by which he reduced them to their former devotion and austeritie
of life.

Against these subtle temptations of this crafty and deceitful Pannurgust,
Remed^es against the temptations of the Devil.
there are no such profitable and wholesome preuentions as fasting and prayer:
as appears by that of Antonius Laverinus, Anton. Lauer.
the unblemished authority of whose name we have used before, the better to
countenance some former Histories. He coming by godly meditations, to heal a
Daemoniacke, or one possessed with a Devil; after he had used certain holy
and devout prayers, such as are used in the like Exorcismes, the obstinat
Devil began to menace him, and told him that he would be with him that night,
to his great terror and affright, and therefore wished him to prepare himself
against his expected coming. To whom he again as confidently answered, that
if he failed of his word, and kept not his promise, he would hold him for one
of the basest and most abject Devils that fell with their arch-Captaine
Lucifer. That night Anthon. Laver. heard him knock three several times at his
chamber door, and suspecting him to be the Devil, betook himself to his
devotions and prayers, commending his safety to the protection of God and his
good Angels, and made no other answer. The Devil went then to the top of the
house, and began to until the roof, as if he purposed there to make his
entrance. But he continuing his godly meditations, was no further troubled,
but slept quietly the remainder of the night. The next day coming again to
visit his Patient, whom the Devil had possessed; after he had prayed with her
a while, he began to vpbraid the Devil of promise-breach, and told him that he
had neither visited nor terrified him, no not so much as entered his chamber,
which he bragged and boasted he would do. To whom he replied, That he was at
the door and knocked; and moreover, That he had vntiled a grear part of the
house, but had no power to enter, the place being so munified and defended by
his holy supplications. Nay more, if all the legions of hell should have
attempted it, it had been in vain, since there is no invasion or irruption to
be made by them into a place sanctified and made holy by prayers and blessings
of holy and devout men. He then proffered the Devil to remove his bed into any
other open place, where was no roof nor covering: but he refused to meddle
with him upon any terms. So that by his pious and Christian endeavor he was
exterminate and cast out, never troubling the good woman after. Most true and
undoubted it is, That the invocation of the holy Name of God is a most
preservative Amulet or sweet smelling Confection, to expel all the noisome and
pestilentiall savors, by which he seeks to poison and infect the soul of
man. Or like the heart and liver of the fish laid upon the coals by Tobit in
his marriage chamber; Tobit c. 8. v. 3.
the perfume whereof being smelt by the evil Spirit, confines him into the
uttermost parts of Egypt.

The miserable ends of notorious Magitians.
I come now to the miserable and most remarkable ends of the most notorious and
infamous Magitions. Amongst whom, Simon syrnamed Magus (from his prestigious
and diabolical act) may claim a kind of priority and precedence; Simon Magus.
wherefore I rank him in the first place. He by the Devils assistance having
long deluded the people with many stupendous and prodigious novelties, grew to
that height of opinion, not only amongst the vulgar and vnletter'd sort of
people, (who are ready to admire every Mountebanke and ^ugler) but had
purchased himself that credit and reputation with the Emperor and Senate of
Rome, that they were not willing only to celebrate his name and reverence his
person, but they concluded and agreed to confer upon him Divine honors;
causing an Altar to be erected, with this inscription, Simoni sancto Deo, To
Simon the holy god. Notwithstanding he had thus blinded the eyes, and deluded
the senses of such an understanding Nation; yet he himself knew, That
whatsoever he did was but Deceptio visus, mere juggling tricks and
legerdemaines. Therefore when he beheld the holy Apostles to work true
Miracles merely and immediately by the powerful hand of God, and in the name
of our Redeemer, he offered them a great sum of money to purchase from them
the gift of the Holy Ghost; as knowing that to be real and essential, and his
spells and riddles to be nugatorie and vain. Nicenus of Simon Magus.
Nicenus commemorateth diverse of his seeming wonders. He has (says he) made
statues and Images to move and walk; he flung himself into the fire, and
wrapped himself in flames, and not been burned: he has flowne in the air; and
of stones made bread that has been eaten; he has changed himself into a
Serpent, and could take upon him the shape of any beast whatsoever: he would
many times appear to have two faces, and harh turned himself into an heap of
gold: at feasts and banquets he would show strange apparitions; all those
dishes and chargers appointed for the service, brought up the meat of
themselves, without any seen to support them; and the bowls and glasses
offered themselves of their own accord into the hands of them who had an
appetite to drink. But after all his cheating, juggling, and prestigion, (if I
may so call it) flying in the air; at the prayers of Saint Peter his spells
failed, and his incantations deceived him, so that falling precipitate from on
high, he brake all his bones to shiuers. And this of his execrable Art was the
miserable end.

Now of those Iuglers that make a trade and profession thereof, and do sell
their tricks for money, there are diverse examples. Of one Zito a Bohomian,
Zito the Bohemian a cunning Iugler.
an expert and cunning Inchanter, Johannes Dubravius thus writes. Vincestaus
Emperor and King of Bohemia, having entered into league and affinity with John
Duke of Bauaria, by taking to wife his daughter Sophia; the father in law
hearing his son to be much delighted in sports and especially in juggling and
prestigious conueyances: he caused a wagon to be furnished with such like
implements and properties, Fencers weapons and the like, to furnish several
pastimes, and carried them with him to the city of Prague, where the Emperor
then kept Court. Now when the most excellent amongst the Bauarian Magitions had
presented himself on the stage to show the Princes and the rest of the
spectators, some rare novel and wonderment, presently appears (unknown and
unexpected of the other) one Zito belonging to Vinceslaus, with his mouth
gaping and drawn to either ear; and coming near to the Bauarian, he seemed
to eat and devour him clothes and all, save his shoes, which were somewhat
durty; and those (as if his stomach would not digest them) he cast up again.
Then, as if his belly had bin troubled with this unaccustomed diet, he retired
to a great Vessel full of water which was placed by, and making show as if he
would ease himself, and exonerate his body charged with such a burden, he
presently delivered unto them the Bauarian conjured out of the tun, wet from
head to foot, to the great admiration and laughter of the multitude. Which
struck such a terror into the rest that came to show themselves and their
cunning, that not one of them after that durst appear in the sight of Zito.

Olaus Magnus writes, A trial of skill betwixt two Magitians.
That one Gilbertus contending with his Master and Tutor, Which was the best
experimented in arr Magic, (which they both professed) the Archi-Mage or
Teacher, whose name was Catillus, produced a small staff, inscribed with
Gothicke or Ruthnicke characters, and cast it upon the ground: which the
scholar Gilbert taking up, he presently grew stiff and hard, and was
instantly conveyed into an Island called Latus Veter, (which lies within the
dominion of the Astro-Gothes) and in a cauerne there was finally confined.

It is likewise reported, This story is reported by an Italia^ Doctor.
That before a public assembly of the Nobility and others in the Court of a
great King, two famous Magitions contended, which of them should have the
precedencie for skill; and in the trial it was concluded betwixt them, that by
turns neither should refuse what the other commanded him to do: to which
covenant they had both past their oaths in the presence of all the Spectators.
The first who was to begin, commands the other to put his head out of a
casement: Which was so sooner done, but instantly there appeared to grow out of
his forehead an huge pair of Hearts horns, of that height and greatness, that
it was not possible to draw his head in again; and thus he kept him for a good
space, to the peoples great sport and laughter. But at length being released,
and gtowing angry and impatient of such an injury, and (as it seems) dealing
with a greater and more powerful Devil, he bethought him of a more deep and
dangerous revenge: He draws with a cole the picture of a man upon the wall,
and commanded the former Magition who had before insulted over him, to enter
and hide himself within that Effigies. But he seeing before his eyes the
terror of imminent death, began to quake and tremble, and beseech him on his
knees to spare his life. But the other inexorable, enjoined him to enter there,
as he had commanded: which he with great unwillingness being enforced to do,
the wall was seen to open and give way to his entrance, and shut again, but
never returned his body back dead or alive.

Of Zedech. a Jew, a great Magitian.
More gentle and of less malice were those Iudifications and deceptions of
Zedechias the Jew, who lived in the time of Ludovicus Pius. He tossed a man
into the air, and dismembered him peece-meale limb from limb, and after
gathering them together, re-jointed him, and made him whole and sound as at the
first. He seemed also to devour and eat up at once a cart full of hay, the
Carter and horses that drew it, with their teeme-traces and all. But in the
end, for poisoning Charles the Bald King of France, he was drawn to pieces by
four wild horses.

A certain Lady (descended from the Earls of Andegonia a province of France,
from which Family Henry the second, King of England, deriueth his descent) was
a great Inchantresse, and as Polidorus testifies, Polidor.
coming one day into the Church where the holy Sacrament was to be
administered, Virgill.
the Devil her master snatched her up alive, and carried her through a window,
her body nor any part thereof being ever seen after.

Iamblicus, who had for his Magic skill great estimation amongst the people,
at length (as Eunapius has left related) despairing by reason of his former
wicked courses, drank poison and so died.

Empedocles of Agrigentum (who as Suidas says, for those black Gothicke Arts
had great name and fame) when as the Etesij or Eastern winds blew vehement
and high, insomuch that the fruits were in great danger of blasting, caused
certain Asses to be stripped out of their skins, and with diverse unknown
charms and murmurations uttered, commanded them to cease their tempestuous
gusts. To which they seemed to obey; insomuch that he was called Ventorum
Coactor, i. The Tamer of the Winds. Of himself hethus boastingly sung:
Pharmaca queis pellas morbos tristemque senectam,
Percipies, quae cuncta tibi communico soli:
Compescesque truces ventorum rite procellas
Ex orto insanis, etc.


Thus Englished: Medicines from me, diseases how to cure,
And make sad Age in strength long to endure,
Thou shall receive, with things of higher rate,
Which solely I Will to thee communicate.
The stormy Winds thou shall command to cease,
Lest their mad gusts destroy the Earths increase.
I Will teach thee how the rivers to reclaim,
And force their streams to turn from whence they came.
Calmes from the midst of tempests thou shall bring,
Cause timely showers in Harvest or in Spring;
And at thy pleasure make the Welkin clear
Or if thou call'st on dead Ghosts, they shall hear.
But what was the end of this great Boaster? notwithstanding his practice and
proficience, his profound learning and judgment, his great respect that he had
from the Philosophers of his time, and the reverend opinion conceived of the
multitude; The miserable end of Empedociss.
yet this great Artist ended his days most wrerchedly, in the sulphur flames
of AEtna.

In a certain part of Germany we read of a Circulator or jugler, who amongst
many other his illusions, standing in the midst of a throng of people, he would
advance himself into the air, and in his flight a woman hold him fast by the
heel, and behind her a young child hold by one of her heels; and thus they
would sport in the air many hours together. But notwithstanding all his
agilitie and cunning, being brought within the lapse of the Law, for certain
sorceries and witchcrafts, he was burnt at a stake, being then forsook of the
Devil when he had most need of his aid.

Nicetas reports of a Sorcerer called Michael Sidecita: Mich. Sidesita a
Sorcerer.
This Fellow sporting with others upon the battlements of the great Imperial
Palace in Constantinople, in that part that prospects upon the water, he spied
a Lighter or Boat which was laden with pots, pipkins, portingers, dishes, and
all kind of earthen vessels, some plain, some curiously painted with diverse
colors; and to show some sport with those Courtiers that were in his company,
by whispering some Magic charm to himself, he caused the owner of the boat
suddenly to arise from his seat, and with his oar never cease beating the
brittle Vessels until he had almost pownded them to powder. Which done, he
was perceived to recollect himself, and after to wring his hands and pluck
himself by the beard, and to express signs of extraordinary sorrow. And
after being demanded, What madness was in him to make such spoil of his
wares, as where before they were all vendible, now to make them worth nothing?
He sadly answered, That as he was busy at his oar, he espied an huge ougly
Serpent crawling toward him and ready to devour him; who never ceased to
threaten his life till he had broken all his merchandise to pieces, and then
suddenly vanished. This the Conjurer did to make his friends sport, but he was
suddenly after drowned in earnest.

Of Eumus an English Magitian, and his wretched end.
Gulielmus Nubrigensis writes of an English Magition called Eumus, who was
likewise an Heretic, and was wont to show the like prestigious tricks to the
people. He could so effascinat the eyes of the spectators, that he seemed to
feast great Princes, lords, and Barons at his table, furnished with store of
seruitors and waiters extemporarie, dishes with delicates being brought in, and
all the rarieties that could be imagined, with waiting-gentlewomen of
extraordinary beauty and feature attending; the Court Cupboords being richly
furnished with silver and guilt plate. He would likewise show them pleasant
and delightful gardens, decked with all sweet and fragrant flowers; with
green Orchards, planted with trees that bare all manner of ripe fruits even in
the depth of Winter. Yet he that could do all these things could nor preserve
his own life: for being condemned by the Council of Rhemes, he suffered by
fire, notwithstanding his many and loud inuocations on the Devil for help to
deliver him from that torture.

Scafius, the Magition.
Scafius a notorious Sorcerer in the jurisdiction of Berne, would brag in all
places where he came, That to escape the persecution of his enemies, he could
at any time trans-shape himself into the likeness of a Mouse. But when the
Divine Justice thought fit to give a period to his insolences, being watched
by some of his enemies, they espied him in the Sun, sitting in a window that
belonged to a stoue or hot house, sporting himself in that shape: when coming
behind him when he least suspected, they thrust their swords through the
window, and so slew him.

A Magition of Nuburch.
In like manner that great Magition of Newburg, who sold a bottle of hay in
stead of an horse; being twice apprehended, and having twice by the Devils help
escaped out of prison; the third time he was forsaken of his great Patron, and
delivered up unto death.

I will conclude with the great Archi-Mage of these our later times, Cornelius
Agrippa; The miserable end of Cornel. Agrippa.
who when he had spent the greatest part of his hours and age in the search
and acquisition of this black and mystical Science, yet doubted not to write
after this manner: The Magitions by the instigation of the Devil, only in hope
of gain and a little vainglory, have set their minds against God, not
performing any thing that is either good or profitable unto men, but leading
them to destruction and error. In whom whosoever shall place any confidence,
they pluck Gods heavy judgments upon themselves. True it is, that I being a
young man writ of the Magical Art three books in one volume, sufficiently
large, which I entitled, Of Hidden Philosophy; in which wheresoever I have
erred through the vain curiosity of youth, now in my better and more ripe
understanding I recant in this Palinode. I confess I have spent much time in
these vanities; in which I have only profited thus much, that I am able to
dehort other men from entering into the like danger. For whosoever by the
illusion of the Devil, or by the operation of evil Spirits, shall presume to
divine or prophecy by Magic vanities, Exorcismes, Incantations, Amatories,
enchanted Ditches, and other demoniacall actions, exercising blasphemous
charms, spells, witchcrafts and sorceries, or any thing belonging to
superstition and Idolatry; all these are fore-doomed to be tormented in
eternal fire, with Iamnes, Mambre, and Simon Magus.

These things this wretched man writ, who saw the best and followed the worst.
For he continued in that execrable study to his end; and having received a
promise from the Devil, that so often as age came upon him, so often his youth
should be renewed, and so live ever; he commanded his own head to be cut off,
in hope instantly to revive again. But (miserable that he was) he was cheated
in his confidence by that great Deceiuer, in whom he most trusted; by which he
made both soul and body a sudden, though long expected prey to the Devil.

There can scarce a sin be imagined more hateful to God, than Magic: by
which the Covenant made with him being violated, the Sorcerer enters a new
with the Devil; in which open war is proclaimed against God, and a treaty of
Peace first debated and after concluded with Satan. God himself says by the
mouth of his servant Moses, Levit. 20. v. 6.
If any turn after such as work with evil Spirits, and after Soothsayers to
go a whoring after them; I will set my face against that person, and will cut
him off from amongst his people. And again, If a man or woman have a Spirit of
Divination or Soothsaying in them, they shall die the death, they shall stone
them to death, their blood shall be upon them. Read Deutronomie, cap. 18.
verse. 10. Let none be found amongst you that makes his son or his daughter
to go through the fire, or that uses witchcraft, or a regarder of times, or a
marker of the flying of Fowls, or a Sorcerer, or a Charmer, or that
counsels with Spirits, or a Sooth-sayer, or that asks counsel of the
Dead: for all that do such things are abomination unto the Lord; and because
of these abominations the Lord thy God does cast them out before thee. Thus we
see, as well by the Scriptures themselves, as by the Civil Laws of Kingdoms,
all such as shall separate themselves from God, and enter into converse and
fellowship with Satan, are cursed in the act, and ought to be extermined from
all Christian Churches and Commonweales.

The Emblem.
A Moth or Silk-worme creeping from an old stock or trunk of a tree, and
turned unto a Butter-fly. The Motto, Ecce nova omnia, Behold all things are
made new. Complying with that which we read in Saint Paul's second Epistle to
the Corinthians, cap. 5. verse. 17. Therefore if any man be in Christ let him be
a new Creature: old things are passed away, behold all things become new. And
Ephesians. 4.22. That you cast off, concerning the conversation in times past, that
Old Man which is corrupt through the deceiuable lusts, and be renewed in the
spirit of your mind, and put on the New Man, which after God is created unto
righteousness and true holiness.

The Emblem is thus expressed: Truncus iners eruca fuit, nunc alba voluctis,
Ambrosium Coeli corpore gaudet iter:
Antea vermis erat, mutatio quanta videtis
Corporis antiqui portio nulla manet.
Vestis, opes, habitus, convivia foedera mores,
Lingua sodalitium gaudia luctus amor.
Omnia sunt mutanda viris quibus entheus ardor,
Terrhenae decet hos faecis habere nihil.


Thus Paraphrased: A mere trunk was the Silke-worme, now it flies,
A white Bird sporting in the Ambrosiall Skies.
Before a Worm: What a great change is here!
Of the first shape no semblance does appear.
Garments, Wealth, Banquets, Contracts, Manors, Joy,
Love, Language, Fellowship, Change must destroy.
"Such men whom Divine ardor does inspire,
"Must of this terrhene dross quench all desire.


After which change follows eternity. And of the Saints and Elect it may be
said, Parva patiuntur, vt magna potiantur; Small are the things they suffer in
this world, compared with the great things they shall receive in the world to
come. We read, Dan. cap. 12. verse. 2. thus; And many of them that sleep in
the dust of the earth shall awake to everlasting life, and some to shame and
perpetual contempt: and they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
Firmament; and they that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the
Stars for ever and ever. Moreover, Job 19. For I am sure that my Redeemer
lives, and he shall stand the last on the earth. And though after my skin,
worms shall destroy this body; yet shall I see God in my flesh, whom I my
self shall see with mine eyes, and none other for me, etc. AEternus non erit
sopor; Death shall be no everlasting sleep. John 5.28. Marvel not at this; for
the hour shall come in which all that are in the graves shall hear his voice;
and they shall come forth that have done good, unto the resurrection of life;
but they that have done evil, unto the resurrection of condemnation. Saint
Augustine in one of his books says, Resurgent Sanctorum corpora sine vllo
vitio, sine vlla deformitate, sine vlla corruptione, in quibus quanta
facilitas, tanta foelicitas erit. i. The bodies of the Saints shall rise again,
without any defect, without any deformity, without any corruption; in which
there shall be as much felicity as there is facility. And Schoonaeus, ex D.
Hieron.

Seu vigilo intentus studijs seu dormio semper:
Iudicis aeterni nostras tuba personat aures.
Whether I waking study, or sleep, still
The Judges last trumpe in mine ears sounds shrill.
I conclude with Iacobus Catsius, de Eternitate, in these words: Cum suprema
dies rutilo grassabitur igni,
Perque solum sparget fulmina perque salum.
Protinus erumpet gelido pia turba sepulchro,
Et tolletur humo, quod modo vermis erit,
Hic c^i squallor iners, cui pallor in ore sedebat.
Vest micans nivca, conspiciendus erit.
Alma dies optanda bonis, metuenda profanis,
Ades and parvum suscipe Christ gregem.


Thus paraphrased: When the last day with wasting fire shall shine,
Dispersed through earth and sea beyond each line;
Straight from the cold grave shall arise the Just,
And breathe again, who late were worms and dust.
He in whom squallid palenesse lat^ has been,
Clad in white shining Vesture shall be seen.
O Day, the good man's joy, the bad man's fear,
(That Christ his Small Flock may receive) draw near.


A Meditation upon the former Tractate.
I.
BEtimes awake thee,
And unto sad and serious contemplation
Dull Soul betake thee;
Thy self retire,
And after the great GOD of thy Salvation
With care enquire.
Withdraw thy self within thy hearts close center,
Whither, save him alone, let nothing enter.
II.
Then let thine Heart
Thus say; My GOD, let me behold thy face;
Show in what part,
Or in what ground
Of the vast world; what corner, or what place
Thou may be found?
How shall I find thee, if thou be not here?
Or why not present, being ev'rywhere?
III.
It Is Thou excellest,
And in thy great incomprehensible Light
For ever dwell.
How can frail Eyes
A Glory that is so luminous and bright
By Sense comprise?
Yet of thy Grace so much to me impart,
That, though it check my Sight, 'tmay chere my heart.
IV.
Who shall abide
Thine anger, if thou be insenc't with us?
Or if Thou hide
From us thy face,
Poor wretches then how dark and tenebrous
Would be our place?
Without the luster of thy loving kindness,
Grope should we ever in Egyptian blindness.
V.
Great GOD imprint
SERAPH, Vriel.
The Seraphs Love into this Heart, scarce mine;
Once Flesh, now Flint:
Stir up an heat
In this my frozen breast, by Power Divine,
I thee entreat;
And never let thy Grace from me remove,
Since Love is God, and thou my GOD art Love.
VI.
CHERVE, Iophiel.
It was the ambition
Of knowing Good and Evil, that first brought
Man to perdition.
The Cherub who
Is Knowledge, and can teach us as we ought,
Our God to know,
Is He, the first Transgressors did expel,
And chac't from the blessed place, in which they fell.
VII.
THRONES, Zaphki^l.
Just is the Throne;
Judgment is thine, o GOD, and it pertaines
To Thee alone:
In balance even,
Impartial thou weigh'st all that does remain
In Earth or Heaven.
Yet though all Justice be to Thee assigned,
In thy good Grace let me thy Mercy find.
VIII.
As thou art Just,
DOMINAT. Zadkiel.
Beyond all apprehension, all opinion;
Even so we trust,
That since to Thee
With Majesty, likewise belongs Dominion
Of all that be:
Thou, which with mighty sway the World maintainst,
Wilt pity have of those over whom thou raign'st.
IX.
The Virtues they VERTVES, Haniel.

In their high Class upon thy Will attend,
And it obey:
Ready they are
In dangers, those that fear thee to defend,
And still prepare,
In hostile opposition to withstand
Satan, with all his proud infernal Band.
X.
The heavenly Powers POWERS, Raphael.

As Ministers about thy Servants wait,
And at all how'rs
Assistant be,
From such as would our Souls insidiate,
To set us free.
And when these Champions in the List appear,
The Tempter flies, surprised with dastard fear.
XI.
Should the great Prince PRINCIP. Chamael.

Of this vast World muster his hellish Legions,
Us to convince;
From Water, Air,
The Earth, or any of the other Regions,
To make repair:
Where any of the Principats are named,
They leave the place, confounded and ashamed.
XII.
Proud Lucifer ARCHANGELL, Michael.

The first of Angels, bearing name of Light;
Who durst prefer
Himself before
His powerful Maker the Great GOD of Might,
Whom we adore;
Was in an instant by Prince Michael
Cast from high Heaven, into the lowest Hell.
XIII.
ANGEL, Gabriel.
Gabriel, employed
In The Virgin Mothers blessed Annuntiation,
Mankind o're-ioy'd,
He first proclaimed
Unto the World, the LORD of our Salvation,
EMANVEL named:
Who though on earth reviled and dis-esteem'd;
Yet by his Suffering, Mankind he redeemed.
XIV.
O Holy, Holy, Holy,
Three Persons, and but one almighty GOD,
Unto Thee solely
Our Prayers we tender;
And in thy Kingdom hoping for abode,
Freely surrender
Our Souls and Bodies. Whilst we li^e, when die,
Protect us with thy heavenly Hierarchy.
Obsecro Domino ne desperem suspirando, sed respirem sperando.
FINIS.
A general Table.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST TRACTAT.
TO prove there is a God, from the Conscience, the Stars, Earth, Beasts,
Rivers, Sea, Globe, Man. Page 3, 4. Poets and Philosophers concerning the
Deity. 5. The same illustrated by History. 6. Sacrilege punished. 7. Religion
from the beginning, with the multiplicity of gods among the Gentiles. ibid. The
history of Syrophanes. 8. Of Idolatry and Superstition. 9. The original of
Idolatry. 10. Of the Atheist, with arguments against Atheism, 11. Of Chance
and Fortune. 12. Illustrations to confute Atheism. 13. The death of Lucian.
Atheos. 14. A Paraphrase upon Chap. 2. of the Book of Wisdom, against
Atheism. 15. What Atheism is. 18. Several sorts of Atheists. 19. Gratitude
toward God taught us, by Beasts, Birds, etc. 21. Atheists confuted by their
own Oaths, by Reason, etc. ibid. By Philosophy, by Scripture. 22. A Deity
confessed by Idolaters, 23. Proved by acquiring after Knowledge. ibid. By the
Ethnicks, by the Oracle, by the Sybils, etc. 24. Miracles at the birth of
Christ. 25. Herod's Temple and that at Delphos burnt in one day. 26. The sect of
the Sadduces, with ridiculous tenets of the Atheists, proposed and answered.
27. Atheism defined. 31. Laws amongst the Gentiles against Atheism. ibid.
Atheists how punished. 32. Judgments upon Atheism, and of Lucian, 33. Of
Timon, his life, death, etc. ibid. Prodigious effects of Atheism. 34
Holy Days observed amongst the Gentiles, ibid. Women famous for Chastity and
Piety. 35. Mortal men immortallised, 36. Of the Semones, ibid. Of diverse
branded with impiety, 37. Bad Wives, naughty Husbands, wicked mothers,
unnatural Daughters. 38 Of selfe-Murthers and Idolatry, 39 Idols named in the
Scriptures, 40 Strange subtilties of the Devil, 42. Prodegies wrought by the
Devil in Idols, 43 The malice of the Devil. 45 Augures amongst the Greeks and
Romans, 46. Aruspices, Auspices, Augures, 47. The vanity of Augurie, 48. Of
Idolatry in general, 49. An Emblem, 50. A Meditation upon the precedent
Tractat, 53.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND TRACTAT.
Whence the multiplicity of gods came, 59. The Unity of the Godhead, 60.
Arguments to confirm it. 61, 62. The power and operation of the Planets, 63.
The Sybils, of God, 64. The Oracle, of God. 65. The God-hoods Unity not to be
divided, 66. The same illustrated, 67. The Manichees, 68. Man's attributes given
to God, how far they extend, ibid. Gods appellations in Scripture, 70. Of the
Trinity, 71. Reasons why Christ is called Our God, 72. Christ typically
figured in Aaron, 73. Observations of the Trin. in Unity, etc. 74. Orators and
Philosophers of God, 75. Of Gods Vbiquitie, 76. Hiero and Simonides, 78. Proper
names belonging to God, 79. Idolatry brought from Asia into Italy. 80. Reasons
why Atheists doubt of God, 82. Pregnant reasons to prove a Deity, 83. From the
Poets and Philosophers, 84, 85. Apothegmes concerning God, 86. Further of the
Poets, 90, 91, etc. Hierogliphyckes of God, 93 The Vadiani of God, 94
Attributes belonging to God, 95. God in all Tongues styled by four letters,
96. The Fathers, of the Trinity, 98. Philosophers Sentences of God, 101.
Comparison for the further illustration of the Godhood, 104. An Emblem, 106. A
Meditation, 108.
THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD TRACTAT.
THe three divisions of the World, Elements, Terrest. Coelest. Super-Coelest.
111. Cabalists and Rabbis of Moses Ark. 112. A Consimilitude betwixt the Arc
and the World, ibid. A second Consimilitude, 114. A third consimilitude, 115.
The best Philosophers, of the premises, ibid. Creatures participating diverse
Elements. 116. Man^ wisdom, the wisdom of the world, The birth of Wisdom,
117. Her beauty, honor, sweetness, and effects, 118. Her fruitfulness and
power, 119. At what time Time began, 120. The creation of the Sun and Moon,
121. Their several offices, 122. Of the Stars and Planets according to the
Poets, Arctos, major, minor, the Serpent Boots, Corona, Hercules, 123. Lyra,
Olor, Cepheus, Cassiopeia, Andromeda, Perseus, Auriga, Serpentarius, Sagitta,
124. Aquila, Delphinus, Equus, Deltoton, Pistrix, Lepus, Orion, 125. Lelaps,
Procion, Argo, Centaurus, Ara, Hydra, 126. Notius, Galaxia, 127. Of the twelve
Celestial Signs, and first of Aries, ibid. Of Taurus and the Hyades, 128. Of
Gemini and Cancer, 129. Stars called Asini and of the Lion. 130. Of Virgo, or
the Celestial Maid, 131. The seven Deadly Sins, 132. The story of Icarius
and Erigone, 133. Fruits of Drunkenness. 134. A remarkable story of a Dog.
135. Arctu^^us, Canicula, Libra, Scorpio, 137. Sagittarius, 138. Capricornus,
Aquarius, 139. Pisces, 140. The birth of Venus, 141. Of the Worlds original,
ibid. The invention of Letters, Writing, etc. 142. Of Cities. The Ages, 143.
Grammar, Rhethoricke, Logic, Memory, Geometry, Music, etc. 144. Against
those who maintain more Worlds, or the eternity of this, 145. The death of
Aristole, 146. The nobility of Man's conceit, 147. Annus Magnus, Vertens,
Mundanus, ibid. The ridiculousnesse thereof, 148. The definition of the World,
149. The Fathers concerning the World, 150. The Poets of the World, and ruin
thereof, 151. The Philosophers, of the World, 153. The World defined, 154.
Philssophers, of the beginning of the world, 156. Creation, from Atoms,
Number, Infinites, etc. 157. Against Curiosity and vain Questions, 158. Of
the four Elements, 160. The Poets of the Ages, 161. The Golden Age, 162. The
Silver and Brazen Age, 163. The Iron Age, 164. A division of man's Age, 165. Of
the Year called Climatericall, 167. Illustrations of the Signs Celestial,
168. The order of the Stars and the Austral Circle, 169. Draco, Artophilax,
170. Corona, Lyra, the death of Orpheus, etc. 171. The Pleiades, Virgiliae,
etc. 181. Cometa, the motion of the Sun, the Bisext or Leap-yeare, 182. The
Eclipse, rules to know fair or foul weather by the Sun, 183. Philosophers and
Poets of the Moon, 184. Conjecture of weather by the Moon, 185. An Emblem.
186. A Meditation, 189.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FOVRTH TRACTAT.
THe three Ternions of Angels, with their several offices, 194. How they are
concatinated among themselves, 195. Of such as hold there be no Angels nor
Spirits, 196. Their opinions confuted 197 Angels and Spirits proved from
Dreams, ibid. The Dreams of Simonides, Sylla, M. Artorius, Calphurnia, Julius
Caesar, Amilcar, etc. 198. The Old and New Testament of Dreams, 199. Angels
visible, and of evil Spirits, 200. Rabbi Achiba concerning Spirits, 201. Abram
Avenzara and Rabbi Azariel, of Love and Hate. 202. A story of an Emperor and
two Beggars, 203. Of Poets and Poetry, ibid. A Meditation of Death, 204. Honor
due to Poets, and done unto them of old, 205. A nomination of some of our
modern Poets, 206. Buchanans complaint, that the Muse is so neglected, 207.
Buchanans Epigram, 208. Spirits Saturnine, Jovial, and Mercurial, 209. The
Essence of Angels, 210. Sundry opinions of the Fathers concerning Angels, 211,
To prove them incorporat, 212. The Lateran Council of Angels, 213. The
difference of their Knowledge, 214. Four Angels over the four winds, ibid.
Over every heaven or Sphere, 215. Angels of the Zodiac their offices and
names, ibid. Four Angels over the four Elements, 216. The object of Gods will
in the Creation, 219, Angels the first creatures, made with the light pure: the
charge they have over Man, ibid. Several employments of Angels in the
Scriptures, 220. Dreams defined, 221. Eudemus, Galen, Q. Catulus, Sophocles,
Alexand. Philosoph. Sfortia, M. Antonius, Torellus, Alcibiades, Croesus,
Atterius Ruffus, Cambyses, Aspatia, Tit. Attinius, their dreams, 223^ etc.
Histories concerning predictions, of Nero, Philip of Macedon, etc. 226.
Dioclesian, Henry King of France, 227. Plato's opinion of Spirits, 228. Spirits
of diverse qualities, and of the Socraticum Daemonium, 229. Histories of the
same, ibid. S. Augustine of the power of Spirits, 230. Strange opinions of
Spirits, and that none can be mortal, 231. A discourse of Death from the
Poets, 232. From the Philosophers, 233. From the Fathers, 234. A Dialogue
concerning death, interpreted from Lucian, 235. Of Constancy in death, 240. A
contented life, 241. Further of Poetry and Poets, 242. A nomination of many
famous Greek Poets, 243. The misery that attends the Muse, illustrated by the
sad fate of many ancient Poees, 245. Ioh. Campanius to that purpose, 248. M.
Edm. Spencers complaint, 249. Faustus Andrelinus the like, 250. A Spanish
Proverb interpreted, 251. That Spirits can transport men or beasts, 252.
Histories of strange transportations, 253. A story of a Centurion, 254. Of a
Captive, 255. A Nobleman of Insubria, 256. Transportation of Witches, 257.
Antonius Leo, 258. Paulus Grillandus of Witches, 259. Medea, 260. The velocitie
of Spirits. 261. Histories to prove the same, 262. An Emblem. 263. A
Meditation, 266.
THE CONTENTS OF THE FIFTH TRACTAT.
GOds Power, Wisdom, and Goodness in the Creation, 271. The concordance
between the Seraph and the Primum Mobile. 272. Betwixt the Cherubin and the
Starry heaven, 274. Betwixt the Thrones and Saturn, ibid. The Golden World,
275. The concordance betwixt the Dominations and Jupiter, ibid. Of the Virtues
with Mars, 276. The maleuolent aspect of Mars, 277. Of the Potestates with the
Sun, 278. Of Stars that receive names from the Sun, ibid. The Trinity in
Unity figured in the Sun, 279. Concord betwixt the Principats and Venus,
ibid. The Arch Angels and Mercury, 280 Betwixt the Angels and the Moon, 281.
The Premises illustrated, 282. Three Religions most professed, 283. What the
Jews say for themselves, 284. Wherein the Mahumetan opposes the Christian,
ibid. Mahomets imposterous Miracles, Saints, and Relics, 285. The Creation of
things according to Mahomet: and of his Paradise, 286. The first Sow, according
to Mahomet, and why Sowes flesh is not eaten in Paradise. 287. The first Mouse,
the first Ca^, and the joys of Heaven, according to Mahome^, 288. His palpable
and absurd ignorance, with his opinion of Angels, 289. Aridiculous tale in
Mahomets Alcaron, 290. Of the Priscillians and Manichees, exploded Heretics,
291. Wherein blessedness consists, according to the Manichees, 292. Of
Truth, 293. The Philosophers and Fathers, of Truth, 294. The Poets, of Truth,
295. An exce^lent discourse of Cardinal Pascalis, of Truth, 296. Truth
constant, and subject to no change, 297. Religion grounded upon Truth, 298.
Religion defined, against those that make it a cloak for hypocrisy, 299.
Three opinions concerning Christ, 300. Josephus, Pontius Pilat, etc witnesses
of Christ, 301. An Epistle of Pliny to Trajan the Emperor, concerning
Christians, 302. Diverse Ethnieke Princes who favored the Christians, 303.
Caesar Maximinus his oration concerning Christians. And of Cublay Emperor of
Tartaria, 304. What a Miracle is, 306. Wonders in Nature, 307. Of Christ's
Miracles, 308. Origin, Greg. Chrisost. etc. of the Virgin Mary, 309. Christ
miraculous in his birth, life, doctrine, and death, 310, etc. Twelve grievous
sufferings of Christ, 315. Of the great Eclipse at his death, 316. The life and
death of Mahomet, 319, etc. Beza his Epigram of Religion, 322. Pope Greg. of
Christ's death, 323. An Emblem, 324. A Meditation, 327.
THE CONTENTS OF THE SIXTH TRACTAT.
A Discourse of the Heart of man, 331. The inconstancy of Man's Heart, 332. How
many ways the Heart of man is insidiated, ibid. How it may be reconciled to
the Creator, 333. Sundry opinions concerning the creation of Angels, 334.
Angels created with the Light, 335. Lucifers glory in his Creation, 336. He is
figured in Tyrus, 337. The creation of Man, the Soul, the Body, and what Man
is, 338. The Incarnation of Christ revealed to the Angels, 339. Lucifers
Rebellion the cause thereof. The Battle betwixt Michael and the Devil, 340.
The Fall of Angels, and the weapons used in the Battle, 341. How long Lucifer
remained in Glory, 342. The power he has since his Fall, ibid. The Fall of
Adam, his offense and punishment, 343. Of Hell, according to the Poets.
Tibullus, 344. Virgil, Seneca, Valor. Flacchus, Lucretius, etc. 345. Of Hell,
according to the Scriptures and Fathers, 346. The torments of Hell, 347. The
several denominations of Hell, ibid. Lucians Dialogue called Nycio Manteia, i.
an Answer from the Dead, 348. The cause of Menippus travel to Hell, 350. The
Civil Laws compared with the doctrines of the Poets, ibid. The vanity of
Philosophers, and their wranglings discovered, 351. Lucians meeting with the
Magition Mithrobarzanes, 352. His superst^tions^ and Incantations discovered
and derided, 353. A description of his passage to Hell. 355. Of Minos the
Judge, with his proceeding against the Prisoners, 355. Diverse great men
arraigned and sentenced, 357. A description of the torments, 358. Of the Heroes
and demy-gods, 359. The equality that is in Hell, 360. A comparison of the
life of man, ibid. Great men on earth how vilified in Hell, 361. The estate of
Socrates, Diogenes, and the like, in hell, 362. A Decree made in Hell against
rich men, ibid. Tyresius his counsel, What life is safest to lead on earth,
363. Menippus his passage from hell, 364. Further discourse of the Heart of
man, 365. Manlius of the ambition of Man's heart, 366. The instabilitie and
corruption thereof, 367. Further, of the Creation of the Angels, when and
where, 368. The Angelical nature how understood, 369. Diverse questions and
difficulties concerning Angels reconciled, 370. The order that God used in the
Creation, 371. Angels immutable, and that no Soul but has an Angel to attend
it, 372. What best pleases the Angels. They govern Nations. Angel a name of
office, not of nature, 373. Nazianzen of the Angels, 374. Of the forming and
fashioning of Man, ibid. The three dignities of the Soul, and the end why Man
was created, 375. Three great gifts bestowed on Man in the Creation, ibid.
Three opposite evils, 376 A just measure of man's body, ibid. Three sorts of
living Spirits created by God. 377, Of the Soul of man, 378. The Philosophers
concerning the Soul, 379. Johannes de Canis a Florentine Physician, 380. The
Poets of the Soul, 381. Of Man in general, 382. Against such as deny the
Resurrection, 383. Difference betwixt the lives of Beasts, Men, and Angels,
ibid. Of the birth of Man, 384, The Ethnicks of Man, ibid. Homer with other
Poets, of Man, 385. Adages and Emblems of Man, 386. Hierogliphycks of Man, 387.
Ethnicks of Hell, 388. The Rabbis of the local place of Hell, 389. The figure
of Moloch, 390 Lucians Dialogue entitled Nyciomanteia with Sir Thom. Mores
Argument thereupon, 390, etc. The acts of Alexander, Hannibal, and Scipio. 392,
etc, A discourse of hell fire, 397. Reasons proving the perpetuity of the
torments, 398. An Emblem, 399. A Meditation, 401.
THE CONTENTS OF THE VII. TRACTAT.
Wisdom contemplateth the wonderful works of God, 407. The Sun, 408. The
Moon, Stars, Rainbow, Snow, Lightning, Hail, Mountains, Winds, Thunder,
Rain, Frost, Ice, etc, 409, etc. The quality and condition of malignant
Spirits, 410. Devils retain their first natural faculties 411. The degrees
among Devils, of which Lucifer is prime, 412. Lucifers figure and description,
413. Prioritie observed among the Devils, with necessary observations, 415.
The Devils strive to imitate God. 410. An excellent history expressing the
instabilitie of Fortune, ibid. The original of Idolatry illustrated from the
former history. 435. Nine Classes of Devils, with their several Orders, 436.
The sundry names of Devils, and what they signify, 437. Of the number of
Angels that fell, more Angels than men, more men than Angels, 438. Of the
motion of Angels, ibid. The distance betwixt the eighth heaven and the earth,
439. All intelligent Substances are incorporeall. 440 Satan and the evil
Demons bounded in their malice, ibid. The admirable knowledge f Spirits, 441.
How and wherein their knowledge is limited, 442. Their equinocating answers in
the Oracles, ibid. Good Angels cannot err, 443. Of Contracts made betwixt man
and Satan, ibid. The manner of the devils temptations set down, the better to
a^oid them, 444. Pasetis a great Magition, ibid. Several Magic books fathered
upon good and godly men, ibid. Several metals ascribed to every sundry
Planet, 445. The vainness of these superstitions discovered, 446 All Magic
condemned at Paris, 447. Of wilful ignorance, 448. Solomon, of wilful
Ignorance, 449. The excellency of Knowledge, 450. Of the Knowledge of our
selves, 451. The Poets, of Selfe-knowledge, 452. The difference betwixt
knowledge and wisdom, 453. The etymology of Wisdom, ibid The excellency of
Wisdom, 454. The wisdom of the Just, ibid. The Poets, of Wisdom, 455.
Wise and witty sayings, 457. Ianus Vitalis of ancient Rome, 459. Sundry
Apothegmes of Orators, Captains, and Emperors, 460. Of things prodigious, 462.
Of Prodegies happening before the death of Princes, 463. God made not death, 464.
Adam, Eve, and the Serpent, 465. Of Spirits that challenge to themselves Divine
worship, 466. The Sarronides of Gaul, 467. Humane Sacrifices performed at Rome,
468. The antiquity of Magic, as being before the Flood, 469. The several
sorts of Magic, ibid. Of the Witch Hercyra, and the Magition Artesius, 470.
All Magic includes a compact with the devil, 471. A strange history of one
Theophilus, ibid The manner of homage done to the Devil. 472 Of Pythagoras and
the Magition Iamnes, 473 A story of the Count of Vestravia, 474. The Witch
Oenoponte and others, 475. Of Spirits called Paredrij, enclosed in Rings, and
of such as used them, 476. Of women that have changed their sex, 477. Histories
to that purpose, 478. The history of Machates and Philemium, 479. Spirits that
have possessed dead bodies, 480. A discourse of Astrology, 481. Philosophers
concerning it, 482. Against Iudicatorie Astrology, 483. Of Mathesis or
Mathema, 484. An Emblem, 485. A Meditation, 488.
THE CONTENTS OF THE EIGHTH TRACTAT.
OF Demons in general, 495 Homer, Tresmegistus, and others, of Demons, 496
Their power and practice, 497. Powers and Potestates of the air, 499. Spirits
called Incubi and Succubae, 500. A story of an Incubus and a Succubus, 501.
Spirits of the four Elements, 502. Spirits of fire, and strange prodegies,
503. Of Ignes fatui, Ambulones, etc. 505. Spirits of the air, and strange
prodegies wrought by them, 506. Spirits of the water, 507. A strange history
of two Scottish noblemen, 508 Of diverse great Magitions, 509. Spirits of the
earth, Genij, Lares, Larvae, Lemures, etc. 510. Discourse of Spectars, 511.
Further of Paredrij or Familiar Spirits, 512. A pleasant story of John
Teutonicus, ibid. A strange story of a familiar Spirit, 514. Of Galeatius
Sforza and others, 515, etc. Of Pride, 519. The effects of Pride, 520. Of
Pambo, and the pride of Domitian Caesar, 522. Of Sapor King of Persia, and
others, 523. Of Ingratitude, 525, etc. Of Michael Traulus and others, 528.
Scripture and the Poets, of Ingratitude, 529. Of Humility, 530. The Fathers,
of Humility, 531. The Poets, of Humility, 532. Of Gratitude, 534. Histories
of Gratitude, 535. An Hierogliphycke, 536. An Emblem, 537. The Poets extolling
Gratitude, 538. The story of a Votaresse called Christian, 539. Of the
Mahumetan Neffesoglij. 540. A strange accident happening in the Diocese of
Cullein, 541. A strange and miraculous Birth, ibid. Diverse other strange
relations, ibid, etc. Spirits have no power of the heavens nor stars, 543. A
strange tale of Spectars, 544. Stories of the Spirits of the air, and of the
Indian Magi, 545. Strange prodigious things in the air, 546. Of Bruno Bishop
of Herbipol. 547. The manner how the Duke of Venice yearly marieth the Ocean,
ibid. A strange story of Hotherus king of Suetia and Daciae, 548. Strange
things of watery Spirits, 549. Diverse sorts of Spirits of the earth, 550. A
strange disease as strangely cured, 551. Of Spectra Meridiana, or Noone-Diuels,
ibid. Discourse of Alastores, 552. The Lamiae or Larvae, and stories concerning
them, 553. A desperate adventure of two Bohemian knights, 554. An Emblem, 555. A
Meditation, 558.
THE CONTENTS OF THE NINTH TRACTAT.
THe power and strength of Wine, 564. Of the King, ibid. Of Women, 565. Of
Truth, 566. Of Zijm, Ohim, Satyrs, Ostriches. etc. 567. Of Subterren Spirits
called Cobali, 568, Spirits the cause of earthquakes, 569. Of treasure kept by
Spirits, 570. A strange attempt of a Botcher, 571. A strange story of Cabades
King of Persia, 573. Of Spirits called Luci-fugi, Hob-goblins, Robin
Good-fellowes, Fairies, etc. 574. A strange story reported by Fincelius, 575.
Of Dacius Bishop of Mediolanum, ibid. A strange story of one recovered to life,
576. A pleasant story of a Spirit of the Buttry, 577. Certain marks to know
good Spirits from bad, 580. What shape Devils may assume, and what not, ibid.
How evil Spirits may be known, 581 Of Music, and the velocitie of the
heavens and Planets, 582. The ambition of man to search into hidden secrets,
583. Several opinions of Philosophers touching God, ibid. Their opinions of the
Soul, 585. And the immortality thereof, 586. Of Covetousness, 589. The Poets
of Covetousness, 590. The sordidnesse thereof, 591. The power of Gold, 592.
The Fathers, of Avarice, 594. Historical examples of Avarice, 595. Covetous
Emperors, 596. An Hierogliphycke, Emblem, etc. of Covetousness, 597. The
Witches of Warboys, 598. Of several kinds of Spirits, 599. A strange story of
a Nobleman of Silesia, 600. Diverse stories of Sylvan Spirits, 601, etc. The
seven Sleepers, 606. A strange story of a Spirit, 607. Anton. Laverinus and the
Devil, 609. Miserable ends of sundry Magitions, 610. Empedocles, Michael
Sidecita, and others, 613, 614. The miserable end of Cornel. Agrippa, 615. An
Emblem, 616. A Meditation, 619.
FINIS.
Errata.
Page 9, Lin. 21. read effect. p, 12, l. 4. r. one p. 14. l 13. r. Theognis.
p. 30. l. 4. r. summus. p. 51, l. 18. add puella. p. 61, l. 20. a mistake in
the star. p. 148. l. 16. r. tenent. p. 188. l. 1 r. Vrbem. p. 190, l. 30. r.
blessed. p. 200, l. 7. for two, r. three. p. 203. l. 26, r. the other. p. 212,
l. 20, r. or. p. 242, l. 1. then, r when. p. 263, l. 35. r globus. p. 264,
larco, r. lurco, nique, r inque. ni, r. in. p. 283, l. 28. r. symptoms. p. 297,
l^ 31. r. floods. p. 349, l. 22, r. tie. p. 382, l. 18. r. terram. p. 400. l.
30. r. Acherontis. p. 433, l. 10. alas^e, r. a loss. p. 439, l. 19. aine, r.
pain. p. 485, l. vlt. r. cupessas. p. 506, l. 11. r. tons. p. 538, l. 17. r.
rependere. l. 24. r. medullis. p. 557, l. 4. r. meus. p. 574, l. 3, add sends.


