THE CHRISTIANS Liue-loode.

Laid forth in a Sermon upon Math. 6.33.

BY SAMVEL HIERON.

Prou. 10.3. The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous.

LONDON, Printed by Edward Griffin for William Butler, and are to be sold at
his shop under S. Dunstanes Church in Fleet Street. 1617.

To my Worshipful good friend HENRY CHAMPERNOWNE of Modbury Esquire.
SIR, that which of late I commended in a Sermon as a gift, to a couple of my
friends, upon their marriage day, as the best thing I had to bestow on them, for
their then (as we call it) entering upon the world, the same (being overcome by
entreaties to put it into print) do I here present to you, as a meet implement
for you at your now first beginning to keep house. If God shall move your
heart (as I trust he has begun to do, and will more) to the entertainment of
that Lesson, which is the principal subject of this Sermon, it will bring that
upon you, which is only able to make you rich, ( the blessing of God Pro.
10.22.
) and be better to you then all that outward estate, which either you already
have, or are in possibility hereafter to enjoy Whatsoever of the worlds is now
yours, either in possession or in expectation, may be either wasted greatly, or
lost wholly, but that which Paul calls the power of godliness 2 Timothy 3.5.
, is that durable riches which the Pro 8.18
Wiseman speaks of, and that Luke 10.42.
good part which can never be withdrawn. As therefore in your childhood (in
the seasoning whereof with the rudiments of Religion and Learning, my self by
Gods providence bare a part) by the ingenuity of your disposition, and
tractablenes in the best things, you gave much hope, and have since both
answered and confirmed it by shunning the atheistical profanenes of these
godles times, so go on I pray you, and increase, and whatsoever the guise of
others be, who think religion is to be made show of, no where but at Church,
yet lay you the foundation of your family, with the noble resolution of that
worthy Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord Ios. 24.15.
. Hereof this Sermon may be unto you, when you shall please to look thereon, a
very fit Remembrance. Which I pray you, that it may remain with you, as a
pledge and testimony of his sincere love, who intends no other but to be
ever,

Yours in his best affections, Sam: Hieron.
Modbury 24 No: 1616.
MATTHEW. 6.33. But seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and
all these things shall be ministered unto you.


IT is a common guise at marriages, The preaching of this Sermon at a Marriage
gave occasion to this preamble.
that the friends of the married, do present them with gifts, to hansell (as
they call it) their entrance into that estate, and to furnish them with some
necessaries toward house. Being therefore invited as a friend to these
Nuptials, and withal entreated as a Minister, to season the business with some
word of exhortation, I thought it best to conform my self (in this) to
custom; and to come in with my gift also, not of silver and gold, but of such
matter and metal (as Solomon speaks of) which is more precious than pearls,
and with which all that can be desired, does not deserve to be compared Pro.
3.15.
. And whereas the best things which men usually bestow, be such as perish with
the use, are subject to mothes and cankers and thieves, and are not able to
protect a man from that necessity which is wont to surprise like an armed man
Pro. 24.34.
; I shall recommend unto you who are now entering upon the world (if you please
to entertain it) such an implement, which shall (like the Arc to Obed-edom 2 Samuel 6.11.
) bring a blessing upon you and all yours, and assure you of that which all the
wealth in the world cannot ascertaine, namely, that although you should double
the age of Methushelah, yet you should never want a competency to maintain
you. Seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. This in brief for the reason inducing me
to choose this text. Out of which as I shall deliver that which will be most
for your good, and the surest stock for you to begin upon, so I shall also
teach that which shall be for the best behoof of every one in this Assembly,
that so none may go away unspoken to. For the verse it self, (as it stands
here in this Chapter, and is to be viewed as a limme thereof) it is a
Direction following upon a Correction. The state of the Text.
The correction, was for the abatement of a distracting and heart-diuiding care
for outward things. The direction, is for the ordering of every man's aim and
endeavor toward that, which is the main of all. The thoughts of a man will be
ever working, and they will be always active upon some subject. It was not
enough therefore for our Savior to take them of, and (as it were) to vnhange
them from the world, unless he did also, fix them other-where; Therefore
lifting them from the world and the things thereof, he setts them to work upon
the kingdom of God and his righteousness; as honorable a remove as was that of
Joseph's, from serving in a prison, to command as the second in a kingdom. Thus
in teaching, Inhibitions and injunctions must be coupled: Inhibitions to pull
back from evil: Injunctions to quicken to a better course. There were two
voices to Paul, the one, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me Act 9.4.
; the other, go into the City and it shall be told thee what thou shall do
ver. 6.
; not this, but this, to these two heads may a man refer all preaching. This
for the connection. Now for the Text: in every man's eye and apprehension it
diuides it self into two parts: The division of it.
The first I may call a Charge, binding us to an heavenly care. The second a
Discharge, because it tends to the freeing of us from a worldly care. In the
Charge we are first to take notice of the substance of that duty which is
pressed, and then next of a maine Circumstance in performing it. The substance
of the duty is to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness. Here touching
the action required, I shall not need to say much; I suppose we are none of us
to seek, what it is to seek: Who does not apprehend it, to be a very diligent
and busy kind of enquiry; such as was his in the parable for his sheep, or
hers for her groate Luke 15.48.
? Concerning the matter to be sought, it requires more opening; it is Gods
kingdom, and his righteousness. For Gods kingdom, it is a term in scripture:
What is the kingdom of God.
sometimes more largely taken, sometimes more straightly: more largely, it is
that ample authority, and unlimited sovereignty, which God has and exercises
over all his creatures, both in heaven and in earth; whereof is mention Psalm.
103.19. The Lord has prepared his throne in the heavens: and his kingdom
rules over all: more straightly, it is that command over his Church, over his
chosen generation, his peculiar people; which is so often ascribed to Christ,
as he is the Mediator betwixt God and us: of this spoke the Angel, bringing
tidings of Christ's birth, Luc. 1.33.
He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there
shall be no end: of this did David prophecy in terming Christ the King set up by
God, upon his holy mountain Zion Ps. 2.6.
. God according to the election of grace has called out some from the rest of
mankind, whom he will save, all that is done for the good of these is the
kingdom of Christ. This kingdom is considerable either as it is in gathering
and sitting in this life, (and is termed so the kingdom of grace) or as it is
in accomplishment in the life to come, (and so is called the kingdom of
glory.) And this is the kingdom of God properly intended here; What it is to
seek the kingdom of God.
so that to seek the kingdom of God, is, to endeavor by an entrance into
grace, to gather assurance of an interest into glory. What is the righteousness
of God.
Now concerning that which is called the righteousness of God, which is here
annexed as a thing to be sought for with this kingdom; Know we this brifely
that by it here, is not meant that essential righteousness whereby God is in him
self righteous, which righteousness sometime betokens his truth and fidelity
in the performance of his promises (as 2. Tim. 4.8. 1 Ioh. 1.9.) sometimes his
iustnes and uprightness in the administration of the world, which is that
doing right which Abraham spoke of Genesis 18.25.
, but here the righteousness of God is taken much after the same sense, as it is
Romans 1.17. and Phil. 3.9 namely for that righteousness, by which man, who is a
base, vile, and polluted sinner in himself, is accepted righteous before God,
and is justified in his sight. This is called Gods righteousness, because as it
is acceptable to God, so it is wholly wrought in man by God through Christ, man
conferring nothing thereunto. Now out of this righteousness, by which a man is
justified before GOD, streameth another which discovers it self by the
fruits of righteousness before men; For those whom the Lord by the
righteousness of faith discharges from the damnation of sin, the same he sets
at liberty by his spirit from the dominion of sin; so that they have their
fruit in holiness, so many as are in the end to have eternal life. This phrase
then touching the righteousness of this kingdom is added but as an illustration
of the former. For to seek the kingdom of God, is to seek the righteousness
of God, that is, to seek a passage through grace into glory, is to endeavor to
be accepted as righteous before God by Jesus Christ, and to shine as a light in
the way of righteousness among men. And this interpretation wipeth away that
base calumny which Maldonate the Jesuit in his Comment upon this place uses
against Calvin. Calvin says that righteousness may indifferently be referred
either to God or to kingdom; whereupon the Jesuits triumph, because (his) in
the Greek is of the masculine gender, whereas kingdom is the feminine.
whereof Calvin could not be ignorant; and therefore went not about to make a
gra^maticall agreement betwixt the words, but to declare a concord of sense;
and to show (that which is true) that the righteousness of Gods kingdom and
Gods righteousness are all one; as indeed it is. For that righteousness which
becomes a subject of this kingdom is such, as by which there is justification
before God, and fruit of sanctification before men. God, and the kingdom of
God require one and the same righteousness. And now having (as it were) paued a
way for that which I am to deliver, by giving the sense of the words, I come to
that which is the doctrine of this place; which is.

Doct. 1.
That the things which concern the soul, both for the present and future good
thereof must be enquired after and sought for with especial care. This is the
very pith and marrow of this charge. We may suppose that we heard our Savior
saying thus: You are full of care and thoughtfulness about many things, your
plots and proiects are spread, and stretched, and enlarged many ways, what you
shall eat, what you shall drink, wherewith you shall be clothed, you extend
your desires like Hell which cannot be satisfied, and so that you might have
your full lading of the things of this present world, it seems as if you would
no more; one thing is truly and simply necessary, and in it you be pitifully
negligent; Behold God offers you a Kingdom, the glory whereof (if you had
eyes to see it) is able to dim and to obscure all the glittering pomp of all
earthly Kingdoms, to the meanest subject thereof: not Solomon in all his
royalty is meet to be compared, the appurtenances whereto, and the
privileges whereof are such as pass understanding, and do exceed all that
you can ask or think, there is righteousness and peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost, pull away your ouereger and too violent endeavors from these baser
things, and fix them upon this; this is that only thing which is worth the
seeking for; Thus is the purpose of the place, thus is the doctrine. Now for
the point it self, it shall be no hard task for me, to confirm it by the
Scripture; what else but this endeavor and care for heavenly things, can be
intended in these terms of seeking for wisdom, and knowledge as silver, of
searching for it as for treasure Pro. 2.4.
, of taking the kingdom of heaven by force Math. 11 10.
, of pressing into it Luke 16.16.
, of laboring for the meat which endures to everlasting life Ioh 6 27
, of striving to enter in at the strait gate Luke 13.24.
, of running to obtain 1. Cor. 9.24.
, of following hard toward the mark, for the price of the high calling of God
etc. Phil. 3.34.
of giving all diligence 2. Pet. 1.15.
; what is here meant in all these but that seeking for the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, which is here persuaded? Is not this that treasure hid in
the field, that pearl of great price for the parchase whereof all is sold Math.
13 44 46.
, was not this it which Moses valued more then the treasures of Egypt Heb.
31.26.
, and which David chose rather then the abundance of wheat and wine, which the
men of the world so much affected Psalm. 4 6.7.
, and which Paul did account as loss, and judge as dung that he might win
Phil. 3 8.
And why are the elect of God called a generation of seekers Psa. 24.6
, but in respect of their inquiries after this, according as it is the brand of
the ungodly that they seek not Psa 10.4.
. And surely if either the excellency of a matter, or the necessity thereof,
may be of force to persuade inquiry, and to stir up care, neither of them is
wanting, in the things which Christ here commends unto our seeking. For
excellency; The very name of a Kingdom argues worth: the Devil had hope to
prevail even with Christ with the offer of Kingdoms Luk 4.5.
, the addition of, God, (the kingdom of God) adds to the dignity, what
thoughts are able to reach to the excellency of such a Kingdom, to which God
is entitled? The kingdoms of the earth will endure no partners, there is one
only King, all the rest be subjects. The limbs of this Kingdom are Kings
all. Christ Jesus has made us Kings unto God even his father Reu. 1.6.
, even in this life they are all through him more then conquerors Romans 8.37.
, and they shall each have a crown of righteousness at the day of his
appearing 2. Tim. 4.8.
. Let us look a little, upon the particular excellency of each degree of this
kingdom. The kingdom of grace, which is his Church here on earth, gathered by
the preaching of the Gospel; Glorious things are spoken of thee (says David)
thou city of God Ps. 8.7.3.
, It is the joy of the whole earth, the City of the great King, in the
palaces whereof God is known for a refuge Ps 48.2.3.
, the members of it, are an holy nation, a selected company 1. Pet. 2.9.
, the people that dwell therein shall have their iniquity forgiven Is. 33.24.
, they are as the first fruits of his Creatures Iam 1.18
, they which wrong them, evil shall come upon them says the Lord Ier. 2.3.
, God gives his Angels charge over them Psa. 91.21
, and is unto them as a wall of fire round about Zach. 2.5.
, It is the honor of Kings to be nourcing fathers, and of Queens to be
nourcing mothers unto it Is. 49.23.
. Thus and more then thus, is the kingdom of grace. Now for the Kingdom of
glory, which way shall I begin to declare the excellency of it, when as the
things, which neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into
the heart of man, God has prepared for them that love him 1 Cor. 2.9.
? This I may say in a word that look what difference there is in proportion
betwixt the Cope of heaven, and the earth, which respectively to it, is but as
a prick in the midst of a Center, the same and much more there is betwixt the
glory of all the kingdoms of the world united together (if it were possible)
into one, and that which the Apostle calls the glory which shall be showed
hereafter Romans 8.18.
. Better with a kind of silent astonishment to admire it, then to take on us
either to discribe it, or to comprehend it in particular. Now shall not such a
thing as this be reputed worthy of our best care? What do men many times to
obtain a corruptible crown 1 Cor. 9.25.
, Strange things are done out of the desire and hope of kingdoms. It is said
in story, that when Nero his mother being with child with him; asked of the
Astrologers what her son should come unto, and was told that he should
reign, Interimat modo imperet.
but kill his mother, said she, Let him kill me so he may be King: thus
ambitious was she of a Kingdom for her son. This for the excellency of the
kingdom. Now the righteousness here spoken of, it is excellent too, else why
does the holy Ghost call it a robe of righteousness, and a garment of
salvation, with which who so is clad is decked like a bridgrome, and tired as a
Bride with Jewels Is. 61.10.
, and how can that be other then excellent, by which an ugly sinner, is made
holy and unblameable, and without fault in Gods sight Col. 1.22.
. I have briefly pointed you to the excellency of the thing commended to our
seeking; Now let me show you the necessity too. The necessity in a word is
such, that without admittance into this Kingdom, without partaking of this
righteousness there is no possibility for a man's soul to be saved in the day
of Christ. For upon all those that are without the pale of this kingdom shall
be executed that sentence, bring them hither and stay them before me Luc. 19.27
, and know ye not (says the Apostle) that the unrighteous, such as have no
righteousness, shall not inherit the kingdom of God 1 Cor. 6.9.
, and now, what says Christ? What shall it profit a man, though he should
win the whole world and loose his own soul Mat. 16.26.
, were it not better for a man that he had never been borne, then to have his
portion in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone which is the second
death Reu: 21.8.
? Look then of what necessity, salvation, and happiness, and life eternal
is, of the same is this kingdom of God, and this righteousness here spoken
of. If it be necessary for a man to seek to be saved, it is necessary to
seek the present and future good of his soul by laying the foundation of his
hope of glory, upon his now being in the state of grace. What can deserve the
very best, and as it were the very quintissence of a man's care if not this?
Thus is the Doctrine. I come now to the use.

The Use of this Doctrine, The Use.
I will begin with a reproof; go on in with an exhortation, and perfect with
a direction. The reproof is of the general, yea and the intolerable neglect
of that, in which (according as has been showed) there ought to be such an
especial care. Men's ordinary carriage in and about the matters of the soul,
in and about this Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, sauoureth of an
opinion, that either it is one of the most needless, or one of the most easy
things that is, to be saved. If it were indeed the most superfluous business
and such as did ask the lest labor for performance, I do not see how there
could be less diligence and more cold endeavors bestowed about it then there
is. Truth is, these are seeking times: every man is busy in seeking something
or other; Here is one seeks for profit, another for delight, another for
revenge, another for a new fashion; but how may a man run (with Jeremy) too
and fro by our streets and inquire, before he can meet with one, who
thoroughly and to the purpose seeks the kingdom of God and the appurtenances
thereunto? For one serious and deep thought, about matters of an heavenly
nature, we have even thousands about these three worldly specialties mentioned
by Saint John 1 Epist. 2.16.
The lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Not a man
among many, but would rather omit an opportunity for his soul, then not embrace
an occasion falling in at the same time, for the improuement of his commodity,
for the tickling and feeding of his delight, for the upholding of that which
he terms his reputation among men. It is a rare thing, when an earthly
business, especially when it carries an appearance and a probable show of
some quick and sensible advantage is made to give place, that so a means of
good and edifying to the soul, may be entertained, but it is an ordinary
thing to see spiritual occurrences, in which God offers his kingdom and his
righteousness unto us, iustled aside, and made to stand by, for the sake of a
present contentment to the outward man; In one word, matters of the soul are
so followed with that sleightnesse, with that seldomnes, with that remissenes,
as if they were only of the By, and matters of the world are plied with that
egernesse, with that industry, with that intention both of mind and body, as
if they were the maine, or as if God had made man only to that end to have a
portion in this life, and to graspe in as much of the world as it is possible.
Does not this deserve reproof? If in any thing a Preacher should make his
words like goads Eccl. 12.11.
, it may well be in this; Folly is too gentle a term to call it by, madness in
the highest degree, is not so foul a name as it deserves: a man to bestirre
himself with the strength of his whole endeavors, for that which cannot add
so much as a dram me to his happiness, nay which may quickly hazard him in the
principal, and in the mean time to put that to an adventure which concerns
the eternal good of his soul and body, can we devise what one name to give
it which may serve to express the grossness of it as it is? understand ye
unwise among the people, and ye fools when will you be wise? with what charm
might a man devise to conjure out this retch-lesse and unworthy spirit, which
makes Hell to enlarge it self, by daily carrying headlong into it such a world
of souls. Let me entreat you, to do your selves every one that right, as to
consider your selves concerning this, to see whether this be not your very
fault, that you fail in care for the things that concern the Kingdom of God,
and that in you a base hungry care, for terrene commodities, does even eat up
and devour, the care of heavenly things, even as the lean Kine, in Pharaohs
dream swallowed up the fat Genesis 41.20.
, and if it be so, then, say not to me as Ahab to Eliah, have thou found me o
mine enemy? but rather as David did to Abigail, Blessed be the Lord God of
Israel which has sent thee this day to reprove me 1 Samuel 25 32.
. Behold I am here present before God, to hear whatsoever thou have to say
unto me from God, for the speedy reforming of this great neglect. And so I come
to the second thing in my Use; the Exhortation; And here, I could wish, that I
had some special gift and power to persuade, and that some such law of grace
were in my lips, that I might be among you this day as was Barnabas at Antioch
Act 11.23
, upon whose words of exhortation much people joined themselves unto the Lord.
And yet is it not strange and pitiful, that in such a case as this is, a man
should so much need a perswasiue faculty? It were wonderful, if there needed
much Rhetorique, to work a sick man, to be willing to have health, a poor
man to be willing to be made rich, a condemned man to be willing to receive a
pardon; And yet such an auersnes is in our nature unto good, and so senseless
are we of the best things, that a Preacher in his meditations, is in no one
thing driven to so great a strait, as to find out arguments and motives, such
as may be forcible enough to work us to this, that we would be saved; and
that we would embrace the offer of a kingdom. If thou knew (said Christ to
the woman at the well) the gift of God Ioh: 4.10.
, and so if we were aware of the worth of that which is tendered to us, and how
much the happiness of the soul exceeds all things else; a few words should
persuade us, Preachers should have small need to importune us, and call to us
as Paul to them at Listra, O men why do ye these things Act. 14 15.
, O ye house of Israel why will ye die Ezekiel. 18.31.
, nay we would never leave pressing and urging the ministers of God with that
question of the perplexed Iaylor Sirs, what must we do to be saved Act. 16.30.
. Let us therefore be stirred up, I beseech you, on all hands concerning this;
you that have bin utterly careless herein, and have scarce bestowed one
earnest thought upon the things that concern your souls, begin now at the
last to be more advised, do not any longer leave this business to an hazard,
as if it were a matter of nothing to be damned; Betwixt the not finding of
this Kingdom and the falling irrecouerablie into the Kingdom of eternal
darkness, with the Devil and his Angels, there is no third. And you that have
bestowed some care this way, be persuaded to be ielous over your care, that it
has not been so earnest, so constant, so intentive as it ought to be, learn
now from hence forth to double your care; and know that unless you be well
acquainted with this, what a deal of business, what inquiry, what striving
does accompany religion, you are yet far from the kingdom of God. He that
cannot say out of personal experience, what an hard and laborious task it is
to be a Christian, he shall never make me believe that he has any thing in
him, save a form of godliness. Seeking requires a care and an endeavor more
then ordinary. Redeem we as much time as possibly we may for this one thing,
let us abridge our selves rather in our outward profits and the pursuit of
them, let us rather want opportunities for our sports, let all other things go
to wrack rather then this one business should not be forwarded. Fie upon it
that so base a spirit should possess men, that they should have more mind to
be slaves to the world, and servants to vile affections then to be Heirs of a
kingdom. And thus is the second thing in my Use, the exhortation; of which
because I conceive some hope in the mercy of God, that it shall not utterly be
in vain, therefore I now come to the third thing, the direction. To exhort to
seeking and not to instruct how to seek, were unprofitable; My direction
therefore shall be reached out to two things, 1. Where to seek this kingdom,
this righteousness. 2. How to know and be assured that we have found it.
These two things I trust of your selves and out of your own reason you will
conceive to be very useful, and of great necessity, so that I shall not need
to persuade you to attention touching them. If you are affected with the love
of the commodity spoken of hitherto, you will be glad to understand where to
inquire it and how to be resolved, that you have attained it. Concerning the
first, Where to seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness.
where this Kingdom, this righteousness must be sought: both the one and the
other must be sought in the preaching of the Gospel, which is proved by this
that the Gospel is called the Gospel of the kingdom Math. 4.23.
, because it declares both the nature of this kingdom and the way leading to
it; and then Paul gives this as a reason, why he was not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ; because by it the righteousness of God is revealed Romans
1.16.17.
. which two texts (not to insist upon any more) show plainly that he who
aims at the Kingdom of God, and at the righteousness of God, must seek it
in the Gospel. The dispensation of this Gospel, God has committed to his
Ministers; It is their office like Iohn-Baptist, to prepare by repentance to a
kingdom Math. 3.2
, and to declare to a man his righteousness Job. 33.23.
, viz. how being vile in himself, he may stand and be presented righteous
before God. These things are plain: God entending to call his elect out of the
power of darkness into the kingdom of his dear son, has appointed Pastors
and Teachers for their gathering Ephesians. 4.11.12.
, and meaning to make them to become the righteousness of God through Christ
has sent the^ as Ambassadors to beseech, to pray, to treat with them in this
business 2 Cor. 3 24.25.
, Behold then art thou persuaded to seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, either seek it in the preaching of the word, or else there is
no hope for thee to obtain it. when I mention this means, I exclude not
prayer (as some account those that are so much for preaching to be enemies unto
prayer) I shut not out the sacrament, I persuade not a neglect of reading, nay
I intend and inioyne these rather; No hope of good and comfort by a Preacher,
had he the tongue of men and Angels, if there be not joined, Prayer to
prepare to preaching, and to be as the shewers upon the mowne grass, after
preaching: Sacraments to seal up the comfort, which is got by preaching:
reading and meditation to confirm and digest that knowledge which is derived
through preaching, these things must not be severed: God has joined them,
and man may not sunder them. But whosoever he is, that thinks he may well
enough find out the kingdom of God and his righteousness in the neglect or
disregard of the word preached, accounting that of no simple necessity to that
end, and so never strives to enjoy it, when he wants it, nor cares to make the
best use of it when he enjoys it, let that man make what show he will of
devotion, of respect to prayer, of honor to the Sacrament, of reverence to
reading, he does utterly beguile his own soul, and shall be but as Solomon's
sluggard, who lusts, but his soul has naught Pro. 13.4.
, or as the Prophets hungry dreamer, who in a dream is eating, but is empty
when he awakes Es. 29.8. Lact. l. 3. cap. 28.
; it was truly delivered of him who said that it is impossible to find out
that which is sought by a wrong way, and I am sure the mouth of the Lord has
sanctified besides this no way, but of this I may boldly say this is the way,
walk in it, and you shall find rest to your souls; and against the forsakers
of this path, I may as boldly denounce that of the Psalm; such as do turn
aside by their crooked ways them shall the Lord lead with the workers of
iniquity Ps. 125.5.
, they do but wait upon lying vanities and forsake their own mercy Ioh. 2.8.
. And this for the first thing in the direction; where to seek. Now for the
next, how we may know that we have found, and that our labor in seeking has
not been in vain. Touching the kingdom of God first: How a man may know he
has found the kingdom of God and his righteousness.
this is a sure testimony and a certain evidence that a man has found it. A
Kingdom erected in a man's own breast; I taught before how all that are
admitted into this kingdom, are Kings themselves; that oil of gladness which
was poured upon Christ by which he was made the King over Gods elect, is like
the oil poured upon Aaron, which streamed thence to his beard, and to the
skirts of his garments, so is that dispersed from him (the head) unto al his
members; and they are partakers with him of his royal dignity; and are Kings
not only in respect of triumphing with him, over Satan, but in respect of a
conquest they have over themselves, their flesh with the affections and lusts
being crucified, and they having by the power of Gods spirit gotten some
command and mastery over their own hearts. Every man naturally is a servant
unto lusts Tit. 3.3.
, and yielding obedience unto sin, in the concupiscence thereof, and is a
slave unto vile affections. He that is brought within the compass of this
kingdom by the power of the Gospel, is in some measure discharged from this
servitude ( for where the spirit of God is, there is liberty 2. Cor. 3.17.
) and though he be not straight way come to that absoluteness of soueragnety
over himself, that there is in him no rebellion of the law of his flesh
against God, yet, he maintains a continual and an implacable war against his
own corruptions; so that by that means, as it is said of the house of Saul and
David, there was long war betwixt the two, but David waxed stronger and the
house of Saul waxed weaker 2 Samuel 3.1.
, so the old man, continually decaieth, and the new man, becomes more potent.
Here then, have thou been a long and a diligent seeker of the Kingdom of God,
by dependence upon the Gospel of the kingdom, and would thou know, whether
thou have found that which thou intendest, and so may with comfort say with
Deborah, to thy self, O my soul thou have marched valiantly; see and inquire
into thy self, how thou can rule thy thoughts, thy will, thy affections, by
the word of God, and by the spirit of God. It may be in many things thou
failest, but here is the question; art thou dragged and drawn into evil as a
captive or do thou follow as a willing Servant? Can thou truly say before
God with whom there is no dissembling, that the evil thou do is that which
thou would not do, and which thy heart is clean against, and for which
thou carriest a kind of indignation, against thy self, and art therefore still
wrestling and combating with thine own unruly motions, striving if by any
means thou may be able to ouermaster them, I say to thee the Kingdom of
God is within thee, and thou have found the thing which thou have sought for.
Otherwise, if thou be a servant unto thine own lusts, and art willingly and
desirously taking thought for the stesh to content it, so that thine own
corruption is no burden to thee, thou maintainest no quarrel against it, thou
contendest not with it, I say to thee, thou art a stranger from this kingdom:
thou art a vassal of Satan: and all thy profession of religion is but mere
hypocrisy. I have given thee a mark, one of many, by which thou may know
whether thou have found that Kingdom. Let me deliver thee an other, by which
thou may understand whether thou have found the righteousness of God yea or
no. I could here insist upon that perpetual companion of being accepted
righteous before God, through Christ, which is called Romans 5.1.
peace toward God; by which is meant inward comfort in the assurance of
reconciliation with God through Jesus Christ. But I commend this rather now for
breuities sake; viz. that the kingdom of God looks two ways; to God and to
man: to God, so as there it presents a man faultlesse in his sight; to men, so
as it makes a man like Zachariah and Elizabeth in the eye of the world to live
without reproof Luke 1.6.
: what is that? to live without just challenge; I say just challenge; for the
most blameless, are liable to unjust exceptions: Cruel witnesses rise up, who
lay to their charge, things which they never knew: but yet he which has found
the righteousness of God (such is the inseparable union betwixt justification
and sanctification) lives so, and by the grace of God, so has his conversation
in the world, that he is not found to live in the ordinary practice of any one
known special sin. Let every one therefore that would know touching
himself, whether he has obtained to that righteousness by which a Sinner is
acquitted before the Tribunal seat of God; inquire into himself for this,
whether out of conscience toward God and in desire to adorn the doctrine of
God, and to save it from being ill spoken of; he cares to walk in the ways
of righteousness before men; He who binds himself to such a circumspect
walking, as that he may keep himself unspotted of the world, and may shine
like a light in these naughty times, that man has found the righteousness of
God. He that is altogether dissolute, walking in the ways of his own heart,
or else contents himself with a formal carriage, thinking (as the most do)
that it is not good to be too precise, and so under a color thereof takes
ordinary liberty to himself in some things, which are not justifiable; that
man is yet in his sins, and he is no other then a loathsome sinner in the sight
of God. And thus I have at last ended this use, and so the first point touching
the substance of the duty given in charge seek ye first the kingdom of God
and his righteousness.

The next is touching the manner or order of seeking: Seek it first.
Concerning which, this is the Doctrine.

Doct: 2.
That the matters of God, appertaining to his glory and the salvation of our
own souls, ought in all things to have the pre-eminence.

Seek first; This before all things, this above all things. The truth hereof
shall best appear, if we take view of it on this fashion, viz. That heavenly
things ought to be first in each man's life, first in each day, and first in
every business. First in each man's life. Remember thy Creator in the days of
thy youth Eccl. 12.1
. It is good for a man to have borne the yoke in his youth Lam. 3.27
, even a child must be taught the trade of his way Pro. 22.6
. Was it not commendable in Josiah that his heart was upright before the Lord,
when he was but eight years old 2. King: 22.1.2.
? was it not well that Timothy was trained up in the knowledge of the Scripture
from a child 2. Tim. 3.15
? If the first fruits be holy, is there not hope, that the whole lump will be
so Rom 11.16.
. Have you never heard of that observation, touching Aarons rod, that it was of
an Almond tree, and an Almond tree as appears by Ier. 1.11.12. is of the trees
which do first put out: he that will be for Gods purposes must begin to blow
and bud betimes. A base thing to reserve the years for the Lord, in which a
man shall say, I have no pleasure in them. The putting off till then, is
ordinarily punished either with a not caring to seek, or with a not
prevailing to find.

2. It must be first in each day. In the morning I will direct me unto thee
Psalm. 5.3.
, I prevented the morning light, and cried for I waited on thy word Psalm.
119.147.
. It is good to consecrate a man's first awaking unto God. Religious thoughts
first let into the heart of a Christian in the morning will keep it in the
better tune all the day. Drunkards rise early to follow drunkenness Is. 5.11.
, and evil men imagine wickedness on their beds that as soon as the morning
light is come they may practice it Mic: 2.1.
. As they give their first endeauours to the Devil, so should Gods servants
deuote and divert their first and their freshest meditations to his glory.

3. It must be first in each business. Our Savior would none of him, that
would do something else before he would give attendance upon his service Luc.
9.61.62.
. The Magistrate must make this the first in his function: so David coming to
the crown resolved to destroy all the wicked of the Land, and to cut off the
Workers of iniquity from the City of the Lord betimes Ps. 101.8.
: and he was ashamed of himself that he had been so careful of a convenient
house for his own estate, before he had provided a better place for the Ark of God to rest in 2. Sam. 7.2.
. The Minister must make this first in his calling, preferring Gods matters and
his business before the advancement of his own personal affairs 2. Tim 2.4.
, nay before his own life Act. 20.24.
. The serving of his own turn must not be his maine end in entering into that
service, but that which the Apostle speaks of, even that by all means he may
save some 1. Cor 9.22.
. He that sets on with the Mastership and government of a family, by entering
into the state of Wedlock must make this first in his proceeding. His first
aim must be, as Gods in the first institution of marriage, the increasing of
Gods kingdom, the advancement of Gods glory, by a godly seed Mal 2.13.
and that he may keep his vessel in holiness and in honor 1. These. 4.4
. When lust and covetousness be the leaders, a marriage is like an heritage
hastily gotten, the end whereof shall not be blessed Pro: 20.21
: In a word it must be thus in all things; for, whether ye eat or drink or
whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of God 1. Cor: 10.31.
. And is there not reason why it should be thus! who by so good right may
challenge the precedence, as God may? In him we live and move and have our
being Act. 17.28.
, is it not of him that we are able to seek, and to whom is all due if not to
him from whom all comes? shall not he have the prime of our days, the flower
of our wit, the best and strength of all that is within us, out of whose
bounty we have all, that we enjoy? Well is it said, that God being the Ancient
of days, may plead a kind of seniority, and by it require to be first
served. Then besides, the things that concern the eternal good and happiness of
the soul are our chiefest business, and the following and procuring of them, is
the maine errand for which we are come into this world. God sent no man into
this world properly to make himself rich, to come to honor, or to sat
himself, with the vanishing contentments of this life, but the end of every
man's coming into the world is, that by glorifying of God here, he may lay up
in store a good foundation for the time to come. Now what man of ordinary
understanding, but if he journey into any place, he will be sure to do that
first which is of most moment? Suppose a man were occasioned to travel up to
London, to the Term upon on some trial of his estate, happily he is requested
being there to perform some kindnesses for others, and it may be he has a
meaning, to buy some such commodities as the place affords; but what does he
do first, whereunto does he principally set himself, will he not first
attend that, for which he undertook the journey, resolving to set that in
some forwardness, before he stirs so much as a foot about ought else, when
that is once done, then if any leisure time fall out, he will bestow that upon
his by-occasions. Is there not the like reason in this? A man is come here into
the world, where in a small scantling of time he has many things to
accomplish, but yet such, as are not all of like importance; some are but like
seeing of friends, or delivery of letters, or buying of trifles, or the like,
falling into such a journey as before I spoke of; there is one maine
employment, and that concerns the soul, it is like a grand trial at the law
whereon hangs a man's whole estate; Is it not now agreeing to wisdom, that
this should be first followed, and applied with the first endeavor, that so
if a man be overtaken by time, if any of his errands be left unfinished, it
may not be that, the not doing whereof, may turn to his undoing, and to his
casting away for ever and ever? What should I labor to say more concerning
this! Surely if matters of this kind must be sought and cared for at all,
they must be sought and cared for, and intended first of all: and therefore
forbearing to make any further discourse in so manifest a point, I will hasten
to the Use.

Here is matter enough for a large discourse; The Use.
it is even enough to vex the righteous soul of a Lot, to see what indignity
is offered to the things of God, and what folly is committed in reiourning
these important businesses, into the hindermost place. To equal Hagar with
Sarah is injurious, but to give Hagar the place and to make Sarah to come
behind as an attendant is intolerable. What says our Savior? Is the servant
that has been abroad all day at work, bid sit down and waited on, as soon
as he is come home? Is he not commanded to attend first upon his master and so
to tarry till his turn comes Luke 17.5.
? How angry was God with the people, who took their own contentment first, in
seeling them houses, before they took in hand the repairing of his house Hag.
1.4.
, and how was the Prophet to exclaim upon those who were wont to offer the lame
and the sick among their cattle for a sacrifice Mal. 1.8.
, as if any thing had bin good enough for God? These things are types and
shadows, of that base usage which is to be seen in men toward God who seem to
account the very dregs and refuse of all to be good enough for him, of whom the
best and the principal is not worthy. In steed of seeking the kingdom of God
and his righteousness in the first part of life, what more usual then to
prorogue and to put off this duty until the last act? That to which the dawning
of a man's age is due, is posted off until the evening, men not considering how
that folly (which as Solomon says Proverb. 22.15.) is bound in the heart of a
child, will, if it be suffered to gather strength by continuance, prove such a
huge and unruly lump, as will not soon be ouermastered: hard is it to pluck
up that plant of corruption, which has taken root downwards. Me thinks when
I epsy an old man, that has spent his younger days in seeking of any thing
rather then the things belonging to his soul, to be to seek how and which
way to serve God aright and to be saved, he is like one who having run out his
youth in iollitie, is in the end put to his shifts and glad to beg for his
living, when he is old. What a myserie, when one shall bring his hoare head in
such extremity to the grave? and far greater it is when one (through the
just hand of God) shall as he has lived in vanity, so conclude in
impenitency, and go out of the world as blindly, as he has gone on in the
world aduenturously. This is the issue mostly of shufling the things of God and
of our souls from the right place. Well; next, for seeking the kingdom of God
in every day; I omit to urge that which is best known to each man's own soul,
touching private communings with the Lord and lifting up the heart constantly
toward him every morning; I do note only the things that are obuious and
apparent. Let the most houses and families be a testimony how rare a thing it
is to begin the day with a seeking of the Lord by prayer. Surely if the Lord
should send an Angel of his wrath into so many houses, as where this evidence
of seeking the kingdom of God first does want, I believe it would fare with
many towns as it did with Egypt, in the night that Israel did depart, not an
house (says the text) in which there was not one dead Exodus 12.30.
. Think on it all you masters of Families for your parts, and if you be
faulty, think whether to neglect this, can be to seek Gods kingdom first,
and resolve that there shall not a day pass more before you do reform it.
Gods curse attends you in whatsoever you put your hands unto if you leave out
this. Well, what say we to seeking this kingdom, first in every business? Let
me begin with you Magistrates; whereto do you principally and mainely level
your authority? I cannot accuse you in particular, but this is the general
guise, upholding of credit, advancing of profit, pleasuring of friends, spiting
of opposites, such things as those march in the foremost rank, it is well if
any thing, that concerns God and his service, come in dropping at the later
end; happily for form and custom, or to get a name or to satisfy the
importunity of a Preacher, some little matter is done that way: but where is he
that makes this his first and chief business? For one such Magistrate as
Nehemiah that will lay all at the stake, that God may be glorified by his
government, an hundred such as Gallio, that do not care for such thingsc. There
is as much injury offered to God, in our business of the ministry. Many an one
there is amongst us, who if he were demanded, friend why came thou hither?
what first moved thee to become a Minister? I believe if he should tell (as we
say) Gods truth, he must confess, it was more to live then to labor, rather
to gather sheaues into his own barn, then to fill up the Lords Garner; Surely
that which has the chiefetie in a man's desire, will prevail most in his
endeavor, he that is more busy to feather his own nest, then to draw the
people of Christ, as so many chickens under his wings, it cannot be thought
that in his putting his hand to the Lords plough, he sought for his
righteousness and his kingdom first of all. What should I say of other callings
and of other businesses; what think we (because of the present occasion, of
marriage business) what if a man should press upon all here that are married,
and in particular upon the now newly married, what was the first sought for
matter in our several choyces? what was the first question? what was the first
inquiry? was it goods, or goodness, was it with what religion is the woman
endewed, or with what portion is she endowed? surely that which most mooues
both parents in their direction and parties to be married in their election,
is rather portion and proportion, then sincerity of heart and well grounded
piety toward God. Hence comes that root of bitterness which grows up
betwixt the most couples; where religion was not the first motioner, the issue
of the marriage without great repentance can never be comfortable. A woeful
thing, a woman to have a Husband, that cannot dwell with her as a man of
knowledge: a lamentable thing a man to have a Wife, whom he cannot
comfortablie love not only as a woman, but as an Heir together with him of the
grace of life. I will conclude this use. It is not enough you see that we take
care for heaven, but we must give it our first, our best, our strongest care. I
wish this to you all that hear me, but especially let me commend it to those
whose nuptials we are here met together to solemnize; you are both young, and
as your education has bin, I trust, in the fear of God, so be sure still to
consecrate these your first and flourishing days to Gods glory, and to the
things which concern your souls. Be not now first for profit and delight
meaning to reserve your grauer years for grauer matters. You know not what a
day may bring forth; even childehood and youth are vanity; and for every
particular day remember to begin it privately with the Lord, and if God give
you a family let all your businesses take their beginning at some such joint
service, as may witness for you that the glory of God and the pleasing of him
is your chiefest aim. If ever God shall raise you to some higher place, in
which to govern publicly, then call to mind the precept given you on your
marriage day, and bind your self to be more for Gods glory and for the
upholding of his honor, then for any other respect whatsoever; and if you have
failed in your proceedings hitherto, not being so careful, touching the
religion either of other as was fit, desire God that it may not be laid to
your charge, and stir up your selves to make a kind of recompense therein by a
constant care more to seek and more to esteem a dram of grace and a mite of
sincerity, then all that ever else the world is able to afford you. And the
more to encourage you to this; I come from the first part of my text, the
charge, to the second, the discharge And al these things shall be added unto
you.

The plain point of Doctrine thus stands. Doct: 3.
That they which labor and seek for heavenly things, shall not be left
vnsupplied of earthly things. Here is a stir (says our Savior) for the
things of the world, and you lay about you, as if the dust of the earth, should
not suffice for every man to take an handful, and all your drift is, that you
may have enough for present maintenance; Behold I will show you a more
excellent way, I preach ordinarily to you of a kingdom, I tell you of the
righteousness of God, seek you that in such sort and manner as you ought; Lo, all
these things will come in of themselves, it may be not in the measure you would;
but in such a proportion, as your heavenly father knows to be convenient. Look
as the shadow follows a man still, which turns his face toward the Sun, so
these things never but attend upon those that set their thoughts upon heavenly
things. What a world is there for this in holy Scripture? God long ago made a
promise unto Abraham, that if he would walk with him and be upright (which is
all one with that seeking here made mention of,) he would be a God to him, and
to his seed after him Genesis 17.7.
. Now how can a man be left destitute whose God the Lord is? who both knows
ones need (for all things are naked and open unto his eyes Heb. 4.13.
) and is all-sufficient; The earth is his and all that therein is Ps. 24.1.
, and whose love passes the love of natural parents? It is possible for a
woman to forget her child, and not to have compassion on the Son of her
womb, but he cannot forget Is 49.15.
, his compassions fail not Lam. 3.22.
. The like promise was after renewed unto Joshua chap. 1. 5.
, and the Apostle teaches every believer to account himself to have an
interest in it Heb. 13.5, 6.
, I will not fail thee nor forsake thee. How often do we read such things as
these: The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him, and upon them that
trust in his mercy, to deliver their souls from death, and to preserve them in
famine Ps. 33.18, 19.
. The Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the Lord, shall
want nothing that is good Psalm. 34.10.
. No good thing shall he withhold from them that walk uprightly Ps. 84.11.
. The Lord will not famish the soul of the righteous Prou. 10.3.
. The good man shall give inheritance unto his childrens children Pro. 13.22.
. That speech of the prophet Habakkuk, three times repeated in the New
Testament; The just shall live by his faith, Cap. 2. 4.
has reference as well to the life of the body in this world, as well as to
the spiritual life of the soul. Faith is as it were, the liuely-hood of a
Christian; It is the stock whereon he lives, inasmuch as it gives him an
assurance not to be cast off. Christ had a meaning to teach this, even in the
course and order of the Lords prayer, in setting that, of Hallowed be thy name,
Thy kingdom come etc, before that concerning daily bread, that we might build
our expectation of being heard in the latter, upon the truth of our desire for
the former. And indeed if we enter into a due consideration of the point, we
must needs acknowledge it to be a truth. He that seeks the kingdom of God and
his righteousness, shall not miss of the end of his desire in that heavenly
benefit. For God will fulfill the desires of them that fear him Ps. 145.19.
. If God will give the more excellent, will he deny the things of lesser value?
Fe are not says Christ, your Fathers will is to give you a kingdom Luc. 12.32.
: will he who will bestow a kingdom, not bestow necessary comforts for the
outward man? Will he who gives Christ, not give with him all things also To.
8.32.
? Whom think we to be respected by God, he that seeks his kingdom, or the
fowls of the air, the beasts of the forest, the lillies of the field, to day
fresh, to morrow in the furnace? Surely the seekers of his kingdom, are his
chief treasure Ps. 135.4
. He delights in them Psalm. 147.11.
. He dwells with them Ioh. 14.23.
. He keeps their bones Ps. 34 20
, their hairs Math 10.30.
their feet 1. Sam. 2.9.
. Consider then, He gives beasts food, and the young Ravens that cry Ps 147.9
, he looks after the sparrowes Matt 10 29
, he takes care for oxen 1. Cor. 9 9.
, he clotheth the grass Mat. 6.30
. How is it possible that he should neglect those whom his soul loves, yea
for whose sakes even Kings are reproved Psalm. 106.14
, and which are to him as the apple of his eye Zac 2 8.
. Strange, but yet comfortable are the evidences and examples which the
Scripture affords of Gods providing for his in outward things. The Ravens first
and last, at morning and evening brought bread and flesh to Elias 1 King. 17.
; by him and for him God made that small portion of oil and meal which the
widow had to last out to the end of the famine. He provided strangely for the
widow of the prophet, when the cruel Creditor was come to take her sons to
be his bondmen 2 King: 17.
. He found^ means for Jacob and his family in the dearth; he had sent a man
before Psalm. 105.17.
. It is memorable which befell our Savior, and is doubtless written for our
learning. He was borne in a poor estate, his mother could find no room in
the Inn, it seems she was in want, otherwise money would have commanded more
respect. The homeborne people (as it is likely) took no notice of her want.
Now see how God, who is a God at a pinch, brought the Wisemen from far, with
their presents, Gold, incense, and myrhe Mat 2.11.
. A notable example of Gods providing, when it is least expected, and where
there is the smallest likely hood. When David fled from Absalom and went for
his life, and had small leisure to take provision with him; see how God
provided, Shobi the son of Nahash, and Machir the son of Ammiel, and
Barzelai brought wheat and barley and flower and beans and parched corn 2.
Sam. 17 27.
. I remember what Christ said to his disciples, When as I sent you without bag
and scrip, lacked ye any thing? and they said nothing Luc. 22.35.
. What meant our Savior in feeding those miraculously that followed him from
place to place to hear his preaching, but to give assurance thereby, that they
which seek heaven as they ought, shall never be forsaken here on earth; they
shall never be oppressed with wants for their bodies, who are careful to make
provision for their souls. But now this doctrine may seem not to be generally
and universally true without exception. For many dear children of God, and
many forward men in religion, have been and are in great want, and may so be,
as is gatherable out of the parable of Lazarus Luc. 16.
, who would have been glad of a few crumbs, or to have licked a trencher; and,
I do not see says the worldling, any of them all a penny the richer, for all
their earnestnes. It is answered. The matter and point undertaken here to be
proved, is not, that they which seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
shall never be poor, shall never be scanted for outward things, shall never be
brought even to a morsel of bread. I know how the prophets of God were glad of
bread and water in a hole under ground, when the prophets of Baal were fed at
Iezabels table 1. King. 18.4, 19.
. Many dear servants of God, do with Michaiah feed upon the bread and water
of affliction; when as they who walk on in their sins, drink wine in
boules, eat the lambs of the flock, and the calves out of the stall, and have
as much as heart can wish. So the poor Jews in Shusan were in perplexity,
when the King and Haman sat drinking in the Palace Hest 3.15.
; and diverse of the Lords worthies were destitute and afflicted Heb. 11.37.
. But here is that, which is hence proved, that he whose heart is set to seek
the kingdom of God first and his righteousness, though he may be afflicted, yet
he cannot be straightened, though he may be in poverty, yet he cannot be overcome
of poverty; though he may be cast down, yet he shall not perish 2. Cor. 4.8, 9.
, he shall never be left comfortles Ioh. 14.18.
, he shall always have a secret comfort to sweeten all his outward burdens.
When he has a small proportion, he shall be taught how to want Phil 4.12
, he shall ever eat to the contentation of his mind Prou. 13.25.
. His little, his pulse, his dinner of green herbs, shall relish better with
him then their plenty, to whom every day is a day of slaughter, Gods
countenance being lift up over him puts more joy into his heart, then the
smalnes of his portion can give discouragement. Once he is sure he shall have
enough for the present, I mean enough for the necessity of nature, and comfort
with it, and greater plenty when the Lord does see it to be more expedient.
Thus then we must understand it. All these things shall be ministered unto you,
food, raiment etc. Christ means not, that God will cloth every such one in
silk, or feed him with dainties, or give him a house of Cedar with pillars of
marble to inhabit in, but he will measure him such a portion of these, as he
shall know to be expedient, and even the scantest portion shall be sweetened
with the gracious feeling of his favor. Thus is the doctrine. Use.


Me thinks in this point I should have every man's attention. Who would not be
glad to hear of such a stock for his maintenance here in the world, as shall
never be consumed. Every man affects perpetuities. He who has a lease for
years thinks himself well; he who has an estate for his own life and his
child's is in his own opinion better; but he who has got the fee simple
estate, he (he imagines) needs not care. These be things whereon men build
their hopes, but (alas) is it not possible that for all this a man may fall
into an extremity? what though a man has joined house to house, and field to
field, until there be no room? what though his grounds bring forth fruit
plenteously, his barnes be filled with abundance, his sheep yield out
thousands and ten thousands in the streets? what if he have so much stock, so
many ships trading here and there, so much certain coming in; what though in
a word he were as rich as Constantine the Emperor, of whom Austen reports, De
Ciuit. Dei l. 5 cap. 25.
that God had filled him with so many and so great earthly commodities, that no
man might dare to wish the like; is such an estate so fenced in, or so
established by any perpetual decree that it cannot be dissolved? Is not the
trust in these things like the house of a spider Job 18.14.
, which though it do take hold upon the rafters, yet is suddenly swept down
with a broom. The Lord sometimes loses the collar of Kings and powers
contempt upon Princes Job 12.18
, and sweepes away even great houses, as a man sweepes away dung till all be
gone 1. King. 14.10.
. All the wisest Lawyers in a kingdom cannot devise how to secure a man for
hereafter. See here a new lesson how to be made sure of meat and drink and
clothing while we live. Here is a portion like that which the King of Babel
gave to Iehoiachim, a continual portion, every day a certain, all the days
of his life until he died Ier. 52.34.
; Seek ye first the kingdom of God etc. This deed was drawn up in heaven,
engrossed by the pen of the Evangelist in the gospel, sealed by the blood of
the Lord Jesus, who witnessed a good confession under Pontius Pilate, who never
yet did, neither ever will bear witness to a falsehood, and let all the world be
examined, it shall not be able to afford one instance of the failing of this
assurance. How glad men be when their Lords have sealed their leases, how
precious be their evidences and tenures of land, how safely they are kept that
they may not be embelezed? How all you Merchants rejoice at the safe arrival
of a ship, and at the report of a boon voyage? how secure begin we to be in
our thoughts, when we see some what under hand; why should we not with joy lay
it up in the midst of our hearts, which shall secure us of a better portion,
then the greatest King of the earth is able to bestow? If the King should give
thee a pension or annuity out of his Exchequer for thy life it were much, yet
because of it thou can not surely say, thou shall not want. This promise
cannot miss, his word who made it does endure for ever, because himself
lives ever to make good his word, and it is impossible for him to deny
himself. And here see (I pray you) how far the thoghts of God are differing
from our thoughts, and his ways from our ways. Men's common thoughts are that
if religion should be thus cared for before all other things; if they should
prefer matters appertaining thereunto before things of this present life, it
were the next way for them to be quite undone. For what is men's ordinary
reason, why they do redeem so little time from the world for holy purposes,
and why they take so much even of the Lords day to give unto themselves? Is it
not this, else (say they) we cannot live? Hence is it that the kingdom of God
which ought to be first sought, is (as I have showed) cast back into the
lowest place. Men think it wisdom first to be sure of the world, before they
look after heaven; first provide for the body, then for the soul; first seek
an estate here, then cast for an estate hereafter. This is the common course:
whereupon it is that there be many who have lived long in the world, and have
labored hard, and toyled infinitely to get a portion in the world, are yet
ignorant which way to seek for the kingdom of God; nay they have scarce so
much as a thought of it, or a conceit or knowledge, what it means: What is the
kingdom of God, what is the righteousness of God, how many old men, how many
rich men, how many painful men, who have even worn out themselves with
catching for the world, if they were put unto it, know not what to answer? Let
us yet at the last all of us, and you especially, for whose sakes principally
this days labor is, learn this wisdom, from the God of wisdom, out of the
book of wisdom, which is able to make us wise unto salvation. Begin we not
still at the wrong end; first the world, then heaven; first gain, then
godliness; first riches, then religion; first the back and the belly, and then
the soul; but let us take the true course both for contentment here, and for
salvation hereafter: make it your first care, your chief care, and in
comparison your only care, how to become members of Gods kingdom, how to
attain to that righteousness without which the kingdom cannot be enjoyed;
Either we must deny the truth of God speaking in his word, and say that he
feeds and foades us of with vain words not to be believed, or else yield this
to be a truth, that this is the alone way to get a comfortable security for
outward things. Thus it is as Nazianzene says, (...) Nec prodi, nec perdi.
It is profit indeed to get gain to a man's soul. This is that wealth, which
(as one says) can neither be betrayed nor lost. He who has it not is a
miserable and an accursed beggar in the midst of abundance, and he who has but
as much of it as a grain of musterd-seede is an absolute rich man, even when
he has nothing. The world will not believe this, yet is wisdom justified of
her children. They which are after the flesh savor the things of the flesh,
and they which are after the spirit the things of the spirit To. 8.5.
.

FINIS.

