THE CONFESSION of Faith, containing how the troubled man should seek refuge
at his God, Thereto led by faith: with the declaration of the article of
justification at length. The order of good works, which are the fruits of
faith: And how the faithful, and justified man, should walk and live, in the
perfect, and true Christian religion, according to his vocation.

Compiled by M. Henry Balnaues of Halhill, and one of the Lords of session, and
Counsel of SCOTLAND, being as prisoner within the old pallaice of Roane: In
the year of our Lord. 1548. Direct to his faithful brethren, being in like
trouble or more. And to all true professors, and sauourers of the sincere
word of God.

Act. 1. Hab. 2. Romans 10. He shall come, and shall not tarry, in whom who
believe, shall not be confounded.

Imprinted at Edinburgh, by Thomas Vautrollier. 1584.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, and Virtuous Lady, ALISON SANDILANDS, Lady of
Hormistoun: Thomas Vautrollier, her humble Seruitour; wishes grace, and peace,
in Christ Jesus.
WHile I consider, (Noble Lady) how that after the miserable saccage of
JERUSALEM, utter wrake and overthrow of the cietie and temple thereof,
lamentable leading till, and being in captivity of the Jews, and to the eyes
of man, the unrecoverable desolation of that whole common weal, having now as
it were, lying so many years deadly buried: yet at the last, besides their
deliverance, which was most wonderful, how I say that wherein their greatest
beauty, and highest felicity ever did stand: yea, the only glory wherein
any people could excel, that is, the law of God given by MOSES, was found
out amongst the old and desperate ruins, undestroyed, unviolated, and safely
preserved, as is to be seen by the holy history 2. Chro. 34. 2. King. 22. I
ca^ not but acknowledge the wonderful providence and exceeding great mercy of
our god, in preserving from time to time, his blessed law and word, wherein
only consists the glory and felicity of his church upon the face of this
earth, from deprauation, corruption, and destruction, in whatsoever extreme
dangers: howsoever the blind papists cannot see this without a visible and
glistering succession of a Church, to do the same. The like persuasion, whereof
now in the whole body of the scripture, now in some parts or portions of the
same: the histories of times and memories of men do record: so that Gods
careful providence: and mercyful preservation has always been bent
hereaway. And if it be lesome to compare small, base, and little things, unto
such as are great, high, and mighty: surely there was a certain pretty,
learned, and godly treatise, M. Henry Balnaues.
compyled by a divine lawier, and honorable sessioner of the kings majesty,
his session and public Counsel, which through the injuries of time,
negligence of keepers, great and careful distractions of the author, was so
lost, and to the opinion of all perished, that being earnestly coueted, greatly
desired, and carefully sought for, and searched out by some good, godly, and
learned, as having some intelligence of the authors travels in that part: yet
it could never be had, as desperate at any time to have been able to be
recovered: until to man's appearance of mere chance, but most assuredly by the
merciful providence of our God, a certain godly, and zealous gentleman,
Richard Bannantine.
privy to the desires of some that so earnestly coueted it, being in the town
of Hormistou^ in Lothiane, finds the same in the hands of a child, as it
were serving to the child to play him with, and so received and recovered the
the same. And as this treatise was a pretty, and gentill strand of the
abundant fountain of the scriptures: why might it not in this point savor of
the own source, spring, and beginning? why might not the birth in such a case
follow the nature and condition of the womb? and why might not the daughter
this far even rese^ble the mother, or be of the same fortune, and as it were
subject, to the same fatalitie with her. Wherefore, this treatise coming to my
hands, as a singular token of the finders loving kindness, and liberal will,
and affection toward me, considering the worthiness, utility, compendious
learning, and singular godliness thereof: I could not, either be so inique to
the honorable fame of the godly author: either so ingrate to the loving
propiner, and offerer unto me, either envious to the common wealth of
christianity, or sacrilegious toward God, in suppressing his glory in this
point, as not to commit the same by my travel, to a longer and more lastie
memory: that so in this raritie of trusty and faithful handmaides, and great
store of treasonable dealing of vile hyrelings: This lawful and loving daughter
might after a manner and some what ancillat or famulat (so to speak it after
the latins) to the own mother, that is, to the scriptures, whereof she
flows and proceeds. And surely not a few, nor small reasons moved me to
utter the same (worshipful Lady) under the shadow of your name, and as it were
dedicat it, at least my pains and travels in setting it out, unto your honor.
For, it being found and recovered in your ground and holding, and after a manner
being the birth thereof: who can so justly as ye now and yours challenge the
right of the same, after Gods calling to his mercies, the Author: It is also a
work bredd and brought forth in that affliction, and banishment for Christ's
sake, in the which ye did breed and bring forth your dearest children. It is
the work of a faithful brother and most trusty Consellour participant of all
the afflictions, and continuing constant to the end, and in the end. It is
such, that when as it was (I wot not how) negligently letten be, amongst the
hands of babes to play them with, it was through gods providence recovered by
that godly gentleman, your Ladyships secretary. Richard Banna^tine. John knox.
It was by that notable servant of God, whom the Larde, your Husband of godly
memory, and ye did ever so duetifully reverence, and he so fatherly and
christianely love you, so earnestly cared for, and so diligently sought out,
and inquired of, that it might be preserved from perishing as almost nothing
more. And as the book of the law found in the temple by Gods providence, was
presented to JOSIAS, to renew again the covenant betwixt God, and his people,
and to bring the^ again under his right obedience, and found them in his true
knowledge and worshipping, which all now a long time had been put in oblivion:
who wot, but the like is resembled and shadowed to you, and given you to
understand and learn in finding this pendicle of Gods law, and word in your
dwelling, that ye and yours maybe put in mind of your duty toward God,
constantly to abide by his truth, and to see that he be truly served in
your dominion, that ye and yours thus first seeking the kingdom of god, and
righteousness thereof, then all other things may be cast unto you: in case ye
or they fail in so doing, it may be a testimony against you or them, that God
has offered him self eue^ to be found by you, and in your ground, and yet ye
have not rightly regarded him. Surely, these with other reasons, besides my
duty toward your honor, moved me to set out this small work chiefly under
your name. The utility whereof (I doubt not) shall be found so profitable, the
delight so pleasant, the dignity so excellent, that whosoever reads it, shall
find them greatly commodat, by the goodness of god the fou^tain thereof,
joyfully delited by the author or writer, and honorably decored through your
mean, whereby they inioye the use of it. Now as to that, that rests, god ever
preserve your Ladyship, and yours in his true fear, grant you good days, and
long life, to the furtherance and advancement of his glory, the helping to the
building up of the work of his Church, and your eternal confort.

JOHN KNOX, THE bound Servant of JESUS CHRIST, unto his best beloved brethren,
of the congregation of the Castle, of S. Andrews. And to all professors of
Christ's true Euangell, desires grace, mercy, and peace, from God the Father,
with perpetual consolation of the holy spirit.
BLessed be God, the father of our lord Jesus Christ, whose infinite goodness
and incomprehensible wisdom, in every age, so frustrats the purpose, and
makes of none effect, the slight of Satan, that the same things, which
appear to be extreme destruction, to the just, and da^nage to the small flock
of Jesus Christ, by all men's expectation (yea, and satan himself) by the
mercy of our good God, are turned to the laud, praise, and glory of his own
name, utility and singular profit of his congregation, and to the pleasure
confort, and advancement of the^ that suffer. How the name of the only living
God, has been magnified in all ages, by them which were sore troubled, by
persecution of tyrants, exiled from their own country, long were to rehearse.
Yet one or two principal will we touch, for probation of our words foresaid.
Genesis 37.
Satan moved the hatred of the rest of his brethren, against young JOSEPH: To
whom God promised honors, and authority, above his brethren and parents. To
the impediment whereof Satan procured, he should be sold, as a bou^dma^ or
slave, carried in a strange country: where many years iniustly, he suffered
imprisonment. And satan wrought this, to the intent, that he which reproved
the wickedness of his brethren, should perish altogether. For nothing is to
satan more noisome, as these me^ in whom Godliness, and in whom purity of
life, and hatred of iniquity, appears, that they should floorish in
dominion, or authority. But all his Counsels were frustrate, when by the
singular mercy, and providence of God, JOSEPH was exalted in most hight
honors: made principal Governor of EGYPT, by PHARAO, the pote^t king thereof:
who gave in charge, Genesis 41.
that all princes of his kingdom, Psalm. 104.
should obey his will, and that his senators should learn wisdom at the
mouth of JOSEPH. Who no doubt, with all study set forth the true knowledge,
worshipping, and religion of the only living God, which in that country was
unknown before. And after certain years, he received his father, and
brethren in this same Country, whom he with all godliness, and wisdom, in
the years of hunger, sustained and nourished. And so was satan frustrate and
all his deceate turned to naught. Gene. 15. Iosue. 11.
When (after this) god of his great mercy, according to his own promis,
sometime made to ABRAHAM, had placed the people of Israel, in the land of
CANAAN: Satan to corrupt the true religion, 3. Reg. 12. 3. Reg. 13. and 16.
which they had received from god by his faith full servant MOSES, invented
abominations of Idolatry, Esa. 1 Ier. 3. 4. Reg. 17. and vltimo.
under the pretext of the true worshipping of God: And albeit, frequently they
were reproved, by true Prophets; Yet ever superstition prevailed, while God of
his righteous judgment, was compelled to punish, first ISRAEL, and thereafter
IVDA, giving them in the power of their ennemies, which translated them from
their own Countries: SALMANASER, ISRAEL, unto ASSYRIA: and NEBVCADNETZAR,
IVDA unto Babylon. Then Satan believed the true knowledge, and worshipping of
God, to have decayed for ever. But he was far deceived, when first
NEBVCADNETZAR, king of BABYLON, and the mightiest prince in the earth, and
after him DARIUS, the potent king of MEDIA, receaueth the true knowledge of the
Lord God, by DANIEL the prophet, one of the same number, which were
transported from their own country. And not only received the kings (the^
having the whole Empire in earth) the true religion of god, but also commanded
the same to be observed by their subjects. For after this manner, it was
written: Then DARIUS wrote unto all people, nations and tou^gs in the universal
earth, saying: Peace be multiplied with you. A decreite is ordained by me,
that in my universal Empire and kingdom, all me^ shall fear, dread, and honor
the God of DANIEL: for he is the living and eternal God for ever. He is a
deliverer, and Savior, working signs, and wonderful things in heaven and
earth, which has delivered Daniel from the den of lions. Secondly after
Darius, the most prosperous, valiant, and mighty CYRUS, the first Monarche of
the Persians, and Medians, not only of the true living God (by the same
prophet) obtained knowledge, but also for singular affection which he bare to
the true religion, restored unto liberty the people of Israel, permitting
unto them to build a new temple of SOLOMON, and to repare the walls of
Jerusalem, which by the Babylonians sometime were brought to ruin. And albeit
that by the perpetual hatred of satan, working by his members, some years
they were impedite, yet at the last (to the great consolation of all the
people) was the work finished, where many years after, Gods true religion was
observed.

Satan never believed his purpose rather to take effect, the^ when after the
death of Jesus Christ, he moved the princes of the priests (who then were
esteemed the true church of god) to persecute the Apostles, and other
professors of Christ's euangel. For who believed not great damnage to follow
the congregation. When after the death of STEVEN (who was stoned to death) the
professors were dispersed, Act. 7.
banished, and exiled from Jerusalem. But what entres thereby took the church
of god, the 11. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles, shows in these words:
And they which were scattered abroad, because of the affliction that arose
about STEVEN, went through till they came unto PHENICE, and CYPRVS, and
ANTIOCHIA, preaching plainly the Euangell of Jesus Christ.

Of these, and other testimonies of the scripture, we may consider (dearly
beloved brethren) that the infinite goodness of our Father, turned the same
things, whereby satan and his members intend to destroy, and oppress, the
true religion of God, to the aduanceme^t, and forthsetting thereof. And that no
less in these latter, wicked, and dangerous days, then he did in any age
before us. Which thing, shall openly declare, this godly work subsequent. The
counsel of satan in the perfection of us: first was to stop the wholesome
wind of Christ's Euangell, Apo. 7.
to blow upon the parts where we converse and dwell: and secondly, so to
oppress our selves by corporal affliction, and worldly calamities, that no
place should we find to godly study. But by the great mercy, and infinite
goodness of God our father, shall these his counsels be frustrate, and vain.
For in despite of him, and all his wicked members, shall yet that same word (O
lord, this I speak, confiding in thy holy promise) openly be proclaimed in
that same country. Scotland.
And how that our merciful father amongst these tempestuous storms, by all
men's exspectation, he has provided some rest for us, as this present work
shall testify: which was sent to me in ROANE, lying in Irons, and sore
troubled by corporal infirmity, in a galley, named Nostre Dame: by an
honorable man and faithful Christian Brother, M. Henry Balnaues of Halhill:
for the present, holden as prisoner (thought unjustly) in the old pallaice of
ROANE. Which work after I had once again read, to the great confort and
consolation of my spirit: by counsel and advise of the foresaid noble and
faithful man, Author of the same work: I thought expedient, it should be
digested in chapters. And to the better memory of the reader, the co^tents of
every Chap. preponed briefly unto them: with certain annotatio^s, to the more
instruction of the simple, in the margent: And also that an Epitome of the same
work, should be shortly collected: we have likewise digested the same in
chapters, which follow the work in place of a table: which thing I have done,
as imbecillitie of ingine, and incommoditie of place would permit: Not so much
to illustrate the work, (which in the self is godly and perfect) as together
with the foresaid noble man, and faithful brother, to give my confession of
the article of justification therein contained: and I beseech you, beloved
brethren, earnestly to consider if we deny any thing presently, or yet conceal
or hide, which any time before we professed in that article. And now we have
not the castle of S. Andrew to be our defense, as some of our enemies fasly
accused us, saying: If we wa^ted our walls, we would not speak so boldly. But
we pray the eternal god, that the same affection, which now and the^ remained
in us, remain with the^ eternally. The Lord shall judge, if all which we
spak, was not of pure heart: having no respect, either to love or hatred of any
person, but only to the word of God, and verity of his scriptures, as we must
answer in the great day of the Lord: where no man shall have place to
dissemble. But blessed be that lord whose infinite goodness and wisdom, has
taken from us the occasion of that slander, and has showe^ unto us that the
serpent has power only to stang the heel: that is to molest and trouble the
flesh, but not to move the spirit from constant adhearing to Jesus Christ,
nor public professing of his true word. O blessed be thou eternal father,
which by thy only mercy, have preserved us to this day, and provided that the
confession of our faith, which ever we desired all men to have known, should
by this treatise come plainly to light. Continue (O Lord) and grant unto us,
that as now with pen and ink: so shortly we may confess, with voice and tongue
the same, before thy congregration, upon whom look, O Lord God, with the eyes
of thy mercy, and suffer no more darkness to prevail. I pray you, pardon me,
beloved brethren, that on this manner I digress; veheme^cy of spirit (the lord
knows, I lie not (compels me thereto. The head of Satan shall be troaden
down, when he believes surely to triumph. Therefore, most dear brethren (so
call I all professing Christ's Euangell) continue in that purpose, which ye
have begun godly, though the battle appear strong, your Captain is
vnexpugnable. To him is given all power in heaven, and earth. Abide, stand, and
call for his support: and so the ennemies, which now affraye you, shortly
shall be confounded, and never again shall appear to molest you.

Consider, brethren, it is no speculatiue Theolog, which desires to give you
courage, but eue^ your brother in affliction, which partly has experience,
what satan's wrath may do against the chosen of God. Rejoice (yet I say)
spiritually, and be glad: the time of the battle is short, but the reward is
eternal. Victory is sure, without ye list to fly (which God forbid) from
Christ. But that ye may plainly know whereby are Satan and the world overcome,
and which are the weapons against whom they may not stand: ye shall read
diligently, this work following: which, I am sure, no man having the spirit of
God, shall think tedious, nor long, because it contains nothing, except the
very scriptures of God, and meditations of his law. Psalm. 2.
Wherein is the whole study of the godly man, both day and night: knowing that
therein are found, only, wisdom, prudence, liberty, and life. And therefore
in reading, talking, or meditation thereof he is never satiate. But as for the
ungodly, because their works are wicked, Io. 3.
they may not abide the light. And therefore they abhor all godly writings
thinking them tedious, though they contain not the length of the lords prayer.
But according to the threatening of ESAIAS, the proph. saying: because they
contemn the law of the lord God, he shall contemn them. Their hearts shall be
endured, in the day of anguish and trouble, they shall despair, and curse the
lord god into their hearts. They shall be no^bred to the sword, and in the
slaughter shall they fall. The^ shall they know that their works were vain, and
that they placed their refuge in lies. Their vestime^ts of spiders webbes
(which are their vain works) shall not abide the force of the lords wind: but
they shall stand naked, and the works of iniquity in their hands: to their
extreme confusion. Esa. 59.
And this shall apprehend and overtake them, because they call light, darkness:
and darkness light: that which was sweet, they called bitter: and by the
contrary, that which was bitter, they called sweet: seeking salvation where
none was to be found. But ye, most Christian brethren, humbly I beseech, and
in the blood of Jesus Christ I exhort, that ye read diligently this present
treatise: Not only with earnest prayer, that ye may understand the same
aright: but also with humble and due thanksgiving unto our most merciful
father, who of his infinite power so has strengthened the hearts of his
prisoners, that in despite of Satan, they desist not yet to work, but in the
most vehemence of tribulation, seek the utility and salvation of others.

It is not my purpose to commend, or advance this work with words (as
commonly writers of profane, or humane science do) seeing, the verity by the
self, is only to be commended. But one thing bouldly I dare affirm, that no
man, which comes with a godly heart hereto, shall pass from the same, without
satisfaction. The firm and weak, shall find stre^ght, and confort. The rude,
and simple, true knowledge, and erudition. The learned, and godly, humble
rejoicing, by the omnipote^t spirit of Jesus Christ, to whom be glory
before his congregation. Amen.

This work following, co^teineth three principal parts. The first part, how
man being in trouble, should seek refuge at God alone. And that naturally all
men is subject to trouble, and how profitable the same is, to the godly. Last,
of the cruel persecution of Satan, and his members, against the chosen of God.

The second part co^teineth, how man is released of his trouble, by faith and
hope in the promises of god, and therefore declares the article of
Justification, proving that faith only justifies before God, without all
deserving or merit of our works: either preceding or following faith: with a
solutio^ to certain contrary arguments, made by the adversaries of faith, and
this article: With the true understanding of such scriptures, as they allege
for the^.

The third and last part contains the fruits of faith, which are good
works, which every man should work, according to their own vocation, in
every estate.

All this plainly may be perceived in the life of our first parent ADAM, which
by transgression of Gods commandment fell in great trouble and affliction.
From which he should never have been released, without the goodness of God,
had first called him. And secondly, made unto him the promise of his
salvation: The which ADAM believing, before ever he wrought good works, was
reputed just. After during all his life, he continued in good works, striving
contrary Satan, the world, and his own flesh.

THE AVTHOR, UNTO THE FAITHFVLL Readers.
THE love, favor, mercy, grace, and peace, of God the Father, God the Son,
with the illumination of God the holy Ghost, be with you all my well-beloved
brethren, which thirste after the knowledge of the word of God. And most
fervently desire the same, to the augmentation and increasing of the church of
Christ, daily to flourish in godly wisdom, and understanding, through faith
unfeigned, ever working by love. Amen.

THE I. CHAPTER.
1 What should be the study of man: And what man should do in time of
tribulation.

AS desirous as the wild heart is (in the most burning heat David: psalm. 41. and
42.
Wherefore art thou sad or sorrowful, O thou my soul or sprit, and why
troubles thou me: believe and hope surely in God, Psalm. 76.
that is: Confide in his mercy, Psalm. 21. and 104.
and call to remembrance the time by past, how merciful, helply, and
propicia^t he has been to the fathers, and delivered them of their troubles:
Even so shall he do to thee if thou beleeuest unfeignedly in him, and seek him
in his word, not inquiring his name That is, the manner how he will deliver.
, what they call him, nor what similitude, form or shape, he is of: for that
is forbidden thee in his law: he is that he is, the God of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, and the God of the Fathers, to whom he made the promis of our
redemption. He would show his name no other way to Moys. Exo. 3. chap. but
commanded him to pass to the people of Israel: and say unto them he which is
That is, he, which of him self has power, and being by whom all had their
beginning life and moving.
, has send me to you, that is my name from the beginning, and that is my
memorial from one generation to another.

THE II. CHAP.
1 How man comes to the knowledge of god.

2 Where should man seek God, and how he should receive him.

3 And by whom we should offer our petitions.

whom we should believe to be almighty, of infinite power, mercy, justice, and
goodness, and that he created in the beginning all thing of naught, as the
scripture teaches us, Psalm. 32.
Genesis 1. Chap. And that by the word (which is the sone of god) he made all
thing which is made: who is equal to the father in divine nature and substance
without beginning in the bosom of the father, which was with god in the
beginning, and was also god. And at the prefined and preordinate time by god
the father, was send into the world, and made man, taking our manly nature and
clothing him with the same, Io. 1.
and dwelled among us. And after long time conuersing amongst us, teaching and
preaching: the realm of heaven being exercised in all trobles and calamities, in
the which this our mortal body is subject (except sin only) finaly for our
sakes suffered the most vile death, To. 4.
for our redemption. And rose from the same the 3. day for our justification.
And after 40. days ascended to the heavens, Luc. vltio* Act. 1.
and sites at the right hand of the father our aduocat, as testifies the holy
scriptures of him.

Act. 2.
And thereafter send the holy spirit to instruct his Disciples of all verity,
Io. 14.15. and 16.
as he had promised of before, who proceeding from the Father and the Son,
Gene. 6. Psalm. 103.
the third person of the Trinity descended upon the Disciples in a visible
sign of fyrie tounges, by whom all Creatures is viuificat, and has life, is
governed, ruled, sustained, and comforted, without the which all creatures
would turn to naught.

Athanasius, confessed in the holy church of Christ. Ascend no higher in the
speculatio^ of the Trinity, tha^ thou art teached in the scriptures of God. If
thou will have knowledge of the father, seek him at the Sone. That is, give
credit to the doctrine which Jesus the son of God has teached.
If thou will know the Son, seek him at the Father. For none knows the Sone,
but the father, and none may com to the knowledge of the father, but by the
Son. And also Christ being desired of Phillip, one of his Apostles, to show
them the Father (answered:) this long time I am with you, and ye have not
known me. (Phillip) he who has seen me, Io. 14.
has seen the Father That is though my father were present no other works,
should he work then I have wroght in your presence: nor yet other doctrine
should he teach to you nor I have done.
beleeuest thou not that I am in the father, and the father in me. Therefore,
whath ever thou desire Math. 11
for that cause christ comanded us all to come unto him, and seeing he has al
things given to him, and also commands us all to come to him: great fools we
are which seek any other way of the which we are incertaine, either in Heaven
or in Earth: as concerning our salvation, we are sure he loves us, and will
hear us, according to his promise. Greater love tha^ this ca^ no man show,
but that he put his life for his friends: Yea verily, we being his Enemies, he
willingly gave him self to the death, to get us life, and to reconcile us to
the Father. Therefore if we will have our thirst and drouth quenched and
refreshed, seek unto Christ, who is the fo^tain ofliuely water, of the which
who soever drinks, Io. 4.
shall never thirst, but it shall be to him a fontaine of running water to
everlasting life.

THE III. CHAP.
1 The fruit of tribulation unto the faithful.

2 God is a peculiar father unto the faithful: what care he takes of them, and
wherefore.

3 Tribulation the sign of Gods love.

4 The judgment of the wicked, concerning tribulation, what they do, and why
they despair therein.

David the holy Proph. when he said: Psalm. 62.
O god thou art my God That is, thou alone are sufficient to save though all men
be enemies.
, of most might and power: therefore I seek thee early in the morning, with
most arde^t desire mysoule thristeth after thee, and my flesh desirs thee:
great and fervent was this desire of the holy man as ye may read the.62. ps.
which teaches us how profitable, holesom and commodious the trobles,
afflictions, and inco^modities of the world, To. 8.
are to the faithful and godly men. In so much that the flesh, which ever of
the own nature is adversary, and enemy to the spirit, drawing and entising the
same from the true worshipping of god, with frequent troubles and calamities,
is so brokin and debilitat, that it takes peace with the spirit, and altogether
most ferue^tly seeks god (saying) better is thy goodness, mercy, and benignity,
the which thou showest to thy faithful flock, Psalm. 62.
the^ this corporal life: therefore my lips shall never cease to praise thee:
O happy is that trouble and affliction, which teaches us this way to know our
good god, and moves this thirst in our soul, that we may learn to cry unto our
god as the fathers did. O thou my god (as David and s. Paul say in diverse
places) I give thanks Paul) to my god for you my brethren. Romans 1.
Howbeit, Malach. 3.
he be god to all creatures by creation: yet to the faithful he is one
special and peculiar god, Exodus 3.
whose troubles and afflictions he sees, and shall deliver them thereof. Exodus
3.
Even as he did his people of Israel, forth of the hands of Pharao, without
all our deseruinges or merits. Therefore, let us not look upon our merits,
worthiness or unworthiness, but only to his mercy and goodness, putting all our
trust, hope, and belief into him, and into no other thing either in heaven or
earth, and say with the Prophet David: O Lord my strength, I shall love thee:
Psalm. 17.30 and 70.
The Lord is my surenes, my refuge, and my deliverance: and after, be unto me a
God, Defender, and a house of refuge, that thou may save me: for thou art my
strength, and for thy names sake, thou shall lead me and nourish me, that is, I
put no confidence in my own strength, wit, nor manly power, but only into thy
mercy and goodness, 1. Pet, 5.
by the which I am defended and preserved from al evils, and lead and kept in
all goodness: Psalm. 61. and 143.
for thou take care upon me, and art my only refuge, and strength
vnwinneable, in all my troubles and adversities.

Therefore my well-beloved brethren Iaco. 1.
and consider them to be good and not evil: the signs and tokens of the
goodwill of God toward us, and not of Ire nor wrath Note well. Ier. 31. Prou.
3. Heb. 12. Apo. 3. Psalm. 118 Esa. 26. and 28.
and receive them forth of his hands, nether of chance, accident, nor fortune:
but of his permissio^ and certain purpose to our weal, as the trial, and
exercysion of our faith. And that he punishes us not, that we be lost
thereby, Ezech. 18.
but to draw and provoke us to repentance, according to that saying. I will
not the death of a sinner, etc Quhat Gop requires of us in time of tribulation.
. In the which he requires of us obedience, faith, and calling upon his name,
as the Prophet David teaches us, saying: Call upon me in the day of thy
trouble, and I shall deliver thee, Psalm. 49.
and thou shall honor me, that is: believe me ever present with them which
unfeignedly call upon me, and I shall not abstract my favor, help, and supply
from them: but shall so deliver them that they may therefore give me great
thanks and praise: For I desire no other thing of man. This manner of trouble
bringes Patience, Roma. 5.
and Patience, Proof, and Proof, hope: which frustrates not, but greatly
conforts the faithful.

Psalm. 59.61 108.
In the which finding no remeadie, finally in his wickedness despaires, for
he can do no other thing, because al things wherein he put his trust and
belief has left him, and so rests no consolation.

THE IIII. CHAP.
1 What do the faithful in time of tribulation.

2 What we have of our own nature, and what of Jesus Christ.

3 What Adam did after his trangression.

4 The goodness of god showen unto Adam.

5 What Ada^ wrought in his justification.

6 To Abraham being an Idolater, was made the promis that he should be the
Father of many Nations, and the conclusion thereupon.

But the godly say, O my good God,

Our wicked nature teaches us to fly selfs, our sin and vice, and object
the same in another as our forfather Adam did, having no respect to person or
love of any creature more then he had: for contrary, his own fellow, which
was of his own flesh, he objected the crime to excuse himself: Yea, and also
against God thinking that the good work of god, making the woman and giving her
to him in fellowship, was the cause of his sin and fall as the scriptures say.
Ge. 3. Chap. But faith in the blood of thy only begotten son christ Jesus,
leads us to thy mercy stool, and hope conforteth us, that we are not
overcome in this battle: knowing perfectly that the flesh is subject to these
bodyly afflictions: that the dregs of sin may be mortified in us, the which
we have of our forefather Adam.

This corruption of nature teaches us what we have of our first Parents, and
what we are of our selfs: which being considered, shall lead us to the
knowledge of god: in whom we shall find goodness, mercy, and justice, as we may
clearly perceive in our first parent: For, after he had transgressed the law
and commandment Adam of his sin, he was not penitent nor trusted not in the
mercy of god, or asked forgiveness: But excused his transgressio^ and fault.
Nevertheless god of his infinite mercy, made the promise of salvation, or ever
he would prononce the sentence contrary the man or woman, (saying) to the
serpent: I shall put enymity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed
and the woman's seed. The seed of the woman shall tread down thy head, and thou
shall sting the same on the heel. Adam, was comforted with these words, and
through faith in this promis, was of wicked made just, that is received again
in favor, and through faith in the blood of Christ to be shed, was accepped as
just.

And thereafter god manifested his Ire and wrath contrary sin, which of his
righteous judgment he can not suffer unpunished: Nahu. 1. Nu. 14.
and pronu^ced the sentence first against the woman, Gene. 3.
and then against the man: and eiected them forth of paradise, clothing them
with skin coats Skin coats were the sign and remembrance of their
mortality.
(saying) behold, Adam is made as it were one of us, knowing good and evil,
that is as much to say: O miserable man, now thou may perceive thy state, and
the fruits thou have gotten for the transgression of my commandment: what is
thy knowledge that thou have learned nothing but to fly from thy Maker, to
pass from life to death, from great pleasure to all misery? And so Adam is
spoiled of all the noble gifts: he was endued with, in his creation, as here
after time and place at more length shall be showen: read with order the 3.
Chapter of Genes. and thou shall understand this matter clearly.

but dust and clay: he made no evil cause, but being made man, he disobeyed
his Maker, trangressed his law, usurping glory to him self, and knowledge,
which became him not to seek. For the which he deserved nothing but eternal
dampnation. Abraham, in his fathers house, an Idolater as he was, and the rest
Abraham, Gene. 11. and 12. Iosu. 24.
and heirs of the promise.

No other way should we seek, but the order taught us in the scriptures of God,
that is, if we will be sure of our salvation and have passage to the father,
pass unto Christ, Io. 14.
who says: I am the way, the truth, and the life, no man comes to the
father, but by me. If ye had knowledge of me, ye should also have knowledge of
the Father: Therefore, if we will walk right in the way, go with christ, and
walk in him, if we will not be deceived, pass unto him: for he is the
verity who ca^ nether deceive, nor be deceived: and if we will not die the
eternal death, he is the life. These gifts may we have, of no other but of him,
and by him only through faith, in the mercy of God, by the operation of the
holy spirit.

THE V. CHAP.
1 The consolation of Adam expelled from Paradise.

2 The consolation of Adam, which he took of his two sons, turned in dolor.

3 What Adam did when he received Seth for Abell, whom Cain slew.

4 The confort of Adam in all afflictions, and example left to us therinto.

Adam, standing trimbling before god, whom he had so highlye offended,
perceauing him self deceived of the false promis, made by the Serpent, which
was that he should not die: how beit he eat of the aple, but should be like
unto God, know good and evil, being therefore eiected forth of that pleasant
gardin of all delight and pleasure, in to the miserable earth, to eat his bred
with the sweat of his face. Trust well, he was sore penitent now: and would
have suffered great torment upon his body, to have satisfied for his offenses:
but that could not be, nor might not stand, with the justice of god. What was
his confort then? nothing but this promise, which he apprehended by faith: and
believed him to be in the favor of god, for that promises seeds sake. This
conforted his spirit, or else of despair he had perished in this sorrow and
trouble: for he found no remeady in himself. For his bodily co^solatio^, god
sent him two sons by natural propagation Adam: but this bodily confort
Gene. 3.
All pleasure of earthly things turns and ends in sorrow.
turned shortly into great displeasure when the one Brother slew the other of
malice, by the which Adam was destitute of all succession. Thus dolorously lead
he his life a long time, desiring ever at God succession in place of Abell.

Of whom god had pity and compassion, and send him a Son, named Seth, of
whom descended the promissed seed, that god might be found true in his
sayings, for rather would he have raised Abel from death to life, then his
promis should not have been fulfilled. By this was the dolor and trouble of Adam
converted into joy and gladness. For the which Abell, Gene. 4.
whom Cain has slain, here he says not that he has gotten a son in place
of Abell: Howbeit by natural generation he begat him, and Eve bare him of her
bosom, but says: god has sent me another seed for Abell, ascriuing the same
to the gift of god, and not to the work of man Mark well.
. This is a notable example to all the faithful, to receive all things forth of
the hands of God, giving him ever thanks therefore as the holy Fathers did:
not contemning the work nor help of man, whom God makes the instrument, to
do that thing which is his godly will to perform.

Let us herefor take example of our forefather, that like as he was subject to
trobles and afflictions, all the days of his life in this miserable world:
Euin so are we, and let us take therefore all thing in patience, thinking us to
have deserved the same justly, how just that ever we be or appeer to the world:
trust well there is, nor was never man which descended of Adam by natural
propagation iuster, nor he was after his fall: for there is no mention in the
scripture of any offense done by Ada^, contrary the law of his god, after his
expulsion forth of paradise. And as for his first rebellion and corrupting of
his nature, we are all gilty of that as he was: and then also gilty of our
sins, proceeding of that rebellion: wherefore we may well be worse then he,
but no better. Think well, he confessed him justly punished, and thought, he
deserved more punishment, than ever was put upon him. Taking ever consolation
of the sweet promises of god, in the which he believed: and in all his troubles
conforted him, with hope to be delivered of them as all faithful do. And to
be restored to the glory he was eiect from, for his owin foolishnes, without
al merits or deseruings of himself, which ware nothing in him, and muchles in
us.

There has been no difference between the expulsion of ADAM forth of
paradise, and Lucifer out of the heauin: if the promise had not been made to
ADAM. Through faith in the which promis he ever hoped victory against the
devil This victory fall we obtein in the general resurrection for then both
body and soul shall be glorified.
who had deceived him, and that by power and strength of the promissed seed,
and not through any power or might of him self. Euin so should we do, co^fiding
in the promises of god, and the merits of the promissed seed Christ Jesus, to
be delivered of the tyranny of the Devil, the calamities and trubles of this
miserable world.

THE VI. CHAP.
1 Wherefore we should rejoice in tribulation.

2 Under what pretext the wicked pursues the just.

3 Whereby ryseth the dishonoring of God.

4 The diversity of opinions, touching the article of justification, and who
are just before God.

5 What is the substance of justification: and why the article thereof should be
holden in memory.

TO the faithful these bodily afflictions and troubles are marvelous 1. Pet. v.
for by them, the faith is tried and made more precious the^ gold, which is
purified by the fire: for by many troubles it is needful to us to enter in
the realm of heaven, by firm and constant perseuering in faith, Act. 14.
as says S. P. And also it behooved Christ to suffer, and so to enter into his
glory that is not for him self, Luc. 24.
but for us. Therefore the godly men in their troubles and afflictions take
great consolation and confort: And anchors them upon God alone by faith, to
whom they can come no other way, and think them no better nor greater then
their master christ: but should take both confort and consolation of his word,
saying, seeing the world has persecuted me, they shall persecute you also.
This persecution is a communion with the passions of Christ, Io. 15.
in the which we have great matter to rejoice, so we suffer not as homicides,
theefes, or evil doers: but for Christ's sake and his word, as S. Pet. says in
his first Epist. the 4. Chapter.

But in this matter take no care what the world judge of thee, but to thy own
conscience and the scriptures of god: for the judgment of the world pronuncis
contrary to the word of god, calling them which professes the same: Heretics,
seditious men, and perturbers of commonweals. Therefore they think they
punish justly in birning, slaying, banishing, and confisking of lands and
goods. And howbeit, the faithful suffer all patiently, and undeserved: yet
they say they suffer justly as traitors, heretics, homicides, perturbers of
commonweals, and evil doers. Let these sayings not move the faithful
brother, but confort thee with thy Master Christ, Io. 7. Math. 27.
who was called by the aduersaires of verity: a seducer of the people, Mar. 2.
Luc, 5.
a dru^kard, a deuourer, or glutton, an open sinner, conversant amongst them:
and an authorizare of their sins. His Apostles were called heretics and their
doctrine heresy. The Prophets were called perturbers of commonweals and
traitors to their country, prophesing contrary the common weal, and liberty
of the realm, as ye may read of Elias, and Jeremy in diverse places of his
prophecy. 3. Reg. 18.
Which Scriptures I pray you read, Iero. 20.21.25.26 and 27.
and ye shall perceive no difference between the blasphemations of the
Prophets of Christ himself, and his Apostles: and the faithful in these
days, for all was and is done by the wicked, under color of holiness.

Herefore, Psalm. 90.
let us seek refuge at our god, and stick fast to his word, who can nether
deceive, nor be deceived: for the world is full of deceit, and judges ever the
wrong part: of the which unjust judgment comes all the diversity of
opinions: and sittes ruling this day in the church of Christ, to the
dishonoring of the name of god, deminishing of his glory, and no little
perturbation of commonweals: the cause hereof is the neglecting of faith, and
taking from the same her due office, which is to justify only by her self,
without the deeds or works of the law Whereby man is made just.
, that is, man of wicked, is made just by the mercy of God, through faith in
the blood of Jesus Christ, without the deeds or works of the law. This I dare
affirm, because the scriptures of god testified the same to be true, as
herafter shall be declared at length.

nether faith nor works, as the plain wicked and ungodly. My well-beloved
brethren let us auctorise neither of these persons: For all they impung this
article of justification. Against the first speaks S. James, in his Epist.
Against, the next Saint Paul speaks in his Epist. to the Roma. Galath. and
diverse other places. And against the other two kinds of men, the hole
scriptures speaks.

By these co^sideratio^s moved, I thought necessary for my own eruditio^, and
your confort, my well-beloved brethren, to declare and forth show my belief,
concerning the article of justification, as the scriptures teach me, having
no respect to ma^s opinion, Rousa. 1.
that thereby we may have consolation through our mutual faith. 1. Pet. 3.
And be more ready to give coumpt and reakoning to all which ask of us any
question of our faith. Always in this and all other things, submitting my
self to the scriptures of god, and authority of the faithful church of
christ, which is governed, ruled, kept, and defended from all spot of heresy
by the holy spirit who moves this ardent thirst in our soul to seek Christ,
Io. 4.
the fontaine of living watter: love and charity in our hearts to Christ, our
brothers salvation as our own. The fondatio^ and grondstone hereto is faith,
and the shield or buckler to defend us with, against the fiery darts of
Satan, at the which he ever shoots, 1. Io. 5. Ephesians. 6.
because it is our victory against him, and gets dominion of the world: but if
he find us destitute, or disarmed of our shield, he shall wound us so, that he
may safely or lightly take us captive to his realm: therefore this our faith
should never be idle, but ever working by love, that is, to be ever cled with
our shield, being vigilant and walkfull, because our said adversary Satan, is
ever going about us, as it were a roaring lion, seking for the pray, to devour
or swolow: Against whom we should resist stoutly into faith, 1. Pet. 5.
taking in our hand the sword of the spirit, which is the word of god, with the
rest of the armor perteyninge to a christian knight, specified by S. P. Ephe.
the 6. Chapter.

The substance of the article of justification,

Above all thing the said article is to be holden in memory, recent among the
faithful. And at every time and hour driven, and inculcat in their ears, as
it were a trumpet, without the which faith (which is the fondation of the
christian religion, and Church of Christ) is made so dark and mistie that no
place shall be found where upon to build the the perfect works of faith.

THE VII. CHAP.
1 What obtained Adam and Eve, seeking wisdom contrary Gods commandment: and
what they, which seeks justification other ways then teaches the scriptures.

2 Whereby is the wicked man, made just.

3 Where may Satan enter, and where not.

4 What wrought the law into Adam, and the office thereof unto us.

The persecution tion of Satan.
are builded: our said adversary Satan vexed in the paradise, when in the
beginning he persuaded and entised, our forefather Adam and Eve, to leave their
faith into God their Maker and Creator: and consent to his false persuasion,
which was that through their own wisdom, strength, and power, they might be
made equal and like unto god, who gave them life, and promised the same ever
to endure, with all pleasures and commodities in paradise.

The Devil perceauing the woman void and without faith, That is Satan after
he perceived the woman doubt of the faith and verity of Gods word, durst
affirm the contrary: saying though ye eat of the tree ye shall not die:
whereto the woman giving credit transgressed Gods command and so to doubt of
Gods promis is rute of all wickidnesse.
love and fear of God: said, howbeit ye eat of the fruicts of this try: ye
shall not die the death: ye know not wherefore God has forbidden you to eat
of the same: but I shall show you the cause. God knows that in what soever
day, ye shall eat of the fruict of this try, your eyes shall be opened, and
ye shall be like Gods knowing good and evil. This same persuasion has all the
wicked: which persuades man to trust to his own works, merits, power, and
strength, thereby to be made just, and to get great reward of god, for doing
of works not commanded by God: but invented by ma^s vain conceat, thinking
that God shallbe pleased therewith. But surely even as our forefather was
deceived, so shall we be, if we consent thairto. Heerefore give trust to no
thing in this case, Genesis 3
or matter, but to God and his word: shall get no place to enter, to deceive us.

Ye shall understand that Adam knew good, and evil, before the eating of the
aple, for that teached him the law of nature: Eccles. the 17. Chap. (saying)
god created them with the spirit of knowledge, and with wisdom, and
understanding, he fulfilled the hearts of them: and show unto them good and
evil. His judgments and justice also he show to the^. What the^, was the
knowledge Ada^ got of the eating of the aple? (only) that he had offended his
good god, tra^sgressed his law, the which show to him his offenses, and sin. By
this knowledge he understood, that he was fallen from the good state, in which
he was created, and should have remained (if he had obeyed the law of his god)
into the miserable estate of sin: for he had never known what the trangression
of the law had been, if he had not sinned. The law before taught him, what he
should do, and leave undone, Romans 3. The office of the law.
what was good, and what was evil, and after he sinned, the law uttered the
same to him, and brought him in knowledge thereof, for it can do no other thing
to the sinner, but trouble his mind, and bring upon him great fear and dread.
This proves the sayings of god to ADAM inquiring, Gene. 3.
who has showen unto thee that thou was naked: but that thou have eaten of the
tree, of the which I commanded thou should not eat.

This hatred and enimity is old, which 1. Pata. 29
hoping hastily to be delivered therfro^, considering we have no permane^t
City here, but as Pilgrims, travailing to and fro, beholding and looking for
that heauinly city, 1. Pet. 2. Heb. 13.
and place prepared to us from the beginning of the world.

THE VIII. CHAP.
1 Wherefore Cain slew Abell, how long god suffered the article of
justification to be pursued by the seed of Cain.

2 What pain he took at last, and how Satan reserved his seed.

3 Whereof sprang the Idolatry, which abounded between the days of Noe, and
Abraham, and under what pretext it was defended.

1. Io. 3.
of malice without any cause: but that the one brother ( Abell) being just and
godly, offered into faith a more pleasant and acceptable sacrifice unto God,
then the other: Cain gloried he was the first begotten and thought therefore*
he was acceptable. But Abel knew him self a sinnar seeking for Gods favor by
that promesed seed alone
Cain, who was wicked, and an hipocrit, whose sacrifice pleased not god because
the person was not acceptable to him: Therefore god looked to Abell, and to his
works: unto Cain and his works he looked not.

There followed against the said article, the perpetual persecution of Satan
intolerable by the sons of Cain, while God was compelled (provoked of his
ryghteous judgment) to drown the whole world, Gene. 4.
and once to purge the same from sin: reserving and defending (through Noe.
Gene. 9
Nevertheless Satan keped his seed, in the third son of Noe Cham, as
testifies the history.

After this the whole world rising in a madness and fury, impugning this article
of justification, finding and inuenting innumerable Idols, and religions: with
the which they pretended to please God, with their own works and inventions,
every one making to him self a particular, or peculiare god or gods. The
which is no other thing: but to think that without the help of Christ of their
own power, works, and Inventions they may redeem them selves, from sin, and
all evils: and please god with their free will, and natural reason.

From Noe, unto Abraham our said The wicked flourish in earth.
By which they believed to please God: but it was not so indeed because they
followed the examples of the fathers in the outward works and Ceremonies but
not in faith. Gene. 4. Gene. 3.
and so all became Idolaters. And the same Ceremonies, and most shining works
appear to be most excellent in the offspring and posterity of Cham. Because
his nephew Nimrode began first to be myghtie in the earth: and usurped to him
the kingdom of Babylon. It is not to presume that the preaching of Noe, and
the word of God taught to him, and his sons by the mouth of god, and his
manner of sacrifice was past from their memory, but man is lightly drawn from
faith and the word to his own conceat, and vain intention, to the exercising
of the outward deed: Mark dilligentlie.
in the which man will never be seen to do evil, so there appear any manner of
outward holiness in his works: the which he defends to be holy, and good,
because the holy fathers did so: and have no respect to faith which makes the
work acceptable and pleasant in the sight of God, without the which al is but
Idolatry, how holy that ever the work appear, and so enters Satan and rules
mightiely, as he did amongst the fathers, to the time of Abraham.

THE IX. CHAP.
1 God reneued to Abraham the promis made to Adam of the blessed seed, whereto
Abraham believing is pronounced just.

2 Though the just be ever persecuted at last they prevail.

3 Wherefore are we brethren to Jesus Christ.

4 The wrong judgment of the fleshly man touching the chosen of God.

GOD of his infinite mercy and goodness moved of love which he bears to mankind
(seeing our adversary ruling so mightily) would steir up this article of
justification in Abraham, that his church should not perish. Commanding him in
these words: (...) 12
Pass forth of thy fathers house, and from thy friends, and forth of thy own
country: and cum into the land which I shall show the: That is as much to say
as thy father: his household, and the whole country in the which now thou
mackis dwelling: Thy whole nation, and kindred, ar all Idolaters therefore of my
mercy and grace, without thy merits or deseruings: I will call the to the
faith, and raise up in the, the groundstone of my church, and make the the
father of all faithful. This exposition ye shall find in the book of Joshua.
the 24. chap. for the scripture is the best interpreter of it self.

And so stired up this article in the person of Abraham, in these words,
saying, I shall make the in a great nation, and I shall bless the, Gene 21.
and shall magnify thy name: and thou shall be blessed: I shall blis them that
blis the: and curse them that curse the: and in the shall all nations of the
earth be blessed. This is the renewing of the promise, maid to Adam in the
paradise That the seed of the woman should tread down the serpents head. Heir
shall ye find the beginning of the faith of Abraham, who past forward as God
commanded him: to whom he gave credence, and surely believed in his promise.
And left all wordlie affections, committing him wholly into the hands of God:
depending only upon his word: believing the same true: hoping to obtein all
things which were promesed him by the word of god: of the which he had deserved
no thing, for the scriptures testifies him to be no other but an Idolater, as
his father was. After this God dreue, and inculcat this article of
justification in the ears of Abraham saying: Dreid not Abraham, I am thy
defender, and reward above measure. etc. Thou shall have him to be thy heir
that shall pass forth of thy bosom: Thy seed shall be as the stars of the
heaven. Io. 4.
Abraham believed God and it was reputed to him for Righteousness. Genesis 15.
etc. Here ye see the proceeding of this article, from faith, to faith, ever
continuing in more perfection day by day.

Then began satan our adversary, newly to impu^g this article, (...). 5. Ephesians.
6.
ever to annul the promis of god and as he persuaded Cain to pursue Abel, even
so persuaded he Ismael to pursue Isaac: Esau Jacob: and the rest of the
brethren young Joseph: whom they sold as testifies the history. Thus still
continued the old hatred and enimitie between the seed of the serpent, and the
seed of the woman. The seed of the serpent, and the seed of the woman.
That is, the wicked pursue ever the chosen and godly, which are the woman's
seed, that treads down the serpe^tes head. For even as Christ, the blessed
seed has obtained victory of our adversary: So shall we by faith in him, of
whose flesh and bones we are: and he of ours: that is, we are members of his
body, and brethren to him by two reasons, the one is, that he is man, and of
our flesh, the natural begotten son of the glorious virgin Marie. And so of
Adam is ^^id our brother. The other reason is that by him, and through him by
faith in the mercy of god, Io. 7. Math. 27.
we are the sons adoptiue of God, and so his brethren and fellow heirs of the
heritage with him. Mar. 2. Luc, 5.


The fleshly man and worldly judgment is deceived in the knowledge of this
seed as our mother Eve was: For she said after she had conceived and borne
Cain. I have gotten or possessed a man by God, that is according to the promis
made by god: I have gotten the seed that shall tread down the serpe^ts head. Here
she looked not into faith but took the fleshly reason of the first begotten
son. 3. Reg. 18.
But when she saw he slew his brother, Iero. 20.21.25.26 and 27.
then she understood him to be the seed of the Serpent. Therefore when she
bare Seth, she held her peace, because she knew her self deceived before in
the opinion of Cain: And then cleued to faith as Adam did, Psalm. 90.
saying: God has given to me an other seed, for* Abell whom Cain has
slain.

Abraham believed of his fleshly judgment, that Ismaell was the promesed seed as
appears by the answer he made to god, when he said to him. Sarai shall bare
unto thee a son, whom I am to blis etc. Abraham smiled in his heart, and
said: would to god Ismael might live before thee. As he would say sufficient have
I received of thy mercy in that thou have given to me a son of whom I am
content.
But hereafter admonished by the mouth of god to obey Sarai and expel Agar and
her son, for he should have no part of heritage with Isaac, he understood
spirituallie and obeyed the voice of his wife.

The seed of the serpent contended with the seed promesed in the bosum of that
noble and godly woman Rebecca: Genesis 17 Genesis 21 Genesis 25.
being both of one conception. This contention moved the mother to say better I
had remained still barren: then to have this displeasure. To whom god gave
consolation, saying, there is in thy bosom conceived two sundry nations and two
people shall be divided of thy belly. That is, thou knows not which of them is
the seed of the promise, the youngest have I chosen, to whom the eldest shall
serve. This is conform to the sayings of S. Paul. Romans the 9. Chap. But
trust well, she understood spiritually by faith, that Jacob was the promised
seed: when she procured and labored so diligently, that he should get the
blessing of his father and defrauded the eldest Esaw. This was not known to
Isaac, for he would not only that Esawe should succeed to the heritage: but to
have gotten the blessing also, which Jacob obtained by persuasion of his
mother. Gene. 27.
Nevertheless, Esaw remained with the heritage in his fathers house: and
ceased not still to pursue Jacob, who at last was compelled to fly for fear of
his life. And so ever the seed of the serpent, pursues the chosing conform to
this beginning. Let Abell dye and Cain live. But finally the seed of Jacob
succeeded to the land of promission. And inioyed the heritage: Howbeit, they
were long troubled and afflicted in Egypt.

THE X. CHAP.
1 The wrong opinion of the Jews, of the promised seed.

2 Wherein the ungodly place justification.

3 Satan moves his members against the true professors of faith.

4 Jeremy the Prophet of God, resisted the whole Ecclesiastical power of the
Jews.

5 The head of the serpent trodden down by the death of Jesus Christ.

6 The article of justification preached after the death of Christ.

Messiah which was promised to them, should rule temporaly as David did: and
establish his realm in great quietness, and rest, withal pleasure, and
voluptuousnes, as ye may understand by the desire of the mother of the Sons of
Zebedee. Math. 20.
Her Sons being with Christ and his Apostles, were of the same opinion, as
testified the aunsweare of Christ, Mar. 10.
saying to them: ye know not what ye ask: But the spiritual knowledge which
the Fathers had, was far different therefrom. Who understood in the spirit
that the realm of Christ was spiritual, and not temporal, to the which they
were led by faith.

By this ye shall understand, not only that the fleshely judgment is
deceived in knowledge of this seed: but also of the persecution of Satan:
Ever persuading the wicked and ungodly, which are his seed to persecute the
woman's seed of the promise: That is, the chosen who according to the promise
of God, obtain victory by faith in the blood of Christ. For Satan intending
to destroy this article of justification, may not suffer the preaching thereof
(that is) That by grace through faith, and not of our own righteousness, and
works: We are made safe, please God, are received into favor with him, and
accepted as righteous, and just, not of our merits or deseruinges, but through
the merits of Christ Jesus our Abell did. So let Abell dye and Cain live, that
is our law, says the ungodly.

Jeremy the Prophet resisted the hole Ecclesiastical power and authority of
the Church of the Jews: that is, the multitude of the wicked, being a few
number of the chosen, that assisted to him as ye may read Jeremy the 26
Chap. Not the les afterward he was stoned to death for the same cause, which
is the reward of man that is which man gives for the true preaching of this
article. So let Abell dye, and Cain live.

Finally, the persecution of satan our Abell dye, and Cain live, that is our
law.

THE XI. CHAP.
1 How satan has deceived the world after Christ, and wherewith he has cled
him.

2 An evident argument showing them, which this day are called bishops, to
be the church malignant.

3 An exhortation to them which enter in the church by the Popes authority:
aend of his power to make bishops.

4 Wherein the wicked Jews gloried, and wherein the Pope and his kingdom.

mankind, had no place to pervert the perfect faith. Then invented he a new
manner of habit, which he found in the same church amongst the slothful
ministers: whom (by process of time seeing them idle and not occupied in the
reading, teaching, and preaching of the scriptures) he provoked to invent
works of their own conceit. And also to abuse the holy sacraments, and good
works of God with vain superstitions: the which they call good works. And by
this means he has so drawn them from faith, that they know not what the
same is, nor what Christ is: but as it were a Thief hanged upon a gallous or
gibbit innoce^tly, or like another manner of profane history of Hector, or of
the great Alexander. And therefore has provoked them to pursue this Article
more cruelly then ever it was pursued from the beginning of the word. Them
selfs by word confessinge the same with their mouth, reading, singing, and of
their manner, daily teaching, and preaching the same. And yet nevertheless
daily burning, killing, and banishing the true faithful preachers of the said
article, and confessors thereof. And so ever shall Abell dye and Cain live,
that is our law, say they.

Our said adversary that he should not be perceived, has transformed him
self in to an Angel of light Note well.
That is in form of holiness. He has entered in the church in wonderful
subteltie: for he has cled him with the most honest and shining works,
invented this day by men's wit or reason. (Yea with the same works commanded
also by God) and by them maintains, and defended him self wholly: yea
verylie, he had cled him with the blessed sacrament of the body and blood of
christ, for he can well disguise him in works with pride, Where may Satan
enter and rule.
vain glory, hypocrisy, diffide^ce, despair, Idle faith, as to believe the
history only, presumption of the own merits, etc. But in perfect faith,
which is the groundstone of this article of justification, he can never enter.
Therefore under color of holiness he has caused and daily causes the prelates
of the Church (as they call them,) who should of their vocation, have (to the
shedding of their blood) defended this Article, pursue the same most cruelly,
with all torments invented by man's wit under the false pretense of good
works: having no respect to faith. And so shall Abell dye, and Cain live.

Ye shall understand that the often repeating of the death of Abell and the life
of Cain is no vain story nor purpose, but the true similitude of the Church
of christ, which first watered with the blood of Abel, remains example to
this hour and shall to the second coming of Christ to the latter judgment.
In the which two persons is set forth to us, the perfect knowledge of the
Church, which consistes in the godly and ungodly Which shall be separate when the
Lord shall send forth his angels in his harvest.
. And ever the perfect and just Church is pursued with the wicked, and never
pursues, by which the disciples and servants of Christ are known as
testify the holy scriptures.

I exhort you which are adversaries to this article of justification: Note well.
consider with your self, if ever ye red the history in canonical scriptures,
or profane histories, that ever the true and perfect church from the beginning
of the world to this hour persecuted any: but ever was persecuted and the
godly glad thereof. Herefore, the form and order of this tyrannical
persecution used this day by them having the ecclesiastical power in their
hands against the faithful professors of this article: I judge to be of the
devil, and may say truly to them as Christ said to the Scribes, and
Pharisees, all the blood which is shed from the blood of Zacha. whom they
slew, between the altar and the temple, Luc. 11.
shall come upon these cruel tirantes which impunge this Article, and slaye
the faithful professors thereof. Against these sayings, the adversaries of
faith and verity cry. The voices of the wicked.
The canon Law, the authority of the Church, the long consuetude, the
examples of the Fathers, the Bishop of Romes authority, the general
Counsels, Heresy, Heresy: So there is no remeady, but let Abel dye, and Cain
live, that is our law.

My hearts, ye which have entered in the Church of Christ, by the bishop of
Romes law and authority, with his fair bulls, your shaven crounes, smaring
you with oil or chreame, and clothing you with all Ceremonies, commanded in
your law. If ye think you therethrough the successors of the Apostles, and
Fathers, of the church: ye are greatly deceived: for that is but a politic
succession or ceremonial. The succession of the Church is far otherwise, the
which requires you to have knowledge in the scriptures of God, 1. Tim. 3.
to preach, and teach the same, with the other qualities and conditions
contained in the scriptures, Tit. ^.
as hereafter shall be showe^ in the special vocations: of the which if ye be
expert and your vocation lawefull, according to the word of god, doubtless ye
are the successors of the apostles: and have the same auctority, they had
committed to them by Christ. And if ye want the said conditions, and
qualities: Ye are but reauing wolfes, Note well.
clede with sheep skins: what authority that ever the bishop of Rome give
you. For it is no more in his power to make a Bishop of him which can not
preach, nor has the knowledge to rule the flock committed to his care,
according to the word of god: then it is in his power to make an ass to speak
or be man: or yet cause a blind man to see. Therefore, I pray you learn the
scriptures that ye may walk in your vocation right: for of your succession ye
have no more matter to glory, then the Jews had, to glory against Christ:
calling them the sons of Abraham, Io. ^.
whom he called the Sons of the devil. They gloried in the carnal
succession: and ye glory in the politic or Ceremonial succession. And all is
one thing, God send you knowledge, and understanding of his word that ye may
cease from your tyranny, and the true faithful may live in rest and quietness.

THE XII. CHAP.
1 The division of justice in general with the definition of every part
thereof.

2 The cause that no man is just by the law.

3 Scriptures and examples proving all me. (except Jesus Christ) to be sinners.

LEt us pass forewarde in the discussing The entres to the article of
justification.
what of the law, either of God or man: which being shortly discussed, we
shall the more easily come to the knowledge of our christian iustificatio:
which is a thing far above all law, either of god or man: for it is the
justice by the which a wicked man is made just, through faith in the blood of
Jesus Christ, without the works of the law, Rom 3. Galath. 2.
because of the deeds of the law no flesh shall be made just before god, The
cause that no man is just by the law.
as the apostle says. This is as much to say as because no man fulfilleth the
law, nor does the deeds and works of the same, in the pure and clean estate,
as the law required them to be done according to the purity of the same.
Therefore the law can pronunce none just before god.

Justice in general.
This word justice or righteousness generally by the philosophers is taken
commonly for the obedience and outward honesty, according to all virtues of
moral manners, the which a man may do and perform of his own power and
strength. This is called an universal or general Justice after the
philosophical definition: the same S. Pau. called the righttuousnesse of the
law, or works, because the Transgressors of this justice are punished as
wicked and unrighteous. For whom the Law is made and ordinate, as Saint Paul
says, 1. Timoth. the first Chap. for the just needs no law. These moral
manners and discipline, is the most excellent raiment or habit, wherewith man
may be cled. Nevertheless, they can not make a man just before God, nor is
not the Justice which we speak of here in this treatise.

The Politic or Civil Justice is the obedience which every Subject and
Inferior estate of man, gives to their prince, and Superior, in all the
world. The which proceeds of the law of nature, and is a good work,
without the which obedience (to the punishment of the wicked, and defense of
the just) no common weal might be conserved and kept in rule and order, but
all would run to confusion. Therefore are Princes and higher powers commanded
of God to be obeyed, Romans 13.
as his good work: for they are the ministers of God unto good. Nevertheless,
ye shall never find man so just in fulfilling this justice: but the law of
nature shall accuse him that he has not done his whole duty, which the
same requires: Neither the Prince to the Subject, nor the Subject to the
Prince, nor equal to equal, that is, Neighbor to Neighbor: The knowledge
of this law of nature is borne with man, prented in his heart, with the finger
of God. And therefore let every man consider his own estate: and he shall
perceive, that if god will accuse him, with this law, he shall not be found
just, because of the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be found just before God.
What is to be just before man.
Notwithstanding, he which does the deeds of this law and is obedient thereto
in doing, and leaving undone, according to the external works is so reakoned
just before man, and lives in the same: and therefore has the name of justice.

The Ceremonial Justice, is the obedience and fulfilling of the Statutes,
ordinances, and traditions of man, made by the bishop of Rome, and other
bishops, Counsels, Schoolemaisters, and Householders, for good rule, and order,
and manners, to be kept in the church, schools, and families. This is a good
work and necessary to be had with these conditions The things which should be
eschewed in keeping Ceremonies.
(that is) that they be made, not repugnant to the law of god: and that through
keeping of them: no man think him, the holyer before god: nor yet therefore to
obtain remission of sins, or to be found righttuous before god. Nor yet
that the same may bind or oblish any man to the observing of them, under the
pain of deadly sin. Nevertheless how well that ever ye observe or keep
them, that is, this law Ceremonial: ye shall not be found just there through
before God, because of the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be found just before
him.

The Justice of the law moral or Moy. law, which is the law of God, exceeds
and is far above the other two justices. It is the perfect obedience required
of man, according to all the works and deeds of the same. Not only in external
and outward deed, but also with the inward affections and motions of the heart,
Deuteronomy. 10. Math. 22. Mar. 12.
conform to the commandment of the same (saying) Thou shall love thy lord god
with all thy heart, with all thy mind, with all thy power, and strength. And thy
neighbor as thy self. This is no other thing but the law of nature, prented
in the heart of man, in the beginning: now made patent by the mouth of god to
man, to utter his sin* and make his corrupted nature more patent to him self.
And so is the law of nature, and the law of Moses, joined together in a
knot, which is a doctrine, teaching all men a perfect rule, to know what he
should do: and what he should leave undone, both to god and his neighbor.

Math. 56. and 7.
And as they are declared and expounded by Christ: and who soever transgresses
the same, shall never be pronounced just of the law. But there was never man,
that fulfilled this law to the uttermost perfection thereof (except only
Jesus Christ.) Therefore, in the law can we not find our justice, because of
the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be made just before God.

For the probation hereof, we will show the aucthorities of the Scripture
from the beginning: how the most holy fathers were tra^sgressours of the law.
And therefore could never be made righteous by the same: and if they which were
most holy, could not be found just by the deeds of the law: much less may the
wicked be pronounced just by the same. Therefore, we must take this conclusion
with the Apostle S. Paul. All have sinned, and have need, or are destitute,
of the glory of God That is by original sin all man is becomme blind and is
fallen from that Image of God (which was integrity of nature, justice, and
righteousness) in which man was first created and now is cled with the
contrary. Romans 3. Genesis 3.
: And are made just freely by grace through faith, in the blood of Jesus christ.

Adam, first in the paradise, transgressed the law: and therefore the same
accused him, and condemned him, and all his posterity, as rebels and
transgressors of the same, to the death. Nevertheless, the law remains still
holy, just, and good, requiring the same holiness, Justice, and goodness of
us, as testified S. P. 7, And because we do not the same, the law ever
accused us, and pronounced us rebels, and transgressors, as our forefather
Adam was. Who might never be pronounced just by the law, because of the deeds of
the law, no flesh shall be made just before god: and seeing all me^ gotten by
natural propagatio^ has descended of Adam: he is corrupted and rebel to the
law as Adam was. For he might get no better sons, nor his nature was. This
corruption is so infixt in the nature of man, that he is never clean purged
thereof, so long as this mortal body of sin, and the spirit remains
together: and this is the cause why we fulfill not the law, in the pure and
clean form as the same requires the deeds thereof to be done. For this
cause S.P. says: Now I work not this evil, Romans 7.
but the sin which dwells in me: for I know there dwells in me (that is in
my flesh) no good: for the good which I would, that do I not, but the evil
which I would not, that do I, as Paul would say, so rebellous is my wicked
nature, to the affections of my spirit, that the very things which I know good,
and would do, for weakness may I not complete. I would love, fear, honor, and
thank God, with all my heart, and all my strength, and adheere to his promis:
in every hour and all tribulation, but by the wicked flesh, I am impedite to
do the same. For howbeit, I have fear, and love, begun into me, yet are
natural securite, and concupiscence impedime^ts, that they be not pure and
perfect as the law requires, and albeit I have faith begun in me: Let every
man judge if in time of tribulation he find not this battle within him self.
which teaches that God is true in all his promises. Yet natural dubitatio^,
and imbecility, causes me frequently to doubt, if God shall deliver. And so
murmurs sometime the flesh, and loves not God withal the heart. Here my
hearts, ye may learn, at the Apost. to know this corruption of nature. For he
gives the example in himself, and in no other: teaching every one of us, to
judge our self, and not our neighbor.

This corruption of nature, Original sin.
is called original sin, which is the wanting of original justice, that
should have been in man, according to his first creation. This corruption of
nature followed the fall of Adam, in all men, that the nature of man may not
truly obey the law of god, nor fulfill the same for the inherent faults, and
concupiscence in the heart of man: engendered of this corrupted nature, and so
can not be pronounced just by the law, because of the deeds of the law, no
flesh shall be made just before god.

From Adam to Noe, from Noe, to Abraham, and from Abraham to Moses, enduring
the which space and time, we ca^ find none of the holy fathers, (which lived
under the law of nature) pronounced just by the deeds of the law: but all were
sinners, and Transgressors of the law as Adam was, as testifies the whole
history of Genesis Therefore, the justice of a christian man shall we not find in
the law, because of the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be found just before
god.

Moses, who was mediator between god and his people of Israel, in giving of
the law of the two tables, (which is but a declaration of the law of nature
right understand) fulfilled not the law, as ye may read in the book of Number.
the 20. chap. The breaking of the first commandment.
where Moys. and Aaron ar both reprehe^ded of god for their diffidence, and
incredulity, the which is the breaking of the first commandment of god. And a
great and weighty sin: howbeit the reason of man cannot consider it: yea
veriely greater and weightier before God, then either slaughter or adultery.
In the sight of man the crime appeeres but small The sin of Moys. and
punishment thereof.
for God gave commandment to speak to the stone, or rock in presence of the
people: And charged the same to give water, but they spak to the people with a
doubt (saying) may not god give you water out of this rock: and then stroke
upon the stone twice, which gave water abou^dantly: but god would not pretermit
the punishment of their unfaithfulness (saying) they should never enter in the
land, promissed to the people of Israel. And Moys. also testified no man to be
innocent before god, Exodus 34.
but by favor and imputation of grace through faith. Exodus 33.
And howbeit Moys. repented sore the said offense, and prayed fervently that he
might enter into the la^d of promis: he was not hard: for god would not alter
his sentence, as ye may collect of the saying of Moses, Deuteronomy. 3. Chap. where
god says to him: speak no more to me of that matter, thou shall not pass over
the water of Iordane. Here ye may see that man can find no justice in the
law, which is of value before God.

Job, who was commended by the mouth of god, the most just in earth, could
find no justice in the law: for howbeit he was innocent in the sight of man:
he might not enter in judgment with god, because the justice of man, is
nothing before god, as ye may read in his book, Io. 6. and 15
and alleges the stars of Heaven, not to be pure in the sight of god:
muchlesse, are men to, stand in judgment with his law, to be pronounced
just. Therefore, the holy man Job concluded his book, with confession and
repentance, granting him to be a foolish sinner. Job. vltio.
And so by faith in the promised seed was received in the favor of God, and
accepted as righteous, the which is the justice, that is of value before god.

David, the figure of Christ, of whom god speaks (saying) I have found a man
according to my hearts desire, 1. Reg. 13. and 16.
says: enter not in judgment with thy Servant (O Lord) for in thy sight no
man living shall be made just, Psalm. 124.
or righteous: that is as much to say, after the mind of the prophet. If ye
will be justified by the law, ye must enter in judgment with God: who is he that
lives so godly, and holy in the earth, which may or ca^ defend his cause,
being called to the justice seat of God, to give account and reakoninge of all
things which he aught to God, and by his law justly he may require: there
is not one as the Prophet says: Therefore (O lord) if thou shall call us to
judgment: and ask question of our life and manners, according to the rigor
of thy law: there shall be to us no hope of salvation. S. August. expounding
the said verse, says: There is no man living upon earth, Augustine concluded
all man to have sinned.
excepted in this cause, no not the Apost. and concluded with these words, let
the Apostles say and pray: O father of heaven forgive us our debtes, as we
forgive our debtours, and if any would say unto them: why say ye so, what is
your debt: They would aunsweare (saying) because no living creature shall be
found just in thy sight. And in another place expounding the said words:
Enter not in judgment with thy Servant (O Lord) that is, stand not in
judgment with me, asking from me all things which thou have commanded, and
given me charge to do, and leave undone: for thou shall find me guilty, if
thou enter in judgment with me. Therefore says he, I have need of thy
mercy, rather then to enter with thee in judgment.

And S. Bernard, in the sermon which he makes and writs in the day of all
Saints, Mark the words of S. Bernard.
speaks after this manner: but what may all our justice be before god: shall it
not be reputed or esteemed, like unto the menstrous cloth of a woman, according
to the saying of the prophet: and if it be sharply accused, all our justice
shall be found unrighteousness: what then shall be our sins, when our justice may
not answer for the self. Therefore, let us cry with the prophet: enter not
in judgment with thy servant (O lord) and with all humility run to the mercy
of God: which only may save our souls. Here ye may clearly understand, by
the holy fathers, saying that they understood the scriptures, and article of
justification, as we do, finding no righteousness in the law: but only through
faith in the mercy of god.

The said Prophet says, if thou (O lord) shall keep our iniquities, and
lay up our sins in store, O Lord, who shall sustain or abide. Psalm. 139.
S. Aug. expounding these words, says: the prophet said not: I shall not
sustain: But who may sustain or abide thy judgment, if thou will accuse. He
saw the whole life of man, Note.
circumuolued with sins, all consciences to be accused with their own
thoughts. And no clean, pure, and chaste heart, to be found presuming in his own
righteousness. Therefore if a clean or chaste heart cannot be found presuming
in his own justice: let all me^ with the heart in faith unfeignedly presume in
the mercy of god, and say unto him: If thou (O Lord) shall keep or lay up in
store our iniquities: O Lord, who shall or may abide it: where then is the hope
of our salvation, with thee (O Lord) for the help and satisfaction or
sacrifice for our sins is with thee, as it follows in the next verse,
Sacrifice for our sins. Esaias. 5 3. Heb. 9. Galath. 3. and 4. Ephe. 1. Tit. 2.
Apo. 5.
of the same Psalm. What is this sacrifice, but the innocent blood of christ
shedd, which has deleted, and put away our sins, the only price given, to
redeem all Prisoners and captives forth of the Enemies hands. Herefore help
and satisfaction is with thee (O lord) for if it were not with thee, but that
thou woldst be a just judge, and not merciefull: and would observe and
keep all our iniquities, and seek them of us, who might abide it. Who should
stand in thy judgment, and say, I am innocent. Therefore, our only hope is,
that help, mercy, and favor is with thee. O ye which are adversaries to
faith, prent these words in your hearts, which ye read with your mouths,
but take no care of them, and then ye shall not impung this Article of
justification: but say with us the words of the prophet: enter not into
judgment with thy servant, O Lord: for in thy sight no living creature shall be
found just.

THE XIII. CHAP.
1 The justice of a Christian.

2 The questions of the wicked against the manifest will of God, taught in the
scriptures.

3 Tokens declaring the serpents seed.

NOw sithe^s our forefathers, which Apost. To. 3. cha. All me^ have left god,
and altogether are become unprofitable: none of them is found good, except one,
which is the man Christ Jesus, the only begotten son of god: by whom and by
his merits through faith in his blood, we are all received into the favor,
grace, and mercy, of God the father, accepted as righteous and just, without
all our merits or deseruinges, to the everlasting life. This is the justice of
a christian which at length shall be declared (with gods grace) hereafter.

Here the adversaries will move three questions, to se if they may impung the
truth. The first is: wherefore gave god the law to man, The objections of the
wicked.
or what auailed the giving of the same: if man of his own power, and
strength, may not fulfill the law. The second question is, if man may not be
made just through the deeds and works of the law: wherefore should man do any
good works. The third is, how were the fathers made just, and by what means.
To the first question concerning the giving of the law: the cause wherefore it
was given: and why we fulfill not the same: I will answer unto it presently.
And the other two questions shall be discussed with the Article of
justification. That is, with the discussing of the justice, pertaining to a
Christian man. And in the forthsetting of good works: which followed faith, as
the true fruits thereof.

But first ye shall note and keep well in memory, The nature of the wicked.
that the wicked ever objects questions and causes, unto god: on this manner
when any thing occurres, which transcendeth their fleshely wit, and reason:
then say they, wherefore did god this or that thing: the which sayings
declares the^ to be the serpents seed, of whom they learned that lesson. For
it was his Eve, in Paradise, saying. Wherefore has god commanded you that ye
should not eat of all the trees in the paradise* thus he persuaded the woman to
give him answer, of the cause not perteining her to know: and so brought her
to confusion: Eue^ so does the ungodly, and sonns of the devil inquiring at God
the causes of his secret judgments, as wherefore has god chosen one: and
rejected another, with other such unprofitable questions, of the
predestination, and forescience of God. But in all such matters which are
above, our capacity and reason: let us say with the Apost. O highness, o
deepenes, o profou^dnes, of the riches, Romans 2.
of the knowledge, and of the wisdom of God. How in comprehensible are the
judgments of him: and unsearchable are the ways of him: for who has known
the mind of the lord, or who has been his Counselor, or who has first
given to him that he should give again to them: for of him, and by him, and
in him, are all things. To whom be honor, praise, and glory for ever.

Herefore my well beloved brethren, inquire ye nothing of the works of god:
Note well.
and of his secret judgments: but as his word teaches you, and seek no
cause of his works, more then of his divinity. But be content to know those
things, which are in your capacity, and under judgment of the reason of man.
For as Job says in his book, Job. 9.
if God hastily inquire us, who shall answer unto him, or who may say unto
him: wherefore do thou so: He is god, whose Ire no man may resist. Read the
whole 10. chap. for confirmation of this matter. And I exhort you by the mercy
of god, to read the Scriptures not as they were a profane history of Hector,
Alexander, or other gentill histories. Nor yet as the manly science of Plato,
Aristotle, the bishop of Romes law, or others, which are but the science of
men, and may be judged by the reason of man: but with an humble heart, submit
you to god and his holy spirit, who is Schoolemaister of his scriptures: and
will teach you all verity necessary for your salvation, according to the
promise of Jesus Christ. Io. 14.16.
For the understanding of the scriptures is not of manly wisdom, or
knoweledge, but the Godly men moved by the holy spirit, have spoken and forth
showen the perfect knowledge of the scripture, Whom to the scriptures are
difficil
as Saint Peter says in his second Epist. the 1. chap. Therefore think the
scriptures not difficil: but to the fleshly man, which shall get no
understanding thereof. They deceive you which say, the scriptures ar difficil,
no man ca^ understand them: but great clearkes. Verily, whom they call their
clearkes, know not what the scriptures mean: fear, nor dread not to read
the scriptures, as ye are taught here before. And seek nothing in them but
your own salvation: and that which is necessary for you to know. And so the
holy spirit your teacher shall not suffer you to err, nor go beside the right
way: but lead you in all verity. And so will we pass forward to the question
before rehearsed. Wherefore god gave the law as we are taught by his scriptures.

THE XIIII. CHAP.
1 An introduction to answer the first question of the wicked.

2 To what creatures god gave law, and why he gave the law to man.

3 Of Adams gifts before his fall, has no man experience.

4 The law given to Moses, and why man may not fulfill the law.

THere can nothing be perfitly understand

God being without beginning, as he is without ending: in the beginning made
all creatures perfect, right, and good: and last of all men, to his own image
and similitude, male, and female, he made them: whom he endued and cled, with
most excellent gifts of nature, and godly virtues, with original justice, full
integrity, the law of nature imprented in his heart, with power to do the same
of his own freewil. And put him in the paradise of pleasure, that he should
labor, and keep the same, with commandment to eat of the fruits of all the
trees of paradise: and forbad him to eat of the fruits of the try of
knowledge of good and evil, standing in the mids of the Paradise: Adjoining
the pain if he transgressed this commandment, Gene. 1. and. 2.
saying, whatsoever day thou eatest of the same, thou shall dye the death.

The cause why God gave the law to man.
. To obey god, is to love God, with all thy heart, What it is to obey God.
with all thy mind, power, and strength, and thy neighbor as thy self. This
law was prented pure, and clean in the heart of Adam, who had free will, and
power, of himself to do the same. For God made man in the beginning, and left
him in the power of his own counsel, he gave to him his precepts, and
commandments (saying) if thou will keep the commandementes, they will keep
thee, etc. He put before him fire and water, that he might put his hand,
Eccle. 15.
to which of them he liked. He laid before him life and death, good and evil
(saying) what ever shall please him, shall be given to him, etc.

The perfection of Adam, and knowledge Ecclesiasticus, the 17. Chapter God
created man of the earth, and made him after his own Image, and similitude,
turned and converted him again in the same. And cled him with virtues
according to himself, etc. Read the whole Chap. which will instruct you of
these noble virtues, and qualities of Adam. What might he want, being
perticipant in virtues to the godly nature: nothing at all: and so all the
works of god were made perfect: All creatures of god were perfect in their
first creation.
the which he never altered nor changed: No more did he his law, but after the
fall of man, by his prophets and holy Preachers he set forth and uttered his
law in the same form and pure estate, as it was created: That man thereby
might the more perfitly know his weakness and imperfection. Therefore the
Apost. says: To. 3. and 7.
by the law is the knowledge of sin. The law is not sin, Romans 4.
but sin is not known, but by the law. That is the cause why the law works
anger and hatred.

The law of Moses of the two Tables was but a uttering and declaration of the
law of nature. And that proves the sayings of Christ: For when he had made a
long sermon, teaching his disciples, and the people, the perfection of the law
of Moys. as ye may read the 5.6. and 7. Chap. of S. Math. concludes on this
manner. All things whatsoever ye will men do to you, do ye the same to them: For
this is the law and prophets. Here ye see the law and all the preaching of the
Prophets joined in a knot to the Law of nature, which teaches us what we
should do, and what we should leave undone. This law was perfitly prented in
the heart of Adam, who wanted no perfection to fulfill, observe, and keep the
same, to the uttermost perfection thereof.

For transgression of the commandment of god, our forefather Adam was exiled,
and banished forth of paradise: and spoiled of the integrity, perfection, and
all the excellent qualities, dignities, and godly virtues, with the which he
was endued by his creation, made rebel, and disobedient to God in his own
default Why man may not fulfill the law.
. And therefore he might not fulfill the law to the perfection as the same
required. For the law remaining in the own perfection, Just, holy, and good,
requires* and asks the same of man, to be in deed fulfilled. But all men
proceeding from Adam, by natural propagation, have the same imperfection, that
he had. The which corruption of nature resists the will and goodness of the
law, which is the cause that we fulfill not the same, nor may not of our power
and strength, through the infirmity and weakness of our flesh: which is enemy
to the spirit, Romans 7. and 8.
as the Apostle says.

O miserable man accuse not God, but thy self, because thou fulfillest not the
law: For howbeit (thou) in thy default fell from thy goodness, and perfection
of nature (by the which of thy own friewill and power, thou might have
fulfilled the law) into euilnes and imperfection: and has corrupted thy
nature: Nevertheless, God remained just, good, true, and unchangeable, and his
law also, which requires of thee her duty, not according to the fragilitie of
thy nature, but to the purity of her nature, according to the good will of
God. Therefore impute no fault to god, nor yet to his law, that thou
fulfillest not the same, but to thy self, and thy corrupted nature, which
obeyed the will of the Devil, and resisted the goodwill of god.

THE XV. CHAP.
1 What remained in man after his fall, and what may man do thereby.

2 The opinion of the Philosophers, touching the wickedness of man.

3 The office of the law, and what shall man accused thereby, do.

4 The conclusion of Paul, and evasion of Sophistes therefrom: with arguments
conuincing them as Liars.

NOtwithstanding after the fall of man remained with our first parents Men may
work outward works of the law.
by the which of our free will and power, we may do the outward deeds of the
law, as is before written. This knowledge deceived and beguiled the
Philosophers: for they look but to the reason and judgment of man: and could
not perceive the inward corruption The opinion of Philosophers.
and pure of nature: And might of his own free will and natural reason, fulfill
all perfection. And when they perceived the wickedness of man from his birth:
they judged that to be, by reason of the planete under whom he was borne, or
through evil nourishing, vpbringing, or other accidents: and could never
consider the corrupted nature of man, which is the cause of all our wickedness.
And therefore they erred, and were deceived in their opinions and judgments:
but the perfect christian man should look first in his corruption of nature,
and consider what the law requires of him: in the which he finding his
imperfection and sins accused: for that is the office of the law, to utter
he shall get the justice, that is of value before God: which can not begotten
by any law, or works, because by the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be
justified before God.

Ye shall not meruell of the often rehearsinge of these words, that of the
deeds of the law, no flesh shall be made just: that is declared, reputed,
found, or pronounced just before god: for they are rehearsed before the
forthsetting of the article of justification, that it may seem the more
clear, and to that effect the same words were spoken by the Apostle Romans the
third Chapter. Of this manner, we know what ever the law speaks: to them it
speaks, which are in the law, that all mouths may be stopped, and all the
world made subject unto god, because by the deeds of the law, no flesh
shall be made just before him. And therefore I have repeated them so often,
because they lead all men to the perfect knowledge of their justification which
is in Christ.

This proposition of the holy spirit is so perfect, that it excludes (if ye
will understand the same right) all the vain foolish arguments of sophistry,
made by the iustifiers of them selfs, which peruerte the words of S. Paul
(as they do the other scriptures of god) to their peruersed sense and mind
(saying) that the Apostle excludes by these words the works of the law
Ceremonial: and not the deeds of the law of nature, and moral law of Moses.
The which shameless sayings, are expressly euacuat by the words of the Apost.
Insomuch that no man of righteous judgment can deny: but shall feel the same
as it were in their hands: by this probatio^, the law speaks to all, that is
accuses all men, that are under the law. Argument against Sophistes.
All men are under the law of nature, or the law of Moys. Therefore the Apost.
speaks of the law of nature and Moy. and of all men which he comprehends
under Jew and gentill, as he proves by his arguments in the first and second
Chap. to the Roma. And concludes in the third Cha. all men are sinners. If all
men be sinners: none is just. If none be just, none fulfill the law. If none
fulfill the law, the law can pronounce none just. Therefore concludes he
that of the deeds of the law, no flesh shall be found just before God. The same
is proved by David in the 13. Psalm.

Here ye see by the words of the Apostle, he intendes to prove and declare,
Argument.
all men Sinners. That is, to stop all men's mouths: and to drive them to
Christ, by the accusation of the law. No law may Moses. Therefore, under that
word (law) the Apost. comprehended the law moral, and not the law Ceremonial
only. Because it follows in the text. The knowledge of sin, is by the law.
And also I knew not sin (says S.P.) but by the law: Romans 3.
Nor I had not known that lust or concupiscence had been sin, were not the
law said: Thou shall not lust: Therefore ye cannot eschew: but confess that the
Apostle speaks of the law moral: yea, and of all laws, and all men, because
he excepts none. Therefore let us conclude with the Apost. and the holy
spirit, Romans 3.
that the justice of god is without the law made patent and forthshowe^ by the
law and prophets. And then shall we come to our Justice, which is Christ, as
S. P. says the 1. Epist. the first chap. to the Corinth.

If ye will say of your vain conceate (as ye which are adversaries to faith
ever objects vanities) that the Apostle in his conclusion comprehends not all
men, proceeding from Adam by natural propagation: but that some just men are
excepted. Ye shall not find that exception in scripture, of any man (except)
Christ. Who being both God and man, is expressly excepted, Esa. 53. 1. Pet. 2.
1. Io. 3.
because he never contracted sin: Fraud, nor deceat was never found in his
mouth, by this exception all other are excluded, because there is no other (who
can be found just) but he. For that cause, he only fulfilled the law, and
satisfied the same. By whom all which believe, are accepted as just, without
the deeds of the law, through faith in the blood of Jesus Christ. Let us
pass forward therefore, in the scriptures, for to find the Justice of a
christian man, which can not be found in the law, nor deeds thereof.

THE XVI. CHAP.
1 The diversity of names of that justice which is acceptable before God.

2 Justice is plainly reveled in the euangell.

3 What is to live in faith, or by faith.

THe justice whereof we have made The justice of a christian men has diverse
names.
is called the justice of God: the justice of faith: and the Justice of a
Christian man: The which is all one thing, glued and joined together, that by
the same, we are in Christ: and he in us: by the mercy of god, purchased by
christ through faith in his blood, without all our deseruings, either
proceeding or following the same. And it is so far different from the other
justice of the law, as darkness from light: and heaven from earth: because it
will be alone, and not participant with any other thing, that Christ may have his
due honor. Who obtained this justice from the father, and is the price thereof,

And first it is called the justice of god, because it proceeds only of the
mercy of God, Secondly, the justice of faith, because faith is the instrument
whereby in Christ we obtain the mercy of God, freely given to us for Christ's
sake. And thirdly, it is called ours, because by faith in Christ without all
our deseruinges, we receive the same: and are made, reputed, and compted just,
and accepted in to the favor of god. And all three ar one Justice, divided by
sundry names, as is before said, which is this article of justification. As
by example: alms deed is but one name. And yet after the common manner of
speaking it is appropriat truly to three: that is to the Giver, to God, and to
the Receauer. In alms, the poor, and indigent, have no part but only to
receive, and give thanks. The giver freely gives of his liberality and
substance, and for gods sake. So it is properly called the alms of the giver,
and justly attribute unto god, because for his sake it is given. And also to the
receauer because he is made rich therewith. In the like manner this justice of
God proceeds of his abundant mercy and grace, favor, and goodness, which he
bears toward man kind, that is poor (yea) above all poverty, laden with
sin, having need of the grace and mercy of God: destitute of all confort and
consolation. And therefore is called his justice, by reason of the giving. And
it is called the justice of faith, or the justice of Christ: because faith is
the instrument, and Christ the Purchaser of the same. And it is called ours by
reason of participation of all christ's merits: which we have through faith in
his blud without our merits or deseruinges.

Therefore even as the sickman receaueth his health: An apt similitude.
The poor his alms: and the dry earth the rain, without all their merits
or deseruings: So receauest thou of God this justice, which is of value before
him, by such instruments as god provides mediatly thereto: he being the
immediate cause. The physician gives thee his counsel in thy sickness,
exercises his labors upon thee, by the creatures of god according to his
vocation: thou do nothing but suffer to work in thee, til thou be healed.
And then at commandment of the good Physician thou keep good diet, not to
get thy health: but that thou fall not again in sickness. The poor man
receiving his alms, has no part thereunto, only but to receive. The man
that gives, being the instrument whom God has made the steward of that his
gift. The Earth received the rain, and has no part thereinto, but to receive.
The Labourer or Plowman, being the instrument to open the pores of the earth
that the rain may descend into it, and then it brings forth fruit in due
time: Even so it is with man.

It is called the justice of God and not of man or of free will: but of God, not
that Justice by the which God is just: but the Justice with the which man is
cledd, and by the mercy of God, of wicked made just, as Saint Augustine says,
in his book of the spirit, and the Letter the 20. Chap. in obteining of the
which we neither work nor give anything to god: but receaueth, and suffers god
to work in us. Therefore, it is far above all justice of the law, which man
does, and works, the which are also the works of god, both, because they are
of the law: and man may do them of his own free will, and power, as to the
external work. And also they are the gift of god. But always they may have no
place in this Article of justification before god, except ye will exclude the
merits of Christ (which GOD forbid.)

This Justice was covered in the old testament under Ceremonies, and
sacrifices, but is made known and patent unto us now, by the Euangell of Jesus
christ from faith to faith: Romans 1.
That is not from one faith to another faith: but from that faith by the which
we receive the Euangell of god, through hearing of his word, and with
gladness accept the same: in continual perseverance growing daily in
perfiter knowledge of god through faith in Christ, til we give up the spirit,
into the hands of the Father of heaven. Never doubting for whatsoever
tentation or trouble, in adversity: but receiving all things from God, and of
his hands, as our forefather Abraham did, and judge all for the best. Then
follows the formal

This is the faith of the which the Prophet Habac. speaks, the Just shall
live by his faith. The just man and faithful has never respect to any thing,
but only to faith in christ: And what ever he work or do, refers all to
Christ: and so remains he in Christ, and Christ in him conform to the saying
of S. P. I live now (no not I) but Christ lives in me: Galath. 2.
for so much as I live in the flesh, I live in the faith of the son of God,
who has loved me, and given himself for me. What is to live in faith.
Here ye may see to live in the faith, is to believe in Christ: joined unto him
continually by faith: then live we in Christ, and Christ in us, from faith to
faith, having no respect to works or merits: but only to the merits of
Christ. And so the just lives by his faith.

THE XVII. CHAP.
1 The definition of faith.

2 What faith the Fathers had before Christ's incarnation: and whereby they
were safe.

3 Good works are a testimony to faith.

4 Wherefore works please God.

4 The method of S. P. in writing and teaching, and the necessity of good
works.

6 Wherefore justice is ascribed unto man.

7 Who spoyleth god of his glory.

THe Apostle defines and declares, Heb. 2.
without the which it is impossible to please god. That is, faith is the true
and perfect thought of the heart: The definition of faith.
truly thinking and believing god, the which a man does when he believes his
word, and puts his sure trust in the mercy of god: which is to believe that
his sins are forgiven him for Christ's sake only: The wrath of the Father
pacified, and he received in favor, and accepted as just: and firmly and
undoubtedly believes the father of heaven, to be ever merciefull, gentle,
helpefull, and favorable unto him, for Christ's sake, without all deseruinges
of his deeds or merits, either preceding faith, or following the same. This
is the Justice of god, which is made patent and revealed by the son of god
Christ Jesus in his euangell, as said is before.

In this faith only in Christ were all the Ier. 23. and 33.

Esa. 4. and 45.

Ezech. 34. The faith of the fathers before the incarnation of Christ.


And therefore all the promises of the coming of Christ, are to be referred
to that promise made in Genesis the 3. Chap. that the seed of the woman shall
tread down the serpents head, etc. And so the faith of the Fathers in the old
testament, and our faith in the new testament, was and is one thing: howbeit,
they had other external rites, obiectes, ceremonies, and signs, then we have.
And they believed in the coming of Christ, to fulfill all promises and
prophesies spoken of him. And we believe he is come already, and has fulfilled
al which was spoken of him, in the law and Prophets. And has ascended to the
heaviness, and sits, at the right hand of the father, our advocate. And as
the Fathers believed the first coming of Christ, ever desiring and looking for
the same by faith: Even so now we believe, and look for his second coming.
And most fervently desire the same, to be delivered of this mortal body of
sin, that we may rule eternally with him in glory. Act. 15.
That the Fathers were safe by faith without the deeds of the law. Mark the
words of S. Peter.
S. Pet. testifies (saying) wherefore now te^pt ye god, to put a yoke upon the
necks of the disciples the which neither we, nor our Fathers might bear: but
by the mercy of Jesus Christ, we believe to be made safe, as they were. And S.
August. in the 157. Epist. says: Therefore if the fathers (being unable to
bear the yoke of the old law) believed them to be made safe, by the mercy of
our lord Jesus Christ: It is manifest that the same mercy, or grace, made the
old fathers to live just by faith. Now ye may see clearly that the old fathers
were all made safe, through the mercy of God, without all the deeds of the
law. Then how will you make your self safe with works: which never did so
good works, as the fathers. So there can be no better conclusion to exclude
your works, in the article of justification: then S. P. makes (saying) that a
man is made just by faith, Romans ^.
without the deeds of the law. Therefore faith only justifies before god. Ye
shall understand that it is all one thing to say: faith only justifies. And
to say faith without works justifies. As by example, if one say, the
goodman is in the house alone, or he is in the house without anybody with him.
This is all one manner of speaking: The scripture says, man is made just by
faith, without the works of the law: Therefore we may well say, that faith
only justifies. For confirmation hereof, ye shall read the 2. Chapter, to
the Hebre. before rehearsed, in the which ye shall find the histories briefly
repeated by the Apost. testifiing the fathers to be made safe by faith,
referring nothing to works, except testimony of the faith. Abell, by faith or
in faith offered to god a more acceptable sacrifice, then Cain did, by the
which he obtained witness that he was just: god bearing witness of the
offerings: Heb. 2.
and by the same hitherto speaks, being dead. God looks first to the heart
of man: before he look to his works, Genesis 3.
as testifies the voice of God (saying) I judge not after the sight of man:
For he sees the thing which appears outwardly: 1. Reg. 19.
But I behold the heart The man is first just before the works be good.
: That is, the man is first made just by faith: And accepted in the favor of
God (as Abell was) And then his works are acceptable and please God, because
they are wrought in faith. That it is the mind of the Apost. S. P. to exclude
all works (either going before or following faith) to be of the substance of
the Article of justification: proved clearly the arguments and matters of his
Epist. Specially to the Romans Galath. Hebre. In the which he labors so
diligently, that all the Sophistes and workers, that are Iustifiers of
themselfes, may not get a corner to hyde them into, from his conclusions,
without they deny Christ and his office. At the least in effect (as they do
after their manner.) But the wisdom of god and his holy spirit deceaueth
them: for when they wrest and throw the scriptures, to their mind in one
place, they are compelled in another place of the same Scripture to confess
them selfs Liars. In the Epistle* to the Romans from the beginning to the 12.
chap. and in the Epistle to the Galath. to the 5. Chap. The purpose of Paul,
in his Epist. to Romans and Galath.
with all labor and diligence, he sets forth the justice of god to be
through faith in Jesus Christ, without all works of the law. And when he has
established the same Article of justification: Then sets he forth the works
of righteousness, in the which a christian man shall live because the just shall
live in faith. This order ye may see in the said Epistles: and in the Epist.
to the Hebre. he declares the office of Christ, his priesthood and sacrifice,
and gives faith her place the 11. Chap. All his labor was to exclude the
mixtion which now these fained workers would have joined in with faith and the
benefit of Christ, which is no other thing but the work of the devil our
adversary, to make the death of christ in vain, Galath. 2.
as the Apost. says: Therefore if justice be of the law, or by the law,
christ's death is in vain.

But think not that I intend through these assertions to exclude good works:
No, god forbid, for good works are the gift of god, and his good creatures.
And ought and should be done of a christian, as shall be showen hereafter at
length in their place. But in this article of justification, ye must either
exclude all works, or else exclude Christ from you, and make your selfs just:
the which is impossible to do, because we are wicked and can do no good at all,
which can be of value before God, or pacify his wrath, except Christ first
make our peace. For that is his office The office of Jesus Christ is: to pacify
the wrath of God, which our works may not do. Cor. 6.
for the which he came in the world and suffered death: So if ye will not
exclude Christ, exclude your works. For in this case there is no concurrence,
more then there is between darkness and light: For what participation has
righteousness with iniquity, or what fellowship has light with darkness.
The definition of this Justice is made plain by S. P. To. the 3. Chap. which I
exhort you to read: consider word by word, conceive, and prent them well in
your hearts, then shall ye be able to contend and fight valia^tly against
satan, 1. Io. 5.
and his sophistes: of whom ye shall have victory by faith, which is our
victory that overcomes the world.

The justice of god is, by the faith of Jesus Christ, In all, and upon all,
which believe in him, there is no distinction or exception. All have sinned,
and have need (or are destitute) of the glory of god: But they are made just,
by his mercy, freely without the works, by the redemption which is in Christ
Jesus: whom god has proponed or laid before a sacrifice or satisfaction by
faith in his blood: to the forthshowing of his justice, for remission of the
sins by past: the which god has suffered to the forthshowing of his
righteousness at this time, that he may be just, and justify him, which is of
the faith of Jesus Christ. Where the^ is thy glory or vanting? it is excluded
by what law of works? No, but by the law of faith: Therefore we believe surely a
man to be made just, by faith without the deeds of the law.

Now, I pray you tell me what plainer words may be spoken, or terms inverted
to exclude all our works, merits, or power, to be participant with god in this
article of justification. They are as plain and clear as the son in midday.
Nevertheless because the words are so precious, and necessary above all
things to be imprented, and continually kept, in the heart of man: I will make
some declaration of every part, and particle of this definition. And prove by
authority of scripture, this justice of god (by the which a man is made just)
to be without all works or power of man, only by faith in the mercy of god.

Of this Justice, Dau. speaks (saying) lead me in thy justice, Psalm. 5.
O lord, because of my enemies: direct my way in thy sight. That is, O Lord my
god, for thy great goodness, singular kindness, and natural love, thou wast
ever wont to show unto sinners and mankind: be to me a governor, guider, and
conuoyer, in all perilles, and dangers: suffer never my mind to decline from
the right way, for any manner of strength or fear of my enemies. And also in
thy justice (O Lord) deliver me: Psalm. 30.
that is, for thy goodness and mercy: And after, judge thou me (O Lord) and
discuss my cause: that is, take my defense upon thee: Psalm. 43.
for I am not able of my self to resist. Therefore in thy justice deliver me:
and be unto me a strength invincible. Psalm. 70.
So shall ye find in diverse and sundry Psalm. and other places of scripture,
as Daniell 9. Chap. Justice and righteousness unto thee (O lord) but unto us
confusion, and shame of face. In the which Chap. ye may read what justice or
holiness, that holy Prophet ascriueth unto him, or to the most holy of the
people: Amongst whom, assuredly there was many good punished with the wicked:
but none which might ascribe righteousness to themself.

Dau. says: Psalm. 4.
hear me, who called on thee (O Lord) of my justice, etc. That is, god the
Author, Giver, and keeper, of my innoce^cie, has looked upon me. And judge me,
lord, after my justice, and according to my innocence, which is in me. Here he
forthshoweth not his virtues or his righeousnes, Psalm. 7.
which are in him with these words, because he says in another place: Enter
not in judgment with thy servant (O lord) for in thy sight no living thing
shall be found just. Psalm. 142. The holy ghost is never contrary to himself.
And the holy ghost is never contrary to himself. But here he called the
justice of God his, by imputation. And also he was innocent of the thing
which was laid to his charge, by King Saul, who ever accused him of treason:
and usurping of the crown of Israel, in the 16. Psalm. he says: Hear my
justice, O Lord, and give attendance to my desire and prayers. Here he
calls his justice, his petition. And in innumerable places of scripture, ye
shall find this word justice sometime ascribed to god: and sometime to man,
Why justice is ascribed to man.
because of the receiving of the same from god: but ever the scripture makes
the self plain, by the sentence that goes before, or else follows, or in
some other place. Therefore, take good heed upon the reading of the
scriptures, that ye deceive not your selfs, ascribing any deed or power of
yours to the Article of justification: for it may suffer none, but only Christ's
merits, because the merits of man, are impure and imperfite, and may not abide
the justice of God: nor stand in his sight.

It follows in the definition of this justice: By the faith of Jesus Christ in
all, and upon all which believes in him. Here ye may see our faith, that we
believe in Jesus Christ, called his faith, as it is in deed. And the faith also
of god, and by the same reason, as the justice is called before, because it is
the gift of God, as S. P. says. Ephe. the 2. Chap. and is the instrument by
the which we obtain the mercy of god, remission of our sins The faith of
Jesus Christ and what we receive thereby.
, the gift of the holy spirit, and everlasting life: all for Christ's sake,
without our deseruings by the which we are joined in Christ, and Christ in us,
as the precious stone is joined in the gold ring. So let all our delight and
pleasure be to embrace Christ in our heart by faith in his blood. For, faith
is the thing which Christ desires of a sinner. Believe son thy sins are
forgiven thee. Math. 9. Io. 11. Romans 10.
And also, all which believe in me (says Christ) shall not dye eternally. And
to the woman in the 7. Chapter of S. Luc. thy faith has made thee safe.

It follows in the definition: there is no distinction nor exception, all
has sinned, and has need of the glory of god: that is, 3. Reg. 8. 2. Par.
6. 1. Io. 1. Eccle. 7.
all wants that justice which god approved or judged to be glory. And so,
all me^ are sinners, and rejected from god, and can not be made just by the
law, because the same accused sin, The law is a mirror.
and is like a mirror in thy hand to consider the form of thy face: which can
do no other thing but show thee thy deformity. God has concluded all under
sin that he may have mercy upon all. The scripture has concluded all under
sin, Romans 2. Galath. 3.
that the promis may be given through the faith of Jesus christ to all which
believe.

It follows in the definition, but they are made just, freely, by the grace
of god, through the redemption which is in Jesus Christ. Here ye see the Apost.
purposes to exclude all your merits in deserving of this justice. To the
effect he may (as in all his Epist. and labors he intended) set forth the
glory of god: and the benefit of christ, the which ca^ no wise be highlier
setforth, then in the making of a wicked man, just, and freely: that is, for
nothing: and without deserving: For that cause Christ is made to us, from god,
wisdom, justice, holiness, and redemption: that he which reioyseth, may rejoice
in the lord. And that means the Apo. Pau. and the prophet Jeremy, 1. Cor. 1.
Iere. 9.
which will have all out virtues given unto God, as wisdom, strength, and
riches, which are in our power, to use and exercise, as the gifts of God: much
more justice, which is not in our power. Note.
For we are made, and make not our selves: the which we do, if we deserve it,
either for works preceding or following the justification, to have any part
of the substance thereof. And so would ye draw the glory of God to you in one
part, the which God will not suffer, as the Prophet Esaias says: Esa. 42. and
48.
My glory will I give to no other, either must ye make your selves just, or
else be made just by god: if ye make your selves just, ye are not allowed of
god. So the glory redoundeth to your self of your own work. This, the holy
spirit will never approve nor consent unto, as ye read the second Epist. to
the Corinth. the 10. chap. Coloss. 3. Phillip 3. Galath. 6.

That we are made just, freely, by the mercy of god, declares S.P. for
confirmation of this his assertion: by grace (says he) ye are made safe,
through faith: and that not of your selfs: It is the gift of god, not of
works, Ephe. ^.
that none have matter to glory or rejoice. This same he affirms in his
Epistle, to Titus the third Chap. and Romans the 11. Chap. where he says, if it
be of grace, then it is not of works: Otherwise, grace were no grace. That is
remission of sins were not freely given.
Here ye may see, this justice is of mercy freely without all our merits or
deseruinges.

Ye are made just by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus: and not in your
selves. For Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law: and is made for
us accursed. That is, he suffered the pain which the curse of the law
enjoined to us by sin: in whom we have redemption by his blood, remission
of our sins, Galath. 3.
according to the riches of his mercy and grace. Ehe 1.
What words may be more plain, to prove this justice only by faith in
Christ, excluding our merits. Ye have the same assertion in the Epistle to
Titus, the second Chapter, Galath. the fourth, and Apocalypsis, the fifth
chapter: Where it is written. Thou art worthy (O Lord) to take the book, and
open the seals of it: for thou art slain and have redeemed us to god in thy
blood, he says not in our works, but in thy blood. The wrath of God against
sin.
Here ye may see and consider our sins were no light things. Considering
there was no other thing which might pacify the wrath of the Father: but the
blood, and death, of his only begotten son Christ Jesus, to be made man for
that cause, And now for vain invented Imaginations, of ignorant Sophistes,
(which will not only be their own redemers: but also redeem others) this
precious blood is repute in vain, or a light thing.

It follows whom God has laid before a sacrifice or satisfaction through
faith in his blood, to the forthshowing of his justice, for remission of the
sins bypast, the which god has suffered (or in the suffering of god) to the
forthshowing of his Justice, at this time, that he may be just: and justify
him which is of the faith of Jesus Christ. Here the apostle abounds in words:
to exclude all sophistry and vain conceate of works, which me^ intend, and
would intend to make satisfaction for sin. For he sets forth Christ
here, the full sacrifice, and satisfaction, for sin. And therefore, he called
him the mediator of the new testament, by intercession of his death. Heb. 9.
And also Christ offered a sacrifice for sins: Heb. 10.
and for ever sits at the right hand of God, beholding till his enemies be
made his foot stool. And S. John says, if any shall sin, we have an
advocate before the father (Jesus Christ) who is just, 1. Io. ^.
and he is satisfaction, for our sins: not only for ours, but for the whole
worlds: and that through faith in his blood. For there is nothing may bring us
thereto but faith only, And no satisfaction may be, but Christ's death, who
has ones dyed therefore, Romans 6.
and shall not dye again, death shall have no more dominion of him. In the
which he has declared him just, in fulfilling the promis made of him in the
law and prophets. That is that he was to make us just, which could not make
our selves just.

And where he says, for remission of sins bypast, the which God has
suffered, etc. Understand not that of the sins bypast before the coming of
Christ only: but also of all sins committed to the worlds end. For these
words are spoken forth of the mouth of god, with whom all things is present,
as ye may consider by the words of Christ, speaking to the Jews on this
manner: Before Abraham was, I am. Io. 8.
Howbeit, Abraham was dead a thousand years before his incarnation. So to the
penitent, all sins are bypast: Therefore the remission of sins by past in
Christ's blood, endured to the end of the world.

Heb. 6.
This is necessary to know for two causes principally. The one is, for
confounding of the heresy of the Nouatia^s, The heresy of the Nouatia^s.
which pervert the sayings of the Apost. whereupon they would infer that man
once being justified: and thereafter falling in sin, may have no place of
repentance, which were the perverting of all the scriptures of God: Io 1.
and his promise in the blood of Christ, 1. Io. 2.
who is the lamb of god, that takes away the sins of the world. And our
advocate, sacrifice, and satisfaction. Howbeit, the Apost. speaks plainly
that it is impossible to be renewed to repentance through renewing of baptism:
for that were to crucify christ again, not in his flesh: but in thy flesh
which would be new baptized.

The other cause is to exclude their opinion which think that Christ satisfied,
but for original sin only: The false opinion of Sophistes.
and that baptism gives or has purchaste grace to man, after the baptism
that he may satisfy for his own sins by recompensation, as god were a
merchant to chop and change with man: That if Christ was the first merchant,
they shall be the next. And this is as great a heresy as the other, by the which
they would make the death of Christ but a vain trifle: and change faith into
works of man's making: The which is the work of the devil, that ever intended
to impung this Article of justification, by the mixtion of works. This opinion
S.I. confounds in his 1. Epistle the first and 2. chap. where he declares:
first, if a man say he has no sin, he deceaueth himself. And then if man
sin (as doubtless all men does) he says we have an Advocate Christ Jesus,
who is just: and is a satisfaction for our sins. Moreover, Note
all men, how just that ever they be, need daily to pray: forgive us our
debts, as we do our debtours: the which prayer were not necessary, nor Christ
had never taught the same: If we might have satisfied for our own sins, at
any time. So Christ is ever our satisfaction, and we daily sinners. Therefore
we ought ever to pray, forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtours.

It follows in the definition where is thy glory? by what law is it
excluded? of works: No, but by the law of faith: and concludes man to be made
just by faith without the deeds of the law: What is glory.
ye shall understand that glory in this place is taken for the sure trust and
belief which men put in their own works and merits, the which the apost.
will have cleanly excluded forth of this article: and given wholly to christ, who
deserves the same, because he is obteiner thereof, to us through faith in his
blood. The which faith will have no thing participant with it in this case,
more then the sight of the eye, will have or suffer the finger in it, to help
the sight. No, it can not suffer a mote, but ever waters, being hurt till the
mote be taken forth. Even so faith, foorthshoweth all thing to the glory of
God, and merits of Christ, without all works or merits of man.

If Abraham had been made just of works, Romans 4.
the^ had he wherein to rejoice, but not before god. And also he had not
obtained that name to be called the father of the faithful, Gene. 15.
but the father of workers. Therefore the scripture says, Abra. believed god,
Romans 4.
and it was reakoned to him for righteousness. Galath. 3.
In the which scriptures ye shall not only find this justice which is of
value before god: Heb. 2.
attribute and given whole to faith, in the mercy of God: but also the works
expressly excluded: For either we must be made just by faith only, or by works
only: because they may not be mixed without Christ's death be in vain: for to
him that works says (Paul) The reward is not impute according to grace, or
mercy, but according to debt. But to him which works not: that is, confideth
not in his own merits: but believes in him which justifies the wicked: his
faith is compted to him for righteousness, according to the purpose of the
mercy of God: And that without works. For the probation and sure understanding
of this assertion, ye shall read the whole 4. Chap. Romans the 15. of Gene. the
2.3. and 4. Galath. and 2. to the Ephe. which words shall be showen in this
subsequent Chapter.

THE XVIII. CHAP.
1 The cause wherefore God loves us.

2 Whereby comes the heritage.

3 The constance of Abraham in faith, and his obedience.

4 Jesus Christ pays for us that, which the law requires.

5 Who spoileth Christ of his office.

BY grace ye are made safe (by faith)

Verily, these words are worthy to be written in letters of gold: and ever
imprented in the heart of man, because they co^teine the whole sum of the
Eua^gell of Christ. And also exclude all the vain sophistical arguments made
contrary this article of justification, because in this Epistle there is no
question of the law (as in the Epist, to the Romans and Galath) But it is written
to the gentiles being confirmed in the faith: And also perseuering thereunto,
whom the Apostle certifieth of their justification in the first three Chap. And
then sets forth to the end of the Epist. the works of righteousness, in the
which true Christians should live, according to their vocation, upon the which
words I will make some short declaration, according to the scriptures.

Wherefore God loves us.
he would not, we should perish. For he loves his own work. Ezech. 18.
and 33.
He says, I will not the death of a Sinner, but that he convert and live:
he made us that he should love us: for no man hates or inuyeth his own
work. This grace we get by faith in Jesus christ, Ephe. 2.
the which is not our work, but the gift of God. For we are not of our selves
able or sufficient (as of our selves) to think a good thought: but all our
ability is of god, as the Apostle says the second Epistle to the Corinth,
the third Chapter, and Galath. the third Chapter: if the heritage be of the
law, then it is not of the promise: but by the promise god gave it to
Abraham, Ismaell, and Esaw, which were the eldest Sons, who succeeded not to
the heritage: but Isaac, and Jacob, which were heirs of the promise,
succeeded.

We are not made safe through works, that none should glory, because god
will not have us rejoicing in our selves in any part of his gifts, as the
Apostle says: What have thou that thou have not received? 1. Cor. 4.
And if thou have received it: why reioysest thou, more then thou had not
received it? Ye see works excluded forth of this Article, that man has no
matter to glory, but to refer all the glory unto god, To be crucified with
Christ.
as is before rehearsed. And that man has nothing to glory into, but in the
cross of Jesus Christ, by whom we should crucify the world to us. That is,
we should esteem all, that is in the world wicked, as the Apostle says, to
the Galathians, the sixth Chapter.

Ye shall not meruell, that our saluatioun is ascribed, and attribute to the
mercy of God, through faith, excluding all works, because the reasoun is here
showen by the Apostle, in these words: For we are the handyworke of God
created in Jesus Christ, unto good works: That is, for so much as we live, have
life, and understanding, and believe, Act. 17. Psalm. 99.
it is of God: and not of our selves, Esa. 45. Iere. 18. Romans 9.
because he is our maker, and Creator: why should the earthen or clay pot,
extol the self against the potter: of whom it has all which it has, or the
branche against the tree: of which it has all the substance, to bring forth
the fruit, as Christ gives the parable in the Euangell of Saint John, the 15.
chapter, the which ye shall read that ye may understand the words of
Christ: and similitude in the which the Father is declared, to be the
Husbandman, or the Labourer: and Christ the wine tree, and us christians to be
the branches: or the Bearers The office of the branche.
for the branche has two offices (the one is) if it remain with the tree
fresh and green, it brings forth good fruit of the substance of the tree,
and not of thee self. The other is, if it wither and bring forth no fruit, it
must be cut of and brint. Therefore if thou will be a christian, and remain in
Christ, by faith ever joined to him: thou shall bring forth good fruit of his
substance, and not of thine: of the which the glory pertains to him, and not
to thee. And if thou will be the withered branche, that is, wicked and bring
forth no fruit, thou art prepared for the fire, there to serve with the
Devil, Who remains in Christ.
and his Angels. And this is sure if thou will either glory in thy works, or
yet that thou art thy own Savior, or any part thereof: as concerning this
article of justification. But to remain in Christ by faith, and suffer him to
work in thee which thou do, when thou workest the works commanded in the
Scriptures of God: and attributs them to Christ, to be his works working in
thee. Wherefore the Law nor satan may not condemn the works of the faithful.
Then shall he make thy imperfection, perfect, that nether the devil, nor the
law, dare accuse them, because they are the works of Christ, and for his sake
received of the father by faith. 1 Cor. 1. 2. Cor. 10. Iere. 9.
So their is heir no thing to the to glory of, but to say with the Ap. He that
will glory, let him glory in the lord etc.

This glory of works is excluded by the law of faith: of the which law the
Apost. makes mention (saying) The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus,
Romans 8.
has delivered me from the law of sin and death. That is, the mercy of god,
the gift of the holy spirit, remission of sins, and everlasting life
purchased to us through faith in Christ* by the which we live in ryghteousnes,
free from sin, and death: and so it is caled the law of faith which excludes
all glory of works: because we receive and give no thing but glory and honor
unto god which is the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. In this we should
live in righteousness and work the works of god, and not become thrall again
to sin, and death: from the which we are freed freely without our merits, Romans 6.
or deseruings through faith in the blood of Christ our Savior and advocate.

Therefore let us co^clud with the Apost. and establish for an infallible
conclusion man to be made just by faith, The conclusion of Paul.
without the deds of the law: as prove the Scriptures before rehearsed, and by
the example of Abra. who had no mix tio^ of works in his justification. The
which we must affirm to be true, because the Scriptures affirm the same, and
testify him to be justified by imputation through faith: because he believed
god: and gave sure trust to his promis: howbeit the same appeared not possible
(as indeed it was to the judgment of man.) Nevertheless he doubted not in his
faith: but believed hope against hope That is he believed the promis of god
albeit the same appeared impossible to nature or manly power.
: and therefore it was co^pted to him for righteousness: not only to him, but
of the same manner to us, which believe and are sons to Abraham by faith. And
trust well Abraham did many noble and heroical works of the law of nature: but
none of these works were participa^t of his justification before god: Gene. 15.
Romans 4.
but only bear witness to his faith, and obedience to god in his righteousness,
as shall be showe^ hereafter.

The most excellent work amongst the Jews was circumcision: which was given to
Abra. and comanded to be used in all his posterity: Circumcision after
Justification.
for the sign and toke^ of the ba^d and covenant between God, and him. The
which was long after the justification of Abraham: as ye may read Genesis the 17.
chap. And the Apost. says, Abraham received the sign of Circumcision: Romans 4.
the seal of the Justice of faith. etc. Therefore this work made him not just,
nor yet had any part of his justification. Nevertheless God reahearsed to him
at that time, the promise saying, Abraham walk before me, and be perfect: and
I shall put my covenant between me and thee: and shall multiply thy seed
exceedingly, and thou shall be the father of many nations. Genesis 21.
And after this God tempted Abraham: Isaac whom he loved, and offer him in a
sacrifice. etc. Consider this command and ye shall perceive it a great
te^tation, of the faith of Abraham, and confer the same with the Scriptures
going before: where God gave command to him that he should put away his son
Ismael: For the seed of the promis should be fulfilled in Isaac. The obedience
and constancy of Abraham
Nevertheless the faith of Abraham was so firm and constant that he rather
hoped, Genesis 21.
and surely believed that god was to raise Isaac from death to life, then that
his word should be falls, or of none effect. And therefore god said unto him,
and confirmed the same with an oath, Genesis 22.
saying, Because thou have done this thing: and have not spared thy only
begotten son: I shall blis thee, and multiply thy seed as the stars of the
heaven, and sand of the sea shore: because thou have obeyed my woice and
charge. Heir ye see and find the promise repeated again, which was made to
him long before. But it is not said here, That because Abraham did this work
it was co^pted to him for righteousness: but that he was commended by the mouth
of god, for his obedience and perseverance in faith, for the faithful should
live by faith daily perseuering, and increasing day by day more and more
perfect, which is from faith to faith: giving ever thanks and praise unto god:
and obeying his command.

No man living wickedly, is called just.
Ye shall take this conclusion that no man can be called just, which lives
wickedly, but he which is godly, and lives well, is called just. Nevertheless,
his good life or works have no participation of this Article. Because they are
excluded by the Apostle, in the words before rehearsed for a conclusion: that
man is made just before God by faith, without the deeds of the law, upon the
which words S. Augustine, says: These words are not to be understand so,
that a man receiving the faith, if he live afterward wickedly, shall be called
just: but he is made just without all his works, that he may live in
righteousness and work well.

Christ is the end of the law (unto righteousness) to all that believe: that is,
christ is the co^summation and fulfilling of the law, and that justice which
the law requires, and all they which believe in him, are just by imputation
through faith. And for his sake are repute and accepted as just. This is the
Justice of faith, of the which the Apostle speaks, Romans the 10. Chapter:
Therefore, if ye wilbee just, seek Christ, and not the law, nor your invented
works, which are less then the law. Let him be the mark whereat ye shoot:
and let him never pass forth of your heart: whereto seek ye that thing,
which already has taken an end. Is it not written in the euangell of S. Luc.
the 16. Chap. The law and the Prophets are unto the time of Iohne, from the
which time the kingdom of God is preached and foorthshowen, etc. And S. Io. in
the 1. chap. of his Euangell, says: The law is given by Moys. but grace and
verity ar given by Jesus Christ. These two words are expounded by S.P. Grace
Grace.
that is the mercy of god, whereby we are made safe through faith in Christ,
Ephe. 2.
and not of works. Verity Verity.
is the fulfilling of the promises of god, for the which Christ was made
servant to circumcision, for the verity of god, to confirm the promises of
the fathers: here ye see, christ will have no mixtio^ with the law, nor works
thereof: In this article of justification, because the law is as contrary to
the office of Christ, as darkness to light, and is as far different as heaven
and earth The office of the law.
: for the office of the law is to accuse the wicked, fear them, and condemn
them, as tra^sgressours of the same. The office of Christ is to preach mercy,
remission of sins, freely in his blood through faith, give consolation, and
to save sinners: for he came not in to this world to call them which are just,
or think them selves just, Luc. 5.
but to call sinners to repentance.

The office of Christ, John the baptist declares, saying, behold the lamb of
God, behold him, which takes away the sins of the world. Io 1.
It is not I, says Ihon, nor the Law, repentance, or works of repentance,
which I preach that takes away your sins: but it is Christ that innocent
lamb of god to whom I send you. And also Christ says, God send not his
son into the world: that he should accuse, Io. 3. Io. 5.
condemn, or judge the world: but that the world should be made safe by him.
And after It is not I (says Christ to the Jews) that judges you, it is
Moses which accuses you And so the Scriptures testify that the law accuses,
and Christ saves. He sends none to the law, The Law rightly considered
compels us to seek christ
but rather the law drives and compels man to seek Christ, If ye will
understand it aright. The woman accused of adultery, he sent her not to the
law: Io. 8.
but said to her, pass thy way, and sin no more. Io. 5.
And to the man which had been diseased thirty eight years, etc. behold, thou
art made whole, now sin no more, that some worse thing happen thee not.
Christ called all to himself, saying, Come unto me all ye which labor, Math.
1^.
and are laden with sin, and I shall refresh you. And Peter says, there is
no salvation but in Jesus Christ: Act. 4.
Nor no other name given under heaven, by the which man may obtain salvation.

Therefore sithe^s no other may save but he, we should put all our trust, and
hope in him, and in his mercy only, and neither in the law, nor works: for to
all them which think they may be safe by works, or made just, Christ's death
is in vain: or if there had been given a law, which might have given life,
then righteousness surely had been of the law: but it is manifest that by the
law no man is made just before god, Galath. 3.
because the just shall live by faith.

What words may be more plain then those are, to exclude works forth of
this article. The fruits which we have of Christ.
Now since the scripture teaches us so plainly, that Christ is our Justice,
our Savior, and Redeamer, satisfaction for our sins, the end and
consommation of the law, and has freed us from the law, sin, and death,
and from the kingdom of Satan our adversary: and bought us to the kingdom
of righteousness, without our merits or deseruinges. Why will we usurp his
office to our selves, and spoil Christ of his glory, or be come thrall again
to that thing from the which Christ has freed us. Who spoyleth Christ of his
glory.
The which we do, if we will be participa^t with Christ in the making of our
selves just, or mixed any works with the article of iustication.

THE XIX. CHAP.
1 As the good tree bears good fruit, so the good man works good works.

2 But as the fruit makes not the tree good: So works make not the man just.

3 For, as the tree is before the fruit: So the man is just, before the work
be good.

4 The cause why we should work good works.

5 The Captains in the kingdom of christ: his subjects, and reward, and of
his adversary Satan.

THis faith which only justifies and good. Even so it is of the faithful
man, the works make him not faithful nor just: nor yet are the cause thereof.
But the faithful and just man, brings forth and makes good works: to the
honor and glory of God: and profit of his neighbor. which bear witness of
his inward faith and testify him to be just before man. Mat. 7.
for Christ says: may ye gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thrisles: no
no, it is contrary their nature. Even so it is with man: till he be made just
by faith: as it is before writtin: He may never do a good work, but what
ever he does is sin, for all which is not of faith is sin: and christ
says to the Pharisees: how can ye speak good while ye ar yet evil.
Therefore or ever we speak good, or do good: we must be made good and that by
the mercy of god through faith in christ: Romans 14. Mat. 12.
without al our deseruings. Then shall we work al good works in the kingdom of
Christ as his faithful subjects.

There is two kingdoms, and two kind of subjects: Diverse kingdoms
which are direct contrary to other because there princes ar as contrary as ar
light and darkness: What we have of our own nature.
That is to say, the kingdom of Christ, and the kingdom of the Devil. To the
kingdom of the Devil, man is of his own nature a perfect subject and the son
of ire and wrath. Ephesians. 2. 1. Pet. 1.
To the kingdom of Christ man is made subject, through his second birth, or
regeneration, which is by Baptism in the blood of Christ. To this kingdom man
is bought neither with gold nor silver: but with the precious blood of the
son of God Christ Jesus: and so is made servant to righteousness to serve
unto life. Therefore who is made just by faith, through the mercy of god: and
merits of Christ Jesus: must (in faith, which is not idle, but ever working in
love) serve Christ, and embrace him in his heart. Then shall he remain in
Christ, and Christ in him: by the which joining through faith, sin shall have
no dominion: nor shall not rule as a prince: howbeit the dregs remain in us.
They shall not be imputed to us: if we persevere in faith, as our forefather
Abr. did, ever working by love, and charity. And this is the cause why we
should work good works, The Captains of the kingdom of Christ.
because we are bought to the kingdom of Christ, in the which rule (as
valiant Captains) faith, hope, and charity, working ever righteousness unto
life.

The kingdom of the Devil, has three valiant Captains, which govern the
same (that is) incredulity, despair, and envy, ever working sin, and
unrighteousness unto death, The Captains of the kingdom of Satan.
because the reward of sin is death. In this kingdom, sin rules as a
prince, having dominion: therefore, if ye will serve sin, and obey the same,
Romans 6.
ye are servants to that thing which ye obey: whither it be of sin unto death,
or righteousness unto life. But Christ has redeamed us, and bought us from this
Realm: that even as Christ has risen from death to the glory of the Father:
right so we should live in a new life: and let not sin have more dominion over
us. There is no man so foolish, who will think he being delivered of a vile
prison (by the grace and mercy of a great Prince) and brought to serve in his
hall: and so made tender to the prince, that he is made participant of his
sons heritage, will say: I will pass again to prison, because he is not a
part of his own deliverance. Verily, it is eue^ so of their sayings, which
say: I will do no good, because christ has delivered me. And being delivered, I
will sin, and follow all liberty of flesh. Wherefore should I do any good
works, since Christ has redeamed me without my deseruings.

My hearts, ye which object these sayings, read the scriptures, and ye shall
find another lesson taught you. And attend upon your Schoolemaister, which is
the holy spirit, who shall teach you the right way, that ye pass neither to
the right hand, nor to the wrong: but the right kingly way: That is, The right
kingly way.
to confess, and ever have prented in your hearts: that by faith only of the
mercy and grace of god, ye are made safe. And then follow the example of our
Lord Jesus Christ, giving your whole study, and cure to love, charity, and
all manner of righteous living to the glory of god, and profit of your
neighbor: Not that there through ye ar made safe, but that ye may be found
thankful unto god: whom we know to be favorable, gentle, kind, and
merciful to the godly, The answer to the question why we should work good
works.
and to the wicked, wrathful and angry. This is the solutio^ to the argument
made in the beginning, which proves, wherefore should we do good, if we be
free from the law: and freely justified by the mercy of God, through faith
without our deseruinges. Therefore, choose you now, if ye will be servants to
sin, or servants to righteousness: Subjects of the kingdom of Christ, or
of the kingdom of the devil: for we are made free, and just, by grace
through faith that we should live in righteousness to Christ, who has dyed for
all: that they which live, live not now to the^ selves: 2. Cor. 5.
but to him which has suffered death for them: and has risen again from the
same. Keeping this order, ye shall never cease to do good works, as occasion
requires.

THE XX. CHAP.
1 An answer to all scriptures, which our adversaries allege for them,
against the justification of faith.

2 Wherefore works are commended in scriptures.

3 An argument proving, that no works justify.

NOw because there is some Scripturs, which our adversaries would cause to be
seen, either contrary to the scriptures before rehearsed, for probation of
this article of justification, or else with them, they would mixed this article:
so that faith not only justifies without works. Therefore, I will rehears some
of the most principal of them: And cause you understand by the same scriptures,
they are neither contrary to his article: nor yet have any entresse with
faith, in the making of a wicked man, just: but follow faith as the due
fruits thereof: In the which the Christian man should live as said is before.

In the Epistle of S. James, the second Chap. It is said Brethren, what
profit is it, if a man say he has faith, but has no works, may his faith
save him. And again (ye see says he) that a man is justified of works, and
not of faith only.

Here the adversaries of faith make a a great feast, but they understand this
saying of the holy Apostle, as they do the other scriptures: ever working with
the Devil to make the holy spirit contrary to himself, which is impossible.
Note the mind of S. James, in his Epist.
But will ye understand, take heed, and read the text, ye shall see clearly
that the Apostle speaks of the historical or idle faith: that is dead
without works, to the confusion of the wicked christians, which have no faith,
but in the mouth, and not of the faith which makes, a man just before God: and
obteineth remission of sins: By the same examples and words that he
rehearses: for he says Mark diligently.
the devil troweth, believes, and dreadeth: but the devil can never believe
that christ has redeamed him: and purchaste to him the mercy of god, remission
of sins, and eternal life: which is the faith to whom S. Paul ascriueth
justification only. And also he reproved the evil Christian (which says) he
has faith and neglects the deeds of charity, in clothing of the naked,
and feeding of the hungry: which deeds are the fruits of faith, of the which
S. P. speaks: Therefore, there is no contrariety in the Scriptures before
rehearsed, but concurrence.

And also the offering of Isaac, as mention is made before, was done above
thirty years after the justification of Abraham, to the forthshowing of his
obedience as the text proves. Gene. the 15. Chap. and 22. Chap. In the which
offering the scripture was fulfilled (as says S. James) Abraham believed God
and it was compted to him for righteousness. Here ye may see clearly, S. James
speaks nothing of the justification before god: but of the justification
before thy neighbor, because of the examples and authorities of the scriptures
alleged by him, which are of works done in faith by the faithful, long after
their justification. For faith only justifies before God as S. P. says
without works: Works justify before men only.
And works justify before man outwardly, and declare a man just before his
neighbor, in exercising the deeds of charity, which are approved before God,
and acceptable to him, in them which are reconciliate by faith in the mercy of
God, and bears witness that a man is just. Heb. 11.
Therefore ye who would allege this authority of S. James to impung the
articlcle of justification: which we confess: understand not the Scripturs:
nor have no foundation for you, but ignorance and babbling of words.

They allege an other text, the 10. of the Acts: of Cornelius whose prayers
and alms deeds, past up in the sight and memory of god. By the which words
they would infer, his works made him just or at the least provoked God to
call him to the faith, which is all one thing. For if we by our deeds, may
provoke god to love us, or to have mercy upon us, through our merits: by the
same reason we may make our selves just. And so we need no other savior: but
let Christ's death be in vain. But my well-beloved brethren, ye shall
understand that God first loved us, and provoked us to love him (we being
sinners unworthy of love: yea enemies also) as the Scriptures of god teach
you, Io. 1. ep. and 4. Chapter, and in his euangell the 3. Chap. and Romans the
5. Chap. And therefore god first preueened us with love, and all goodness, and
we not him. And so shall ye understand this text following of Corn.

The text says, there was a man named Cornelius, a captain, etc. a devout
man, and one that feared god, withal his household which gave great alms to
the people, and prayed god continually, etc. To whom the angel sent from god
(said) thy alms and prayers are past up in the sight of God, etc. Here ye see
this man was faithful, and just, by the first two proprieties, by the which
he is commended: which can not stand without faith: That is, devout and
fearing god: Devout, is to say, a true worshipper of god. No man truly ca^
worship God, or please him, but in faith because it is impossible to please god,
Cornelius had faith and thereby wroght good works. Heb. 11.
with out faith. Cornelius worshipped God truly: and so pleased him:
therefore he was faithful, he feared and dread god, by love, for that is the
fear whereof the text speaks. Therefore Cornelius was faithful because that
love can not be without faith. The works which Cornelius wroght were the fruits
of faith, and pleased god: because god approved the same, which he had never
allowed, except they had been done in faith: For all which is not of faith is
sin. Therefore ye must confess that Cornelius was faithful, and just
before god: or else ye must deny the scriptures (which good forbid).

And then will ye say: to what effect was Peter sent for, to instruct him in
the faith, and teach him what he should do: if he was faithful, what faith
was it he had? To that I shall answer. Cornelius had the same faith that Adam,
Noe, and the fathers had, for he believed the promised seed, which was Christ:
and knew not that he was come: What faith Cornelius had and wherefor was Peter
sent unto him.
But believed in one god, and that the same god had promised a Saueour to
redeame the world. So god looking upon the faithful, humble and simple heart of
Cornelius: and the fervent desire of his prayers (which desire doubtless was
conform to the sayings of the Proph. Esaias: Esa. 65.
O if thou would break a sunder the heavens that thou might come down)
would not have him deceived, to look for him, which was already come Therefore
he caused him send for Peter to instruct him in the present faith. And to
certify him that Christ was come whom he looked for so ardentlie. Ye may
read the text: the^ shall ye perceive the sermon Peter made unto him, which
was only of the opening of the Scripturs testifieing the coming of Christ in
the flesh: and fulfilling of all the promises, and Prophets sayings, spoken of
him before: and that he was risen from death: and had given Peter, Math. vlt.
Mar. 16. Luc. 24.
and the rest of his Disciples and Apostles, co^ma^d to preach repentance and
remission of sins to all which would believe in his name. etc.

To the which words and preaching of S. Peter, Cornelius, and his whole
household gave firm faith, and received by a visible sign the holy spirit.
The which is no other thing, but this article of justification. For he
believed the word of god: and by faith in Christ, through the mercy of God
received the holy spirit, without all working of any deed of the law of
Moses: but only being under the Law of nature: and so was baptized etc.
Therefore ye can not prove by this authority of scripture, that either the
works preceding, or following the gift of the holy spirit, was the cause of
his justification, or yet any part thereof. But first being just through the
faith which the fathers had (who had also the holy spirit) truly worshipped
god: and feared him of love, and so he was just. And in that righteousness
wrought the fruits of faith, in prayers and alms deeds. And secondly, being
taught by Peter, believed that Christ was comme the sure Savior of the world:
and had fulfilled all which was spoken of him by the prophets. By this faith
was he by the mercy of God, made just: and received the holy spirit visiblie,
without all works or deseruings. And then in the kingdom of Christ and
righteousness, wrought the fruits of faith unto life, as all perfect
Christians should do.

They allege another text. Galath. the 5. Chap. Faith, which works by love,
etc. by these words they would infer of their corrupted manner: that faith
only justifies not before god: but faith which works by love. By this manner
of understanding, Sophistes would make the holy spirit speaking in S.P.
contrary to him self.
they not only make the Apost. false, but also cast all down and destroy the
same thing, which he has builded: for in the fourth Chap. of the same Epist.
preceding, with great labors and invincible arguments, he sets forth the
article of justification, proving faith only to justify without all deeds or
works of the law. And then in the 5. chap. he begins to set forth the
fruits of faith (saying) ye are abolished from christ, which would be made
just by the law. Ye have left grace: for we by thee spirit of faith, behold
or look for the hope of righteousness: for into Christ Jesus, neither is
circumcision, nor uncircumcision, any thing worth, but faith which works by
love.

In these words shortly, and in brief terms, the Apost. excludes all works,
and laws, sacrifices, and worshippings, both of Jew and gentill, to have any
mixtio^ with Christ, in the justification of a christian: for if there had been
any more excellent work, or greater in estimation among the Jews (which were
the chosen people of god) the^ circu^cisio^, no doubt but the Ap. would have
excluded the same: and so the principal work commanded by god, and given by
him, as the seal of his promis and covenant, made to Abraham, being excluded
forth of of this article: how can any other work of less or equal
estimation, have part thereinto. Therefore, the Apost. co^cluding shortly, and
co^prehe^ding the whole estate of a Christian man, says, neither is
circumcision, nor uncircumcision any thing worth in christ, but faith which
works by love: he says not, love which works by faith, but faith which
works by love: that is, faith inwardly makes a man just before God, Psalm. 49.
who has no need of our works: for the whole world, and all that is therein
is his: and love outwardly testifies of thy inward faith toward thy
neighbor, who has need of thy works: for whose utility and profit, thou art
commanded to do good works. Note.
To whom thy faith avails nothing. And so this text impungeth not the
article of justification, but fortifieth the same.

Ye read, love greatly extolled by S.P. the 1. to the Corinth. the 13. chap.
(as it is worthy) but ye find never justification before god attribute to love:
for that is not the office thereof. But love follows faith in the third
degree, The nature of love.
whose office the Ap. sets forth in the said chapter Specially how that love
suffers all things, believes all things, hops all things, and endures
all things. Yea verily some things which faith may not suffer, nor will on no
ways suffer, as a light superstition repu^gning to the word of god: love will,
or may suffer the same to be in it, for the weakness of the infirm brother.
But faith may in no manner suffer the same, because it may be prejudicial to
the article of justification: and induce the mixtion of works. Also Faith,
Hope, and Charity, being reakoned, the Apost. exalts Charity, to be the most
excellent of the three: but gives her none of their offices. But if ye will
understand the text well, ye shall know the Apostles mind by the conclusion
(saying) now we see through a glass darkly: but the^ we shall see face to face.
Now I know in part, but then shall I know, even as I am known, and now
abides Faith, Hope, and Charity, but the chiefest of these, is Charity Why
Charity is called the chiefest.
as he would say: Now we are imperfite, but then we shall be perfect: Faith and
Hope, shall both perish, and vanishe away, but Charity, shall remain in her
perfection: for then she is in her perfection when the other two have taken
effect, and are vanished away: for in the heaven there is neither faith, nor
hope, but Charity is in her most excellent degree there, which never has an
end.

The cause wherefore the Apo. extolleth Charity, ye shall consider in the
first to the Corinth. the 12. chapter the which (I pray you) read. For in that
whole Epist. there is no question of the Article of justification, nor of the
office of faith, Collos. 3.
but an instruction how the Christian man should live: reproving hatred, envy,
dissentions, and opinions, amongst the Corinth. which became not to be amongst
christians: therefore, he exhorted them above all things, to Charity, which
is the band of peace, and the most excellent virtue to be had, and ever kept
among the Christians: for by that, men shall know you (says Christ) to be my
Disciples. Therefore howbeit, Charity be the most excellent virtue: Io. 15.
and that the whole life of a perfect christian, is faith and Charity, or
faith working by Charity: Nevertheless Charity justifies not before god, nor
yet has any mixtio^ with faith, in the making of the wicked just: but
follows faith, as the due fruits thereof: conform to the order of
scriptures before rehearsed: and as also hereafter shall be showen.

To impung this article: they allege this text, If thou will enter into life,
keep the commands. By the which they would infer, that the keeping of the
commands, is in our own power of free will: and that we fulfilling the same
according to our power and strenght, may thereby obtain the kingdom of heaven
by our works. The which is as agreeable to the saying of Christ as black and
white is: as ye shall clearly understand by the Scriptures.

Christ being asked, and inquired by the young man, what he should do or
work, Math. 19. Luc. 18.
that he might have eternal life, answered on this manner saying, If thou will
enter into life keep the commands: which are they, says the young man? Jesus
a^swered, thou shall not kill: thou shall not commit adultery: thou shall not
steal: thou shall speak no falls witness: thou shall honor thy father and thy
mother: and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. Here ye see, Christ
teaches the young man, the works of the second table, which concern our
neighbor only: and speaks no thing of the first table: which pertains
properly to God, and consists into faith. Therefore by these words of Christ
it may not be inferred, that he sends any to the law, to obtein perfection
therein: that is to say, justification, or salvation: but only to let them
know, what the Law requires of them, and what they were oblished to do: that
they seeing no remeady thereinto, might seek Christ: who came in the world, to
call all unto him, and not to send them to the Law, for that was the office of
Moses. What auailed Christ's coming in the flesh: If he would have sent man
to the Law to get salvation: but Christ declares plainly hereafter in the
same text, that there was no perfection to be had in the deeds of the Law,
of man's doing, as appears by the answer made to the young man, and precept
given to him.

When the young man said, he had observed all the said deeds of the Law, from
his youth etc. Howbeit, he made a lie, Christ accused him not, because it was
not his office: but said unto him* if thou will be perfect, go thy way, and
sell all that thou have, and give it to the poor: and come and follow me. But
when the young man hard that saying, he went away sorrowful, and left Christ,
because he had great possessions. The words of Christ uttered the hypocrisy
of the young man.
These words of Christ are no other thing, but the declaration of the fained
man, to let his heart be known, which believed that through fulfilling of the
outward deeds of the law, he might be found just before god. And also to teach
us the duty, which we are bound to do to our neighbor. For howbeit, Christ
has freed us from the thraldom, and malediction of the law, he will that we
work the works of charity, to the vtility of our neighbor: and nothing
draws us so much therefrom as avarice and covetousness. Therefore Christ
opened the young ma^s covetous heart (which he would have hidden, as all
hypocrites do) and taught him, if he would be perfect, to follow him, in
whom is all perfection. And so this text makes nothing for them which impunge
this article of justification, but rather against them, because the matter of
which christ speaks, does concern the neighbor only, and works to be
wrought to his weal and vtility, which of necessity follow the article of
justification, as the fruits of faith done by the justified man, who may or can
find no better works to do, nor they which are commanded in the law of God.

The adversaries of faith reading the scriptures, How the wicked do read the
scripturs.
where ever they find mention made of works, that part they collect not to the
effect, as it is spoken by the holy spirit: but to the intent they may impung
thereby the holy spirit, as contrary to him self. This proceeds of the
devil to empoyson the article of justification (that is) to mixed the same with
works, that he may enter and obtain his place, by the which he may abolishe
faith, or at the least the perfect office thereof, and diminishe the glory of
God. But for eshewing of this, ye who will know the perfect estate of a
Christian man, where ever ye find mention made of faith in the scripture,
without any adiection thereto: ye shall understand it of perfect faith
unfeigned, which without al works, either preceding or following the same,
justifies. And upon this faith S.P. groundeth all his arguments, to prove that
faith only justifies before God, without the law or works, which he ever
excludes, as is proved by the scripturs before rehearsed.

S.P. makes mention in all his ep. after he has set forth the article of
justification: therefore the works are but the witnessing of faith: and the
obedience which is required of the just and faithful man, to the glory of
god, and profit of his neighbor, by the which the just obteineth witnessing of
his faith, as is proved clearly by S.P. to the Heb. the 11. chapter where he
reakoned from the just and faithful Abell, and their works in special, till
he come to Gedeo^, Barac, Sampson, Iepthe, David, Samuel, and the prophets in
general, declaring the^ all to have done many great, and excellent works into
faith: and yet ascribes nothing to works, but to faith only, showwing the
works to be the testimony and witnessing of their faith outwardly: and no
part of their justification, concluding in this manner: the which by faith have
subdued and overcome Realms, have wrought righteousness, obtained and gotten
the promise, have stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire,
and escaped the edge of the sword, etc.

Here is a clear solutio^ to all the obiectio^s to please God without faith:
where then are the works which preceede faith, and move god to give grace and
favor (which ye call de Congruo) And then ye work of your own strength, and
power (as ye say) the works which deserve remission of sins and everlasting
life, yea, not only sufficient to your self, but also superaboundant to save
others (which ye call De co^digno, and opera supererogationis.)

The scriptures are plain against your false superstitions, and sophistical
arguments, concluding that neither works preceding nor following faith, have
entres in making of a wicked man just: nor yet may save you. It is written, all
which is not of faith, is sin. How then can ye do any work preceding faith,
that it may please God, or provoke him to love you: considering all that ye do
out of faith, Romans 14. Mark diligently.
is sin. Will ye say, that he deliteth in sin: No no, it is a thing most
abominable in his sight: therefore all that ever ye do, how excellent the work
be in your sight, it is sin before God: and ye heap sin upon sin, which
is abomination in his sight as says the Prophet Esaias. The works which
follow faith, make you not just: because or ever ye work good works, ye must
be made first just, and thereafter (in faith) ye work the works of justice.
Nevertheless the said works may not save you: nor merit the kingdom of
heaven to you, muchlesse may they merit to others: But ye are made safe, by
the mercy of God: Tit. 3
and not of works: as S. P. says: Not of works of righteousness, which we
have done, shall we be saved: but according to his mercy, God has saved us

Here ye see not only works excluded in general, The works of Justice is
excluded in the cause of justification.
forth of this article: but also the works of justice, which can not be done,
but by the justified man, where are then your works: which deserve the
kingdom of heaven of their worthiness: not only to your selves, but
superaboundant to others? They are excluded by the Scriptures of God. Therefore
I exhort you to exclude them also, and cleave to faith.

THE XXI. CHAP.
1 The opinion of the wicked, seeking their own glory.

2 The works commanded by God, and done without faith, ar abomination before
him.

3 Whereby comes the new birth.

4 Paul refuses his works, seeking no Justification thereby.

5 The conclusion of all the Scriptures.

6 What is given to man which has true faith,

The wicked advance the^ of works which they never do.
the which ye never do: nor yet it is in your power, of your self, to
complete: according to the perfection, that ye may set the^ before the
judgment seat of god. And this same thing did your forefathers, the scribes
and Pharisees against Christ. Romans 10.
And now ye against his faithful little flock, of the same blindness and
ignorance. For, to establish your own justice, ye neglecte the justice of
god: and will not be subject thereto as the Apost. says. And Christ says:
Ye are they which justify your selves before men: but god knows your hearts:
because that which is of great estimation in men's eyes, is abominable before
god. ^ue. 16. Esa. 55, 56 57. and 58. Zach. 1.
Even so it is of your works not commanded by god: how honest, or shining that
ever they be in the sight of of man: God never was nor will be pleased with works
of man's invention.
for verily God will be pleased with no works of man's innentioun: but with the
works commanded by him self: And the same should be done in faith: according
to his will, and not ours for the which we are commanded, and should daily
pray, Thy will, o heavenly father, be fulfilled and not ours. What better
works ca^ man do: the^ the works comanded by god, as prayers, alms deeds,
fastings, and keeping of holy days, and others, as ye may read Esaias. the
first Chap. Works which of them self are good, done without faith, are
abomination before god. Math. 7.
The which god by the mouth of the prophet calls abomination. And Christ
called prophesying, preaching, casting forth of Devils, miracles, wonders, and
signs, and many other great and excellent virtues, done in his name: The
works of iniquity, and the doers of them: the workers of iniquity (saying)
pass away from me all ye which are workers of iniquity: for not all which
say unto me (Lord, lord) shall enter in the kingdom of heaven, But they which
do the will of my Father, which is in Heaven. These works are contemned by
god, for no other cause, but that they are wrought by the wicked without faith:
or mixed with the article of justification, thinking therethrough to be made
just, or to be a part of their own justification. And therefore cannot please
God, but greatly displease him, because the good work is converted into sin,
through the iniquity of man. Nevertheless, they appear in the sight of man
to be most excellent good, and should have a great reward after the judgment
of man: but ye see here what reward god gives them.

And seeing the works commanded by God to be done: Note well
are so displeasant in his sight, wrought by the wicked without faith. What
shall be of your works, which are not commanded by God: nor have no authority
in his Scriptures, but invented by your selves, of your good zeal, and
intention, to make your selves just by them: having no respect to faith: but to
the working of them of the self deed: yea verily express contrary the
scripture, and plain Idolatry. Nevertheless he that does them, ye make
just: and he that does them not, ye condemn: Is this any other thing, but to
make the death of Christ in vain: and to be iustifiers of your selves: for
seeing the justice which is of value before God, is not of the deeds of the
law: how can it be of your deeds. Therefore Christ will say unto you, Pass from
me all ye workers of iniquity: I know you not. Notwithstanding in other places
of the scripture, ye shall find the same works, greatly commended by God,
where they are done by the just man, as the fruits of faith: and reward
promised to the workers of them. So they confess them unprofitable Servants,
when they have done all that they can: For, Christ said to his Disciples: Luc.
17.
when ye have done all which is commanded you to do, then say: we are
unprofitable servants: We have done that, which we were bound to do.

And if they, which fulfill all the commandments of god, are compted, or
repute by him, unprofitable servants: what have we to glory in, which fulfill
not one of his commandments. Now I pray you, lay this text to your assertion
(if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments) and ye shall think shame
of your sayings: insomuch as ye would impung the article of justification
there with: and mixed works with faith, to the making of a wicked man, just.

Now I trust, it be sufficiently prouen by authority of the scripture, as is
before rehearsed at length, to the satisfaction of a Christian, and godly man,
that works are excluded forth of this article of justification: and have no
participatio^ therewith, but follow faith as the due fruits thereof, that all
glory may redound to god: howbeit, the wicked hypocrites and iustifiers of the^
selves, will never be satisfied, by any authority of the scripture: for they
cannot nor will not be content with god, nor his word: Esaias. 48.
but ever impung the same, to establish their own authority, and glory.
Hypocrites are never at rest in their conscience.
And therefore are never at rest, nor quietness, in their conscience, with God,
because they reject the mercy, grace, and peace of god, the which are the
substance of the estate of a christian, wherein the just lives by faith: and
ar so necessary, that they should ever be blown in at the ears of the
faithful, by the ministers of the word.

Therefore, where ever the Apost. S. P. writed or preached (howbeit, there was
no question of the law, nor works thereof) he never pretermitted in the
beginning of his Ep. (as the other Apost. in like manner used) to certify the
Christian congregation of the substance of this article, A repetition of the
article of justification and substance thereof.
saluting the^ with grace, and peace, which is as much to say, as, the mercy of
god, by the which ye are made just, and accepted as righteous in the favor of
god the Father, through faith in Jesus Christ, The salutation of the Apost.
our only Lord and Savior. Rest, and quietness, in your conscience, I desire
to be with you, and remain with you continually, that thereby ye may work the
fruits of faith, by charity, or love, in righteousness, to the glory of god,
and profit of your neighbor, through Jesus Christ, Romans 1.
by whom we have this mercy and grace: and entres to the father, Romans 5.
and the same grace: the which grace is given to us by god in Jesus Christ, 1.
Cor. 1.
that no flesh should rejoice in his sight, who has given him self for our
sins, that he might deliver us out of this present wicked world, according
to the will of god the father: and according to the riches of his mercy, the
which he has abundantly shed forth upon us, Galath. 1.
by whose mercy we are made safe. He has called us by his holy vocation, Ephe.
1. and 2.
not according to our works, but according to his purpose and mercy, 2.
Timoth. 1.
the which he has given to us by Jesus Christ.

And S. Peter says, blessed be god the father of our lord Jesus christ: who
according to his great mercy, has begotten us of new into a lively hope, by
the rising of our Lord Jesus Christ from the death. Therefore, if we be
borne and gotten of new by mercy: 1. Pet. 1.
It is not of works, nor of our deseruinges: but freely given us by the grace,
and mercy of God, through faith in Jesus Christ. Nor we have no righteousness
of the law, nor works, as is before clearly proved by the scriptures at
length. Philip. 3.
And the same S. P. testifies in his own body to be true, Paul wrought many
excellent good works, but reputeth them nothing.
who wrought many excellent works of the law. Nevertheless, he reputeth all, but
filthiness, that he may win Christ: and be found in him, not having his own
justice, or righteousness, which is of the law: but that justice which is of the
faith of Jesus christ.

And seeing the holy Ap. the chosen vessel of god might not obtain
righteousness in the law, nor works: but in the mercy of God, through faith in
the precious blood of Jesus Christ: Alace, what blindness is in us wicked and
miserable sinners, which will ever glory, and cry good works (which we never
do) and will have them mixed with this article of justification. In so much that
Christ (after our judgment) is not sufficient to save us, and make us just:
howbeit, it be the cause, wherefore he was made man for us only.

The entresse to good works.
the^ shall he not be idle, but eue^ as the good tree shall bring forth good
fruit: because a man truly believing, has the holy spirit: and where he is,
he suffers not man to be idle, but does move and provoke him, to all godly
exercises, of good works, as the love of god, patience in troubles and
afflictions, calling upon the name of god, and thanksgiving, and to the
forthshowing of charity and love, unto all. This is the order of a Christians
life, and the substance of good works, as hereafter follows: and as we have
also touched some thing in the beginning, concerning the trouble and patience
thereof.

THE XXII. CHAP.
1 What works should Christians do.

2 The life of man, is a perpetual battle.

3 What is the law of the members, and what the law of the spirit.

4 What sacrifice we should offer to god, and what is required, that our
sacrifice be acceptable.

5 Who follows Christ, who goes before him, and who is equal with him.

BEcause good works are the fruits man as the good fruits of the good tree:
without the which no Christian man may get witnessing of his faith.

Therefore after the forthsetting of the article of justification: should ever
mention be made of good works, and all faithful taught to do the same. The
method of S.P. in wreting. To. 5. 2. Tim 3. Prou. 3. Heb. 12. Apo. 3.
The which method S. P. uses in all his ep. but specially in the Epist. to
the Romans and Galath. For being justified by faith, we are at peace with God,
by our Lord Jesus Christ. But then hastily rises the battle and strife with
the world, and persecution, because all which will live godly in Christ Jesus,
shall suffer persecution: Then shall thou begin to rejoice of thy trouble:
knowing surely that thou art the son of God, because he chasteneth all sons
whom he loves. This affliction whether it be in spirit or body, brings
patience to thee, which is the proof of thy faith. Then conceive thou hope,
whose office is to confort thee, that thou be not ouercomme in thy affliction,
and so then faith and hope, being joined together, the love, Romans 5.
favor, and grace of god, are by his holy spirit shed abroad in our hearts:
by the which we (as valiant knights) pass to a new battle, against the
devil, 1. Io. 5.
the world, and the flesh, of whom we obtain victory by faith: and suffer
not sin to rule over us. This method to good works teaches the Apost. Romans
the.5. and 6. Chapter, exhorting us, that as we of before, gave our members,
to be weapons of unrighteousness unto sin, to the death: that now we being
justified by faith, give to god our members, weapons, and armor of
righteousness unto life. The reward of sin is death. To. 6.
For the reward of sin is death, but the grace of god is eternal life, by
our lord Jesus christ. Then let us surely believe, he who has begun the good
work in us, which is god, Philip. 1. The beninning of good works.
shall perform the same to the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. And so to begin
good works, is, not to suffer sin to rule in this mortal body, that we obey
not the lusts and concupiscence of the same.

The whole life of man, Job. 7.
is but a battle upon the earth: And who soever will pas fordward, Whosoever
serves the lord, must prepare him self for trouble. Romans 7.
in the service of god, he must prepare him for tentation and trouble. This
battle S. P. had, and as a knight of great experience taught us the same: how
he fand a law in his members, repungning to the law of his mind: which is no
other The repungning of the flesh.
Not only in external works, but also in the inward affections of the
mind, as to doubt or diffide of the goodness and mercy of god: or to be
slothful, void, and empty of the love, and fear of god. The law of the
mind is, the law of god provoking, and calling man to do all Justice, and
righteousness, which the faithful man consents to in his mind, to be
good and just. And yet finds no power in him self to perform the same: for
the which the holy Apost. with an exclamation (says) O unhappy man that I am,
who shall deliver me of this mortal body, which is no other thing but a mass
of sin. These words he says not, as of a doubt in his faith, but of a
fervent desire to be dissolved and separated from this vile life to be with
Christ, because he gives thanks unto god by Jesus Christ, by whom he is
delivered of the said battle. Read the 7. Chapter, of the Epistle to the Romans
where ye shall clearly perceive this matter at lenght. Therefore, the saints
and holy men vehemently lamente these motiones and affections of the flesh,
which they feel in their inward wit, reason, and manly wisdom, repungning
against the spirit, and will not be subject thereto, nor may not of their own
power or strength, but by the spirit of god, To. 8.
which bears witness with our spirit, that we are the sons of god. There
are none which perceive this battle or valiant fighting, but the just men,
which confide not in their own works, merits, or deseruings, but only in the
mercy of god, through faith in Jesus christ, by whom they obtein victory, and
thank god.

But because this mortal body of sin is ever repungning unto the spirit,
Romans ^.
and our greatest ennemie daily borne about with us. The Apostle exhorts us
most fervently by the mercy of God, to give and offer the same a quick,
lively, holy, and pleasant sacrifice unto God. And that our service, and
worshipping of God be reasonable: not co^forming our selves to this world: but
to be renewed, and reformed into a new wit, knowledge, and understanding.
Romans 12.
That we may have proof, how the will of god is, how good how acceptable, and
how perfect, The which is, that we mortify our bodies, and members, which are
upon earth: not only to abstein from external, outward and gross sins: as
from fornication, incest, uncleanness, avarice, indignation, wicked lusts, and
concupiscence, ire, filthy communications, and like unto these, Colloss. 3.
reakoned by S. P. but also to conceive in our hearts the true and perfect fear
of god, which moves and causes us to abhor sin: and detest our wicked
corrupt nature, which ever resists the will of God: and entiseth us to
follow our own will, wit, reason, and honest appearance of good zeal, and
intention, the which we should not obey, but the will of God, which is to
believe in him, Io. 6. The will of God.
and in Jesus Christ, whom he has sent: and also, it is the work of god,
for the which we should ever pray to god, thy will be fulfilled and not ours.

This doing, the kingdom of heaven, is within us, as Christ says, Luc. the
17. Chapter. And the old man mortified in our bodies, To. 6.
and crucified with Christ: the body of sin abolished, and destroyed, that
we serve no more to sin: the which is no other thing, but to cast off all
our affections of the fleshly man: and submit us wholely to Christ: and as he
has risen from death, To be crucified with Christ.
that we likewise rise with him from sin, and live a new life, in the
kingdom of righteousness: no more being under the law, nor sin, but under
grace. That is, Christ and his word, the which will never teach us to sin,
but to all virtue, in faith. The order hereof S. P. teaches Romans. the 12.
chap. and so forth to the end of the epistle. And S. Peter in his first epist.
the 2. chap. teaches the same.

This quick, and lively sacrifice, which God desires of us, and is so
pleasant and acceptable in his sight, is a contrite, and broken heart, The
sacrifice pleasant to God.
a troubled spirit humiliate and subject unto God. These the Prophet calls,
Psalm. 50.
the affections of the mind, or thoghts of the heart, which are broken,
afflicted, and cast down by the knowledge of sin, and place their whole hope
and confidence only in the mercy of god. The same affections of the heart, he
calls the sacrifice most acceptable unto god: And commanded the same to be
offered unto him: as it is written: Give unto the Lord, the sacrifice of
righteousness, Psalm. 4.
and put your whole hope into him. And in the 49. psalm. he calls the same the
sacrifice of praise, and tha^kesgeuing. For we should ever praise god that is,
preach and foorthshowe in all things, his infinite goodness. And what ever we
think, speak, or do, direct the same to his glory. This is a worthy
sacrifice to be done by a Christian: on this manner we are taught by S. P. to
the Heb. and diverse other places of the scripture.

To the fulfilling of this sacrifice is required that we spoil our selves of
the old man, The old man.
that is our first conversation in sin: which we have of natural
propagation of old Adam. And is cledde and bears the same so long as we live,
after the example of Adam. Collos. 3.
Ever rebels to god, and his law: And clothe us with new Adam: that is Christ,
with whom we are cledde, when we reform our life to the similitude of him:
which restores again to us, the Image and similitude of god, to the which we
were created. This is the right and true holiness, integrity and justice, to
the which, in Christ, we are renewed: by the holy Spirit, that we should live,
in all Justice, and holiness of life. In that we were created by god in the
beginning, that we should walk before him That is love and extol his
magnificence in all kind of godly life.
Therefore the Apost. commands us to be renewed with the spirit of the mind,
and cloth us with the new man. The mind is the fountain, and beginning of all
things: So it must be renewed, if any good works should follow: Ephe. 4. Esa. 1
And that teaches the Prophet Esaias in these words: Put away the evil of
your thoughts from my eyes. etc. And so to do good works according to the
pleasure of god, and order of the scripture, is to begin to mortify this
sinful body, as is before rehearsed. Then are we the good tree, whose fruit
is sweet, and pleasant in the sight of god, and acceptable to him.

Mat. 16 Marc. 8. Luc. 14. 1. Pet. 2.
Therefore let us deny our selves take our own cross upon our backs, and
follow Christ: as he harh commanded us in his Euangell: for the which he
suffered death for us: leaving to us an example that we should follow his
footstepps, and neither go before Christ, nor yet aside with him, but let us
follow him: Who follows Christ.
the which we do, when we cast from us, all our wisdom, righteousness,
holiness, and redemption, and receive them from Christ, who is made to us by
god, our wisdom, justice, holiness, and redemption: And confess us to have
nothing of our selves, 1. Cor. 1.
but evil: and all our goodness to be from god, as S. James says in his Ep.
the 1. Chapter This our cross is no other thing, The cross of the faithful.
but the troubles and afflictions, both spiritual and corporal, that we have
in this present life: the which are the probatio^s, and exercises of our faith,
whereby the same is tried and searched by our heavenly father, to our weal.
Heb 1.^.
And testify us to be the sons of god, and not bastardes. And therefore we
should gladly accept the same with thanks giving from the bottom of our heart,
thinking them to come to us for the best, Romans 8.
and that we are the beloved of god, So accepting them.

And then in the greatest troubles and afflictions raise up our hearts with
faith, Psalm. 30. and 70.
and hope, believing surely our good god, to be so faithful and true that he
will not suffer us to be overcome, or confounded, and tempted above that we be
able, God will not suffer us to be tempted above that we may sustain, 1. Cor.
10.
but will even give the issue with the tentatio^, that we may be able to bear
it, because our weak and fragill nature is known to him. He will have
compassion upon us, for Christ's sake, by whom we are reconciliate to his
favor. So let us not go astray, but follow Christ's footesteppes: That is, to
suffer all things patiently, and think that we have deserved more for our
sins. Also, remembering that Christ our savior has suffered ten thousand
times more for us. Esaias. 53.
On this manner we follow Christ's footsteppes, who has borne our sins in his
body upon the cross: 1. Pet. 2.
that being dead from sin, we should live in righteousness. My hearts, ye which
are adversaries to the article of justification: learn to read the scripturs
with effect, to the perfect understanding thereof: and the^ ye shall obtain
knowledge to begin to do good works in faith, pleasant and acceptable to god.

Since we have made mention of three kind of persons: that is of them which
go before Christ, of them which go astray from Christ, and of them which
follow Christ's footesteppes. It is necessary, to let them be known by them
selves, that the true and faithful may be known by their deeds: Who goes
before Christ.
They which confide in their own works, merits, and deseruings, thinking
therethrough to obtain the kingdom of heaven: and satisfy for their own
sins: Not only for them selves, but also of the superabounda^ce of their
merits, for others: of the which they make marcha^dise. These are they, which
go before Christ, and are called Antichrists or contrary to Christ, because
they usurp his office, and will be Iustifiers of them selves and others. Who
goes astray from Christ.
They which think faith not sufficient to justify without works, but will
have their own good deeds joined, to help Christ, in their justification.
These are they which go astray from Christ, and will be equal with him, in their
own justification, for none of these has Christ suffered death.

Therefore, he shall abstract from these two kinds, his wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, and redemption, and shall suffer them to contend with
the law in the latter judgment, whose works being accused, and the purity
and cleanes required, according to the perfection of the law: all their noble
works and deeds of good zeal, and intention shall be found abomination in the
sight of God: how excellent or shining that ever they be before men, Luc. 16.
to whom it shall be said: Pass your way from me, ye workers of iniquity.
Lucifer, was thrown down out of the heaven, Math. 7. The punishment of pride.
because he would have made him equal with god: Adam, forth of paradise,
because he pretended to know more, then was given him in commandment to know,
etc. The Pharisie, of whom Christ makes mention, Luc. ^8.
pretended no other thing, but a great reward for his good works: The same
thing pretend all they which impu^g this article of justification: for will ye
compare their sayings, and doings, it is the same self thing: but of another
arrayeme^t. Nevertheless, they are as like, as a egg is like another. And so,
they are not of Christ's little flock which he has chosen, and follow him.

The third kind of persons, are they, which put all their trust, hope, and
confidence in Christ: take his cross upon their backs, and daily follow
Christ in his footsteppes, To follow Christ.
neither declining to the right hand, nor to the left, that is grounded in
faith, ever working by charity, absteining from evil, and doing good works,
in the which they put no confidence, but think when they have done all, which
is commanded them to do, nevertheless they think them selves, but unprofitable
servants: they lay their sins upon Christ's back: and follow him by faith,
ascribing all their wisdom, justice, holiness, and redemption to Christ: and
nothing to them selves, nor their merits, because they are sinners: and
through the dregs of sin, left in them, of the old corrupted man, their
works are not perfect, according to the perfection which the law requires.
Therefore, they may not stand in judgment with them, of their own power, and
strength, but believe the same works, through faith in Christ, to be accepted
as obedience to the law: and through Christ's merits made perfect. These are
they, to whom it shall be said: Math. 27.
Come unto me ye blessed of my Father, and possess the Kingdom of Heaven,
prepared unto you, from the beginning of the World. Against the which the
Law has no place to accuse, nor condemn their works of any imperfection,
because they are Christ's works, made by him perfect, through faith in his
blood.

THE XXIII. CHAP.
1 What the reason of man persuades to be done, in the matter of religion.

2 Arguments against good zeal and good intention.

3 The papisticall church this day, is worse the^ the external church of the
Jews, in the days of the Prophets and Christ.

4 What fruit brings the good zeal of man.

THe blind reason, wit, and understanding of man (which is but the desires
and appetites of the fleshly man) is the cause why we misknowe the good and
perfect order, to do good works, taught us in the scriptures: All men
depe^ding upon his own reason, is deceived.
neglecting the word of god, and following our own will, which teaches us
good zeal, and good intention. This our reason affirms good, and thinks
that God shall approve the same, according to our desire, which is but flesh
(I mean of the whole man, and all that is in him) But the spirit and word of
god teaches us to walk in the spirit, and not to perform the desires and
lusts of the flesh. For the flesh ever contendeth against the spirit: and
the spirit against the flesh. Therefore we are commanded to fight valiantly
against the desires of the flesh: and to abstain from the lusts and
appetites thereof: and to follow the will of God, which is to walk in the
spirit, and clothe us with Christ Jesus.

This order the Apostle teaches Galath. the 5. chapter, Romans the 8. chapter
and 13. And S. Pet. in his first epistle the 2. chapter.

O miserable, blind, and ignorant man why do thou neglect the good work of
god, to inue^t a good work of thy own making: thinking there through to
please god: saying, thou do it of a good zeal and intention, which is
as much to say as, that thy mind, and intention are good in the self. And
because thou thinks the same good, God after thy judgment, should approve
the same as good. Thou art deceived, because thou understand not the
Scriptures, or will not understand the same. It is written that the whole
thought of man, and all the cogitations of his heart, The co^futation of good
zeal, and good inte^tion.
is ready given and bent upon evil, at all time. And also the wit,
understanding, and conceat of man, and the thought of his heart, are prone,
Genesis 6. Genesis 8. Psalm. 43.
ready, and inclined to evil from his youth head, and young age. And David
says, The Lord knows the cogitations of man's heart, that they are vain.
Now my hearts, where will ye find your good zeal, and good intention:
either is it evil of thee self, or else God is false, the which can not be:
ye may call it good, but God who has better knowledge thereof, then ye have,
by his word testifies all that is in you to be but evil, as he has
declares by the mouth of Moses, Deutr. 12.
commanding that we do not that thing, Ier. 11.
which we think good, but that thing which he has commanded us to do: that
should we do The commandment of god, contrary our good zeal.
: and neither add to his word, nor take therefro^, but walk in the way, the
which the lord has commanded. This shows thee, that thou should not follow
thy good zeal, and intention, thinking therethrough to please god: Psalm. 115.
or fulfill his will, the which thou can not fulfill, but by his word. For all
man of them selves, are but Liars, and full of vainitie.

Great is the difference betwixt the will of god, and the will of man. The
thought of god, and the thoughts of man. The ways of god, and the ways of
man: as says the Prophet in the person of god: Esa. 55.
my thoghts, and cogitatio^s are not yours: nor your ways mine: but as the
heavens ar exalted above the earth: even so ar my ways and cogitations from
yours. This is no other thing, but to teach us to follow the will and command
of God, and not ours Mich. 6. All which man should do is contained in the
scriptures
who has declared in his scripturs plainly, what we should do, and leave
undone that we need to seek no further. So doing we shall procure the blessing
of God, if we take his erudition and teaching: as David says: Blessed is the
man, whom thou (O Lord) instructs, Psalm. 93.
and of thy Law teaches him. And if we will follow our own teaching, Who does
works not commanded by God in his scriptures incurris his malediction. Ier.
15. and ^9.
doing works of our own intention (the which we think good) we shall procure
the plagues and punishments threatened by the Proph Jeremy the 19 chap. because
we do the thing, which he has not commanded: nor spoken to us: nor yet has
ascended in his heart. Trust well the people thought they did a great excellent
work to God and sacrifice to please him, when they spared not their own
children, to kill and offer sacrifice unto god, 4. Reg. 21 2. Cro. 33. The
fruits of good zeal.
of their innocent blood. This was their good zeal, and good intention. But
they had no command of god for them: and verily ye have less for you, to make
such sacrifice, as ye do daily: to deceive the poor people, and to purchase
to your selves great riches, goods and possessions. Therefore I exhort you by
the mercy of God, to cast away that good zeal, and inte^tion: and follow the
word of god, as he has comanded you in the scripurs, for they bear witness of
him: and show to man what is his will: seek no further, nor confound not the
works of God with thy vain thoghts.

Through the vain co^ceate of man used in these words (good zeal and
inte^tio^) have all the abuses, now ruling in the church of god, risen. That the
sayings of the Proph. Israel, Ier. 2. The words of Jeremy ar true this day.
are co^plete this day in the Church of Christ: and may be said to us, as they
were said to the Jews. Eue^ as the thief is ashamed when he is taken: even so
is the house of Israel ashamed: they, and their kings, their princes, priests
and Prophets: saying unto the tree or stock, thou art my father: and to the
stone, thou have be gotten me. They have turned their back to me (says the
Lord God) and not their face. And in the time of their trouble, and affliction,
they shall say: Rise, and deliver us, then shall the Lord say unto them, where
are thy gods which thou have made thee? let them arise and deliver the, in the
time of thy trouble. Thy gods were verily in number according to the number of
thy cities, o Judah, what? will thou contend with me in Judgment? (...) ^2. and
11.
ye have all left me, says the Lord.

Now I pray you, confer these words of god, here plainly spoken, with the
doings of these days, now ruling in the church: and then ye shall perceive
the abuse of gods word. We pray commonly the Pater noster (that, is our
father) to the Image of this, or that saint, made of tree or stone. And
specially to this or that altar, we kneel, which is by our selves, or our
predicessours founded, upon such a Saints name, whose picture is well graued
in a stock or stone: And with costly colors painted: and the blessed
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (after their manner) offered daily to
this or that Saint: and called his mess, for doing of the which, Exodus 20.
Leuit. 26. Deu. 5.
there is not a syllabe in gods word, for you: but the contrary expressly
commanded: both that ye should have no graven Images, Psalm. 80.96. and 113.
nor worship them: nor yet invent any manner of worshpping of god: But as god
has commanded by his word. And for your defense, ye have only these words
(good zeal and intention) the which is expressly contrary the first
commandment of god: for even as we are forbidden and inhibite to have strange
gods: So are we inhibite to have strange worshippings of god. Strange
worshipping of God, is not contained in the scriptures.


Blessed be god, the matter is so patent and plainly set forth in these days,
concerning the said vain works, invented by man, to the confusion thereof by
the godly men: which labor day and night in his Scriptures to the edification
of Christ's chosen little flock, that it is not needful, to abide long upon the
discussing of these matters: but only to remit you to the Scriptures, and the
said godly declarations made thereupon: against the superstitious worshipping
of Saints: going in pilgrimage, purgeing in purgatory, hallowing of water, or
other elements foundatioun of masses, to public or private idolatry, offering
or sacrifices making, not commanded in the word of god, choice of meats,
forbidding of marriage in the church of god, and abominable abuses of the whole
Christian religion, by the shaven, oincted, or smeared priests bishops, monks,
and friars, having only there vocation of man, and by man. Therefore we let
the specialities of them pass, and refer the same to thy judgment (good
reader.) Thanks be to god these abuses, and grounds are not unknown: and we
will pass forward to the knowledge of the works commanded us to do, and work
by the scriptures of god, as the fruits of faith.

THE XXIIII. CHAP.
1 What works Pastors should teach unto their flock.

2 Wherefore the yoke of Christ is sweet, and his burden light to Christians.

3 Vocation mediate and immediate.

4 Vocation in general, by the which all true Christians are equal, made
Kings and Priests, in Christ blood.

IF any will ask or inquyre, what works should the faithful do: I can find
no perfiter answer to make thereto then the Euangell teaches us. Good works.
As S. Luke says the 3. chapter. John the baptist preaching repentance in
remission of sins: the people inquired at him, what they should do: to whom
he answered saying He that has two coats, give to him that has not one. And
he that has meat, let him do in like manner. This is no other thing, but to
exercise the deeds of mercy, Esa. 58.
and charity toward thy neighbor, as the Prophet Esaias says, break thy
bread to the hungry, needy, and the poor who ar cast out, bring into thy
house: when thou see the naked clothe him, contemn or despise not thy own
flesh. This is the forth-showing of thy faith, which S. James desires of thee
in his epistle. Thou art taught the same, with the other works of charity to
thy neighbor. Ezech. the 15.

The Publicanes and open sinners inquired in like manner, what they should do:
to whom he answered (saying) ye shall do no further, then that which is
commanded you to do: as he would say, decline and cease to do evil, and
learn to do good, as ye ar teached by the Propete Esaias. the 1. Chapter. And
David teaches you the perfecton of religione (saying) Come to me my sons,
and hear me, and I shall teach you the fear of of the Lord. Ier. 7. and 26
Ezech. 18. Psalm 33. 1. Pet. 3. Tac. 1.
Who is he who lives and loves to see good days: let him refrain his tongue
from evil, and his lips that they speak no fraud: decline from evil, and
do good: seek peace, and follow the same. Therefore, pass your way and
sin no more: for I will not send you to the law to get remeady of your
sins. But look in the law, and behold what is ordained you to do. The which
will declare you to be sinners, and transgressors. And then ye shall seek
Christ, for remeady, whose forerunner I am. It is he, in whom ye shall find
remeady. Io. 1.
Therefore, I say unto you: behold the lamb of god, which takes away the
sins of the world.

And being inquired of the soldiers, what they should do: Luc. 3.
He answered (saying) ye shall strike, The vocation and office of men of war.
nor hurt no man: nor yet do wrong or injury to any person: but be content
of your wages, which is as much to say, as oppress none: take no persons gear
violently: ye are public officers, depute by princes, and magistrates, for
keeping of good rule and order amongst the people, for rest, and quietness, of
the common weal: for the which cause ye have your wages. Your office is honest
and the good work of god: Therefore, look on your own vocation: and do that
justly which is commanded you, and exceed not your bounds.

Here is a good order taught you which are ministers of the word, to learn
the auditour in general, or special, to do good works: That is, to show them
the works commanded by god: the right fruits of repentance, and faith, to the
which ye should send them, and not to vain works invented by man, which is no
other thing, but to heap sin upon sin.

And Christ being asked by the Jews: What shall we do (say they) that we
might work the works of god: Io. 6.
answered (saying) This is the work of God, Faith is the work of God.
that ye believe in him, whom he has sent. Here, he sent them not to the
law (howbeit, the law be the work of god) but to faith, which is not the work
of man, but the work of god, which he works in man. Therefore Christ says
to us: Believe, and ye shall be safe. Io. 6.
And so let us say with S. Peter: Lord, to whom shall we pass, thou have the
words of life: we will seek no other, but believe in thee. Ye shall consider
that Christ, after he had refreshed the people with their corporal food.
Then he taught them the perfection of a Christian man. And fed them with the
spiritual food. And they which receive the same, did follow him: the rest
left him, which had no faith, but took his doctrine carnally, and of external
and outward works, as did the young man, to whom Christ made the answer, as
is before rehearsed. Math. the 19. Chap. There is no perfection, but in Christ.
By the which scriptures we are taught to follow christ, because there is no
perfection, but in the following of him.

Therefore, as we have received our Lord Jesus Christ, let us walk in him,
being rooted and builded in him: and confirmed in the faith as we have learned,
abou^ding in the same with giving thanks, as the Apost. says, Coloss. the 2.
Chap. for he is the fountain of all goodness, and the head of our felicity,
and let us have respect to no other thing, nor lay no other foundation. 1.
Cor. 3.
For as the Apost. says: No man Christ is the head and foundation of our
felicity upon whom we should build good works.
may lay another foundation, nor that which is already laid, the which is
Jesus Christ. Let us build upon this foundation, gold, silver, and precious
stones, which are the works of God, commanded in the holy scripture, to be
wrought into faith: every one according to his vocation, in the which we should
walk worthily, Coloss. 3.
as we are called with all humility, and meekness, and patience, supporting
one another in love, and charity, careful to keep the unity of the spirit,
in the band of peace, as we are taught by the Apost. Ephesians. the 4. Chapter.

And Christ says: Take my yoke on you, and learn of me that I am meek, and
lowly in heart: Math. 11
and ye shall find rest unto your souls: For my yoke is easy, and my burden
light. The which words, Christ would never have spoken, if he had laden us
with the law. For, that burden is so weighty that neither we nor our fathers
might bear it, as S. Pet. says, in the Acts of the Apost. the 15. Chapter.

But verily, the yoke of Christ is easy Wherefore Christ's yoke is easy, and
his burden light.
and his burden is light to the faithful, and chosen, for they lay all upon
Christ's back, and follow him through faith: confiding nothing in their own
works, nor merits: but ever working all good, according to their vocation,
giving all glory, and honor unto God: not exceeding the bounds of their
vocation, which is the best rule, that the faithful can have, to do good
works: to the knowledge thereof, we will make some short declaration, and then
make an end. Of general and special vocations.


Ye shall understand, that there is two kinds of godly vocatio^s. The one
is, immediate by god, as the prophets were called in the old testament:
Immediate vocation.
yea, and as David to be a King, and Moys. a governor, to the people. And as
the Apostles in the new testament. Mediate vocation.
The other is mediate by man (and immediate by god) as Iosue in the old
testament, was called by Moys. to be Governor to the people, at the
commandment of god. And as Timoth. and Titus, were called by S.P. to be
bishops: and as all they, which now are called to be bishops, which are
lawfully made, according to the word of god, and authority of the magistrates.
Therefore, to the knowledge of every man's vocation, I remit him to the word of
god, and his own conscience, which are his inward and most sure judges.

Vocation general.
through the which we are made one body, and one spirit: Even as we are
called in one hope of our vocation: for that charity is required of us by the
word of God, which makes and brings us together in one body, through mutual
conjunction of faith, working by charity: therefore Charity, is called the ba^d
of Peace. Charity, is the ba^d of peace.
There is but one fellowship of all the faithful, and one body: That is, one
church, whose only head is Christ. In this church is, nor should be, no
division: for there is in this vocation and christian religion but one body,
one faith, one baptism, which is the seal of our religion, marked by god,
with the blood of his only begotten son Christ Jesus our lord: in whose blood
we are baptized: one god, and one father of all, which is upon all, and by all,
and in us all. 1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. and 5.
And therefore the Apostle testifies us all to be but one body: that is one
church in Christ. Why the faithful are called one body.
For in to one spirit, and by one spirit, the whole universal congregation of
the faithful, is governed, ruled, strengthened, and kept. There is but one mark
or end, to the which all the faithful contend or shoot at, that is eternal
life. We are all the Sons of one Father, and participant of one heritage, as
we are called in one hope of our vocation.

And seeing, we have but one lord, which is Jesus Christ. It is convenient that
his servants be of one mind, and not divided through discord, and envy.
There is but one profession of faith, in all this Christian religion, and
vocation: for howbeit, we see in these our days many sundry professions, and
opinions of faith: There is but one true faith, which is that faith, which the
Apost. of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1. Cor 3, Ephe. 2. Act. 9.14. and 20. Romans 5.
1. Cor. 12.
together with the patriarchs, and prophets, have professed, and given to all
nations through their teaching and preaching, as testify the holy scriptures.
Upon the which foundation, the whole church of Christ is builded. Therefore by
one baptism, we are al made clean and purified, and by the which, we are
ingrafted in Christ: and made the people of God, purified from our sins, and
altogether buried with Christ. There is amongst us all, but one power or
strenght, of baptism: and in one name of the father, Math. 38.
son, and the holy spirit, we are baptized. And so ar we made one body into
Christ, being many members, co^pacted and joined together into him. For the
more perfect understanding of this body ye shall read the whole 12. chap. of
the 1. epistle to the Corinth. The 4. and 5. to the Ephesians. In the which ye
shall find this matter declared by the Apostle at lenght.

In this general vocatione their is no distinction of persons, for all men
are equal before god, of one estate, by one general promis al are called to
the faith, Mar. 16. Job. 33.
under one Lord and King Jesus Christ, who has shedd his blood, for all which
believe in him. Therefore all Scriptures which make mention, that there is no
exception of persons before god, are referred to this general vocation in the
Christian religion, as Romans the 2. chapter: where the Apostle inte^ding
(under Jew and gentill comprehending all men) to prove them sinners, says,
before God there is no acception of persons: And Peter says, In verity I
have found that God is not an accepter of persons: but in all nations and
people, he is accepted unto him, Act. 10.
which fears him and works righteousness. Ia. 2.
And S. James says, My brethren have not the faith of our glorious Lord Jesus
Christ in respect of persons. And S.P. says, to the co^fou^ding, of the false
apost. which seduced the Gal. through great authority: and also to show him
self equal in power with James, Gal 2.
Peter, and John, That God is not a respecter of the person of man: but in this
vocation of Christian religion by baptism through faith in the blood of
Christ, Galath. 3
all me^ ar equal: both Jew and ge^till, serua^d, free man, and woman, all
are one in Christ Jesus: the sons of Abraham by faith: and according to the
promis heirs: that is to say: all which believe ar the sonns of god therefore ar
they fre and heirs of eternal life.

To this general vocation pertains the sayings of S. Pet. in these words: 1.
Pet. ^^.
Ye are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, and a people
set at liberty, that ye should forthshowe the virtues of him that has called
you forth of darkness, into a marvelous light, etc. The same is said by
Moses, Ex. the 19. Chapter. Here ye see in this vocation there is no
acception of persons We are all the holy people of God, which believe
unfeignedly, yea kings oincted in Baptism by the holy Spirit: and priests
making sacrifice to god daily, of this our sinful body, Al faithful are kings
and priests
mortified from sin: and offer a holy and acceptable sacrifice after the
manner above writtin: conform to the teaching of the Apost. Romans the 12. cha.
But be ware ye call not your selves kings in office, Note well.
and dignity: nor priests in administration of the word, and holy sacraments,
for that pertains to a special vocation, or office by the self. Therefore I
exhort you which read the scriptures take heed that ye confound not the
works of god, for if ye do, ye shall not escape error: These special
vocations shall follow in their own places.

If we will look daily to this christian vocation, we shall have perfect
knowledge what works we should do, and what works we should leave undone. The
neglecting hereof, is the cause of all the enormities, and abuses now ruling in
the church of christ through the whole world. For considering we ar all
members of one body: and all members have not one office, but every one serves
other in their own place: as when the ears hear any thing, the eyis casts
the sight what it should be: the^ the feet and hands prepare them to pursue, or
defend, to stand or flee. And al these members and whole body, Ephe. 5.
obey the head: and awaite upon the direction of the same: Every member should
serve in his own vocation.
Even so we being all members of one body (which is the Church) whose head, is
Christ: should in our estate and office, according to the gift of god, and
grace given to us: differing one from another, serve in our special vocation,
every one another, in our own estate: Not inuying the gift of god in our
neighbor: but as the Apostle says: Romans 12.
Let us love brotherly fellowshippe, in going before another, in honor, and
reverence. In doing hereof, there would be no strife in the body: but if a
member were troubled, hurt, or had any disease, all the other members would
have compassion of it. And if one member were glad or joyful, all the other
members would rejoice with the same, as the Apost. says, the 1. to the,
Corinth. the 12. Chap. If we knew this perfitly, none would usurp another
office or dignity (to the which he were not called) but would be co^te^t of
his own vocation, and give to every man his duty: tribute, to whom tribute is
due: custom, to whom custom pertains: fear, to whom fear belongs: and
honor, to whom it pertains. The which are all compleite by this saying:
love thy neighbor as thy self: for the love of thy neighbor, works no
evil. Therefore, the Apostle says: Owe nothing to any man, but that ye love
together. To. 13.
These words being observed, ye fulfill the whole law. Love is ever debt
There fore this love one to another, is ever debt and should ever be paid.
For will the Prince and Superior do his duty to the subject: and the subject
his duty to the Superior, there would be no disobedience. The minister of
the word to the auditour, and flock committed to his care: The auditour to the
minister of the word, there would be no division in the Church. The father and
mother to the children, and the children to the parents, there would be no
dishonouring. The lord to the servant, and the servant to the lord, there would
be no contempt, nor trouble in the common weal. And so would we all look
upon Christ, our head, and be ruled with his word, and seek no other way beside
it, nor mixed the civil or politic estate, with the word of god but every one
to serve in the own rowm and place: the^ should there be no question of
politic works: nor no other works of any law, to be mixed with faith: which
justifies only before god, as it is before written: but every faithful person
should by the word of god know their own vocation, and diligently exercise them
therintill. And seek no further knowledge, nor wisdom, but that, that is
needful to them to know. And that with meekness and sobernes, ever working
the works of god, which are the fruits of faith to the honor of god, Men should
seek no knowledge but it which is profitable.
and profit of our neighbor.

THE XXV. CHAP.
1 All estate of man is contained, within one of these four special vocations.

2 The offices of princes, magistrates and judges

3 Wherefore judges are called the sons of God, wherefore, and in what case
they should be obeyed.

To the more perfect knowledge and understanding of our special vocations: The
division of the estaits of men.
in the which we shouid walk, according to the word of god: and gift of the
holy spirit, we will divide all the estate of man, in four offices dignities,
or special vocations: (that is to say) In the office of a prince: under whom
we comprehe^d all kind of man, having general administration in the common
weal, or jurisdiction of others. In the office of the administration of the
word of god, under whom we comprehend all power ecclesiastical. In the fathet
and mother: under whom, we will comprehend al householders, having special
families. And in the subject or serua^d, under whom we will co^prehe^d al estate
of men, subject to other.

If thou be called to the office, estate, or dignity of a king, prince, or any
supreme power, having jurisdiction of people in the civil ordinance: Consider
thy estate, The office of kings and magistrates.
and know thee perfitely to be the creature of god, equal to the poorest of thy
kingdom, or dominion, his brother by creation and natural succession of Adam:
and of nature a rebel to god: the son of wrath, and Ire as he was, as the
Apost. says, Ephesians. the 2. Chap. And the innocent blood of Christ, shed for
thy redemption, as for him: and thou called by faith, and borne of new by
baptism in his blood, the son of god by adoption, and made fellow heir with
Christ of the kingdom of heaven without respect of persons (the son of
favor and grace.) Therefore the poorest and most vile within thy jurisdiction,
The king should love his subjects.
is thy brother, whom thou should not despise, nor contemn, but love him as
thy self. This is thy debt, and duty, because it is the commandment of god,
whom thou should love and fear: Pro. 1. Psalm. 110.
for that is the beginning of wisdom (as Solomon says) The right way to rule
in thy office, is to know God: No man may know god, but by his word.
of whom thou ca^ have no knowledge, but by his word and law, which teaches
thee, what thou should do, and leave undone, according to thy vocation.

And as to thy princely estate and dignity, and office, thou art Father to all
thy kingdom. Their head in place of god, to rule, govern, and keep them,
upon whom thou should take no less care, then the carnal father takes
upon the best beloved son, gotten of his body. For they are given by god to
thee, in government: The king should have knowledge of gods law.
Therefore thou should begin to know the will of thy god, and take the
book of his law, in thy hand: read upon it, which teaches thee, the will of
god. It should never pass forth of thy heart, nor depart from thy mouth, day
and night having thy meditation thereinto, that thou may keep all which is
written therein, Deu. 17. Iosu. 1.
then shall thou direct thy way, and have knowledge and understanding of the
same. This being done, thou shall get the blessing, Psalm. 1.
of the which speaks Dau. (saying) Blessed is the man, which deliteth in the
law of the Lord, and has his meditation thereinto, day and night. Then ask
at God wisdom, and understanding (which is the knowledge of his godly will)
and a heart that may receive teaching, that thou may judge thy people, and
decerne betwixt good and evil, as thou art taught by the example of Solomon: 3.
Reg. 3.
For if thou lack wisdom, ask the same at god, who gives abou^dantly. And
doubt not, for he that doubts in his faith, shall obtain nothing from god.
Iaco. 1.
Co^fide not in thy own wisdom: For god makes wisemen, blind: which are wise
in their own conceate: his witnessing is faithful, which gives wisdom to
young babes: That is, Psalm. 19.
to simple hearts, bearing them selves lowly and humbly before god: not
presuming in their own wits. Sap. 1. 1. Pet. 5.
For there is no place to wisdom in the proud breast, as says Solomon: For
god resists the proud, but to the meek and humble, he gives grace. The
mighty and proud, he casts down of their seat, and exalts the humble
and lowly in heart, Luc. 1.
as testifies the Song of the glorious virgin Marie.

Therefore humbly, and lowly submit thy self in the hands of thy God, and
take thought of him, being governed by his word. Begin at him, and set forth
the true and perfect worshipping of god, in thy Kingdom. The king should set
forth the true, and destroy the false religion of god in his kingdom.
Restore the true, pure, and sincere Christian religion, abolish, destroy, and
put down all false worshippinges, and superstitions contrary to the word of
god: and not commanded therein, according to the example of the noble Kings of
Judah, Ezechias and Josias, as thou may read the fourth book of the kings,
the 18. and 23. Chapter. This is thy vocation, in the which thou should
walk: and orderly proceed in guiding of thy people as thou art taught by the
word of god: Deuteronomy. 17.
and decline not therefrom, neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but the
kingly way, teached thee in the holy scriptures.

To you, which are princes, Judges, and superior powers, upon earth, perteine
wisdom, knowledge, understanding, and learning, that ye may justly and truly
exercise the office, and charge committed to your care by God. Therefore, David
exhorts you (saying) understand, Psalm. 2.
and know (o ye kings) and be learned, O ye, which judge the earth: And serve
the lord in fear and reverence, and rejoice in him with trimbling. Deuteronomy. 4.
This is your wisdom and understanding, taught you in the law of god. For the
godly man needs not to seek wisdom, but in the scriptures of God, where
he shall find, how he shall behave him, both to god and man, in prosperity,
and adversity, in peace, and war: To seek wisdom other ways, but in gods
scripturs, is foolishnes.

1. Cor. 1.


Therefore, to seek wisdom any other way, it is nothing but foolishnes
before god. Since ye are the ministers of God unto good: created and
ordained by him, as the Apost. says. Romans the 13. Chap. It becomes you of
your office to guide, and rule your subjects, in all goodness, and sweetness,
not seeking from them their lands, or goods: but seek righteous judgment:
Zach. 7. and 7.
help the oppressed: judge righteously the people and widows cause. Esaias. 1.
Psalm. 81.
Justify the needful, humble, and poor, as teaches you the scriptures of
god. Defend them from the injuries and oppressions of the wicked: And being
unjustly pursued, in judgment absolve them. Exodus 28.
Take from them your duty and no more: have no respect of persons, nor take no
bribes or rewards, Leuit. 19. Deuteronomy. 16.
the which blind the eyes of the wise: and peruerte the words of the just.
These two things (that is to say) respect of persons and rewards, peruerte all
righteous judgments. The first comprehends in it the fear and reverence of
great, mighty and rich me^, love of friends, favor of kin, or affinity,
contempt of the poor, humble, and sober persons, mercy of the wicked, and
gilty, peril of thy own life, tinsell, or loss of fame, and loss of goods,
or worldly honors. The second (that is rewards) comprehends in it, lucre,
profit, hope, and all that infinite and insatiable goulfe of avarice. Exodus 18.
Therefore, Iethro cou^selled Moses, to provide (for administration of
Justice, and good order in the Civil policy) wise men which feared god, and
were true, hated and detested avarice, the which is the root, and beginning of
all evil. And so learn, yea above all things, to detest avarice, vain
glory, and particular affection of persons, if ye will walk right in the
Christian religion, according to your vocation.

Your estate and office is great, and not to be contemned: but of all men to
be praised, Io. 10.
and commended, of your subjects feared, reverenced, and also loved Judges
should be honored because they are participant in power with god.
because ye are as it were gods: and so called in the scripture, by reason of
participation of the power of god committed unto you, whose judgments ye
exercise: and called the sons of God, as David says, Deuteronomy. 1 Psalm. 11.
I have said, ye are gods, and sons of the most highest: that is, for the
excellent dignity of your office, I have called you my sonns. Nevertheless know
your selves to be but men: and for to suffer death, as other men does: and in
like manner as princes of earthly kingdoms, or tyrants, which have the ruling
of commonweals, as ye have. Therefore, be just, and righteous, exercising
your self in all godlynes, according to your vocation: being sure, ye shall
shortly die, and give account and reakoning of your administration. For ye are
but flesh, and all flesh is but grass, and all the glory of the same, Esaias.
40. 1. Pet. 1. Iac. 1.
as it were the flower of the field: the grass is withered, and the flower
falls, but the word of god remains for ever: Therefore, know Christ to be
your king, ruler, guider, and governor, who shall rule you with an Iron rod,
and break you asunder, as it were a clay pot, or vessel of fragill earth. If
ye will not understand the will and commandment of god, his Ire and wrath shall
rule above your head, at all times. These sharp threatninges, are showen you
in the scriptures, Esaye the first, Jeremy the fifth Chap: David in the 2. and
81. Psalm. And Zachary the 7. chap. where ye are taught the chief points of
your office, and works which ye are bound to do: Whereof shall judges be
accused, and whereof not.
for neglecting of the which undone, ye shall be accused before god. But never
for neglecting of pilgrimages, offering to Images, praying to Saints, founding
of masses, and abbayes of monks and friars, making of Images, belles, Copes,
and other such vain superstitions, because the same are not commanded you to
do, but rather the contrary. This dare I affirm, because gods word affirms
the same.

Ye should be pure, and clean of life, without crime, because ye are depute
by god, and ordained to the punishment of crimes. A judge of corrupted life,
ca^ never minister justice equally.
How can ye judge justly, being corrupted. A thief shall never punish theft.
An oppressor, ma^slayer, adulterer, a false Liar, a dishonourer of father and
mother, a disobeyer of his superior, a covetous or auaritious man, a
blasphemer of the name of God, shall never punish these crimes in others:
Therefore, the scriptures of God teach you to abstain from all such vices and
crimes. For in you which are great me^, and have the care of others, Subjects
follow the vices of their superior magistrates.
your crimes and sins are not so much to be lamented in you, as the evil
example your subjects take thereof. And therethrough follow you in the same and
other crimes, heaping sin upon sin: ever till god of his righteous judgment
take vengeance (yea) and cause another as wicked as ye are, punish you, as ye
may read of the punishment of the people of Israel, by the open ennemies of
god God commonly punished the wicked by them which are more wicked.
and manifest Idolaters, because they neglected the law of God as testify the
whole histories of the kings, and Judges of Israel, and Judah.

And the greatest punishment, is sent by god, for doing of the most excellent
work after the judgment of man, because it was not commanded by god Ier. 7.
for no thing from the beginning of the world has ever been so displeasant in
the sight of god, Mark diligently.
as to invent any manner of worshipping of him, 1. Reg. 15
which he has not commanded. For this cause king Saull was eiected, and all
his posterity lost, and fell from the kingdom. In the which example, ye
shall consider that the works wrought by King Saull, were right excellent in
the sight of man, and also done by him of a good intent, and for a good cause
he offered sacrifice, for fear that the people should not pass from him, he
being then prepared for battle against the ennemies of god. He did show the
deed of mercy, in saving of the life of an aged and impotent King: 1. Reg. 15.
And for the love he had to the worshipping of god, assented to the people,
and keept the fattest bestiall, most precious clothing, and jewels of gold and
silver, to offer the same to god in a sacrifice. Was this not a goodzeale, and
intention? but ye may read the great punishment which god laid upon him, which
shall remain for an example in all ages to come.

THE XXVI. CHAP.
1 The office of a bishop.

2 Bishops should not mixed them with worldly matters.

3 If the flock perish, their blood shall be required of the bishop.

4 Bishops should exhort their flock, to frequent the reading of the scripture.

5 Bishops can do no good works, without they preach the word of God.

6 The punishment of bishops, which leave that undone which God co^ma^deth,
and attend upon their own superstitions.

IF thou be called, to the office of a bishop, Saint Paull, written to the
first bishop, that he made, called Timotheus: And to another, called Titus.
There, thou shall find the works, which thou art bound to do: and what is
thy office, specially, in the first to Tim. the 3. Chapter: and to Titus the 1.
Chap. There is nothing left unexpressed, that is necessary to thee to work, in
the scripturs of god. Thou art commanded to be a mirror, or example to thy
flock, in teaching of the word, in good life, and honest conversation: in love
and charity in faith, and chastity: ever exercising thy self in reading,
exhorting, and teaching the which if thou do, 2. Tim. 4.
thou shall save thy self and others.

2. Tim. 2.
or business, for that is not thy vocation: follow the example of the Apostles
in all righteousness and godly living: 1. Tim 6.
in faith, love, patience, meeknes and sweetness, as thou art taught. If ye will
remember daily, upon the office ye are called to which are bishops: ye shall
find you to have a great charge and work to do: and not a great dignity or
Lordeshippe. But alace, now ye take thought of the lordshippe, dignity, rent,
and profit: and look never to the work ye should do: the cause thereof, is
the neglecting of your vocation. The which if ye will understand perfitely,
ye would not omit the charge, and commandment given to you by god, and invent
vain superstitious works not commanded. The principal work ye should do,
is to preach and teach: which ye never do, because ye can not, and to excuse
you, ye have as (ye say) others to whom ye commit the cause and charge. Ye
are blind and know no thing: They to whom ye commit the charge, know as little
or less. So perish the poor people, in ignorance, for ye are blind, and
leaders of the blind: and therefore both fall in the mire. The blood of the
flock perished for fault of spiritual food, shall be required at the bishope.
Nevertheless the blood of the^ shall be required at your hands, as the Prophet
Jeremy says the 23 chapter And Ezech. the 34, chapter, the which I pray you
read: for there ye shall see

Ye should not only your selves, co^tinuallie read, and teach the
scripturs, but also ye should co^ma^d the flock in your charge to seek their
spiritual food in the same. This was the order in the church of Christ in the
beginning. Ezech. 3. and
The minister of the word, to teach, and thereby they might take the teaching
the better, as the Thessalonians did at the preching of the Apost. as ye may
read and consider in the Acts of the Apost. the 17. chapter. And Christ
teaches us to search the scriptures, for they bear witness of him. And S. P.
says: All things which are written: they are written to our learning, that
through patience, and consolation of Scriptures, we may have hope (that is) of
eternal life. The which is the mark whereat shoot all the faithful: for in
the Scriptures of God, all things are contained necessary for our salvation.
Alace, think ye not shame (which are bound and oblished, under the pain of
eternal damnation, to teach your flock this manner of doctrine) to inhibit
and forbid them to look upon the scripture, either to hear, or read them.
This is far different from the order of the apost. yea, and of the holy
fathers of the church long time after: as appears clearly by the teaching of
Chrisost. writting upon the 1. chap. of S. Math. the 2. and 5. hom. where he
with a great lame^tatio^, The complaint of Chrisostom
reproves the secular me^, and householders, which alleged the reading and
teaching of scripturs perteined not to the^. Exhorting them to give atte^dance
to the scripturs, that they might instruct there families, and household, how
they should live, according to the order of the scripture, and as becomes
christians: but by the contrary, ye would that none of your flock, or
auditors should know the^, lest your misdeeds were espied.

The feeding of your flock the atte^da^ce and care ye should take thereupon
is so necessary, Without a bishope preach truly he can do no good work
before god.
that without the doing thereof, ye can do no good works at all according to
your vocation, which can please god, because in neglecting of this ye neglect
faith: out of the which all good works should spring. So should all your good
works, follow faith. And this principal point of your vocation is the cause
that S. P. departing from Ephe. to Ieru. called before him the ministers of the
word in the congregation: certifieing the^ he would not return again in
bodily presence: and therefore he left to them this legacy, saying: Attend,
and take heed unto your selves, and to the whole flock, in the which the holy
spirit has put you, bishops to guide, and rule the Church of god: the which
he has redeamed with his blood. For I know after my departing, there shall
enter in amongst you, ravening wolves, which shall not spare the flock. And of
your selves, there shall rise men, speaking wickedness, that they may lead
disciples to follow them. The legacy Paull unto bishops.
Therefore be diligent and vigilant, keeping in memory, that by the space of
three years, I ceased not day and night, with tears, and weeping, warning and
admonishing every one of you, etc.

If the Apostle had known any better work or more excellent, to have been left
in memory or legacy to the ministers of the word, he would (no doubt) have
expressed the same: And eue^ so, S. P. in his 1. Ep. the 5. Chap. exhorts you
to feed the flock of Christ, committed to your charge: Even as Christ said to
him thrice: feed my sheep. So says he to you, feed the flock committed to
you, every one within his bounds, according to your vocation This food is the
word of god, and woe be to you, That is sorrow and eterne damnation abides you.
which do not the same, because it is your vocation. For the Apost. says, Woe
be to me if I preach not the Euangel etc. for the neglecting of this good work
undone, 1. Cor. 3.
ye shall be accused before god: but not for the neglecting of the other vain
superstitious works, invented by man: but rather ye will be accused for the
doing of them. And it will be said unto you, Wherefore have ye left the command
of god undone, for your statuts and traditions.

Ye should teach every estate of man, how they should behave them in their
conversation. The poor to the rich and the rich to the poor: the servant to
the master, and the master to his seruaund. And give your selves forth, for
an example, in deed, to be followed, as ye are teached by the Apost. and play
not the tyrant, 1. Timoth 6 Tit. 2.
or the lord, upon the inferior ministers and estates of the Church: But from
the bottom of your heart, be as it were a form, or rule to the flock, as S.
Pet. teached you in the first Epistle, the 5. Chap. Labor continually in your
vocation, as the good knights of Christ, being ready (if need require) to
suffer death, 2. Timoth. 2
for the flock: resisting the unfaithful, and eshewing profane and worldly
triffles, as ye are taught by the Apost. If ye will attend upon these works,
which are good, taught and commanded you to do, as the fruits of faith: ye
should find your selves so well occupied in the scripture, that there shall be no
place found, to your vain superstitions above written, which are not commanded
by God nor his word. For in the using of them, ye do that, which is not
commanded you, and leave that undone, which is commanded.

Malach. 2.
For this cause god suffers you to be contemned and cast off, because ye have
left him, he has left you: and will punish you after the same manner, Sap. 11.
as ye have sinned. For the contempt of god, 1. Reg. 2 3. Reg. 2.
and neglecting of his word, Hely the chief Priest was deposed, and all his
posterity of the priesthood. His sons killed in battle, the ark of god put
in the hands of his ennemies: 1. Reg. 2.
And the people also heauely tormented, as testifies the history.

The holy King David, for the slaughter of Vrias, and adultery of Bath-sheba:
the son of his own body, defiled his daughter. The one son slew the other,
and also defiled his wives, and concubins in public presence of the people,
and usurped the crown of his realm, as ye may read the second book of the
kings, the 13.15.16. and 18. Chapter. The punishment of David pertains to
bishops as well as to princes.
This example of David pertains as well to you, as to princes, and to all
estates of the world, that they may learn not to sin. And if they fall in
sin, that they despair not, but turn to repentance, and come unto god,
whose will is that all be safe, and come to the knowledge of the verity.

THE XXVII. CHAP.
1 The office of the fathers to the sons: Householders to their families, and
of Husbands, to their wifes.

2 What kind of men were chosen to be bishops, in the primative Church.

Ephe. 5 Collos. 3.
even as thy own body. There is no man which hated or detested his own body,
but nourishes and feeds the same, as Christ the Church, for we are members
of his body, of his flesh, and his bones: for that cause, man shall leave
father and mother, and cleave unto his wife, and they shall be two in one flesh.
1. Pet. 3.
And in like manner* thou woman, be subject to thy husband, as if it were to the
lord: for the man is thy head, even as Christ is the head of the congregation.
And as the church is subject to christ, eue^ so be thou subject to thy husband,
in all lawful things. This is your vocation in the which ye should walk,
according to the commandment given to you, by the Ap. Ephesians. the 5. Chap. and
Colos. the third. In these words: Let every man love his wife, as himself: And
let the woman fear and dread the husband, this is the commandment of god.

If ye (me^ and women) would take care upon your vocation, how honorable the
estate of the same is, and what ye ought every one unto another, there were
none of you, who would commit adultery, or defile your own bodies, nor
defraude one another, of their duty and right. For thou man, have not power of
thy own body, but the woman: Nor thou woman have not power of thy own body,
but the man. Therefore, there is neither of you, that should give your bodies
to other me^ or women, 1. Cor. 7.
nor abstract one from another, that mutual love which ye are commanded to
have together. This doing, ye exercise the good work of god. Be not outrageous
nor thraward upon the woman, but teach her with meekenes, Coloss. 3. 1. Pet. 3.
1. Tim.
and sweetness, forbearing her somewhat, as the weakest vessel. And thou
woman, pretend no dominion upon thy Husband, but obey him as thy lord, taking
example of the obedience, of that noble woman Sarai. If ye would keep this
order, and rule in your own vocation, there would be no strife betwixt you, but
all godliness and love. No man would contemn or disdain his wife: nor no woman
her husband: but every one love other, as their own body, and take care one for
another, in all things.

Thou man should daily and hourly exercise the, according to thy vocation. And
labor diligently, for sustentation of thy wife, children, and family. That
thou may minister unto them their necessaries: for if a man take no thought
of his own, and specially of his household and family, he has denied the
faith, 1. Tim. 5.
and is worse the^ an infidele. Suffer not thy children, nor servants to be
idle: but se ever that they be occupied in some good and vertueous occupatio^.
For that is the right way to keep them from vice and sin, because idleness is
the beginning of all evil. Psalm. 77. Deuteronomy. 6.
Teach the^ the law of god: use all things with discretion, and provoke not
your children to anger, but bring them up in good teaching, discipline, and
correction, and in the erudition of the Lord. Coloss. 3.4. Ephe. 6.
Give unto your servants that thing which is just and right. What ye promise,
pay them: knowing well, that ye have a Lord in heaven.

And thou woman, exercise thee in nourishing, and up bringing of thy children
in ruling all things within thy house, as thou have commandment of thy
husband, take care upon his direction, as thy head, and transgress not his
commandment: for that is the will of God. I mean not of evil, but of all
goodness: because I speak of the fruits of faith, and works of
righteousness: ye are all bound to do the works, which God has commanded
you to do, in his holy scripture, of mercy, love, and charity: by reason of
your vocation in the christian religion: And these other works in your
special vocation. In doing of the which, think that ye do the good work of
god: and please him, if ye work them in faith (albeit, Hypocrites commend not
the same) Being occupied on this manner daily, there shall be no place to
vice, for your mind is occupied upon other business.

It is but Idleness to you, to pass in pilgrimage, to this or that Saint, to
sit the half of the day in the Church, babbling upon a pare of beads,
speaking to stocks or stones, the thing which neither thou, nor they know. And
neglects the good work of God, the which thou art bound to do. Right Prayer.
If thou will pray right, learn the Lords prayer, in the tongue, thou
understands. Thy Creed, that is the articles of thy believe: the ten
Commandments of god. And daily at thy rising, and downlying at night, have
some space, to thy contemplatio^ thereinto: and teach thy household the same
manner. And occupy the rest, as is before said, according to thy vocation: not
exceeding the bounds there of, nor seeking no other works, but them which are
commanded in the holy scriptures. And are necessary to be done, as is written
to Titus the 3. Chap. Let the faithful which are of our number, be ever
ready, and learn to do good works to all necessary uses, that they be not
unfruitful. For the faithful can never be idle, because unfeigned faith,
works ever by Charity. The vnfaithles work no good works. To. 14.
But they which know not their own vocation, can never be faithful.
Therefore they can never work good works, but all is evil, whatsoever thing,
they do or work, without faith because all which is not of faith, is sin.
Therefore, if thou will work well, be faithful, and look ever to thy
vocation. And thou shall find thy conscience, teaching thee (both) to do good,
and eschew evil, at all times.

Ye should be pure and clean in your conversation, for good example giving to
your Children and family. For as they see you do, so shall they learn: And
are ever rather inclined to do evil, the^ good, by reason of this corrupted
nature of man: The life of the fathers should be clean because it is a mirror
to the sons.
Therefore teach them to love and fear God, to know his law, being ever your
selves an example to them: And as it were a mirror to look into, in all godly
life and conversation. For if they behold you living together (in great love
and charity, chastity, and temperance, being merciful to the poor,
supporting the indigent, after the quantity of your riches, at love, and
charity, with your neighbor, ever speaking good of all creaturs, detracting
none) they shall follow the same doings, by the which ye shall be called the the
faithful fellowship of Jesus Christ: and true subjects of his realm. Your
vocation is good and holy, and it becomes you to know the scriptures: For in
the primative church, * the bishops were chose^ commonly forth of your number.
A godly and honest householder, who lived in chaste matrimony, ruled, and
guided, his household well: brought up his children in subjection, and
reverence, in all manner of godly teachings. He having this outward witnessing,
is commanded by the Apost. to be chosen to the office of a bishop. 1. Tim. 3.
When this order was kept in the church of Christ, the word of god flourished.

Therefore, woe be to you, which say that laickes, or secular men, and
householders, should not know the scripturs, read them, or teach their household
the same: ye impung the holy spirit: and dishonor the old Fathers of the
Church, which taught the contrary, as by example of Chrysostom, Mark
diligently.
before rehearsed: it is even alike to you to say: temporal or secular men,
should not hear the word of god: Deuteronomy. 8. Math. 4.
read and teach their families the same, as to say: they have not a soul, for
the word of god, is the food of the soul: and if ye will abstract the food,
without the which the soul must perish: ye shall make man as a brutishe
beast. And if ye will admit them to hear the word, ye should admit them to
read the same, and talk thereupon: for what avails the hearing, if a man
should not conceive, and keep in memory that thing, which he hears: and
live thereafter. For Christ says, Blessed are they which hear the word of
god, and keep the same. * The often reading of the word, and communication
thereof, keeps the same ever recent in memory, and digesteth in thy heart, by
continual meditation, some confort and consolation: and abstracteth thee from
vice, and sin, leads and conuoyeth thee to all godly living. Therefore
David calls that man blessed, which deliteth in the law of God, and has his
meditation therein day and night.

Woe, woe, be unto you therefore, which would abstract this blessing from any man
or woman, the which God pronounces with his mouth. These doings of yours bear
witness of you: that ye are not the ministers of the word of God, or true
successors of the Apostles, but false teachers, fubuerters of the word, and
very Antichrists. Wherefore, I exhort you which are the faithful, whatsoever
estate or vocation ye be called to, that ye both gladly hear the word of
God. read it, teach your children, family, and subjects the same, and confor
me your life thereto* ever working the deeds of charity, and mercy, in all
godliness, according to your vocation, and give no credit to them, which
teaches you the contrary, for they are false teachers, and members of the
Devil, which withdraw you from that thing, which is your salvation.

THE XXVIII CHAP.
1 The duty of the master unto the servant, and contrary.

2 Of the subject, to the prince.

3 Of the son, to the father.

4 The honor, which the sons ought to the parents.

5 The devilish doctrine of pestilent papisticall priests, in the contrary
thereof.

If thou be a subject, servant, son or daughter, be obedient to thy
superior: first unto thy prince, as the supreme power: and to every one
having power from him, for they are the ministers of God, whom thou should
obey, and not resist: ordained by god to the revenge of evil doers, and loving
of the good doers which is the will of god, as ye ar taught Romans the 13.
chapter. And the first of Peter the 2. chapter. Your duty is to honor al
men, love brotherly fellowship fear god, and honor the king: be obedient to
him, not only for fear and dreadour of his ire: but also for hurting of your
conscience, because it is the will of God, in all things not repungning to his
command. Give to thy prince and superior his duty: or what ever he charge
thee with, concerning temporal riches: inquire not the cause, for that
pertains not to thy vocation. He is thy head, whom thou should obey.
Trangresse not his Laws. Be not a revenger of thy own cause. For that is
as much as to usurp his office. So thou walk not aright in thy vocation.
Look not to his faults, or vices, but to thy own: disobey him not, howbeit
he be evil, and do the wrong (which becomes him not of his office) grudge
not thereat, but pray for him, and commit thy cause to god. Be not a perturber
of the common weal, but live with thy neighbor at rest, and quietness, every
one supporting others, as members of one body: forgiving gladly and freely, one
an other: If there be any complaint amongst you, even as the Lord has
forgiven you: Be sweet, meek, bening humble, and patient, one with another:
as it becomes the saints, and well-beloved of god: having compassion one of
another. Above all these have love, and charity, which is the bond of
perfection. For charity coupleth togegether many members in one body. This are
ye taught by the Apostle Coloss. the 3. chap. and in other places before
rehearsed.

Here ye find abundance of works, commanded you to do by God: and need to
seek no others. There is none which can work these good works but the
faithful. From doing of the which, the faithful and justified man can not
cease: but ever works as he finds occasion, according to his vocation: he
looks ever to his own faults, and sins, and not to his neighbors. The
faithful lament the faults of others.
But if he perceive any fault or vice in his neighbor he lamenteth the same,
and considered, greater vices, to be in him self. And therefore has
compassion of his neighbor: and neither blasphemeth bak biteth, or dishonoreth
him, but counsels and conforteth him, as his own body of brotherly love and
affection.

Ye children, obey your parents, with great humility, love, fear, and honor
them, for that is the command of God: and the first which has promis (as
concerning thy neighbor) that it may be well to the, and that thou live long
upon earth. This obedience, and honor consists not in words only, nor in
salutations: but also in ministering all things necessary unto them.
Remembering as they ministered unto you, in your tender, feeble, and poor
youthheade. Even so do ye to them: in their feeble, impotent, and poor
age.*Neglecting this good work undone ye can do no good work, that can
please God. There is no color of godliness may excuse you from this good work.
Howbeit your wicked and ungodly pastors, have taught you to found a soul
mass: with your substance, and suffer father and mother to beg their bread
This is a deuilish doctrine to convert the good work of god into Idolatry. The
Scribes and Pharisees their forefathers taught the same, as testify the words
of Christ.

Ye servants obey, your carnal Lords, and masters, with fear and
trimbling, with simpleness of heart, as it were unto Christ, not in eyes
service, as it were to please men: but as servants of Christ: doing the will of
God, not only to them which are good, and well instructed in manners, but also
to the wicked and evil. What ever ye do work the same with your heart, as
it were to the lord, and not to man: knowing surely ye shall receive from the
lord the reward of the heritage. Therefore serve the Lord Jesus Christ. Be not
flatterers, nor liars, backbiters, nor detracters: serve not your masters
only in their presence, but also in their absence: without deceat or
dissimulatio^. Take thought of the things given you in charge, and obey their
will, even as to God, who looks upon your inward minds. Pretend not to be
equal with your Lord, or master, because ye are both of one Christian
religion: but serve him the better: have love, and charity, with your equal
fellow servants, as all members of one body: exercising you in all good
works, according to your vocation in the Christian religion.

Now ye see that we which profess the true faith of Jesus Christ, and
ascribes the justification of man before god, only to faith, without all
works merits or deseruinges, on our part: that we are not the destroyeres of
good works: but the mainteiners, defenders, and foorthsetters of the same: as
the fruits of faith: as I have before at lenght showed.

Therefore I exhort you (which blaspheme us, saying, we would destroy all good
works, because we affirm with the scriptures of god, faith only to justify
before god) to remord your conscience, and read the Scriptures with an humble
heart and spirit, which shall teach you the right way, by the grace of the holy
spirit, who will lead you in all verity. And then I doubt not, but ye shall
aggrie with us, and contemn, and despise, the vain superstitious works, not
commanded in the Scripture: but invented of man's vain co^ceate (as we do).
And altogether as it becomes the faithful members of Jesus Christ: work the
works of God which are commanded us in his holy scriptures: Every one
according to his vocation, proceeding of love, forth of a clean and pure heart,
of a good conscience, and of faith unfeigned, which works by charity, to the
profit of thy neighbor and glory of god. To whom be all praise, honor and
glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
TO THE READER.
IF it please thee, good reader, of these pleasant flowers, amongst the which
thou have walked at large, again to take a taste, or smelling. Thou shall read
these short abbreuiations subsequent. Exhorting thee, that where any obscurity
appears, that thou make recourse unto the preceding places, where every
thing is manifestly expressed. Thou shall do well, if earnestly thou shall
pray that Lord only, to whom the harvest pertains, that it would please him
send true workmen thereto: To the manifestation, of his own glory before his
congregation, by Jesus Christ: whose omnipotent spirit, satiate the hearts of
them which thirst righteousness.

Amen.
THE SOMMARIE OF the first Chap.
Our whole study should be to adhear unto god: running to him in the time of
tribulation (as does the wild heart, in the birning heat, to the could river)
with sure hope of deliverance by him allone. Not inquiring his name. That is
the manner, how he shall deliver us.

The sommarie of the second Chapter.
BY faith have we knowledge of god, whom we should seek in his scriptures: and
receive him, as he is offered to us thereinto: that is, a defe^der, protector,
refuge and father, inquiring no further speculation of him. For Philip desiring
to see the Father: Answered Christ, Who has seen me, has seen the Father.
Meaning that the love, goodness, and mercy, which God the Father bears unto
mankind: he had expressed in doctrine, and works. And also should show a
most singular token of love, giving his own life for his Ennemies. And
therefore would all men come to him, to whom the Father has given all power.

The sommarie of the third Chapter.
TRibulations are profitable to the faithful: for thereby the strentgh of the
flesh somewhat is dantoned, and cease to rebel against the spirit: And
begins to seek god, who is a peculiar Father to the faithful: delivering
them from all tribulations: Not for their worthynesse, but for his own mercy.
Worldly tribulations are the sign and token of gods love, albeit, the wicked
and unfaithful judge otherwise, which in time of tribulation run from God,
seeking help at man (which is but vain) whereof they being frustrate, and
deceived, fall in desperation.

The sommary of the fourth Chapter.
THe faithful thank god in tribulation, and albeit our wicked nature,
teaches us to fly from God, as did our first parent Adam, after his
transgression: Yet faith in Jesus Christ leads us, to the throne of our
Fathers grace, where we find goodness, mercy, and justice, given to us freely
by Jesus Christ, as they were given to Adam. Who albeit, fled from god: yet he
moved of love, toward his own handywork, followed him: and albeit, Adam at the
voice of god, repented not, but obstinately excused his sin: yet god made to
him the promise of salvation, before he pronounced his wrath contrary sin
(which of his righteous judgment he must punish*) And so Adam wrought nothing
which might move god to make this promise: more then he wrought that of dust,
and clay, he should be made a living Creature, to the Image and similitude of
god. And to Abraham, being an Idolater, was made the promise, he should be
the father of many nations (which he merit not) to which promise Abraham
giving credit, was reakoned just, by the which it is plain, that the mercy of
god, and not our works, is the cause, that he calls us by his word,
whereto we giving credit, are reakoned just: all our deseruinges or merits,
being excluded.

The Sommarie of the 5. Chapter.
ADam, expelled forth of paradise, had no consolation, except in the blessed
seed promissed. By whom he believed him to stand in gods favor, for all
bodily consolation which he had of his two Sons, was turned in dolor: when
Cain killed Abell. In the which dolor, Adam many years remained, will God
having compassion upon him, gave him another son, named Seth: of whom
descended the blessed seed. For this son, Adam gave thanks unto god, taking
all afflictions in patience, knowing him worthy of greater punishment, by
whose example we should patiently (with thanksgiving unto god) suffer all
tribulation. For none descending of Ada^, by natural propagatio^, are iuster
then he was after his fall: which all his life, suffered trouble, having no
confort, but that he should overcome all worldly calamity (yea, and also the
slightes of Satan, which had deceived him) by the blessed seed promissed. And
this same should be our confort in all tribulations.

The sommarie of the 6. Chap.
BY bodily afflictions our faith is tried, as gold by the fire. They are also a
communion with the passions of Jesus Christ. And therefore in them have we
matter and cause to rejoice: considering we suffer without cause, committed
contrary man. Notwithstanding the wicked persecute the faithful, in all ages,
as if they had been mischievous or evil doers, as may be seen in the
persecution of the prophets, Apost. and of Jesus Christ him self. The cause
hereof, is the neglecting of gods word: and taking from faith her due office,
whereof rises all dishouring of god: for none may or can honor god, except
the justified man. And albeit, in diverse men, there be diverse opinions of
justification: yet they alone, in whom the holy spirit works true faith
(which never wants good works) are just before god. The substance of
justification is, to cleave fast unto god, by Jesus christ, and not by our
self, nor yet by our works. And this Article of justification should be
holden in recent memory, because without the knowledge thereof, no works are
pleasant before God.

The sommarie of the seuinth Chap.
AS by persuasion of Satan, Adam and Eve seeking wisdom, contrary Gods
commandment, were deceived, and fell in extreme misery. So they seeking
justification otherwise, then teach the Scriptures, remain under the wrath of
god: for faith alone reconciliateth man to god: which the Law whose office is
only to utter sin, and trouble the conscience (as it did to Adam after his
transgression) may not do. Therefore who list to resist Satan, let him cleave
to faith: for it is the only shield, which his darts may not pearse.

The sommary of the eight chapter.
CAin a wicked hipocrit, killed his brother Abell. For no other cause, but that
his brothers sacrifice pleased god, because it was offered into faith. And the
posterity of Cain pursued perpetually them which depe^ded upon the blessed
seed: while god was compelled to drown the whole world, 8. persons being
reserved, amongst whom yet was keept the seed of Satan, in the third son of
Noe, Cham. From the days of Noe, to Abraham this article of justification
altogether was obscured, Idolatry spredding over all. The cause thereof was,
they followed the external works of the holy fathers in sacrifice: but had no
respect to faith, without the which all sacrifices ar Idolatry.

The sommarie of the ninth Chapter.
GOd of his mercy providing that his Church should not perish altogether:
renewed to Abraham the promise of the blessed seed, made to Adam: whereto
Abraham giving credit, is without his works reakoned just. But shortly after
began satan newly to pursue the just, by his members, stirring up Ismaell
against Isaac, Esau against Jacob, but the just, at the end, shall prevail, as
has done Jesus Christ, whose brethren we are, by reason he is very man of the
seed of Adam. And also because in him we are adopted, and made the sons of
god. The fleshly man is ever deceived, judging the wicked to be the chosen, as
Abraham believed Ismaell: And Isaac believed Esau, to have been their heirs.
But faith judged righteously, which caused Rebecca to labor with diligence,
that Jacob the youngest son should be blessed by his father.

The sommary of the 10. Chap.
THe Jews having a carnal opinion of the seed promissed (that their Messiah
should rule temporally, as did David) refused Jesus Christ, appearing simple
and poor. But the cause which moved Satan to stir up his members against
Christ was, that he plainly taught, that by faith without all works, man is
reakoned just. For the wicked thinking to make their foolish works a part of
their justification: may never suffer them to be damned. And the true Preacher
can never, but exclude them from the justification of man: as did the
prophets, Jesus Christ him self, and his Apostles, for which they suffered
death: leaving to us a sure testimony, for confirmation of this article, which
after Christ's death was plainly preached.

The sommarie of the 11. Chapter.
Satan perceauing his crafts, wherewith he deceived mankind, discovered, and
his head trodden down by the death of Christ, cled him in a new arrayement. And
finding them, which should have truly preached, idle: persuaded man to invent
new works, by the which they should seek justification, neglecting true faith.
Which pestilent works so has abolished the effect of perfect faith: that
they which are called bishops, understand nothing thereof, but pursue all them,
which truly preach or defend the same, by the which they show them selves
the Church malignant. For the chosen never pursue, but ever is pursued.

The sommarie of the twelfth Chapter.
Justice in general, is an outward obedience or honesty, which a man may
perform of his own power. And is divided in the justice of man, that is,
which comes of the law, which man makes: And in the justice of the law of
god. The justice of man is divided in politic, and Ceremonial. Politic
justice is: an obedience, which the inferior estate gives to their superior:
which should be keept, because it is the command of God that princes be obeyed.
Ceremonial justice is: the observing of statutes and traditions commanded by
the Bishope of Rome, counsels, or Shoolemaisters, which are to be keept, so that
they repung not to the law of god: nor yet that by the^, men seek remission of
sins. The justice of the Law of God, is, to fulfill the same as it requires:
that is, to love, fear, serve, and honor god, with all thy heart, and
strenght thereof. Which because no creature in earth does: there is no man
justified, by the works of the Law, for in all man (Jesus Christ excepted) is
found sin: as prove the examples of Abraham, Moses, Noe, and vthers most
holy fathers, in whom all sin was found. For by the transgression of Adam,
all his posterity became rebels to the Law: And are compelled to pray with
David: Enter not in judgment with thy servant (O Lord) for in thy sight no
living creature shall be found just.

The sommary of the xiij chap.
Seeing the^ our forefathers were not just, by the law, nor works thereof, of
necessity must we seek the justice of another (that is of Jesus Christ) which
the law may not accuse: In whom if we believe we are received in the favor of
god accepted as just without our merits or deseruinges. But here obiecte the
wicked (as their use is, when any thing transcendeth their capacity in
understanding) these questiones. First wherefore gave God the Law: if man may
not fulfill the same? Secondly, wherefore should we work good works, seeing by
them we are not made just? thirdly whereby were the fathers made just?

The sommary of the 14. Chap.
FOr understanding of the first question, man should learn to know god as he
is declared in the Scripture: That is to know him creator and maker of all:
which also made all his creatures in their first creation good, and perfect,
who not only gave a law to man: but also to the rest of his creatures: as to
beasts, Sun, Moon, sea, and elements. That thereby he might be glorified,
and known Lord. And so to man he gave a Law, to the effect he should know
his maker, and obey him. Which Law when Adam transgressed, he lost his
perfection, and righteousness. And so the cause, why man may not fulfill the
law, is: that the law remains in the own perfection: in the which it was
first created by god: but man by his disobedience, and foolishness, fell from
his perfection. And therefore should he accuse him self, and not god, that he
may not fulfill the law, which is perfect,

The sommary of the 15. Chap.
IN Adam, after his transgression remained a little of that knowledge, and
power, with the which he was indewed by god: and from him it descended in his
posterity: whereby man may work the outward works of the Law. But the whole
obedience thereto, gives no man. For these words prove all man (Jesus Christ
excepted) to be sinners by the law: Of the deeds of the law, shall no flesh
be justified before god. Which words Sophistes would abolish, saying, Paull
speaks of the Ceremonial law, and not of the moral, or law of nature: but
the plain words of Paull, prove them to be liars, He says: The law speaks
to all which are under the Law. And all men is under the law moral. And
therefore Paull speaks of the law moral which condemns al man, Jesus
Christ excepted.

The sommarie of the 16 Chap.
THe justice which is acceptable before god, has diverse names: first it is
called the justice of god, because it proceeds only of the mercy of god:
secondly it is called the justice of faith: because faith is the instrument,
whereby we apprehe^d the mercy of god. And last it is called justice, because by
faith in christ, it is given us freely without our deseruings: but eue^ as the
dry earth receaueth the rain, but all deseruinges of the self: So receive we
the justice, which is of value before god, without all our works: but yet we
must suffer god to work in us. And this justice is plainly revealed in the
eua^gel, from faith to faith, That is, we should continue in this faith all
our life. For the just live by faith: ever trusting to obtain that which is
promissed, which is eternal life, promissed to us by Jesus Christ.

The sommarie of the 17. Chap.
THe faith of the fathers before Christ's coming in the flesh, and ours in the
new testament: was and is one thing. For they believed them to stand in the
favor of god: by reason of that promissed seed, which was to come, whom we
believe, is come already, and has fulfilled all which was spoken of him, in
the law, and prophets. By this faith were the fathers made safe, without all
their works as testifies Peter. And where our adversaries ask them, what
auailed works? We answer, that works are an outward testimony to faith, by
which only man, is first made just: and thereafter his works pleas God, because
the person is acceptable. And so, no godly man forbids good works: but of
necessity, must they be excluded from the justification of man. For Paull
says, if justice be of the law, Christ's death is in vain. For albeit,
justice sometime be ascribes to man: that is not, because it proceeds of
man: but because it is given to man, freely by god: like as our faith, is
called the faith of Jesus Christ, because by him we are repute just: for he is
made to us from god, wisdom, justice, holiness, and redemption. And so all the
scripture testifies, us to be made just freely, by the mercy of God, that all
glory may be given to him. And therefore, who maked works a part of their own
justification, spoil god of his glory.

The sommarie of the 18. Chap.
GOD loves us, because we are his own handywork, created unto good works in
christ Jesus. In whom we remain, as branches in the wine root, bringing forth
good fruits, not of our own strenght: but of the power of the spirit, of
Jesus christ remaining in us, by true faith: which works the law may not
condemn, because they are the works of Jesus christ, and not ours. And so the
glory of works is excluded by the law of faith. For in our justification, we
only receive, as did our Father Abraham (whose sons we are by faith) which
was reakoned just, before he wrought any good works. The verity of the
scripture proves, that the heritage comes not by the law: for by the law,
Ismaell, and Esau, the eldest sons should have succeeded to the heritage: and
not Isaac and Jacob, which were younger. And so by the promis comes the
heritage, and not by the law. For the law ever accuses, and craves more of
us, the^ we are able to pay. And therefore damnation abides us, without we
apprehe^d Jesus Christ, which pays for us, that which the law requires. For
he alone takes away the sins of the world. He called all to him self, and
sends none to the law, to seek justification. And therefore, who seeks any
part thereof by their works, spoil Christ of his office.

The sommary of the 19. Chap.
AS the good tree bears good fruits, so the just man works good works:
but neither makes the fruit the tree good: nor yet the works the man just:
for as the tree is before the fruit: so the man is just before the work be
good. We should work good works, because we being sometime the sons of gods
wrath, and subjects to satan, are bought by the blood of Jesus Christ, to
serve in his kingdom: in the which ruled faith, hope, and charity, ever
working righteousness unto life. By the contrary in the kingdom of the devil,
rule incredulity, despair, and envy, ever working unrighteousness. And so we
owe obedience to him, whose servants we are. There be diverse princes, realms,
subjects and rewards, no man can serve both, nor of both the rewards, no man
shall be participant: but who serves sin, receaueth eternal death for his
reward: and who serves righteousness, receaueth life everlasting, by Jesus
Christ.

The sommarie of the 20. Chap.
Works are commended in the scripture, not that they justify before God, but
that they are the fruits of a justified man, wrought to testify his true
faith. Which only justifies without works, either preceding, or following
the same. And that proves Paull (saying) without faith, it is impossible to
please god. And also, all which is not of faith, is sin: whereof it is plain,
that sophistes alleging that works preceding faith, deserve, the grace of
god, De Congruo: say as much as sin deserves the grace of god: for all works
preceding faith, is sin. And that works following faith, justifies not,
testifies the same Ap. saying: not of the works of righteousness, which we have
wrought, shall we be safe, but acording to his mercy god has made us safe. And
so neither works preceding, nor following faith, justify.

The sommary of the 21 chap.
THE wicked by works of their own intention, would be a part of their own
salvation: because they seek their own glory (as did the Scribs and Pharisees)
and not the glory of God. But seeing the works commanded by god done without
faith, to deserve, remission of sins, are abomination before god, as
testifies Esaias: what shall be of the vain works of man, set up without the
command of god: by which hypocrites would be made just. And if we should
confess (as commands Jesus Christ) when we have done all: yet we are but
unprofitable servants: where is the merit of the works of supererogation:
which hypocrites would sell to others: And if Paull which had right excellent
works, esteemed them al, to be but filthiness, that he might win Christ, and
be found in him not having his own justice, which is of the law: but the
justice which is of the faith of Jesus Christ: If Paull (I say) sought no
justice in his own works, how shall we (whose works are on no manner equal, to
the works of Paull) be justified thereby: And therefore with the scripturs and
Apostles we conclude, that by faith only in Christ, we are made just, without
all law or works. And after man be made just by faith, and possesses Jesus
Christ in his heart, then can he not be idle. For with true faith, is also
given the holy spirit: which suffers not man to be idle, but moves him to
al godly exercise of good works.

The sommarie of the 22. Chap.
AFter the article of justification, christians should be instructed to do
good works: not these which are inverted by man, but which are commanded by
god: amongst which the principal is, to rejoice in tribulation: giving thanks
to god, in all things, with sure hope, and patience, abiding his deliverance:
knowing that the life of man is a perpetual battle upon earth: The law of the
members ever rebelling against the law of the mind. The law of the members, we
call the tyranny of the devil, ever drawing us to the lusts of the flesh,
not only in external works, but also in the inward affections of the mind:
as to doubt of the goodness and mercy of god, to be sloughtful, and not to
love, and fear him, with our whole heart. The law of the mind or of the
spirit is: the motion of the holy ghost, stirring us up to all justice, and
righteousness: which we know to be good, and yet find no power in our self,
to perform the same. And this battle is most vehement in the most holy, as
witnesses Paull. And therefore to kill this outward man, which is our wit,
reason, and will, we should offer our bodies unto god in a quick, lively, and
holy sacrifice: but before this sacrifice be pleasant to god, must the mind
(which is the Fountain of all good works) be renewed with the spirit of
god, and made clean: which is, when we cast from us our wisdom,
righteousness, holiness, and redemption, and receive the same from Jesus Christ.
Some there is, which put their whole trust in their own works, thinking thereby
to obtain the eternal glory. And these men go before Christ, and are called
Antichrists. Others there is, which think faith not sufficient: but will have
their works joined to help Christ: and these go astray from him. For none of
these two kindness suffers Jesus Christ death: but for them only which follow
him, laying all their sins upon his back.

The Sommarie of the 23. Chap.
THe foolish reason of man, persuades us, to leave the works commanded by
god: And to set up works of our own invention, thinking God to be pleased
therewith, because they are done of good zeal, and intention. The scriptures of
God shows all the thoughts and cogitations of man, to be evil at all time.
And if so be, what is our good intention? But whether the intent of man be
good, or not, the fruits proceeding therefrom, shall testify. For as sometime
in Israel abounded all Idolatry (they having gods, according to the multitude
of their Cieties) So now amongst them which are called Christians, are set up,
carved Images, defended, adorned, and worshipped, contrary the express
commandment of God. The blessed sacrament of Christ's body and blood, abused,
and profaned, before them. And all this and much more abomination proceeds
from that zeal, which we call good. But how good that ever it appear in our
sight the adhearers thereto shall receive the malediction of God.

The sommary of the 24. chapter.
NO better works can be, then John the baptist taught to the people: which are
the works of mercy, and to desist from fraud, injury, and oppression. And
these works (and not the vain inventions of man) pastors should teach their
flocks: instructing the^ first, in perfect faith. For Jesus christ (being asked
by the Jews what they should do, that they might work the works of god: that
is, that they might please god) answered: This is the work of God, that ye
believe in him whom he has sent. By the which words, our master
understands, that without faith, which is the work of god, and not of man,
no work pleases god.

The yoke of Christ is easy, and his burden is light to the faithful, because
they lay all their sins upon Christ's back, and follow him, every man in his
own vocation. There is two manner of vocatio^s, one immediate by god, as the
prophets, and Apostles were called, to be preachers without authority of man.
Another is mediate, as when one man called another: As Paull called Timoth. and
Tit. to be bishops. There is a general vocation, by which all the chosen are
called to a Christian religion. Having one lord, one faith, one baptism: In
this vocation, there is no difference of persons, but all are equally loved by
god: because we are all the sonns of one father, and al boght with one price, all
servant to one lord, all guided with one spirit, all tending to one end, and
shall all be participant of one heritage, that is, the life eternal by Jesus
Christ, by whom we are all made priests, and kings: but let no man herefore,
usurp the authority of a king in dignity: nor the office of a priest in
administration of gods word, and sacraments: for that perteinteh to a special
vocation.

The sommary of the 25. Chap.
All estate of man, is contained within one of these four special vocations,
either is he prince, or subject: pastor, or one of the flock: father, or
son: lord, or servant: In the prince is contained all magistrates, having
Jurisdiction in a co^mounweall. Whose duty is, first to know god, and his
law, which has placed them in that authority. Secondly to guide, feed, and
defend their subjects: knowing them selves to be no better of their nature,
then is the poorest in their realm. Thirdly to defend the just and punish the
wicked, but respect of persons. Having their hearts and eyes clean and pure
from all avarice. They are called the sons of God, and should be obeyed in
all things, not repungning to the command of god, because they are ordained and
placed by god: to punish vice and maintain virtue, and therefore their own
life should be pure and clean: first because otherwise they can not punish
sin: and secondly, because the wickedness of princes, provoke their
subjects to the Imitation thereof. And therefore the life of princes should be
pure and clean as a mirror to their subjects: and should admit into their
kingdoms, no worshipping of god: except that which is commanded in the
scripturs: for god being commoned by Idolatry: and strange worshipping, has
destroyed many kingdoms, as all prophecyings witness.

The sommarie of the twenty sixth Chapter.
THE principal office of a Bishop is, to preach the true Euangell of Jesus
Christ, knowing that if the flock perish, the blood shall be required at his
hands. And that he neglecting the preaching of the Euangell, is no bishop, nor
can do no work pleasant before god. And therefore no bishop should mixed him
self with temporal or seculer business: for that is contrary his vocation:
but continually should preach, read, and exhort his flock, to seek their
spiritual food in the Scriptures. And so the tyrants in these days,
forbidding men to read the Scriptures, declare them selves, wolves, and no
pastors: whom god shall shortly punish (because they have contemned his
command: attending altogether upon their own vain supertitions) as he did
Hely, and his two sons under law: and the whole priesthood after Jesus Christ.

The sommary of the twenty ewint chap.
THE office of the Father (under whom is comprehended all householders) is to
rule, and guide his children, family and servant, in all godliness and
honesty: instructing them in the Law, and word of God. For honest householders,
who lived in chaste matrimony, ruled, and guided their housholdes well,
nurished their children in the fear and reverence of God: were chosen to be
Bishops in the Primitive church, And therefore they are blasphemous to the
holy spirit: which inhibit the Laickes (so style they the chosen of God)
learning, reading and teaching of the holy Scriptures, wherein is contained the
food of the soul: whereof Antichrists willing to deprive them, would also
kill the soul. For the soul without gods word, has, nor may have no life.
The office of the husband is, to love, and defend his wife, giving to her only
his body. The office of the wife is likewise to love, and obey her husband,
usurping no dominion over him. And the office of them both is, to instruct
their children in gods Law: ever giving to them, example of good life: and
holdding them at godly occupations, laboring also them selves faithfully, for
sustentation of their families.

The sommarie of the 28 Chap.
THE office and duty of the Lord is, to pay unto his servant, the reward
promised. And the office of the servant is, faithfully to work, and labor,
to the profit and utility of his lord, but fraud or simulation, as he would
serve Jesus Christ. The office of the subject is, to obey his prince, and
rulers placed by him: giving unto them, honor, custom, and tribute, not
requiring the cause, why they receive the same: for that pertains not to the
vocation of a subject. The office of the son is, to love, fear, and honor
his parents. Which honor stands not in words only, but in ministering of all
things necessary unto them, which if the son do not to the father and
mother, he can do no good work before god. And therefore deuilish doctors
are they, which teach men to found soul masses of their substance: suffering
father and mother, to labor in indigence and poverty.

FINIS.
The works before written, are they, in the which every christian should be
exercised, to the glory of god, and utility of his neighbor.

