

A True Description of His Majesty's Royal Ship, Built this Year 1637. at
Wooll-witch in KENT. To the great glory of our English Nation, and not paraleld
in the whole Christian World.

Quae freta jam Circum Cingunt regalia Regna
Deberi Sceptris Carole scito tuis,
Auspicijs macte ergo bonis invicte Monarcha
Parcere subiectis, perge, Domare feros.
Published by Authority.

LONDON: Printed by John Oaks, for John Aston, and are to be sold at his shop
in Cat-eaten-streete at the sign of the Buls-head, Anno 1637.

TO THE HIGH AND Mighty Monarch CHARLES The first of that NAME, KING of Great
BRITAIN, FRANCE AND IRELAND, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Consecrateth these his humble endeavors,

Thomas Heywood.

To my much respected Friend, Master Thomas Heywood, and of his Book of his
Majesty's Great Ship.
NOw for an Homer whose immortal Verse,
In well lim'd lines, and raptures might rehearse
The bravery of this Vessel, he would have found
A way fit to express her, and have crowned
Her stately Fabric, with invention,
As large and stately as her self. Not one
Calliope, but the whole Muses Quire
Had bin invoak'd, his fancy to inspire.
He would have told, how Jove in Counsel sat,
And all the gods determined of Her fate.
The Grecian Argo, that now shines in glory
A Constellation, had bin lost in Story.
This only had bin stellified, and made
The Subject of an intyre Iliade.
He would have told how well she had bin wrought,
And all the Argive Heroes (were her fraught,)
Such wonders of her frame, and all but truth,
Would have so fired the Macedonian Youth,
And his proud thoughts into such passions hurled,
He would have prized her, 'bove another World.
Her, Neptune at first sight embraced, and gave
Her power to insult upon each swelling Wave.
Then laid his Trident on her Deck, and swore
To fill her womb with the rich Indian Ore.
This Homer would have told, and for tuition,
The Deities stood all in Competition.
The Winds too should have struggled in their iayles,
And br^ake out, to salute her pregnant Sails.
Scylla with her fierce Dogs, had barkt no more;
Nor should the Seaman heard Charibdis roar.
This Ship alone had torn their stony jaws,
And with her Bullets surfeited their mawes.
This Homer would have told, but in what state
And strength of verse, no Muse can arbitrate.
Achilles br^zen Lance had not been named,
To shake down Towers, nor that great Machine framed
By Pallas Art, wherein were Captive led
A thousand Conquer^rs, that ruined
Priams (...) ^lion, and did levill lay
With the base ground, the pride of Asia.
Had this brave Ship rod there, no need had been
Of Ajax, Nestor, or of Id^men,
Nor of Achilles Mirmidons; each stone
Had owed its ruin to her strength alone*
Then after the long siege, and ten years stir,
Ulysses wanderings had been put in Her.
Thus the true Prince of Poets, Homer would
Have in Fames lasting^Booke Her name in rol'd.
And they that shall of such a Subject sing,
Their lines deserve acc^^tance from a King.
But tell me Muse, though I must ever keep
Close to the shore, not launch into the Deep.
Yet deigne to tell, by a Propheticke way,
What neighbor Nations censure, what they say?
The Spaniard with his politic shrug, cries out,
There Is some design in hand, and without doubt
Against our late fleet: is there no way to take her,
Or build the like? could not our Jesuits make her
Turn Romist? and then they discourse the fight
Of old Lepanto, and of eighty eight.
The neighbor French, look only by mere show,
And outside gawdinesse, that think we owe
Much for intelligence, 'cause they impose
Their fancies on us, how to cut our clothes,
And cringe, and congee; yet the j^st report
Of this Ships Architect^re, does extort
This truth from their belief: she was no vain
Invention, nor kick sh^we of their brain;
They never could aspire to i^; ('it is known)
And I am glad this fashion is our own.
The numerous Dutch, still thriving in their purse;
That World-like, do enjoy the happy cur^e,
To wander through the seas, that labor more
Than Bees, and suck the honey from each shore:
In all their travels swear they never saw
One so much water, so much honor draw*
What else should be supplied, I ^ust b^queath
To thee, friend Haywood, who have Royal leave
To publish it unto the worlds broad eyes,
And art well skild in all her properties.
Shackerley M^rmion.

Imprimatur Tho. Weeks.

With permission likewise by Peter Pett, Master builder 7. of September. 1637.

A True Description of His Majesty's Royal Ship built this Year 1637. at
Wolwitch in KENT, etc.
NAvigation is as ancient, as the first great Deluge, and the Arc, which God
Almighty commanded to be made, the first Vessel that was ever lifted upon the
Waters. For as before the Earth was unplowed, so were the Seas unfurrowed. One
Ship at once contained all the living people of the World, but now what a
multitude of Ships does the World contain? The first, had neither Mast, Sail,
nor Oar, for what need was of these, or any of them; when He who made the ^eas
and the Winds, was both Pilot and Steares-man? Noah, the first Navigator entered
the Arc, in the year from the Creation, 1656. in the second Month, and the
seventeenth day thereof, when he himself was six hundred years in age. His
voyage was a full s^lary year, which contains twelve Lunary Months, to
which are added ten days, called Epactae. For so long he floated upon the
Waters, ere he set footing upon the Earth. The Arc, after the Flood was
somewhat abated (according to the testimony of Moses, first rested upon the
Mountains of Ararat, which the best Cosmographers held to ^e Montes Gordaei
the Gordaean Mountains, which have their situation in Armenia.

Haitonus Armenus in his Book de Tartarijs Cap. 7. Writes that in Armenia
there is a Mountain, which is held to be one of the highest upon Earth,
vulgarly called Arat, on which the Arc first touched: and though by reason of
the abundance of Snow which clothed it Winter and Summer, it be altogether
unpassable, yet in the very Apex and top thereof, there is still to be
discerned a black shadow, resembling a Dark Cloud, which by the Natives of
that Country, has successively bin held, to be the still remaining carcass of
the Arc of Noah.

Him, all the Ethnicke and Gentile Writers, call Ianus, because he first
planted the Vine, for the Hebrews call Vinum Iajin, from whence he received the
Denomination of Ianus Vinitor, who after arriving in Italy, and there seating
himself, from him that Country was called Ianicula, and the City Ianua, by
corruption of time, since called Genua, was thought to have bin by him Erected.
My observation concerning the premises is, That he who was preserved in the
Waters, was the first that taught the use of Wine. In which it may be
supposed, more souls have since bin Ship-wrackt, then perished in the first
Universal Cataclisme.

Quintus Fabius Pictor, in his first Book de Aureo Seculo. i.e. the golden
World, tells us, that this Ianus (before said to be Noah) entertained
banished Saturn into Italy, who came thither by Sea, entering at Ostia, and
sailed up the River Tyber. This, Ovid in his First Book De fastis, Elegantly
expresses, who Demanding of Ia^us the reason why upon one side of the Roman
Navall Coin, a ship was Figured, and on the other, his own double
Portraicture? (According to the Poet) having resolved him of the latter, he
thus proceeds to satisfy him touching the former.

Causaratis superest, Thuscum rate venit in Amnem,
Primus aberrato falcifer orb Deus.
Hac ego Saturnum (memini) tellure recepi
^oel^tibus regnis, a Jove pulsus erat.
At bona Posteritas puppim formavit in aere,
Hospitis adventum, testificata Dei,
Inde, diu genti mansit Saturnia nomen,
Et dicta est Latium terra, volente deo.
Thus Interpreted.

Why the Ship's there; it follows I should tell
Saturn, whom Jove did from the heavens expel,
After he travailed had the World so wide,
First with his Ship this Tuscan River tried,
For which posterity on their Coin impressed.
A Ship, to show that he was here my ghest.
Saturnia's name, long after bore this Clime,
Till (by his will,) 'twas Latium called in Time.
But we read further of a second Inundation which happened in Greece. Athens was
the first Accademy that can be read of, the Town famous, the Inhabitants
ingenious; as first teaching the Argives the use of Woole, by Carding, Spining,
and Clothing, tutoring them in the two beneficial Commodities of Oil and
Wine. Instructing them in Agriculture, as to Plow, to Sow, and to Reap, and to
sustain themselves with bread, who before fed on Achornes. Learning and Arts
were there first Studied and Taught, in so much that the City was h^ld as
sacred as a Temple Dedicated unto the gods.

Cecrops was the first King thereof, whom Antiquity fabled to be Biformis, as
participating two shapes and Sexes. For no other reason, but because he first
coupled and joined men and Virgins in the modest and civil tie of marriage.

Him Craunits succeeded, from whose beautiful Daughter Atthis, the whole
Region and Province that lies betwixt, Achaia and Macedonia, took the
Denomination of Attica: Craunus expiring Amphitrion was invested in the Throne,
who first consecrated the City unto Minerva, and named it Athens: In whose
time happened that great flux of Waters which covered the greatest part of
Greece, and in which many thousands of the people perished. Such as could save
themselves in skiffes or Boats, escaped into Thessaly, a more Mountainous
Country, where being gently received, and comfortably relieved by Deucalion
and Pyrrha, who at that time reigned King and Queen. The Poets to magnify
their royal Hospitality, feigned, that when the whole World was destroyed by
an Universal Deluge, (saving them two, who preserved their Lives by climing up
to the top of Pernassus) they were the sole miraculous restorers of Mankind.
But this Flood which according to truth, only afflicted the most of Greece,
and some part of (...), happened in the year of the World tw^ (...) four
hundred forty, after, Noah's stood seven hundred eighty four. By this (...) it
manifestly appears, that Shipping has bin of old, and Exercised by sundry
Nations: and so much briefly for the Antiquity of Navigation.

BEfore I come to speak particularly of this Royal Ship it self, it will no^
be (...) altogether impertinent, to give you a Summary Relation of such
several kinds, of Vessels as were used of old by sundry Nations; that the
rudeness of the first, may the better set off the rareness of the Last.
Nonnius speaks of Miaparo, a kind of Vessel most used by Pirates, and made
much after the manner of our small Pinaces. Varro and Budaeus, write of Parones
which were the same which we call Brigantines. Acatium was Navis Actuaria, that
is a small nimble Galley. Anchiromacu^ was made after the manner of our great
Liters, and employed only to carry Anchors, Cables, Cordage, and other
Nauticall Instruments. Baris, was no other then Cymba, a small Boat, and in
such as Propert. Lib 3. affirms, the Egyptians used to Ferry the bodies of
their Dead to their places of burial. Catascopium, was Nauis Exploratoria, a
Ship of Watch and Discovery, and of such Caesar makes mention in his
Commentaries. Celox was a small and short kind of Boat or Crare, so called for
the swiftness, of which Plautus in his Aulular makes mention, and of which
was grounded that old adage; Celocem qui regere nequit onerariam petit: He
desires to take charge of a great Ship, who knows not how to govern a small
one. Cyrcerus was a Vessel of great burden used in Asia, employed in
Merchandise, and the Transportage of all useful Commodities, from one Country
to another. Fasellus was built after the same manner; and as Salust in his
History witnesses, most Frequent in Campania. Lybrini were Ships of War and
very swift of Sail, so called of Lyburnia an Harbor in Dalmatia; and of such
Horace, remembers us in Epod. Horia was a Fisher-boat, Lembus a Bark short
and swift, spoken of by Pliny.

The names of several Vessels used in Navigation, according unto Gellius, are
these that follow. Lib. 11. Cap. 25. Gaulae, Corbitae, Caudicae, Hippagines,
Cercuri, Celoces, Oxiae, Remiculi, Actuaria, Prosumia, Gescortae, Orioles,
Carrae, Scaphae, Pontones, Nuctuciae, Mediae, Phaselli, Parones, Myoparones,
Lintres, Caupulicae, Mari-placidae, Cydarum, Ratariae, Catascopium, etc. Linter
was a small Boat compact of hollowed Trees, joined together, and those the
Germans Dwelling near unto the River Danubius first devised. Monocilon was a
Boat made only of one Tree, not cut into plankes, and such the Indian Canooes
are imagined to be. Gaulae, were made almost together round, yet such as they
ventred with, not only upon the Rivers, but in calmes upon the Seas:
Corbitae, were Ships for Traffic, big but very stow of sail. Caudicae, were
Boats made out of the pieces of a Ship that were broken up. Hippagines, were
Ferry Boats to carry over Horsemen. Circurus, was built much after the manner
of the Spanish or Portugal Carvels. Of Oxiae, the name is only remaining, but
of what Fashion or burden the Vessel was, is not left to us. Remiculi were much
after the condition of the Venetian Gundeloes. Prosumiae, were small Barks,
and swift of sail. Gescortae, were a kind of Spie-boates which waited upon a
fleet at Sea. Oriolae, some do think to have been fashioned much like unto
our English-Barges, others think them to be the same with Horia before spoken
of. Carrae, takes the Denomination of Carras, Currum, or Currus, that is a
Wagon or a Chariot, because in such as in our Barges they were Rowed upon the
Water for pleasure. Scapha or Scaphula was a small Boat or Wherry. Ponto^es
were Ferry-boates, in such a one Phaon transported Venus over the River.
Catascopium a small Ship or Pinnace, and so of the rest.

Trieris was a Vessel of great Burden first devised in Greece, which the
Rowers, with three orders of Oars on either side, forced upon the Waters. The
Latins called such an one Triremis, or a Ship of three orders, as we read
Q^adremes, and Quinque-remes amongst the ancient Romans, and amongst the Greeks
Epteres, and Enneres, and Deceres, those of seven, nine, and ten orders.

Pliny tells us, that Dam^ sthenes was the inventer of the Bi-remis, Ammocl^s
the deviser of the Tri-remis, Gorin of the quadri-remis, first used amongst the
Carthaginians; Nesicthon the quinque-remis, who was borne is Salamine, the
Country of Ajax, Xenagoras of Syracusa, in Sicil^a that of six orders, and
Nesigiton that of ten. Alexander the great commanded one of twelve orders to be
made: Ptolomaens Sother exceeded him, and brought them to fifteen. Demetrius
Antigonus caused one to be built of thirty orders; Philadelphus increased them
to Forty, and Ptolomaeus Philopater to Fifty, of which Calixenes in his first
book Re^um Alexandrinarum makes an incredible mention, as that she was in
length two hundred and fourscore cubits, and fifty cubits in height from the
Keele to the upmost deck, that she had two beake-heads, and two Sternes; that
she could not be rowed with less than three thousand and four hundred Oars:
but the Greeks so Hyperbolize in all things, that I should not without
blushing give you a relation of her whole dime^sion.

The like I read of the great ship of Hieron Syracusanus, described by Moschius
after the like unbeleeveable manner, for thus he writes: Much to be admired
was Diocles Abderites for devising that rare Present which Demetrius brought to
the City of the Rhodians, so Timaeus for that funeral Pile prepared for
Dionisius the Tyrant of Syracusa; so Hi^ronimus, for that incomparable Chariot
in which Alexander the great rode in Triumph: so Polycletus for that inimitable
Candlestick which was after presented to the great Sophy of the Persians: but
above all these, H^eron the King of the Syracus^^ns, always a faithful
colleague with the Romans* who much delighted in the building of Vessels of
great burden, convenient for the transportage of grain from one Province to
another. But above all, he is to be renowned for one Navall structure, to raise
which he employed at once threescore Triremes, to fetch Timber from Aetna, the
rest of the materials useful for such a great work, as nails, plankes, etc.
some out of Italy, some he had out of Sicilia: His cordage he had from Spain,
his hempen sails were brought through the River Rhodanus, with diverse other
necessaries to accommodate so great and rare a Fabric. He hired also many
Officers belonging to the Sea, as Masters, Pilots, Pursers, boat-swaines, and
other ordinary Seafaring men, over whom he made one Archias Co^inthius prime
governor and commander. There were three hundred Ship carpenters* daily at
work, who perfected the half part of her in six months* and then she was
lanched into the River, which had been with great difficulty, had not the
famous Archimedes devised new Engines to roll her out of the stocks into ^he
water, which he did with great facil^ty: In six Months after her upper d^cks
were finished; the Nails which fashioned the planks together, were all of
brass, some of which were of ten pound weight: Her inward parts contained
Hall, Parlour, withdrawing and banqueting Rooms, and those of no small rece^te,
paved with Achates, Emeralds, and other precious stones f^und in his own
Country* and those maritime and adjacent Regions. She had a kitchen furnished
^oth with earthen and brazen vessels, and in her Prore or forecastle a room
shut, lined with shingle boards, or wainscot-plankes, in which were leaden
Cesternes, and in them almost all sorts of Fishes preserved, holding many
measures of water: There were sundry Bath-tubs made of Brass, every of which
contained quinque metretae, that is, five vessels of water, every of them
receiving three times thirteen Gallons. In her was a Schoole-house, and a
Library; diverse chambers to dine and sup in, and Cabins with beds belonging
unto them for all the prime officers of the Ship: There were moreover ten
Stables for Horse, and room allowed both for their Hey and Provender: she had
four Anchors of wood, and eight of Iron; but (which I had almost forgot) she
had in her a Garden, and an Orchard, with Vines, and all kind of Flowers; the
Trees and Plants being set in earthen and leaden vessels filled with choice
earth, being well watered, producted according to the Season: Her sink drew no
more water than one man might easily empty by a pumpe, which was devised b^ the
Art of Archimedes: she was first called Syracusia, and after Alexandria. I
have not yet given you a Tithe of her description, only I thus end with her,
that according to the same Author, as Athenaeus lib. Dipnosop. 5. cap. 7.
witnesses, besides all the former burden, her victualing was sixty thousand
measures of Corn, ten thousand earthen vessels furnished with bread and salt,
twenty thousand Talents of flesh, and of other necessaries belonging to
Navigation, besides the Masts, Sails, and people that manned the Ship, twenty
thousand after the former account.

But the Greeks were held to be the greatest fablers of the World, of every
moale-hill, apt to make a Mountain; who out of an Ant would strive to beget an
Elephant; or if such vessels were possible to be made, I would gladly know to
what use or service: Alas, if two of our small whelps should meet such an
unweildy Bulk upon the Sea, should they but roar upon her, she must be either
forced basely to veil and yield, or else, notwithstanding all her muniments
and defenses, be forced to founder, and perish with all her glorious Riches in
the Ocean. Yet one thing I cannot here let pass, that for one Hyperbolizing
Epigram composed upon this ship by the Poet Archimelus, containing only nine
Cuplets, Eighteen lines in all, (according to the same Author) Centum frumenti
medimnis decoravit, King Hieron rewarded him with an hundred measures of wheat,
and every Medimnum contained six of our Bushels, etc. which after he carried
to the Granary, and so much they then affected Poetry, that he solded it unto
them at his own price.

I will now give you the Names of some of the most famous devisers of Ships:
Tiphis was the first amongst the Tyrians; Danaus brought shipping out of Egypt
into Greece, of which Erythra made the first practice in the Red Sea. Boats
were made of tanned leather, and such were first known in the British Ocean:
In Nylus they were composed of Paper, and Reeds.

Jason and the Argonauts were the first that ventured to Sea in a long boat,
or Galley, of which one Argus was the Architector; (for so says
Philostephanus) Egesius attributes the honor of the first ship to Parthalus;
Ctesius to Samira, Stephanus to Semiramis, Archimachus to Aegaeon, Moses to
Noah: The Vessel called Oneraria, or of burden, Hippius Tyrius invented; the
small Bark the Cyrenen^es; the Pinnace and Ferry-boate the Phaenicians; the
Celox the Rhodians; the Cercurus the Cyprians. The first observation of the
Stars, by which to direct their Navigation, the Phaenicians: The Capae
devised the Oar, in managing of which the Plateae assisted; Icarus the Sail,
Dedalus the Mast, and crosse-yard that bears the sail: the Hatches the
Thasians, the Beake-head Pysaeus, the Anchor the Tyrhians, Anacharsis the
Grapples, Tiphis the smaller ropes assisting to the greater cordage; and King
Minos of Creete was the first that hazarded his person in any navall conflict.

These were great Navigators of old, remembered by the Historians and Po^ts.
Tiphis, the first famous and renowned Pilot, is celebrated by Virgil in his
fourth Eglogue, by Seneca in Medea, and by Ovid in many places of (...) P^ems.
Pelorus was the Pilot of Hannibals ship, when he fled from Scipio. (...) in
Melpomene makes mention of one Colaeus, who was a prime Navigator amongst the
Samians: Phereclus was the chief Architector of that Navy provided for Paris
to rape Hellen from Greece, in which fleet he was also chief commander:
Amiclus was one to whom Caesar came in the time of the civil War, and by him
was transported into Italy; for so says Lucan Pharsal. lib. 5. Phraates was
the son of Onetor, and governor of that ship in which Menelaus imbarkt
himself in that expedition made against Troy.

Erasmus in his Proverbs remembers us of one Mandro, the Pilot of a small
Bark, who by the favor of Fortune, after attained to the imperial dignity,
and of a second called Acessaeus, whom he calls Ignavus Nauta. Plutarch reports
from Simonides, that one Amarsiades Pereclus was the master of Theseus his
ship, when he was sent to be devoured of the Minotaure, but Philocharus says,
that Nausithaeus and Pheacus were the two Rect^rs of that Vessels. The same
Author in Themistocle testates, that Artomenes was the chief Admiral of
Xerxes fleet, when he came to invade Greece, who affirm^^h also, that one
Petitius was Master of that ship which carried Pompey in his flight, after the
battle of Pharsalia. Ophel^es was a notable Pirate and Spy, remembered unto
us by Sidonius.

Another of the like condition I read of, whose name was Saro. Menesteus,
Sergestus, Cloantus, are three Sea farers spoken of by Virgil, Aenead. Lib. 4.
who tells us also of Palinurus, who was Pilot to Aeneas his ship, when he
sailed into Italy. Lucan lib. 3. much commends one Telon Massilensis both for
h^s Art in Navigation, and skill in the Stars, when he says, Dirigit huc
puppim miseri quoque dextrae Telonis,
Qua nullam melius pelago turba^te ca^^nam
Audivere manum, nec lux est not^or ull^
Crastina, seu Phoebum vid^at, seu cornua L^nae,
Semper ventur is componere Carbasa ve^^^s.
The wretched Telons hand does hither steer
His Vessel, nor did any ever hear
Of one more expert to divide the waves
With his sharp Keele, when most the Ocean raves.
None could so well guess at the morrows light,
Saw he the Sun by day, or Moon by night.
To apt his Sails and Tables he well knew,
And court the winds which way soever they blew.


The same Author speaks farther in the great commendation of one Phoceus, who
was both Nauta, and Urinator, a Sayler, and an ex^ellent Diver, who would
drown himself for a long space together, and then suddenly appear emergent
above the waters, who thus speaks of him: Eximius Phoceus* animam servare sub
undis,
Scrutarique fretum, si quid mersi^^ et arenis.
The nimble Phoceus, who beneath
The waves could keep his wind,
And what was dropped into the Sea,
Upon the Sands could find.


It was the custom also of the ancient times, to give several names to all
their ships of note, (whom our Architectors even in these days imitate) as
that Galley in which all the Grecian Heroes rowed, who went in the quest of the
golden Fleece* to Colchos, was called the Argo: Some think she had her
Denomination from her swiftness, but others are of opinion, that she received
it from Argus, the Ship-carpenter: others think ab Argivis, because the Argive
Princes manned her to Sea. Pristis, Chimaera, Scilla, were names of ships,
according to Virgil, Aenead. lib. 5. In his 10. book he speaks of another
called Tigris, of which one Massichus was Rector. Centaurus is also the name of
another great ship; for h^ says, Ingentem remis Centaurum promovet: of her one
Cupavones was Pilot. Coelius from the testimony of those who were the
Interpreters of Aristophanes, informs us, that there were two great Vessels
belonging to the Commonweal of Athens, the one was only employed to transfer
such as were summoned into the Courts of judgment, and was styled Salaminia:
the other solely negotiated in porting and reporting such as were sent to
inquire of any thing at the Oracle of Delphos, of the Ship named Castor and
Pollux, we read in the Acts of the Apostles, etc. but I fear^ I have made too
long a voyage abroad, it is high time therefore that I now change my course,
and steer nearer home.

And here a fit occasion might be taken, to introduce a large Catalogue of
many worthy and brave Seamen of our later times, as well foreign as
homebred, whether they were Navarci, that is, Generals, Admirals, and
Captains: Naucleri, that is, Masters, Pilots, and owners: or Nautici, that is,
Pursers, Boat-swaines, or other ordinary Navigators and Sailors, and enter into
a voluminous narration, by telling how well, and worthily they have demeaned
themselves to the honor of their Prince, and the profit of their Country,
either in doubtful discoveries, or more dangerous Naumachies or Sea Fights,
but therein I should but deviate, and quite digress from my purpose, which is
fully intentive upon brevity, and the subject now in agita^ion.

Yet grant me so much liberty amongst infinites of our own Nation, and natives
to commemorate, and commend unto you the never-dying fames of four great
Archithalassi, (for what less can I term them) who wheresoever they voyaged,
were Princes, and sole commanders at Sea, who flourisht in the days of Queen
Elizabeth, a Virgin, and a Virago of a masculine spirit, and of blessed and
sacred Memory. And now (though long after their Deaths) let me bestow on each
of them a surviving Character: The first, worthy Sir John Hawki^s, on whom I
confer this merited Motto, Archithalassos expugnavi: the second, valiant Sir
Martin Furbisher, on whom I bestow, Hostium classes profligavi: the third,
famous Sir Francis Drake, who may justly challenge to himself, Orbem circum
navig^vi: the fourth, Sir Charles Cavendish, who may truly write, Drachum
praevium imitavi: all which for the vulgars better apprehension I thus orderly
interpret: Hawkins. Over Sea-princes triumphed often have I.

Furbusher. Of Enemies whole F^eets before me ^^y.

Drake. A Girdle to the world my Voyage lent.

Cavend^sh. And I Drake followed wheresoever he went.



Then was a time, when in every brave Soldiers ^ outh there was no discourse
offered, but it either began, or ended with Pugnandum, non dormiendum: that is,
Now is a time to fight, not to sleep; to be famous for our cou^age, not
branded for our cowardice: which was almost no sooner spoken, than suddenly put
in action. But I must ingeniously confess, that for many years together there
has been a long ces^ation of Arms, neither has just occasion been
ministered, wherein our noble Nation might give any full expression of the
hereditary valor, and virtue of their Ancestors, till of late: And now me
thinks I hear all our brave Heroic spirits, as our High-Admirall,
Vice Admiral, Captains, Commanders, and other Nautick Officers, as being so
long kept from their wished employments, with a loud unanimous voice acclaime,
and say, -- Steriles transmissimus annos,
-- Nunc, o nunc tempus in hosts!


Neither have I exposed those before named invincible Generals to their view,
that they might Admirando desperare; but Imitando, superare: Not by admiring
them, despair to arrive unto their height, but rather by imitating them,
^antecell them in their honor: Of which there is no doubt or diffidence to be
made, considering how forward and indulgent his sacred Majesty has been, and
still is, not only in the repairing, but increasing his Royal Navy above all
the Princes that have preceded him.

But in this last incomparable structure, he has made an inimitable president
for all the Kings and Potentates of the Christian World, or else where: No
River, no Flood, no Sea, whether Mare, Fretum, Aequor, Caeruleum, Pontus,
Salum, Altum, Hadria, Pelagus, Oceanus, that could ever boast of the bearing so
glorious a Vessel: which considering, and withal, his Royal Majesty, at
whose great, and almost infinite charge and expense her building is undertaken,
it put into my thoughts this fortunate and auspicious presage, -- Quicquid
habitabile, tellus
Sustinet, hujus erit, pontus quoque serviet ill^.


And concerning the Ship it self, at my first view of her bulk only, being
yet unperfected, it compelled me to break out suddenly into this
Epigrammaticall rapture which follows.

An Epigram upon his Majesty's Great Ship, lying in the Docke at Wooll-witch.
WHat Artist took in hand this Ship to frame?
Or who can guess from whence these tall O^^s came?
Unless from the full grown Dodonean grove,
A Wilderness sole sacred unto Jove.
What Eye such brave Materials has beheld?
Or by what Axes were these Timbers feld?
Sure Vulcan with his three Cyclopean Swains,
Have forged new Metalls from their active brains,
Or else, that Hatchet he has grinded new,
With which he cleft Joves skull, what time out flew
The armed Virago, Pallas, who inspires
With Art, with Science, and all high desires,
She has (no doubt) raptured our Undertaker
This Machine to devise first, and then make her.
How else could such a mighty Mole be raised?
To which Troyes horse, (by Virgil so much praised,
Whose bulk a thousand armed men contained)
Was but a toy, (compared) and that too feigned.
For she bears thrice his burden, has room, where
Euceladus might row, and Tition steer:
But no such Vessel could for them be made,
Had they intent, by Sea the gods to invade.
The Argoe, stellified because 'twas rare,
With this Ships long Boat scarcely might compare*
Yet sixty Greek Heroes even in that
With Oars in hand, upon their Transtrae sat.
Her Anchors, beyond weight, expanst, and wide,
Able to wrestle against Wind, and Tide:
Her big-wrought Cable like that massy Chain
With which great Xerxes bound^d in the Maine
'Tweene Sestos and Abidos, to make one,
Europe and Asia, by that Line alone.
Her five bright Lanthorns luster round the Seas,
Shining like five of the seven Hyades:
Whose clear eyes, should they (by often weeping) fail
By these, our Sea men might find Art to sail.
In one of which, (which bears the greatest light)
Ten of the Guard at once may stand upright:
What a co^spicuous Ray did is dart then?
What more than a Ti^anian Luster, On Satturday, being June 17. last.
when
Our Phoebus, and bright Cinthia jointly sphear'd
In that one Orb, together both appeared:
With whom seven other Stars had then their station,
All luminous, but lower Constellation.
That Lamp, the great Colosse held, who bestrid
The spacious Rhodian Sea-arme, never did
Cast such a beam, yet Ships of tallest size,
Past, with their ^asts erect, between his thighs.
Her maine Mast like a Pyramid appears,
Such as the Aeg^p^ian Kings were many years
To their great charge erecting, whilst their pleasure
To mount them hie, did quite exhaust the^r treasure.
Whose brave Top top-top Royal nothing bars,
By day, to brush the Sun; by night, the Sta^res.
Her M^ine-sayle, (if I do not much mistake)
For Amphitrite might a Kirtle make:
Or in the heat of Summer be a Fan,
To cool the face of the great Ocean.
She being angry, if she stretch her lungs,
Can rail upon her enemy, with more Tongues
(Lo^der than Ste^tors, as her spleen shall rise)
Than ever Junoes A^gus saw with eyes.
I should but loose my self, Mendaeum mingun^ (...) regna tenentes M^llibus in
^lratis, etc. H^rmippus, Poeta Craecus. co^sule (...) lib. de Dypnosop. page 50.
and cra^ze my brain,
Striving to give this ( glory of the Maine)
A full description* though the Muses nine
Should quaffe to me in rich Mendaeum Wine.
Then O you Marine gods, who with amaze,
On this stupendous work, (emergent) gaze,
Take charge of her, as being a choice Jemme,
That much out-valews Neptunes Diadem.
-- Semper bona causa triumphat. Before I come to give you a true and exact
dimension of her Bulk, burden, etc. it is necessary that I make some
satisfaction to the world concerning those Decorements which beautify and
adorn her, and to r^nder a fair account of mine own invention and fan^y
concerning the carving work, the figures, and Mottoes upon them, which some
perhaps have too liberally taxed: Thus therefore to any who have formerly
either doubted of their property, or are at this present desirous to understand
their imagined obscurity, I thus freely deliver my self.

Upon the Beak-head sits royal King Edgar on horseback, tramp^ing upon
seven Kings: now what he was, and who they were, I shall brie^ly relate unto
you, rendering withal a full satisfactory reason to any unpartiall reader, why
they are there, and in that manner placed.

This Edgar was the second son of King Edmund, who having reigned two years
over the Mercians and Northumbers, in the days of Edwin his elder Brother, at
sixteen years of age, was by an unanimos consent elected to succeed in all
his Dominions: being indeed the first that could truly write himself an
absolute Monarch of this Island; for there were diverse Reguli in those times,
who were small Kings, and had absolute Dominion over diverse Provinces.

I shall not need to tell you how, or into what parts this Land was divided,
let it suffice to know so much only: That he by his valor made himself sole
Sovereign, and all the rest were his Liegemen and Tributaries. The entire
Monarchy, and all the royal Titles of the Kingdom, falling under his Scepter.

He was the Thirteenth King from Brute, and though a great Soldier, as may
appear by his many battles and victories, yet the Chronologers of those
times gave him the Characters of Just, and Peaceable; for that is the true end
of War, to prepare and confirm a constant and settled peace.

He was first crowned at Kingstone upon Thames, by Otho Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the year of our Redemption, according to Fabian, and others,
940. in the fifth year of Lotharius King of France, and yet not admitted for
absolute King till twelve years after, when he was again crowned, and
anointed in the City of Bath by Dunstane, Archbishop of Canterbury, and
Oswald, Archbishop of York. The cause why his anointing was so long delayed,
(as the most write) was by reason the King grew much inamored of a beauteous
Virgin called Wilfryd, who to avoid his many temptations, put on her self the
habit of a Nun, who notwithstanding was at length brought to the Kings Bed,
for which act he was by Bishop Dunstane enjoined seven years penance, etc.

Concerning those Kings whom you may perceive to lie prostrate under his Horses
hoofes, they were Kynadus King of the Scots; Malcolme, King of Cumberland; and
of the petry Kings of Wales, Dufnall, Grifith, Huval, Jacob, Iudithil. He
moreover surprised by Sea a Prince of the Romans, whose name was Maxentius, who
had done many out-rage^ upon the Ocean, and was the greatest Arch-pirate that
those times afforded. He also compelled Ludwallus, prime Prince and King of
Cambria, which is Wales, (because he would have all the ravenous and dammageous
beasts to be destroyed through his Land) to pay unto him yearly by way of
Tribute, three hundred Wolves skins: by reason whereof within the space of
four years after, in England, or Wales, both which (but especially Wales) who
before were miserably infested with that kind of beast, there was scarcely to
be found one Woolfe alive: and so much for the Princes over which he had s^le
dominion.

His Navy King Edgars Navy.
Royal consisted of three thousand and six hundred Ships, (such as they used
in those days) yet not any of them but serviceable either for Fight, or
bearing victual, and munition, to furnish the Navy, which he divided into
three parts, appointing to every of them a several Squadron: and this he did
to secure Navigators, from Enemies and Sea-Rovers, as also from all other
neighbor Princes who might challenge any interest in these our four Seas. And
therefore every Spring and Summer, he in person sailed with those in the
East-parts, to them that lay hovering in the West. And sending them back
again with their charge, would with the West quadrant, sail into the North,
and after with the Northern fleet compass into the East, by which the Maine
Ocean rounding those Islands, of which he was sole Prince and Monarch, being at
his only charge, both quieted and secured, he did (as justly he might) write
himself Lord of the Four Seas. And therefore his sacred Majesty, claiming
this unquestionable Title from Him, and being his true and undoubted
Successor; and this claim being this thousand and odd years not any way
controversied. I do not see but this Motto, Ab Edgaro quatuor Maria vindico,
may genuinly to Him be approbriated, and to Him alone. But if any man shall
either maliciously or peevishly make the least scruple of this His Majesty's
just and undoubted challenge? Let them but read Pol^dore Virgill, Guido,
Ranulphus Hidgim in his Polycronicon, Guli^lmus Malmsbury, Florentius,
Landulphus, Marianus, Hovedaine, Harding, Matthew Paris, Matthew of Westminster,
Froysart, Fabian, Holinshed, Speed, etc. (all of them Authentic and approved
Chronologers,) and he shall find that they all agree and consent in this
Musical Harmony.

And as they comply in the premises* whosoever shall truly examine them shall
find also that they differ not at all in the subsequence, which (as in the
former) I study brevity, namely, That being at Chester, he provided him self
of a most Princely Barge, which was to be rowed with Oars, which were silvered
all over, with which he entered into the River Dee, and sitting at the Stern,
took the charge of the Helm, and caused eight of the beforenamed Contributary
Kings to row him up and down the River, Maxentius made the eighth, who was
after Emperor of Rome.
unto the Church of Saint John's, from, and unto h^s Palace distant three
miles, to let the World know that He was Lord and King ^f so many provinces.

For his Religion; His Religion
he favored Churchmen above all the Princes before him, and gave to them great
immunities and privileges; building and reparing no les^e than threescore
decayed Churches, and Monasteries, within the compass of sixteen years; (for
he reigned not longer) For his Justice; His Justice.
he used such rigor, yet intermixed with mercy, that never before his days was
used les^e oppression and robbery.

For his Temperance; His Temper^nce.
he was of such contiuency, that when the Danes, who were then frequent in the
Land, had brought in drunken healths, to ^he evil example and hurt of his
Commons and Subjects, he made a Law, and or dayned certain Cups of several
sizes, with pinnes and nails driven into them, and whosoever drank past that
mark or pin, was to forfeit a certain piece of money, whereof one half fell
to the Accuser, and the other half to the Bayliffe, or governor of that
Borough, to distribute to the use of the poor, but nothing to his own
private use or benefit.

Concerning his particular valor, His Valor.
it is further thus reported of him: One of those subjected Kings, whom the
History calls Kinadus, a very personable and proper Gentleman, and of a
strong and able constitution, rowing upon the River, when King Edgar himself,
(being but of a low stature, and as we phrase it a middle-siz'd man) steered
the Barge, whispered to him who sat next, him, and said, Observe you not the
insolence and pride of this Dwarf, whom Fortune, not Valor has raised to
this Eminence? I vow, if I had him singly, and alone in the field, I would cut
him into pieces, and eat him after. This being told the King, he seemed to
take no further notice thereof, than to say, That losers had liberty to speak
freely; and no question but he was able to perform as much as he had boasted:
neither did he once change his countenance upon him who had thus threatened
him, but calling one of his own servants unto him whom he most trusted,
commanded him to provide two swords of equal size and fashion, suitable to his
strength, and such as he was well able to weild: which done, he laid them
aside, and the next day he invited Kinadus to a Feast, and gave him more than
ordinary welcome. Much familiar discourse past betwixt them, and more than
custom. Dinner being ended, the King desired him to walk abroad, and take the
air; to which the other willingly assented, neither of them having more than
one servant to attend them: All the way they enterchanged pleasant discourse,
till at length coming to a Grove, King Edgar commanded those who then waited
upon them, to retire, and leave them.

When entering the Thicket, and finding a convenient place fit for a single
Duel, Edgar drew from under his garment those two Swords, and desired Kinadus
to take the choice of them, saying unto him, We are now single, and alone; now
prove thy courage with mine, and let us try which of us is most worthy to be
subject to the other: It becomes not any generous spirit to boast that in
private, which he will not make good in the Field: Here I am according to thy
wishes, first cut me into pieces if thou can, and then I will give thee leave
to eat me at thy pleasure. Which having spoken, he distanc'd himself from
him, and bravely stood upon his guard; which the other perceiving, and knowing
that he was guilty of that language, withal, seeing the very fire of Anger
sparkling in his eyes, he also out of an enterchangeable brave humor began to
meditate, and consider with himself, both how unadvisedly he had spoken, and
how contrary to the condition of so great and heroic a spirit: therefore
casting his sword away, he desired to embrace him, and said, Now I perceive O
Royal King Edgar, it is thy true valor, and not thy fo^tu^e has made us thy
Tributaries, and thou art not only worthy to Empire over us only, but all the
Kings of the Earth. I will always wear a Sword to draw on thy party; but
against thee, or those who love thee, never. Which unexpected Answer King Edgar
so accepted, that between them two there was an indissoluble League of Love
confi^med after.

My purpose is not to enter into a large discourse of his noble Acts and
Atcheivements; what I have done, is only to give the World a true and
authentic expression, that whatsoever his sacred Majesty challenges
concerning his absolute dominion over the four Seas, he justly, and with an
unquestionable Title claims from this King Edgar, being his true and lawful
hereditary Successor: but if any be desirous to be more fully informed
concerning his Majesty's Title, I refer him to learned Mr. Seldon, in that
exquisite and absolute work of his called Mare Clausum, etc. I have met with
an Epitaph writ upon this King Edgars Tomb, By one Henricus Historiographus in
old English, which I thus deliver unto you.

Ayder of the poor, and punisher of trespass;
The giver of worship, King Edgar is now gone
To the kingdom of Heaven, which like to pra^se was
As Solomon, that for wisdom above all shone:
A father of peace, a Lion to his Fone.
Founder of Temples, and of Monks strong Patron;
Oppressor of all wrong, and of Justice Guardon.
I began at the Beak-head, where I desire you to take notice, that upon the
stemme-head there is Cupid, or a Child resembling him, bestriding, and bridling
a Lion, which imports, that sufferance may curb Insolence, and Innocence
restrain violence; which alludeth to the great mercy of the King, whose Type
is a proper Emblem of that great Majesty, whose Mercy is above all his Works.

On the Bulk-head right forward, stand six several Statues in sundry postures,
their Figures representing Consilium, that is, Counsel: Cura, that is, Care:
Conamen, that is, Industry, and unanimous endeavor in one compartment:
Counsel holding in her hand a closed or folded Scrole; Care a Sea-compasse;
Conamen, or Industry, a Lint-stock fired. Upon the other, to correspond with
the former, Vis, which implies force, or strength; handing a Sword. Virtus, or
Virtue, a sphearicall Globe: and Victoria, or Victory, a wreath of Laurel. The
Moral is, that in all high Enterprises there ought to be first Counsel, to
undertake; then Care, to manage; and Industry, to perform: and in the next
place, where there is ability and strength to oppose, and Virtue to direct,
Victory consequently is always at hand ready to crown the undertaking.

Upon the Hances of the waste are four Figures with their several properties:
Jupiter riding upon his Eagle, with his Trisulk (from which he darteth
Thunder) in his hand: Mars with his Sword and Target, a Fox being his Emblem:
Neptune with his Seahorse, Dolphin, and Trident: and lastly Aeolus upon a
Camelion, (a beast that lives only by the Air) with the four Winds, his
Ministers or Agents, the Fast, called Eurus, Subsolanus, and Apeliotes: the
North-winde, Septemtrio, Aquilo, or Boreas: the West, Zephyrus, Favonius, Lybs,
and Africus: the South, Auster, or Notus.

I come now to the Stearne, where you may pe^ceive upon the upright of the
upper Counter, stands Victory in the middle of a Frontispiece, with this
general Motto, Validis incumbite remis: It is so plain, that I shall not need
to give it any English interpretation: Her wings are equally displayed; on one
Arm she wears a Crown, on the other a Laurel, which imply Riches and
Honor: in her two hands she holds two Mottoes; her right hand, which
points to Jason, bears this Inscription, Nava, (which word howsoever by
some, and those not the least opinionated of themselves, mistaken) was
absolutely extermi^'d, and excommunicated from all Grammatical Construction,
nay, Jurisdiction; for they would not allow it to be Verb, or Adverbe,
Substantive, nor Adiective: and for this I have not only behind my back bin
challenged, but even Viva voce taxed, as one that had writ at randum, and that
which I understood not. But to give the world a plenary satisfaction, and that
it was rath^r their Criticisme, then my ignorance, I entreat thee Reader, but
to examine Riders last Edition of his Dictionary, corrected, and greatly
augmented by Mr. Francis Holy-oke, and he shall there read Navo, navas, ( and
therefore consequently nave in the Imperative Mood) ex navus, (...), that is,
to employ with all ones power, to act, to aid, to help, to endeavor with all
diligence and industry; and therefore not unproperly may Victory point to
Jason, being figured with his Oar in his hand, as being the prime Argonaut,
and say Nava, or more plainly, Operam nava; for in those Emblematicall Mottoes
quod subintelligitur, non deest. She points to Hercules on the sinister
side, with his club in his hand, with this Mottto, Clava; as if she should say,
O Hercules, be thou as valiant with thy Club upon the Land, as Jason is
industrious with his Oar upon the Water. Hercules again pointing to Aeolus,
the god of Winds, says Flato; who answers him again, Flo: Jason pointing
to Neptune, the god of the Seas, (riding upon a Seahorse) says Faveto; to
whom Neptune answers, No: These words Flo, and No, were also much excepted
at, as if there had been no such Latin words, till some better examining
their Grammar Rules found out Flo, flas, flavi, proper to Aeolus, and No, nas,
navi, to Neptune, etc.

In the lower Counter of the Stern, on either side of the Helm is this
Inscription, Qui mare, qui fluctus, vent^s, navesque gubernat,
Sospitet hanc Arc^^ Carole magne tuam.


Thus English^: He who Seas; Winds, and Navies does protect,
Great Charles, thy great Ship in her course direct.


There are other things in th^^ Vessel worthy remarke, at least, if not
admiration; namely, that one Tree, or Oak made four of the principal beams
of this great^Ship, which was Forty four foot of strong and serviceable
Timber in length, three foot Diameter at the top, and Ten foot Diameter at the
stubbe or bottom.

Another, (as worthy of especial Observation is) that one piece of Timber
which made the Kel-son, was so great, and weighty, that 28. Oxen, and 4. Horses
with much difficulty drew it from the place where it grew, and from wh^nce it
was cut down, unto the waterside.

There is one thing above all these, for the World to take especial notice of,
that she is, besides her Tunnage, just so many Tuns in burden, as their have
been Years since our Blessed Saviors Incarnation, namely, 1637. and not one
under, or over: A most happy Omen, which though it was not at the first
proiected, or intended, is now by true computation found so to happen.

It would be too tedious to insist upon every Ornament belonging to this
incomparable Vessel, yet thus much concerning Her outward appearance, She has
two Galleries of a side, and all of most curious carved Work, and all the
sides of the ship are carved also with Trophies of Artillery and Types of
honor, as well belonging to Land as Sea, with Symboles, Emblemes, and Impresses
appertaining to the Art of Navigation: as also their two sacred Majesty's
Badges of Honor, Arms, Eschutchions, etc. with several Angels holding their
Letters in Compartements: all which works are gilded quite over, and no other
color but gold and black to be seen about her, and thus much in a succinct
way. I have delivered unto you concerning her inward and outward Decorements. I
come now to Discribe her in her exact Dimension.

Her Length by the Keels, is 128 foot or there about, within some few inches.
Her main breadth or wideness from side to side 48. foot. Her utmost* length
from the ^ore-end of the Beake-head* unto the after end of the Stern, a prora
ad puppim* 232. foot, she is in height from the bottom of her Keele to the
top of her Lant-horne seaventy six foot, she bears five Lant-hornes, the
biggest of which will hold ten persons to stand upright, and without shouldring
or pressing one the other.

She ^ath three flush Deckes, and a Fore-Castle, an half Deck, a quarter
Deck, and a round-house. Her lower Tire has thirty ports, which are to be
furnished with Demy-Cannon and whole Cannon through out, (being able to bear
them. Her middle Tire has also thirty ports for Demi-Culverin, and whole
Culverin: Her third Tire has Twenty six Ports for other Ordnance, ^er
fore-Castle has twelve ports, and her half Deck has fourteen ports; She
has thirteen or foureteen ports more within Board for murdering pieces,
besides a great many Loope-holes out of the Cabins for Musket^shot. She
carries moreover ten pieces of chase Ordnance in her, right forward; and ten
right aff, that is according to Land-service in the front and the rear. She
carries eleaven Anchors, one of them weighing four thousand four hundred,
etc. and according to these are her Cables, Mastes, Sails, Cordage; which
considered together, seeing his Majesty is at this infinite charge, both for
the honor of this Nation, and the security of his Kingdom, it should be a
great spur and encouragement to all his faithful and loving Subjects to be
liberal and willing Contributaries toward the Ship Money.

I come now to give you a particular Denomination of the prime Worke-men
employed in this inimitable Fabric; as first Captain Phines Pett, Over-seer
of the Work, and one of the principal Officers of his M^j^sties Navy; whose
Ancestors, as Father, Grandfather, and Great-Grand-father, for the space of
two hundred years and upwa^ds, have continued in the same Name, Officers and
Architectures in the Royal Navy; of whose knowledge, experience, and
judgment, I can not render a merite^ Character.

The Master Builder is young M. Peter Pett, the most ingenious son of so
much improoved a Father, who before he was full five and twenty years of age,
made the Model, and since has perfected the work, which has won not only the
approbation but admiration of all men, of whom I may truly say, as Horace did
of Argus, that famous Ship-Master, (Who built the great Argo in which the
Greci^^ Princess Rowed through the Hellespont to fetch the golden Fleece from
Colch^s. -- Ad Charum I ritonia Devolat Argum,
Moliri hanc puppim iubet --
that is, Pallas ^er self flew into his boso^e, and not only i^joyn'd him to
the u^dertaking, but inspired him in the ma^aging of so exquisite and absolute
an Architecture.

Let me not here forget a prime Officer Master Francis Shelton, Clerk of the
Check, whose industry and care, in looking to the Workmen imployd in this
Structure, has been a great furtherance to expedite the business.

The Master Carvers, are John and Mathias Christmas, the Sons of that
excellent Workman Master Gerard Christmas, some two years since deceased,
who, as they succeed him in his place, so they have strived to exceed him in
his Art: the Work better commending them than my Pen is any way able, which
puts me in mind of Martial, looking upon a Cup most curiously Carved.

Quis l^bor in phial^? Docti Mios? I^ne Mironis*
Mentoris an manus est? an Polyclet^ tua?
What Labor's in this curious Bowl?
Was It thine o Myus tell?
Myrons? Mentors? or Polyclets?
He that can carve so well.
And I make no question, but all true Artists can by the view of the Work,
give a present nomination of the Workmen.

The Master-Painters, Master Ioyner, Master Calker, Master Smith, etc. all of
them in their several faculties being known to be the prime Workmen of the
Kingdom, selectedly imployd in this Service.

Navis vade, undae fremitum posuere minaces,
Et Freta Tindaridae spondent secura gemelli,
Dessuetamque iubent pelago decurrere Puppim,
Auster and optatas afflabit molliter auras.
FINIS.

