A FUNERAL ELEGY.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Harper. 1625.

A FUNERAL ELEGY, UPON THE MVCH LAMENTED DEATH OF THE Trespuissant and
unmatchable King, King JAMES, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith.

Who to the universal sorrow of the Princes his Allies, his own Kingdoms and
people, expired the 27. of March, Anno 1625. In the year of his reign 23.

Written by Thom. Heywood.

Tibul. Lib. 5. Eleg. 2. Non ego firmus in hoc non hac patentia nostro (...):
frangit fortui corda dolor.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Harper.

1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, EDWARD EARL OF Worcester, Lord of Chepstoll, Ragland
and Gower, etc. Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Lord (...) Seal,
and one of the Kings most Honorable (...) C^fort.
THe continuance of your favors, and necessity of my duty (Right Honorable)
as having been the unchanged Patron of all my weak and imperfect labors,
that have been published even from the first to the last, have compeld me
(bowsoeuer troublesome to your more serious and weighty designs) to make this
affectionate presentment of my long service (and yet still due to your
Lordship) in these mourning papers. Assuring my self that you, who reioyst in
so incomparable a Kings life, will not refuse to ^rtaine this sad Elegic of his
death. For even amongst the greatest (...) best; of their virtues this is nor
held the teast to have bec^ compossionate and heart-sad, for the lamented loss
of our so gracious and so good a King, whose wisdom ^ and his ^ the whole
earth not equal Account at ^seech your Lordship is your (...) grace and
elemencie this solemno Obsequie performed to Him and obliged affection,
celebrated to you, wishing you as many happy future joys, as for King (...)
been, or shall hereafter be wept Funeral tears.

^

^

Thomas Heywood.

To the sad Reader.
TO thee; (Compa^ Reader) (...) I pay
My lost of Duties at this Bayall^ (...)
(For best of^ (...) better) give me Ieame
Some thing to speak, which (I intraint) recaine
With as prepared, and well-dissasta (...)
As it is freely to thy ^
I have observed, and still me thinker I see
Beneath this goodly and (...) Tree,
(Now ruined and ^
Under his shadow, ^
By his protection cheered and kept alive,
Their growth and beauties multiply and thrive,
Sweld with increase, their boughs on him depending,
Laden with ripe fruits to the ground even bending,
Has shadowed from the Winters bleake extremes,
And (in the Summer) the Suns scorching beams.
Yet this fair Dodon Oak, late all-commanding,
Has in his mighty ruin left them standing:
And not (as we (...) seen) great buildings fall
Crushing and ^
Now ^
Bettred to this day by his former graces:
Others by transplantation; higher reared,
And to more eminence in Court preferred:
(Excepting still those (...)
That sought to suit his favors with their merits)
Since some (...) ^rrely by him (...)
To such great worth and goodness (...)
Rites due and needful, as ^
For such a royal Patriot fr^ (...) came.
Excuse me even the weakest if I ((...)
Not known to him) that only from him grow
To others profit; ^
Yet never tasted of his ^
And this ((...) Reader) (...),
Now if thou please, to tears prepare thine eyes.
A Funeral Elegy.
DOubly at once despoiled, where shall I borrow
To Express one private grief, a twofold sorrow?
Oh thou of all the nine, the saddest Muse,
Whose Invocation I of force must use,
Give me direction, in what Funeral strain
A Subject may a Sovereigns loss complain.
It were too little should we weep whole Seas,
And sigh huge tempests, what alas could these?
Or could we to our selves assume a power
To drop upon the earth a greater mowte
Then made the general deluge, twere too small
Sufficiently to weep his Funeral.
Let the Gangetick shores their Emperors boast,
Or where Chiaspes is renowned most.
Let Tanais speak of Princes near it bred;
Let Granicus, that of Darius dead
Keeps memory: or such as crown the style
Of Potentates, bred by the River Nile:
Sca^der show thy worthes; or thou Rine
Thy (...) or fair Tiber thine
(The all (...) Caesar's.) Let that stood
That in the greatest compotence (...) stood
For Ancestry, that flows through France or Spain,
They for priority shall (...) in vain:
Since about the^ or thy Londons, Thames.
Has bin man glorious by the great King JAMES.
He than the Romans with the Greeks compared,
And punctually their amplitudes declared,
Of such as werain veriucs anteoelling:
Their greatness and their goodness paralelling,
Though in his search of Annals he might find
Matches, and likes, in fortunes, and in mind
For Justice, Mercy, Bounty, Wisdom, Glory,
Or for what else could dignisie a Story,
Observes no equal, to Him mourned here,
Who as he lived, so did without compeere.
For sound in struction and wise document,
He might have bin a remarked president
To th'Sages of whose memory even Greece
Is proud to this day more then of their Fleece,
For what by any of them has boene done ^on Dorot.

Like to his gift bequeathed unto his Son?
Had grave Hartenfius in his time so Famed,
Or Cicero by some (before him) named
Heard his smooth ^oquence, which was (...),
But their^, (...) laboure^ and premoditante,
They would have (...) (as forhemring)
To give his Languages delightful hearing.
The Academics both his fluence praise,
And worthily did laurtace him with Bays.
In Parlaments phat were by him acci^ed,
Where then the members with the head vinted
Sat in delibe^ (...), (...)
Of pol^ (...), and deep designet of State,
You might observe them in his words inelining
As to an Oracle: He still diuming
Nothing but ^mmongo^: did beb^ speak,
The wisest there, to him to (...), foem'd weak;
His apprehensions, and concepcious growing
Like Hydraes heads; for with continual flowing,
Conceirbogot conceit, (by all admired)
As still in course, and yet at no time tired.
No phrase but was an Apotheg^ Inn^
New, and unwearied to bego^
Nothing that slipped him, but to be inrold
By pens of Diamonds, in rich leaves of Gold.
But whether this so said (...) deprivation
Be for the many sin^es of this our Nation,
Or for our great Ingratituds, not estimating
So great a blessing inther vnder-rating
This gemme beneath his value, as possessed
Of mighty wealth (like Mysers) nay the best,
Yet in this height of fullness, did not (...) it
To others good, but in our selves abuse it;
Or to what else our loss we may impute
"This all-good-speaking Oracles are mute,
Yet have his virtues in their last bequest
Departing to his cuerlasting rest,
To recompense the silence of that tongue,
Which might have still his own deserving song
Behind him left, to all succeeding days,
Myriads of pens and tongues to sound his praise.
I only yet speak to y^ how he spoke;
But of his actions who shall notice take,
Shall find them (if they but consider well)
(As far as good works, good words) to excel
His Machination^ (...) common things,
Leaving a president to after Kings,
Of which he only, and alone might boast,
"That seeming to do least, he still did most.
The King of Peace this King did imitate,
Who planting it in our domesticke state
Did labor it in others remote hence,
Sparing therein, not counsel nor expense,
But so his purpose to his Saviors suited,
Who the command of peace first instituted,
Knowing no better president to find.
He where he left us, left his peace behind.
Yet as the couchant Lion, when he lies
Down to repose and rest, never shuts his eyes;
He, the like providence about him kept,
And still wakt for us, when he seeming slept;
For when whole Christendom was up in Arms
Frighting the fearful Subject with alarmes.
Nations distracted; even the great'st ability
Of the most potent, weakened with hostility:
Drums each where thundering, and the Canon roaring,
Proud victory tweene doubtful battles soaring,
While horrid war, in his extream'st of rage,
Filled both the streets and fields with blood and strage;
How have these late afflicted Kingdoms wondered
To see us in our blessed Goshen sondered
As freed from Egypts plagues, no way distressed,
Yet they with all calamities oppressed.
Ruins attending them; on us, increase
Still multiplied by this fair King of peace.
Wherefore should I thus labor to commend
Him, whose renown is datelesse without end,
Subject to no expression; their least strain
Not within compass of the pen or brain,
Scarce dare I further in his praise proceed.
Being a project that in me does breed
Amazement only; as so far above
My weak performance, that the more I love,
The more I fear, for as a moderate light
Comforts the eye, and benefits the sight,
But view the Sun in's glory, and we find
That his more perfect luster strikes us blind;
It Is eath t'apply; His worth being so divine
In all respects, and so defective mine,
Yet shall my love so far outstrip my fear,
Rather to dare, then break abruptly here.
Ere I proceed, let me a little borrow
Space to collect my self, high drowned in sorrow.
Beware the Ides of March; 'twas a prediction
To him that had the whole Worlds Jurisdiction,
Julius, the first of Caesar's, who declined
Just in the hour that was before diuin'd.
In th'Ides of March the blessed Eliza fell,
The famous Mother of our Israel.
In March Queen Anne, a Princess much admired
(As much lamented in her death) expired.
Now lastly in these ominous Ides of March
Is snatched away, our strong and glorious Arch,
(As violently by death from us extorted)
By whom three mighty Kingdoms were supported,
And had he not an Atlas left behind,
Succeeding him in potency of mind,
In virtue, goodness, royalty of State,
And all things, that a Son may imitate
So great a Father in; so just, so wise,
So rare a Phoenix, suddenly to rise
Out of his Ashes: in a Time so small,
We likewise had bin crushe beneath his fall.
Oh ominous Month, thou did our loss presage
When with thy windy and obstreperous rage
Thou vsher'dst in the Spring: yet I commend
Thy going out, thou lest'st-ys as a friend
And fellow mourner (as to all appears)
Parting with us in many showers of Tears,
In strange varieties of stormy weather,
Snow, rain, hail, winds; and in all these together
Weeping and sighing. But (O King) to attend thee,
How many Noble servants did death send thee
As harbingers before to view the place,
Where thou art anchored now, the land of Grace?
Richmond and Lenox Duke, whose memory was Loabwi^ (...) Duke of Rubmmond and
^my.

Worthy to be ingrau'd in Iron or Brass
For his inimitable modesty,
And what does grace even Princes honesty,
Integrity of life, nay every Thing
That might become a kinsman to a King.
It was the noble Earl of Dorsets task The Earl of Dwset.

To make one likewise in this doleful mask,
And much more cause we should have still to need him,
Had he not left behind here to succeed him
So brave a brother, one so good, so wise
In all true Noblesse, him to equalize.
Then Lenox Duke, a brother him succeeding The Lord (...) Duke of Lenox.

(Alike endowed) as of one birth and breeding;
In this the partial sisters were too blame
To take him hence so soon as give him name:
Now Duke, now dead, stooping to the earth his knee
Ere he could well express what he would be. Charles Earl of Nottingham

Then Nottingham a Pilot, who did steer
Englands once dreaded Navy many a year;
Who though he cut his cable ere he did,
Brought here his Ships in a fair Port to ride.
Henry, Southamptons Earl, a Soldier proved; Henry Earl of Southampton.

Dreaded in war, and in mild peace beloved.
Oh give me leave a little to resound
His memory, as most in duty bound,
Because his servant once. His worth expressed
Can no way be detraction to the rest.
HENRY WRIOTHESLY Earl of Sowth-Hampton.

His Anagram.

Thy Honor is woorthe all praise.

A short Elegy upon the ANAGRAM.
THy Honor's woorthe all praise: it is true, the same,
By which we Anagram matise thy name,
(Thrice Noble Henry) which, let me define
And first show wherefore Honor, next, why Thine;
Last from thy Ashes vrne, to build and raise
A Monument to prove it, Woorthe All praise.
If only that bare honor here were meant
Which Heraldry allows thee from descent,
And only that inherent, understood
Which lineally Nobilitates the blood,
It ranks thee equal with the great'st of Peers,
Deriuing thee from long forgotten years.
But that is thy least (though some affect it most,
(Of that which is not ours, why should we boast?)
The noble seeds in our forefathers sown,
May well be termed our Grandsires, not our own;
But happy those, their Ruins can repair,
And husband still, their Names from heir to heir;
Wriothesley was such, in all things striving
To gain a Name, by Arts, and Arms: suruiuing
Beyond all Marble, which at this time weeps
Upon the bed where now this worthy sleeps.
Cambridge, thy pupillage; thy youth, the Court,
And singularity that can best ^opprt:
Of thy brave valor Ireland witness can,
Writing thee Soldier, even as soon as Man.
And what as native was in thee begone,
Thy valor left success^ to thy Son The Lord (...) oath fly son to the Earl
Hen y

Let Belgia mourn with us a double loss,
Your gold repur'd thence, you have left them dross.
Let me look back again to Ireland; where
Me thinks I see thee a brave Cheualeere,
Commanding others, and so far extend
Thy worth; as only to be termed the friend
Of Noble Essex: such thy friendship was, Robert Dt^ax Earl of Essex.

Deserving to be charactered in Brass
And ever read: shrield with a stentor's breath,
'Twixt you it lived, and parted not in death.
Thy patience in thy troubles thousands sing,
Thy innocence, the goodness of the King
Crowned at's inauguration; whose free grace
Suited thy merits both with gifts and place;
And thou whose wisdom seemed obscured but late,
Thought worthy to be Councellor of State,
And honored with the Garie^: we fuide then
Kings through the breast, see more then common men.
Religion, which becomes a Statesman best,
Was in thy bosom planted, and irop^est
Without all schism or faction, charity,
Devotion, bounty, noble courtesy,
Which many (sweld and pust with Title) scorn,
These did thy other virtues much adorn.
Thy breast of all these Jewels was the Mine,
Marks of true Honor all: And all these Thine.
And since their number far exceeds thy days,
I thus conclude, Thy Honors woorthe all praise.
Next him the Noble Hammelton; a Man, The Mirqueste of Him^.

Whom, let detraction do the worst it can,
With no despightfull callumnie can brand,
A mighty prop and collume of the Land,
Whose death so much lamented well approues
Him dennison'd in all the peoples loves;
Nor was there ever any Northern Peer
Better deserved, or more bewailed here.
From these I now descend unto the last Sir (...) Lord Belsalt.

That followed them in death, the Lord Belfast,
A Soldier and a Counselor of War,
Who though he went where no such turmoiles are,
The Fates thought fit to send him, as forerunning
To tell the Saints, the King of peace was coming.
Now thou most gracious and all dreaded power,
To whom ten thousand years are as one hour,
And ages less then Instants, that in measure
Do spare or punish: If thy heavenly pleasure
So think it fit (but yet thy will be done)
Spare thou the rest still to attend his Son.
How may we best consider this great cross,
So many lands lament, unless the loss
We rate at highest: and to undertake
That task, it were impossible: To make
Value of lands we may, of gold, of treasures,
Jewels, and Honor, nay of wealth and pleasures,
Set a full price of our own lives we may,
And how much we esteem them. Nay even they
That enjoy Scepters, Crowns, and Kingly state,
May their great glories and abundance rate,
But never Him: All these, man may enjoy,
Which if he lose, it can but one destroy;
But this privation is so general,
(As if all were but one, it touches all.)
Oh Royal Sir, beneath whose potent sway,
So many Kingdoms peaceably obey:
How deep it wounds each loyal subjects breast,
To think upon your loss above the rest;
TO imagine you sit mourning among your Peers,
Your self heart-sad, their eyes all glazed in tears:
Let all their eyes unto their own hearts turn,
And weep to think that you have cause to mourn.
Yet why should the least sorrow touch thy heart,
That the sole hope of many millions art?
Or wherefore should the least offensive brine,
With their salt watrie drops moist those fair Eyne?
Yet Nature will have course, Kings and Kings Sons
Must all obey to passion; for it runs
The Row every vein, and with internal zeal,
Despite the breast, it from the heart can steal
Sighs and sad throbs, norspares it Princes eyes,
But even from them, draws tears at obsequies;
But let not one of my weak parts possessed,
Dare search the sorrows of a Kingly breast.
Now ere that you your moistened cheeks can dry,
The news (for still bad tidings swiftest fly)
As far as Holland will artiue, and there
Who can express the sorrow shall appear,
To see a great Kings daughter in her pride The L^die (...).

Of Love and Beauty, and by her fair side
Her hopeful Issue (pretty Infants playing)
They, as not capable of her dismaying,
Or what themselves have lost; but when they spy
Her change of looks, with a pearle-dropping eye
Distracted, and confused, (For who can blame
Strange ecstasies in her, to hear such fame)
Those little souls for company to weep,
To see her fall, those tears she cannot keep.
What heart so obdure in all her Princely train,
At this sad sight will not in felfe complain?
Making the soul within the bosom melt,
Be It but to see the pangs that she has felt.
Amidst this doleful Quire, next to behold
The Princely Pfaltzgraue, unto whom its told Fre^ (...) P. Psalizgr^

The cause by this, in whose heroicke brow
You may like passion read, perplexed now,
Whether in his staid thoughts to comfort theirs,
Or add to grief with his own sighs and tears,
Me thinks I see both in his looks prepared,
But which shall first break forth, to guess it is hard.
Me thinks I hear the passionate Lady cry,
Oh what a loss King Charles has, and what I;
What England, Scotland, Ireland, and what All,
Suruiuing his lamented Funeral.
Oh you his joy, the Peers selected pleasure
Offorraigne Climes, the praise of ours a Treasure,
On whom your Maker has his bounty showed,
And Heaven with all choice graces has endued;
Whom even the Angels love, and men admire,
Made up with what perfection can desire
From Earth or Heaven: your health and beauty spare,
He sainted lives, his virtues crowned are.
The whilst we daily of hie Heaven importune,
You may increase in grace and blessed fortune:
Prove thou a Prophet, Muse, say it is decreed,
All Christendom may flourish in your seed:
And excellent Pfaltzgraue, may your loves persevere,
That these our Nations may admire you ever,
Diurnally augment, but not decline,
Till Heaven that gave you us, make you divine.
But does not Denmark think I do it some wrong,
TO have stayed you in the Netherlands so long,
Not to take view of the great sadness there,
The blacks they both in hearts and habits wear: Christerne K. of Denmark.
Duict esse of San^, Ducctetle of Binns^cte, the Kings sisters.

Excuse me, Mighty Christerne, if for haste,
To come to thee, I almost had ore-past
Two Princely Germane Ladies, both like near,
T'expir'd Queen Anne, and to thy self as dear.
But on their griefs why should I further dwell,
Since I have only a sad tale to tell.
And the row the world there is no place assigned,
Where for the present I can comfort find;
For he that to a sorrowful heart shall come,
And without comfort, had as good be dumb:
To search a desperate wound, and have no skill,
In stead of curing he as soon may kill.
Where others grieve, and I my self complain,
Seeking to ease, I shall but add to pain.
Then better to be silent^: be it not yet
Offensive, if I loath am to forget,
(Oh Mars-slarr'd Denmark) your fraternall love A memory of Queen Anne.

To our deceast Queen Anne, now shrin'd above,
When has it often, nay scarce once been seen,
So great a King, to see a sister Queen,
And for no other reason, but to please
His eye with her bright glory, twice the Seas
To Have crossed with danger: his Maiesticke state,
Safety and ease, leaving, to tempt his fate
Against tempests, gusts, and the swollen surges wrath,
Nay all the fearful terrors Neptune has:
Not all the Oceans frownings and affrights
Could stay him from th'inticements and delights
He took in her sweet sight: Whirlewinds nor wrack,
No fear of surge or billow kept him back:
All these expressed his love; but for Queen Anne,
His Sisters death, his sad laments who can?
My weakness I confess, and therefore leave it
To some that can more feeling passion give it,
And come unto her gratitude, whom Spite,
Nor Envy can accuse; She to requite
His magnitude of love, (to give it name
To all posterity, and whence it came,)
Her Palace, which to her great charge and cost,
She then repaired, as there delighting most,
With goodly structures beautified and walled,
Late Somerset, now Denmark House is called.
Do but observe (I entreat) one thing with me,
To show the love and unanimity
Betwixt our Royal King, and blessed Queen,
What more remarkt a president has been?
As if the heavens to show his love unto her,
And that in death (again) he meant to woe her,
Have so ordained, that though he did romoce,
Some miles from hence (not all unworthy note) ^

Even to the very place by death assigned her,
His breathless corpse, as hoping there to find her,
Should be conuer'd; whether at his bequest,
Or that th'mscrutable powers so thought it best,
I Am ignorant; yet this assured I am,
She went from Denmark house, he thither came.
From thence (as in one Temple they were wedded)
So in one place to be together bedded:
But into foreign Countries I was grown
So far, that I had nigh forgot mine own;
As if we had not Country, Court, and City,
All to b'included in this mournful dittie;
Therefore in this griou'd synod I comprise
The poor, the rich, the ignorant, the wise,
The Noble, base, the Citizen, the Swain,
Who all (and all aronce) his loss complain.
But were their grid^ like yours, thrice Noble Sir,
In whose more sad view, this sad character
I give to safe protection, it would move
M^ble or Adamant, or what is above
These in relentlosse hardness, Corsicke stone,
Flint, Iron, Copper, Steel, or that which none
Can parallel in's kind, and nothing but
It self can work to beauty, mould, or cut,
The Diamond; could it partake your passion,
'Twere possible even that to frame and fashion
Just as the fire does wax; nay, which is more,
Even drop it into Tears: you did adore
His state and maiostie, for by his grace,
You stood before him in high eminent place.
But loath at this sad season should I be,
To put you (honored Sir) in memory
Too much of that, of which so much your breast
Is to your more infirinity possessed.
Our general comfore is, he is but translated
From earth to heauon, where he is now instated.
His peaceful soul has given his foes the foil,
Death where is thy sting, and Hell where is now thy spoil?
What should I now, having the greatest past,
Dwell on tholester? they may weep as fast,
Though not so fully, for the greater far
The persous be, the greater their griofes are:
Pause (...) a while, his funerals to deploce,
Some other ( that can better) praise him more.
A short Consolatory Elegy, alluding to the happy and blessed succession, of the
hopeful and most Royal CHARLES the first King of England styled by that name.
SVnshines succeed black tempests, calmes a storm;
The Heavens that in themselves have uniform,
Mix cares with pleasures, joys with discontent,
As if (to moralize) they thus much meant,
Presume on nothing; Things incertaine are,
Nor (in thy most deiectednesse) despair.
Long tedious fasts in men consumptions breed,
Continual surfets make us loath to feed:
That we may both digest with more facility,
They have ordained the Lady Mutability
To soueraignize on earth, as merely sent
To tell us that there is nothing permanent.
Sickness attends on health, a fall on pride;
Again, there is no ebb but has a tide.
All this the inconstant Moon can teach us plain,
Growing to the Full, declining in her waine:
The heart of man does still affect variety,
And yet in nothing can it find satietie;
There Is emptiness, and fullness; Flux, and wast;
Yet (Man) in neither thou assurance have;
Rest follows labor, Day succeeds Night,
And now my black page I will change to white.
The Kingly Prophet; who the Psalms compiled,
Left us a pres'dent, mourning for his child,
Who ^oulst the ^ufaut on his deathbed lay,
Was groueling on the earth, did fast and pray,
But after seueu days, when he saw hope past,
That his (so much beloved) had breathed his last,
He that had all that time abstained from meat,
From his teare-watred couch, arose and ear:
Being asked the reason, the wise King replide,
I had some hope of mercy, till it did,
By prayer and fast his weakness to restore,
But now in vain I should lament him more.
By humane power, I never heard or read
Sackcloth and ashes could revive the dead;
But as He instantly persuaded sorrow
From all such eyes as teanes from his did borrow;
So our Kings obsequies performed and done,
Cast eyes of joys on his successiue son.
The bitter sadness I before pursude,
Thus with the tragic Poet I conclude;
-- Tibi crescit omne,
Et quod occasus vides and quod ortus, ^.

Paree venturis, Tib^ Mors part
Sis licet segnis propiramus ipst
Prima qua vitam dedit Horacarpsit.
An Acrosticke upon the most happy Inauguration of CAROLVS IACOBVS STVARTVS our
dread Lord and Soucraigne.
C harles James succeeds King James in his true Right,
I n Majesty, Globe, Scepter, Sword, and Crown.
A Royal Son, to give great Kingdoms light,
A fter his Fathers set, and going down;
R adiant and shooting far, may his beams fly,
C ompassing Lands where Britain's name's scarce heard;
O uer all civil States, remote, or nigh;
O uer all Seas may his great power be feared:
L ong may his growing glories amongst us last,
B lest with a fortunate Nestorian Reign.
V ertue; in which his Father all surpast,
V nchang'd a Legacy with him remain.
S hold I all panegyries put in one,
S uch as of the ancient Heroes have been writ,
S ure it might be conferd on him alone;
T ruth tells me he so truly merits it;
V aliditie of body, Heaven long send him,
A rmour of proof, protect him from Invasion.
R eligion, zeal, and piety defend him,
T o guard and guide him upon blessed occasion.
V nto my King I dedicate this Oad,
S ince in his breast all virtues have abode.
FINIS.

