THREE POSITIONS Concerning the 1 Authority of the Lords day. 2 State of the
Church of Rome. 3 Execution of Priests.
ALL WRITTEN UPON Special occasions by JAMES BALMFORD Minister.

2. Tim. 2. 7. Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee understanding in all
things. AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston for RICHARD BOIL. 1607.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, AND VIRTUOUS LADY THE LADY MARGARET Countisse of
Cumberland; JAMES BALMFORD (an unprofitable servant of Jesus Christ) wishes
all true honor in this life, and eternal glory in the life to come.
I Will honor them, who 1. Sam. 2. 30
honor me, says the Lord of Lords: but in no one thing is that Lord more
honored, than in a religious sanctifying of the Lords day, which is an holy
Sign Exodus 31. 13
between the Lord and us, that he does sanctify us to be his people, and that
we sanctify him to be our God. Of which day it is thus written; If thou turn
away Isa. 58. 13. 14.
thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delight to consecrate it as glorious to the Lord, and shall honor
him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking a
vain word, Then shall thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to mount
upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy
father: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. In which words we may
observe, 1. How highly the Lord esteems his Sabbath. 2. How religiously the
people of God are to sanctify the same. 3. That they, who make no conscience
of such sanctifying the Sabbath, can never delight in the Lord, what profession
soever they make: and 4. That religious sanctifying the Sabbath, as it is a
principal part of Godliness, so it has a special promise of special
blessings, even in this life. With these, and many other most gracious words,
would God persuade man to be holy. But man has sought out many inventions,
and amongst the rest, this conceit; That the Lords day is not the ordinance of
God. Upon which ground many make no more conscience of sanctifying the Lords
day, than of keeping holy days (so called) ordained only by humane
authority; and some, by writing, not yet published, have opened a gappe to
much licentiousness. To sloppe which gappe (as I may) I have endeavored to
prove; That the Lords day is an ordinance of God. Which Position, with two
other, concerning the Church of Rome, and Execution of Priests ( written upon
just occasions, and by persuasion, the former of your Honor, the other of that
right Christian Nobleman, of most honorable memory, Henry late Earl of
Huntington) I houe published under your Right Honorable name; As knowing your
well informed zeal for the Lords day, and against the Synagogue of Rome to be
such, that England were the happiest nation in the world, if all noble
personages were endued with the like; And (withal) hoping, that by these, and
other more Divine Treatises, the same shall be yet more and more inflamed, to
the glory of God, and comfort of your own Soul.

THE FIRST POSITION. THE LORDS DAY, commonly called Sunday, is an ordinance of
GOD.
IF this be true, that man is not to pollute Act. 10 15
what God has sanctified; and If Saturday (so called) were sanctified by God,
I appeal to the consciences of Gods people for judgment, whether Man can make
Saturday common, without warrant from God himself. If not; then Saturday is
made common, either in regard of some Ceremony, or by God himself, for some
other special cause: As he permitted a man unclean, Numb. 9, 10, 11.
or in a long journey, to make common the Passover (which otherwise was to be
kept) in the first month. That there was no Ceremony in the Jews Sabbath to
be abrogated by the coming of Christ, I have proved in another Discourse,
which with sundry points concerning the Sabbath, I am desirous to publish
hereafter, if God will. In the mean while, I desire the Reader to consider
these brief notes. 1. That the Sabbath was made Mark. 2, 27. Deuteronomy. 5. 14, 15.
for man, yea so, that great care is had of servants their rest: which is no
ceremonial respect. 2. That the Learned do so disagree about the supposed
Ceremony, that one affirms Rest, and denies The seventh day; another
affirms the seventh day, and denies Rest to be the Ceremony. 3. That the
fourth Commandment (which by consequence gave confirmation to Saturday before
Christ his death, as now to Sunday) and every word thereof, was Exodus 34. 1. and
twice written by the finger of God in tables of stone: To show, 19, 11. and
20, 1. Deuteronomy. 4, 12, 13. 14. Genesis 17, 9, 10, 22, 23.
That the Decalogue, as it was preached to the Church immediately by God
himself, (before it was written by God, and delivered to Moses on the Mount)
so it is eternal as God himself; As the Gospel preached by Christ himself,
who was God as well as Man, is eternal. Gal. 3. 19. Heb. 12. 27. 28. and 21.
etc. and 8. 2.
Whereas Circumcision, and the ceremonial Law, brought from God to the Church
by Abraham and Moses, was temporal. 4. That none of the other nine
Commandments (except the second by Papists) is said to be in any part
ceremonial. 5. That Saturday of it self without the consideration of Rest, or
the number Seven, (both which are also liable to Sunday) cannot signify any
thing to come. 6. That it was sanctified Genesis 2. 3.
in Paradise (though not expressly named) and therefore not instituted at the
first, to signify Christ to come, and therefore no more a Ceremony, to be
abrogated by the coming of Christ, than Marriage which Genesis 2. 23. 24.
was also instituted in Paradise, and is figuratively applied to signify
Ephesians. 5. 25. etc.
the spiritual conjunction between Christ and his Church.

But let it be supposed, that Saturday was ceremonial. What other thing is
thereupon to be inferred, but, that therefore it cease to be Gods Holy day?
But can we imagine, that God would take no order, that another day should be
established for his own worship? Did he sanctify a Sabbath in the time of
innocence, and when there were none to keep it but Adam and Eve? And would he
not appoint a Sabbath in the time Mat. 19, 28.
of Regeneration, and when his people were Isa. 2, 2, 3.
multiplied, his Son Psalm. 110. 1, 2, 3.
King in Sion, and the power of his rod such, that (as it was prophesied) His
people should come willingly at the time of assembling his army in holy
beauty? Did he himself, not only institute a Seventh day in Paradise to our
first Parents, but confirmed it also Exodus 20, 1, 8.
to the Jews? And will he leave Christians ( 1. Pet. 2, 9.
Achosen generation, and Royal Priesthood) without a Sabbath sanctified by
his Divine authority; considering the Sabbath Exodus 31, 13, 17.
is a sign that we may know that he is the Lord, who does sanctify us to be
his people? And to what other end, than Ezech. 46, 1, 2, 3.
to worship him our Sanctifier? Lastly, when the Passover was not kept in the
first month, because of uncleanness, or a long journey, did God suffer it
either to be omitted, or translated, as it seemed good to the Israelites? Nay,
he himself Number. 19, 10, 11.
nominated the fourteenth day of the second month to be kept for the Passover
in those cases. Was God so zealous for the Passover, a ceremonial Sabbath,
and therefore temporal? And would he neglect The seventh day, a moral
Sabbath, and therefore eternal? Since in the fourth precept he commands A
seventh day to be holy for ever. For as he commands Worship upon the
Sabbath, prescribing neither Jewish, nor Christian; so he commands A seventh
day to be the Sabbath, prescribing neither Saturday, nor Sunday. So that the
fourth Commandment and every word thereof (without any alteration) does belong
to Christians, as well as to Jews. If so, then I conclude, that (whether
Saturday were made common, because of a ceremony, or for some other respect)
some other day in place thereof was sanctified to holy worship, by divine
authority.

If it be objected, that whereas by God himself, the institution of the Jews
their Sabbath, was commanded unto Adam, and the confirmation thereof promulgated
to the Israelites, with the rest of the Decalogue: It is strange, that it
should cease (not of it self, as being ceremonial, but) for some other
special cause; and another day appointed in the place thereof, and that by
God, and yet it is not known, whether immediately, or by whom, God made this
alteration; I answer; that as God, at the last day, will judge the world Act.
17. 31
by the man whom he has appointed; so in the mean time he does govern the
Church by his Son, Psalm. 2. 6. Joh. 5. 22. Col. 3. 1. and 2. 20.
whom he has placed King in Sion. So that whatsoever the Son does is
authentical, and of Divine authority. Not only because he is God Romans 9. 5.
1. Tim. 6. 14. 15. 16.
blessed for ever, but also in that he is that great Prophet Deuteronomy. 18. 18. 19.
Act. 3. 20. 22.
like unto Moses, whom we are to hear; For he does nothing of himself Ioh. 3.
32. 33. and 8. 28.
but as his Father taught him. But that Christ the Son of the living God
sanctified that other Sabbath day, I thus prove.

If the Son be as faithful in all his own house, in things concerning the
worship of God, Heb. 3. 2. 5. 6.
as Moses the servant; If Christ be the Messiah, Ioh. 4. 19. 20. 25. 26.
who should teach us all things: If Moses prescribed every thing belonging to
the Tabernacle Exodus 25. 9. 38.
even to a pair of snuffers; If the things belonging to the house of God,
befew in comparison of those which belonged to the Tabernacle of Moses, because
the hour is come, when Ioh. 4. 23.
we must worship the Father in Spirit and Truth, that is, spiritually, Gal. 3.
3.
without the intolerable Act. 15. 10 Gal. 4. 3.
yoke of carnal Heb. 9. 1. 10.
rites; If a Sabbath be as necessary unto the edification of Christ his house,
as a pair of snuffers to the service of Moses his Tabernacle: then (without
doubt) Saturday being made common, Christ appointed some other day to be a
Sabbath unto his people, as the Leuiticall Priesthood being ceased, Heb. 7.
11. 12. Ephesians. 4. 8. 11. 12.
he sanctified another Ministry under the Gospel.

Again, whereas Christ came Mat. 5. 17.
not to break, but to fulfill the Law, and the Law does command one day of
seven to be a Sabbath, as is said; Therefore Christ did either confirm
Saturday, or sanctify some other day of the week: but that he confirmed
Saturday none will affirm, therefore, he sanctified some other day of the
week: Which to be Sunday, I thus prove.

We see that Sunday is generally kept holy in all the Churches of Christ; And
there is nothing to the contrary, but that it has been sanctified In, and
since the Apostles time. If then God, by Christ, has sanctified a Sabbath unto
Christians, it must necessarily follow, that either the Church has never
regarded, but neglected the ordinance of GOD, for many hundred years; or else,
that Sunday was sanctified by Christ. But the former is not easily to be
admitted, considering the Church 1. Tim. 3, 15.
is the Pillar of truth, therefore the later more willingly to be received.

Again, if the Son Ioh. 5, 19, 21.
does whatsoever the Father does; and if the Father has committed all
judgment to the Son, Exo. 22, 23
that all men should honor the Son, as they honor the Father; then, as the
Father sanctified A seventh day; Genesis 2, 2, 3
as on which he finished his works of Creation, and Romans 1, 19. 20.
was declared mightily to be the living God, Exodus 31, 13, 17.
to his own honor, (and therefore Isa. 58, 13.
did call it mine holy day) For it was not a shadow of Sanctification (as some
dreaming of a ceremony, do imagine) but A Sign to Gods people of their
Sanctifier, that is, A toke^, or memorial that they may know that the Creator
is the Lord, who does sanctify them to be his people: So the Son sanctified
that day, 1. Cor. 15, 16, 17, 57. Romans 8, 34. and
whereon he consummated, and sealed his works of Redemption, and was declared
mightily, 1, 4.
to be the Son of God, to his own honor. Which was Sunday, called for that
respect, Revel. 1, 10.
The Lords day, as shall be declared hereafter. For Leuit. 23, 15, 16. Matthew.
28, 1, 5, 6.
upon that day Romans 4, 25
Christ rose again for our Justification, and manifested himself to be Act.
1, 6, 7, 8, and 2. 1.
the spiritual King of his Church, by miraculous giving the power of the Holy
Ghost unto his Apostles. So that, Sunday is a sign, or memorial unto
Christians, that they may know, that the Redeemer is the Lord, who does
sanctify them.

If it be demanded why Christians should so honor the Son, that they
neglect the Father; and so celebrate the memorial of the Redeemer, that they
neglect the memorial of the Creator? Seeing it is written, Ioh. 4, 23.
The hour is come, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in
Spirit and Truth; and by the light of nature Act. 14, 15, and 17, 23, 24
God is glorified, as he is Creator; I answer: That it is not so; for A
seventh day, (though not Saturday) is still sanctified. Which to be sufficient
to celebrate the Creator, the fourth Commandment prescribes neither this, nor
that seventh day, but one of seven, does evidently prove. So that whereas Sunday
is The Lords day, and withal A seventh day, we may observe, that Christians
Ioh. 14. 13.
glorify the Father in the Son, and celebrate the Creator with the Redeemer.
By whom a New creation (though spiritual) was performed Isa. 65. 17. and 66.
21. 22
according to the prophecy of Isaiah.

Lastly; If it may appear by the word, that Sunday was confirmed by the
Apostles practice, and preceptiue execution, then Sunday has authority, not
from the Church, but from Christ. But it appears by the word, that Sunday was
so confirmed; therefore it has authority not from the Church, but from Christ.

That the sequel of the Mayor may better appear, I will manifest the Minor,
by these three places of holy writ: viz. Act. 20, 6, 7. and 1. Cor. 16, 2. and
Revel. 1, 10. For, in the first place three things are to be observed. 1. That
Paul abode at Troas seven days. 2. That it is not said; The Disciples were
called of purpose to his preaching, but Being come together to break bread,
that is, to be partakers of the Lords Supper. And 3. That, ready to depart on
the morrow, he continued his preaching, till midnight; Then it will appear,
that Sunday (there called The first day of the week, in respect of the Jews
their account, to whom Saturday was the seventh, that is, the last day of the
week) was sanctified to holy meetings, and exercises. And that Paul waited (as
at Philippi Act. 16. 12. 13.
for the Sabbath of the Jews, so) at Troas for the Christians their Lords day.
Which he would not have done, being an Apostle, and having such have of
departure, if Sunday had not been sanctified, by greater authority than the
ordinary authority of the Elders and Brethren.

If it be objected, that (according to the original) the words be One of the
Sabbathes, in the two former places, and therefore it is uncertain, whether
Sunday be meant in those places, rather than Saturday, I answer; That, by the
same reason, it is uncertain whether our blessed Savior did arise again the
third day 1. Cor. 15. 4.
according to the Scriptures: For all the Evangelists Mat. 28. 1 Mark. 16. 2.
Luke 24. 1. Ioh. 20. 1.
use the same words, when they report, That Mary Magdalen went to seek Christ,
when he was risen.

But more fully to confute this Argument, three things are to be noted. 1. That
in the original the numerall ( One) is put for the ordinall ( First.) For
Mark having said in the second verse of his 16. chapter, One of the Sabbathes,
speaking of Mary Magdalen her seeking of Christ, changes the words in the 9.
verse, and says; The First day; showing that Christ was risen. And that
Sabbathes is put for Weeks. As in Leuit. 25. 8. it is written; Thou shall
number 7. Sabbathes (that is weeks) of years. Secondly it is to be observed,
That in both places only Christians are said to have these meetings: For they,
who came together, are called Disciples and Churches, and are said To break
bread, that is, To receive the Communion 1. Cor. 10. 16. 17. 18.
which none but Christians may do. And therefore in both places the Spirit of
God, in two sundry writers Luke and Paul uses these words; The first day of
the week, rather than, The Sabbath day, more distinctly to express that day,
which was sanctified by Christians. Whereas at Philippi, where no Disciples
were as yet, Paul is said Act. 16. 12. 18.
to go on The Sabbath, to the place, where the Jews were wont to pray, after
he had bin there certain days. For what need had the Christians being none
but themselves, to neglect the Lords day, for the Jews Sabbath? Thirdly, note
that it is said; Every first day. 1. Cor. 16. 2. and consider whether there be
any probability, that the Apostle would have them come together every Saturday.
If not, it follows necessarily, that by The first day of the week Sunday is
understood.

In 1. Cor. 16. 1. 2. we are yet further to consider, that the Apostle says;
As I have ordained in the Churches of Galatia, which argues Generality, and
Every first day, which argues Perpetuity. So that by this place, holy
assemblies upon Sunday may seem, as general in those times, so confirmed for
ever, by a preceptiue exhortation. For as in this speech 2. Tim. 2. 19.
Let every one, that calls on the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, a
preceptiue exhortation to call on the name of Christ, is implied, howsoever
only departing from iniquity be expressly commanded. So in this speech
delivered by an Apostle, Every first day of the week let every one of you put
aside, is implied a preceptiue exhortation, to come together upon the first day
of the week, howsoever only putting aside be expressly commanded.

If it be objected, That these meetings were only to gather for the Saints, I
deny it. For it is said, Act. 20. 7. That the Disciples came together to break
bread, which imports other holy exercises. Again, If no more were understood
than expressed, then Christians confirmed in the faith, were less religious
upon their settled and sanctified holy day, than they were ordinarily, if not
every day, at their first entrance into their holy profession. For then they
met together Act. 2. 42. 46.
not only to break bread, but unto doctrine also, and prayers. Lastly, The
Apostle, who was so zealous to sanctify the Lords day at Troas, would (no
doubt) reprove in this place so great neglect of The Lords day, if such a
matter were then to be supposed.

As for Revel. 1. 10. if nothing else were urged, but the consideration of the
two former places, it does sufficiently appear, that by The Lords day is meant
The first day of the week (now called Sunday) according to the judgment of
all the learned. Against which stream to strive, by making a doubt without
reason (at least probable) is to bewray a proud conceit of a private opinion.
But howsoever this be sufficient, yet for the godly their sake, I will say
somewhat more than enough.

It is the judgment of the learned (and I see nothing to the contrary) That
as Paul praying in the Temple Act. 22. 17
fell into a trance; so John sanctifying the Lords day, was ravished in
spirit. If so, how can we imagine, That John banished Revel. 1. 9
in the isle Patmos, having no cause to co^straine him, nor occasion to induce
him, should rather sanctify the Jews Sabbath, than the Christians holy day?
Again, If we find these titles, Our Lord, or The Lord, so attributed to the
Son, that he is called 1. Tim. 6. 14. 15.
The Lord of Lords, and by the title Lord 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5. 6. Ephesians. 4. 4. 5.
6.
distinguished from the Father, and the Holy Ghost, so that in few (if any)
places of the new Testament it is applied distinctly, by way of title, to any
but to the Son, will any who says Jesus is the Lord (speaking by the Spirit
of God) make any doubt that by The Lords day is meant that day, which was
especially sanctified to the honor of Christ? And will any Christian
considering that which is said, be yet doubtful, whether that were Sunday, or
no? Lastly Beza in his note upon 1. Cor. 16. 2. reports, That, in one Greek
copy, these very words, The Lords, be added to Every first day. Which shows
manifestly, That not the Jews Sabbath, but The first day of the week was
called The Lords day.

If then in 3. places of holy Scriptures written by 3. holy men inspired by the
Holy Ghost (of whom Luke was an Evangelist, Paul and John Apostles) we find,
The first day of the week (according to the computation of the Jews) now
called Sunday, sanctified to the worship of God, yea so, That Paul waited for
it at Troas, and does preceptiuely exhort the same (though by implication) to
be sanctified every week amongst the Corinthians, as in other places; and it
obtained the name of The Lords day, as being specially sanctified to the honor
of our Savior, we may conclude, That it appears by the Word, That the Lords
day called Sunday, was confirmed by the Apostles practice, and preceptiue
exhortation.

Now the Minor, or assumption of the former syllogism is manifested, I am to
confirm the sequel of the Mayor, or proposition. Wherein two things are to
be proved. 1. That The Lords day was not established by the ordinary
authority of the Church. And 2. That it was established by the Divine
authority of our Savior Christ. The reason of both is; because it was
established by the Apostles.

The former (though evident by that which is said) will yet further appear; If
we grant, That the Primitive Church attributed as much to the Apostles, who
first 1. Cor. 3. 6. 10.
planted the same, and (for the performance of that work of God) were Act. 2.
4.
endued with extraordinary gifts, inspired by the Holy Ghost, and instructed
and 1. 3.
by Christ 40. days after his resurrection, as Israel did to Moses their
Lawgiver. But while Moses lived the Israelites took all their directions from
him; yea so, That not only in difficult cases Leuit. 24. 11. 12. Number. 15. 32.
33. and 27. 1. 2.
of blasphemy, Profaning the Sabbath, and Daughters inheritance, not formerly
ruled by Moses, they came to him to know the mind of the Lord; but also in all
things about the Tabernacle Exodus 31. 3. 6. and 39. 37. 42. and 25. 38. 40.
even to a pair of snuffers, the worke-men, though miraculously inspired with
cunning, were altogether directed by him, who had his instructions immediately
from GOD. Can we then think That the Disciples came together every first day
of the week of themselves, though by general consent, without the authority
of the Apostles so directing them? If they had attempted such a thing, how
could they have answered this question, 1. Cor. 14. 36. 37.
Came the word of God out from you? A question made by the Apostle in a
supposition, that the Corinthians misliking Paul's directio^s touching sile^cing
tongues without interpretation, and women in the Churches, would happily say,
That they were of another opinion. So that it imports this reply. But I pray
you consider, that the Apostles are the first teachers of the Church, having
received their instructions, either immediately from Christ his mouth, or by
revelation, therefore the Church is to be ordered by them. If then worke-men,
cunning by inspiration, could not make a pair of snuffers without Moses his
direction, nor the Church in Corinth, by it own authority, permit the
manifestation of the extraordinary gift of the spirit to be in their public
assemblies without interpretation, could The Lords day (a matter of so great
regard) be established without the authority of the Apostles?

Again, Whereas the Apostle having reproved certain male vsages amongst the
Corinthians, and taken some order for reformation of ye abuse of Love feasts,
which were of good use at the first, but tending, at last, to the profaning of
the Lords Supper, concludes thus, 1. Cor. 11. 34.
Other things will I set in order, when I come: Is it not evident, that ye
Church could do little, or nothing, much less establish Sunday to be the Lords
day, without Apostolic authority? Lastly; If Titus an Evangelist Tit. 1. 5.
could not reform Creta, nor ordain Elders, but as he was appointed by Paul,
I see not but that all things in the Church were ordered and ordained by the
Apostles. If by the Apostles, then by Christ. Which is the second point in the
Mayor now to be proved.

If we receive the writings of the Apostles, as the Word of God, why not their
constitutions accordingly? I mean not unwritten verities, or rather the very
lies of Antichristian Papists, but such ordinances, as are mentioned and
commended in the Word. For the Apostles were Act. 1. 2. 8. and 22. 15.
chosen, and faithful witnesses of those things, which they have heard and
seen; and (no doubt) as faithful 1. Cor. 7. 25 1. Tim. 3. 14. 15.
in all the house of God, as Moses was about the Tabernacle, and in governing
Israel: But Moses did not direct the worke-men to make any thing, no not a
pair of snuffers, but according to the pattern, which he saw in the mount,
and in the said cases of Leuit. 24. 12. 13. Number. 15. 34 35. and 27. 5 6.
Blasphemy, Profaning the Sabbath, and Daughters inheritance answered not of
himself, but consulted with God. Therefore the Apostles did not prescribe
ordinances, but with such authority, that Paul (and so all) might say, 1. Cor.
11. 23.
I have received of the Lord (to wit Christ) that which I have also delivered
unto you. But what need these inferences? Does not the Apostle charge and 14.
37.
Every man that thinks himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, to
acknowledge that the things he writes to them, are the Commandments of the
Lord? If the things which he then writ, viz. Directions about Prophecy,
Speaking with strange tongues, and Silence of women in the Church, were the
Commandments of the Lord, can we think him to be a true Prophet, and
spiritual indeed, who perceiving The Lords day to have been established by the
Apostles, will not acknowledge it to be a Commandment of the Lord?

If it be demanded, when our Lord commanded his Holy day: I answer; The
faithfulness and credit of the holy Apostles, are sufficient to persuade an
humble Christian to receive it as the Lords ordinance; though it be not
certainly known when Christ did ordain it. But it is probable that he gave
commandment concerning the same, within those 40. days after his
resurrection. When (as it is written Act. 1. 2. 3
in express words) he gave, through the Holy Ghost, Commandments unto the
Apostles, whom he had chosen, and spoke of those things which appertain to the
Kingdom of God. Now does it not especially appertain to the kingdom of God,
that Christians should sanctify their Lords day, wherein 1. Cor. 1. 23. 24.
Christ crucified, 1. Tim. 3. 16.
The mystery of godliness, and Mat. 1. 21.
Savior of the world should be Act. 10. 42. 43.
preached, as well as the Jews had their Sabbath, on which Moses, A school
master Gal. 3. 24
to Christ, and A minister of the Letter 2. Cor. 3. 6.
which kills was Act. 15. 21.
preached?

Again, If in those 40. days Christ Ephesians. 4. 8. 10. 11.
appointed what Ministers should teach his Church for ever; how can it be, but
that the^ also he appointed some Sabbath, whereon they should ordinarily
perform the work of their ministry, as he was wont Luke 4. 16.
to do himself? Seeing it is prophesied, Psalm. 110. 2. 3.
That ye power of his rod should be such, that His people should come willingly
at the time of assembling his army in holy beauty. Seeing his Father (whose
works Ioh. 5. 19.
he imitateth) appointed Leuit. 16. 2. 29.
as an high Priest, so a time, when (once in a year) he should enter into the
Most holy place; and as other Priests, Exodus 29. 44. 38.
so morning and evening sacrifices; and considering it is written Eccles. 3. 1.
To every purpose under heaven there is an appointed time.

Lastly; If the Son be like his Father, as in teaching his Apostles 40. days
(for so long Exodus 24. 12. 18. and 39. 42.
was Moses with the Father upon the mount) so in speaking those things which
appertain to the kingdom of God, as his Father taught Moses al things
belonging to the furnishing of the Tabernacle; and If the Son be like his
Father in sanctifying a day to his own honor, as has been declared, Why may
not Christians believe, that Christ sanctified The Lords day within those 40.
days, as the Father Deuteronomy. 9. 9
confirmed The seventh day in those 40. days, that Moses was with him on the
mount? And the rather, because it is te be observed, That the Disciples Ioh.
20. 19. 26.
assembled the two first days of the two weeks immediately following Christ his
resurrection; and that our Lord, not only of purpose sanctified both those
assemblies with his holy and miraculous presence, but also (immediately before
his Ascension) commanded his Apostles Act. 1. 4. 5. 7. 9.
to wait, a few days, for the promise of the Father; Which (by his providence,
in whose power be times, and seasons, as Christ affirmed even in this case)
was fulfilled Mark. 16. 1. 2. Leuit. 23. 15. 16. Act. 2. 1. 4. 14.
upon a Sunday; and at the same time the Apostles first began the execution of
their ministry, and preached Christ publicly: But public preaching Number.
10. 7. 8. Isa. 58. 1. Ezech. 44. 23. 24. Act. 23. 14. 42.
is a special work of the Sabbath day. It may therefore be gathered, That
Christ appointed his Apostles to sanctify Sunday, whereon he would manifest
himself and 1. 6. 7. 8
to be King of Israel, as his Father instituted A seventh day, as on which, he
was manifested to be GOD of heaven and earth.

To conclude, If Saturday were made common, not by man, but by God himself,
and that not for a Ceremony, but for some other cause; If God sanctified a
Sabbath as well to Christians, as to Jews; If every ordinance of Christ were
an ordinance of God; If Christ were as faithful in all his own house, as
Moses about the Tabernacle; If Christ came to fulfill the fourth Commandment,
which prescribes one day of seven; If the Church of God be not easily to be
condemned as neglecting the ordinance of God in sanctifying Sunday for many
hundred years; If Christ were like his Father in sanctifying that day to his
own honor, whereon he was declared to be the Son of God, and King of Israel,
to wit Sunday; If the day be so appointed, that the Creator is glorified with
the Redeemer; If it appear by the Word, that the first day of the week was
confirmed by the Apostles practice, and preceptiue exhortation; If by the first
day of the week be meant that day whereon Christ did rise again, and that was
Sunday; If in the Word Sunday be called The Lords day to the honor of Christ
our Lord; If the warrant of Sunday consists not in the ordinary authority
of the Church, because it was established by the Apostles; If every spiritual
man be to acknowledge the ordinances of the Apostles, to be the ordinances of
the Lord; and If the Apostles were informed by Christ touching the Lords day
within those 40. days after his resurrection: I may safely hold this my
Position; The Lords day, commonly called Sunday, is an ordinance of God.

THE SECOND POSITION. THE CHVRCH OF ROME IS not the Catholic Church, neither
yet has continued an apparent member of the same, ever since the Apostles time.
1
THe Church is said to be Catholic, in regard of the universality thereof; for
this word Catholic signifies Universal. The Universality thereof consists
in Times, Persons and Places. For there is no age of the world, no nation on
the earth, and no sort of people, that can be exempted from the same. And
therefore it is called The celestial Jerusalem, and said to be the
congregation Heb. 12. 22. 23.
of the first borne, which are written in heaven. So that we are to believe,
That as there has been ever an head (to wit Christ) so there has been also a
body (to wit the Church) some where, or other, but the Church of Rome is a
particular Church, confined within a certain compass, and has not been a
Church but since Christ his coming in the flesh, therefore it is not the
Catholic Church.

2 The Catholic Church is an object of faith, according to the Apostles
Creed, and therefore invisible, howsoever the members thereof (called by Peter,
Lively 1. Pet. 2. 5. Heb. 11. 1.
stones) be visible, as they be men: For faith is the evidence of things not
seen: But the Church of Rome is visible, therefore not the Catholic Church.

3 I grant, that as one man, so one particular Church may be called Catholic,
but it is only in regard of the Catholic faith, (as being one, and the same
throughout the Catholic Church) which that one man, or that one Church
professes: But the Church of Rome professes not (indeed) the Catholic faith
(as shall be in part showed hereafter) therefore (in no sense) it can be truly
called Catholic. But suppose it held the Catholic faith, yet were it not,
for that cause, an object of faith according to the Apostles Creed, more than a
particular man, or any other particular Church holding the faith. Here it is to
be understood, that howsoever we may say: This man, or that Church is
Catholic, yet we may not say, and speak properly, This is the Catholic
man, or That is the Catholic Church.

4 That ye Church of Rome holds not the Catholic faith, neither yet has
done for many years, may be demonstrated in sundry fundamental points. Let it
be sufficient to produce though but one, yet that most fundamental, since it is
called by an excellency, The Word of faith, preached Romans 10. 6. 8.
by all the Apostles. And the rather that One, because it is the principal
argument of that worthy Epistle, which Paul wrote Cap. 1. 8.
to the Romans, whose faith was then published throughout the whole world. So
that, if the Church of Rome swerve from this truth, it is manifest that it is
the offspring, not of the true members of the Primitive Church of Rome, but of
the troublers of that Church, of whom Paul thus writes: Now I beseech you
brethren, Cap. 16. 17. 18.
mark them diligently which cause division, and avoid them: For they that are
such serve not the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and with fair speech
and flattering deceive the hearts of the simple. But what is that most
fundamental point? Even that same, which Paul, after a large and learned
disputation, sets down as his peremptory judgment in these words;
Therefore Romans 3. 28.
we conclude, that a man is justified by faith, without the works of the Law.
But the Church of Rome, that now is, holds, and for many years has held,
That a man is justified both by faith, and works, contrary to the conclusion;
therefore the Church of Rome is not Catholic, but Antichristian.

5 I say Antichristian, because it may be proved such, by many reasons, and
that because it erreth in this point; but I only propound to wise and religious
consideration this deduction: That Antichristian Apostasy, or Antichrist, is
called, The Mystery 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7
of iniquity, that is, a mystical iniquity, that is, an iniquity which is
indeed iniquity, but not perceived, as Christ is called The Mystery of
godliness, that is, a 1. Tim. 3. 16.
mystical godliness, that is, godliness indeed, but not perceived. But
wherefore is Antichrist a mystical iniquity? Because his Righteousness,
though glorious in show, is iniquity in deed, because he attributes Gal. 5. 4.
Romans 3 27. 1. Cor. 4. 1. Romans 1. 16. 17. and 4. 5.
Justification thereunto. Now this is a mystery to flesh and blood (which
would feign rejoice in it self) that Righteousness should be Iniquity. Even so
is the Gospel a mystery, for by it the Righteousness of God is reueiled, which
otherwise could not be perceived of flesh and blood. For is it not a mystical
paradox to carnal reason, to say; God justifies the ungodly? which yet is
clear to him, who, understanding the Scriptures, does not only abhor his
foul iniquity, but also Phil. 3. 9. Esa. 64. 6.
disclaimeth his own defiled righteousness, and by faith lays hold on the
righteousness of God, which is only by Christ, or Who trusts not to his
righteousness inherent, which tastes of the caske, but to righteousness imputed,
which makes us blessed. These things well considered; It may appear, that as
Christ is the mystery of godliness, not only because he is very God, though in
the shape of a servant, but also because the Word of Christ, viz. the Gospel,
teaches a mystical righteousness; So the Pope is Antichrist, not only because
he is an adversary in exalting himself above all that is called God, though he
pretend to be the servant of servants, but also because his doctrine is a
mystical iniquity. Here it is to be remembered, that on the forehead of the
Revel. 17. 5. 9. 18.
Whore of Babylon (to wit Rome) was written this word, A mystery; and it is
also to be understood, that on the Popes Mitre is the same word set with
precious stones. If then for the doctrine of Justification and merit by works,
the Church of Rome be Antichristian, it follows, that it is not Catholic,
and therefore has not continued an apparent member of the Catholic Church,
ever since the Apostles time.

6 The later point inferred, may be the rather admitted, if we mark well that
Paul says, That the Mystery of iniquity 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7
was working in his time. So that it is likely, that those troublers (of whom
mention is made in the 4. section) ouergrew (as weeds) the good corn in time,
and prevailed still, until that mystery of iniquity was revealed, and
consumed by the Spirit of God in the mouth of Luther, and other the servants of
Christ Jesus.

7 For the better manifestation of this point, let us seriously consider, that
howsoever the Church of Rome were now an apparent member of the Catholic
Church (which indeed is not to be imagined) yet since it is not the Catholic
and invisible Church, but a visible and particular Church, and has not any
special promise, that it should continue the same from the first constitution,
how can we be assured, but that, in so many hundreds of years, there have been
some alterations and innouations, as well as in the Church of God among the
Israelites, Romans 9. 4.
to whom pertained the adoption, glory, covenants, giving of the Law, service
of God, and the promises? And yet it is written 2. Chro. 15. 3
of the Church: Now for a long season, Israel has been without the true God,
and without Priest to teach, and without Law.

8 As for that promise of Christ, Thou Mat. 16. 18.
art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not overcome it, it appertains to the Catholic Church, as builded upon
Christ the 1. Cor. 3. 11.
only foundation of his Church, and not to the Church of Rome, more than to the
Churches of Asia, which are overcome, or any other particular Church which may
be overcome; and yet that promise remains Genesis 9. 13.
inviolable, as the covenant, whereof the Rainbow is a sign, is inviolable,
notwithstanding sundry particular countries be overflowed.

9 Indeed Augustine did once take that Rock to be Peter the Apostle, and his
successors the Bishops of Rome; but he after altered that his opinion, and
understood Rock to signify Christ, by Peter confessed: For that Christ did
not say to Peter, I will build me upon thee, But his words were (so Augustine
conceived them) as if he had said, I will build thee upon me, and not me upon
thee His meaning Col. 1. 24.
is: It is absurd, that the Church which is Christ's body (and is therefore
called 1. Cor. 12. 12.
Christ; because it cannot consist without the head thereof which is Christ
himself) should be builded upon Peter, who is but a member of the body. It is
therefore convenient, that Peter being but a member, should be builded upon the
body, considered together with the head.

10 Surely Augustine had reason to fly 1. Pet. 2. 6.
to the true Rock of salvation. For howsoever the succession of the Bishops of
Rome till his time, was an excellent testimony to the truth, because they
successively maintained the faith touching the fundamental points thereof; yet
he might well consider that Personal succession, without succession in faith,
is not a sufficient confirmation, or authentical note of a true Church. For at
Constantinople there has bin an interrupted succession of Bishops til this
day. And yet the Papists will deny that to be any part of Christ his Church,
because it reteineth not the true faith of Christ.

11 But because there is such ado about the succeeding of Peter, and it is
made a matter of so great importance, it is necessary to be proved, that the
Bishops of Rome be Peter's successors: Which how possibly Papists can perform,
I cannot see; since there is such a disagreement about his supposed immediate
successor; the Decrees affirming Clement, and writers of good regard, (as
Ireneus and other) placing Linus next after Peter.

12 That this doubt whether the Bishops of Rome be Peter's successors, may be
put out of all doubt, the Papists must necessarily prove four things. 1. That
Peter was at Rome. 2. That he sat Bishop there 25. years. 3. That he was
universal Bishop. And 4. That his universal authority was sufficiently
conveyed over to all that should lawfully succeed him in that See. In any of
which if they fail, the Popes authority falls to the ground. For if Peter
were never at Rome, how could he be Bishop there? If not Bishop at all, how
universal Bishop? If he had no such authority himself, how could it be
conveyed over to his pretended successors? And if there were not sufficient
conueyance, how frustrate is the Popes claim? But that there be such doubts in
every of these points, as the Papists cannot clearly resolve, consider well
the four next articles.

13 None does simply deny, but that Peter might have been at Rome, as a
passenger; or for some short abode, although so much be not manifest: But that
he sat Bishop there, and that so many years, is altogether unlikely. For it
not very likely, that Paul saluting so many by name, as he does in his Epistle
to the Romans, but that he would make some honorable mention of Peter? And
whereas six of his Epistles were dated at Rome, Is it not likly, but that in
some of them he would speak of Peter, if he had been there so long, and in
such authority, as he does of Timothy, whose authority was less, that thereby
his exhortations, and reprouings might better prevail? To say nothing that the
Scriptures do not in any place, signify that Peter was at Rome: Which (in
likelihood) should have bin done, if God had seen succession of Bishops at
Rome from Peter, to be a matter of so great importance, as now it is made.

14 But say that he was at Rome, it will help the Papists nothing, except they
can prove, that he was also Bishop of Rome. Whereof there is small likelihood,
if we take this word Bishop, not in the large sense, which comprehends
Apostles, and all Ministers having authority; but in the strict sense, which
signifies a Minister entitled to a certain place. For is it likely that
Peter descended from the highest degree in the Church (of which al Apostles
were) next to Christ the head, to the inferior degree of a Bishop? or Is
Matthew. 18. 18. and 28. 18. 19. 20.
it likely that he who had authority throughout the whole world, as he was
an Apostle, was tied to a particular charge, as he was Bishop?

15 But they say, He was Universal Bishop, and therefore his authority was not
restreined. They must needs say so, for else his supposed being Bishop at Rome
will stand them in no stead. But was his authority enlarged hereby? If no,
(for how could he have a larger jurisdiction, tha^ Apostolical authority
throughout the world?) what reason then can they give, why he should enjoy that
Universal authority, rather by the name of a Bishop, and that of a particular
place, than by the name of an Apostle? Again, Is it not strange, that they
cannot by any Scripture prove this point, since it is of such consequence with
them, as that it binds their consciences to the Sea of Rome? Nay rather the
Scriptures show the contrary. For it is recorded in holy Writ, That the
Apostleship of the circumcision Gal. 2. 7. 8.
(that is, of the Jews) was committed to Peter, and the Apostleship of the
uncircumcision (that is, of the Gentiles, such were the Romans) was committed
to Paul. Again, Is it likely, that Paul who Romans 15. 20.
enforced himself to preach the Gospel, not where Christ was named, lest he
should have built on another man's foundation, would so intrude himself into
Peter's office, as to meddle with the affairs of so many Churches as he does,
(and that with all authority) in his Epistle to the Romans, and other his
Epistles from Rome, and all this, without any mention of Peter, if Peter had
been at Rome, and had such an Universal authority? Since Paul (as is said)
joined with himself (for the more authorie of some of his Epistles) Timothy
one of less authority than Peter, and writes to the Philippians, That he
Phil. 2. 20.
had none like minded to Timothy, that would faithfully care for their matters.
Lastly, It is utterly unlikely, That Paul Gal. 2. 11. etc.
would have reproved Peter to his face, and that openly, for withdrawing
himself from the Gentiles, if Peter had had such authority, as the Papists
dream of.

16 But suppose that Peter was at Rome, and had such authority, what is the
Pope better for it, if it were not made over to Peter's successors, by
sufficient conueyance? But in this point, which chiefly concerns the Pope,
the Papists seem utterly to fail. For Gregory the first, reproved John
Bishop of Constantinople for indeuouring to obtain the title of Universal
Bishop, and to have his Church called the head of all Churches, telling him
that none of the Bishops of Rome durst take such a title, though the Emperors
began in Rome, were wont to abide there only, and did then entitle themselves
Emperors of Rome. Nay he told him yet more plainly, That whosoever aspired to
be Universal Bishop, was a forerunner of Antichrist. Whereby it is evident
that in Gregory's time, there was no knowledge of any conueyance of Peter's
supposed authority made over to the Bishops of Rome. But for all this peremptory
judgment of Gregory (surnamed The Great) within few years after (about anno
607.) Boniface 3. obtained that title, with much suite and bribery, of Phocas
an adulterer, and murderer of his master (that Christian Emperor Mauritius)
with his wife and children. But succeeding Popes for the credit of that
dignity (being belike ashamed of such an institution) pretended to hold the
same by ye Donation of Constantine the first Christian Emperor. So that all this while, there was no co^ueyance of that authority from Peter that yet came
to light. At last, the Pope (being come to the height of his pride) thought it
a scorn to be beholden to Constantine, or any of them all, and therefore laid
hold upon those words of Christ, Thou art Peter, etc. But what hold he has by
them is partly showed before, and is further to be considered, In that the
Popes champion (father Bellarmine, made a Cardinal for his deserts) does
confess, that this Universal Bishopric is descended to the Pope by a
conueyance indeed, but not of the word, but of tradition. Thus you may discover
the sundry grounds of an article of the Popish creed, viz. That the Pope has
Apostolical authority over the whole Church, as he is Peter's successor.

17 Leaving these doubts touching the pretended successors of Peter, and
commending them to the advised examination of the Reader, I proceed briefly to
prove (in more special manner) the Church of Rome not to have been an apparent
member of the Catholic Church, ever since the Apostles time. I say Briefly.
For if I should demonstrate (as I could) the many, and gross errors of the
Church, both in doctrine and discipline (under which word I understand the
administration of the Sacraments, and the Liturgy) and if withal, I should
paint out the bloody tyranny thereof, in persecuting the children of God, it
would appear more than manifest that it is, and has bin long an apparent
member, not of the Catholic, but of the malignant Church: But then I should
be longer than I may, by reason of necessary business, or need, considering so
many books are written of those Arguments. I will therefore only propound some
few things of many concerning the Pope, whom the Papists make the head of the
Catholic Church. So that as a member of a man's body, is but dead if it receive
no life from the natural head, so a particular Church is (in their opinion) no
apparent member of the Catholic Church, which is not under the jurisdiction
of the Bishop of Rome: From hence it follows, That if the head be dead, the
body must needs be dead: and, if the Pope be not, the Church of Rome cannot be
an apparent member of the Catholic Church: But the Pope is not. Ergo.

18 The Pope is Antichrist, and has been so long, therefore the Church of Rome
is not, and for a long time has not been an apparent member of the Catholic
Church: For as his See is the seat of Revel. 17. 9. 18.
the whore of Babylon, to wit the City builded upon 7. hills, namely Rome, so
he has the properties of Antichrist: For he sits in the Temple as God, In
charging 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4
the conscience as strictly with his decrees, and traditions, as with the Word
of God, from whence the other have no warrant, and In auouching himself to be
free from error, which is proper to God. 2. He exalts himself above all that
is Romans 13. 4. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
called God, In esteeming himself as far above the Emperor (who must hold his
stirrup, and on whose neck he must tread) as the Sun is above the Moon, and
Romans 13. 1.
therefore he will not be subject to any Magistrate, contrary to the express
word of God. 3. He is an adversary to Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
howsoever he pretend to be his Vicar; but 1. Ioh. 2. 22.
therefore Antichrist in deed, seeing this word Antichrist signifies For
Christ, and yet Against Christ. I say an adversary, not only In teaching
Justification by works, to the prejudice of Christ's death, for if Gal. 2. 21.
Righteousness be by the Law, Christ died in vain, but also, In teaching that
by Christ we are freed from the guiltines of sin, but not from the punishment
thereof; and yet the Popes pardons, and the breaden God of his own creation,
can do as much good to souls frying in Purgatory, as to all, that pay well for
them 1. Tim. 4. 1. 3.
while they live on the earth. 4. He teaches doctrines of devils, forbidding
to marry, and comma^ding to abstain from meats, which God has created to be
received with thanksgiving, of the^ which believe and know the truth. And 5.
He 1. Ioh. 4. 3.
denies Christ to be come in the flesh, In affirming Christ his body to be, by
transubsta^tiation, in so many places, as where Mass is said. As the
Anabaptists likewise deny Christ to be come in the flesh, In affirming Christ
to have brought his flesh from heaven.

19 Again; Since the Pope (as supposed head) is of the essence and form of the
Church of Rome, it must necessarily follow, that the Church of Rome has not
been always an apparent member of the Catholic Church (according to the sense
of the Papists themselves) if it can be proved, that often, and sometimes many
years together, there has been no apparent Pope: But that is not impossible
to be proved: For first it is to be noted with a memorandum, That by the
special providence of God, Pope Joan was delivered of a child as she was going
solemnly on procession in the midst of the open street, and in the presence
of the people. As if God had said from heaven, Behold the Whore of Babylon.
Secondly, It is worthy the observation, That Stephen 6. and Sergius the third
proceeded against Formosus, as against an unlawful Pope, both taking him out
of the grave, spitefully disgraded him. The former summoning a Council, attired
him with the pontifical robes, plucked them off again, put on Lay-mans
apparel, cut off the two fingers of his right hand, cast them into Tiber,
buried him in Laymens burial, and disanulled his decrees. The other set him
in the Popes chair; drew him thence again, cut off his head, and the other
three fingers; hurled body and al into the river, and recondemned all his
acts, so that it was needful to admit them new to orders, whom he had made
Priests. Thirdly, It is not to be neglected as not worth the reading, That six
Popes (viz. Clement 5. John 23. Benedict 12. Clement 6. Innocent 6. and Urban
5.) their See was 70. years together at Auignion in France. Where Popes were
elected, lived, and died, so that some of them never saw Rome. This I say is
not to be neglected. For if John the Patriarch of Constantinople claimed the
title of Universal Bishop, because the Emperors had then their seat there,
howsoever they then bare the title of Emperors of Rome. If Peter were
therefore the Bishop of Rome, because he had his seat there, and there died, as
Papists do suppose, and If by the holy days for Peter's chair at Antioch, and
Rome, Papists show their judgment to be, That it is of the essence of a Bishop
to sit in the Sea, whereof he has the title, for otherwise they need not make
such ado, to prove that Peter was at Rome, seeing it were sufficient to prove
(if they could) that he accepted the title, then those 6. Popes, howsoever they
were in title Bishops of Rome, yet in truth they were Bishops of Auignion and
therefore no apparent successors of Peter, and therefore no apparent heads of
the Church, and therefore for 70. years the Church of Rome was not an apparent
member of the Catholic Church, according to the sense of the Papists
themselves. Fourthly, Onuphrius (a Popish writer) tells of 30. Schisms in
the Church of Rome. Of which the 29. lasted 50. years together. Wherein there
were sometimes two Popes together, and sometimes three. All which three were
removed by the Council of Constance. Can any say, that all this while there was
an apparent head? If not, it must necessarily follow, That the Church of Rome
has not been ever since the Apostles time an apparent member of the Catholic
Church, according to the sense of the Papists themselves.

20 Lastly, As when the eye is dark, Matthew. 6. 23
the whole body must needs be dark: So, if the head, viz. the Pope, be so
corrupt, as that it cannot be perceived to be an apparent member of the
Catholic Church, how can the Church of Rome, whose being is altogether in that
head, be an apparent member? But most of the Popes have been such: Ergo. For
howsoever that cannot be verified of all the Popes, which was said of Boniface
8. commonly called A devil incarnat, That he entered like a Fox, reigned like
a Lion, and died like a Dog, yet some of them entered by Coniuration; or the
devils help, as Siluester 2. and Gregory 7. first called Hildebrand, or The
brand of Hell. Some by harlots, as Christopher 1. and John 11. Some by
poisoning their predecessors, as Damasus, who also did drink of the same cup;
and the said Hildebrand, who (besides his Coniuration) made way to the Popedom
by poisoning six of his predecessors; and many by Simony or Violence. Were
they apparent members of the Catholic Church, when they were Popes? Nay
sundry of them were heretics. As Liberius was an Arrian: Honorius 1. a
Monothelite: Anastasius a Nestorian: John 2 2. denied the Life to come, and the
resurrection of the body, and this was laid to his charge when he was deposed
by the Council of Constance: and Eugenius 4. was condemned and deposed as an
heretic in the Council of Basil. As for their Lives, In respect of all, it
is no less truly, than commonly said of Gregory 1. That he was the worst
Bishop, but best Pope of Rome. But some of them Platina (no Protestant) called
Beasts, and Monsters, and of John 12. Cardinal Turrecremata writes thus:
Because the life of this Pope was detestable, therefore Christ himself gave out
the sentence of condemnation. For while he was abusing a certain man's wife,
the devil stroke him suddenly, and so he died without repentance. To set down
in particular the monstrous offenses of most Popes, is too large and too filthy
a field for me to walk in; I will therefore shut up with the words of
Genebrard (a Popish Chronicler) who writes thus: For the space almost of
seuen-score years, and ten, from John 8. to Leo 9. about fifty Popes did
revolt wholly from the virtue of their ancestors, and were Apostaticall rather
than Apostolical. Yea some did get into the Sea, by force or bribery;
Wherefore it is no marvel, if they were monstrous, since they entered in, not
by the door, but by a posterne gate.

To conclude, If the Church of Rome be not the Catholic Church, because it is
confined, visible, and fails in the faith, without which faith, personal
succession is of no validity; If it have no promise of perpetuity, the words
of Christ to Peter not serving the turn; and therefore may be overcome as well
as the Church of Israel, whereunto the promises did appertain. If Papists
cannot prove, that Peter was at Rome, nor that he was Bishop there, nor that
he was Universal Bishop, nor that his authority was sufficiently conveyed over
to the Bishops of Rome, upon which succession stands the being of that
Church. If the Pope (upon whom as their head the Church of Rome depends) be
Antichrist, and sundry times, yea many years together, there has bin no
apparent Pope at all, and most Popes have been no apparent members of the
Catholic Church, because of their heresies or monstrous lives, it follows
evidently, that the Church of Rome is not the Catholic Church, neither has
bin an apparent member of the same, ever since the Apostles time. And therefore
it is to be wondered that any Christian man or woman, should be so simple, as
to hang their salvation upon such a Synagogue, as out of which, God from heaven
bids his people to depart: Revel. 18. 4.

THE THIRD POSITION. PRIESTS ARE EXECVted, not for Religion, but for Treason.
IT is not to be denied, that Priests are executed for affirming the Popes
Primacie, and reconciling to the pretended Church of Rome, etc. which are
points of their supposed religion: But yet they are not executed for these (or
like) points or parts as they be religious, but as they be traiterous, or
dangerous to the State, in civil consideration.

1 For, if Priests were executed for these, or like points, as they be
religious, then the Church would proceed against them in Ecclesiastical manner,
before the secular power execute civil punishment. As against Anabaptists,
and other in this Queens reign, has been performed. So that Priests their
case differs from Hackets only Secundum magis and minus, the one being more
dangerous in civil consideration then the other.

2 Secondly, they should be executed as well for affirming the Popes primacy and
reconciling, etc. (as Story for his misdemeanure, though) beyond seas. For such
affirming the primacie and reconciling, etc. are as damnable in religious
consideration on one side of the seas, as on the other, but not so dangerous to
our state in civil consideration.

3 Thirdly, they should be executed as well for other points of popery: as
giving the glory of the Creator (to wit prayer and praise) to creatures,
Angels, Saints, stocks, and stones, etc. being no less damnable then such
affirming the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. in religious consideration,
but not so dangerous to the state in civil consideration. As may appear by a
like case propounded.

If Anabaptists, denying magistracy, and that Christ took flesh of the Virgin
Mary, should swarm in England, and if Magistrates should punish in a more
civil manner of proceeding, not the latter (though no less damnable, as it is
religious) but the former, being more dangerous to the state in civil
consideration, who would say, that Anabaptists did suffer for religion, and
not for treason or felony?

4 That affirming the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. may appear directly
to be dangerous to the state in civil consideration, and therefore traiterous;
it is to be known and considered, that Pope Pius Quintus (by his bull
declaratory) pronounced our gracious and Christian Queen an heretic, and
excommunicated all such as yield obedience to her. If then the Popes authority
be persuaded as a matter of conscience, and if by reconciliation her Majesty's
subjects become vowed members of such an head as is her capital enemy, we may
be assured that so many as are so persuaded and reconciled, are prepared to
obey the Pope, and disobey the Prince. Is not then such affirming the Popes
primacy and reconciling, etc. dangerous to the state, in civil consideration,
and therefore traiterous?

5 In that I say (prepared) it is yet further to be known and considered: that
whereas the Northern Earls had ill success in executing the said Bull, other
devises were frustrated, and the hope of Papists their present prevailing much
failed Parsons and Campian (English Priests) being to come into England to urge
the said Bull, and doubting that (in the rigor thereof) it would not be
readily obeyed, did crave and obtain of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, this
exposition more plausible to Papists, but more dangerous to the state: That the
said Bull may always bind the Queen and heretics: but Catholics (that is
Papists) in no sort, things standing as they do, but then only, when there may
be public execution thereof.

6 Philopater a lover of his country (as he pretends by that fained name) no
Englishman (if ye will believe him) yet descended of the English nation (as he
says himself) in a poysonfull and traiterous book, often printed in diverse
places beyond the seas (such liking find such books with such subjects as
Papists be) grants that Priests are sent, with authority Sect. 3.
from the Pope, to pardon, excommunicate, reconcile, and teach (according to
the Bull expounded) that subjects are not to obey the Queen in spiritual
matters, but in civil, and that for the present state of things.

7 What is implied in this last clause, Philopater himself discovers when he
says, that it is agreed among diverse Lawyers and schoolmen, that if a Prince
Sect. 3.
fail from the Roman faith, and endeavor to withdraw other, subjects may and
ought oppose themselves, and depose their Princes, if they have force. Which
prouiso, he inculcateth and urges with this reason: Last religion should be
indamaged, and advanced, attempts not prevailing.

8 The same Philopater does peremptorily pronounce as tyrannical, this
question moved to Priests, fugitives, recusants, and such like: If the Pope, or
other in his behalf and cause of religion, should invade the land, what part
would you take, the Popes or the Princes? His reason of mislike is, because a
right Papist cannot answer freely thereunto, without offense to God or Caesar.
As if God were offended, if Caesar defended against the Pope.

By which exposition of the bull, doctrine of the Priests, and mislike of a
question so necessary it does clearly appear that the end of affirming the
Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. is to prepare her Majesty's subjects to be
ready (upon pain of excommunication) to join with such forces as shall be
employed against our Queen and state, in a pretended cause of religion. Is not
this dangerous to the state in civil consideration, and therefore traiterous?

9 Let the affects and effects of such teachers and scholars be observed, and
the truth of this assertion will be so evident, as that nothing can be more
manifest. To let pass their broad speeches, when and where they dare: their
concealing and abetting traitors, and traiterous designs, as they may
(possibly) without danger, their rejoicing at, and spreading abroad news,
importing success to the Pope, though danger to the Prince, etc. To omit (I
say) these and many such arguments of their traiterous affection, the shameful
practices of many, bewray the Popish preparation of most, if opportunity once
serve. Many have been the conspiracies against her Majesty's person, to take
away her life. But O Lord have mercy upon us, to preserve her. Many have bin
the treasons against the Land to destroy it. But O holy one of Israel defend
this thine inheritance. Who have bin the authors and actors of all these
tragical attempts, but such teachers and scholars? What were the Rebels in
the North? And were they not provoked to rebellion by Nicholas Morton Priest,
sent from Pope Pius, to urge the execution of his bull? What were the Rebels in
Ireland? And was not Nicholas Sanders a Judas (that is) a leader to the Popes
army, that came in pretense to relieve them? Parry and Sommeruile went about to
murder her Majesty. The one was encouraged in his devilish enterprise, by
Cardinal Como, in the name of the Pope: and shall we think that the other
wanted the holy counsel of Hall the Priest arraigned? Babington and his
accomplices, conspired against Prince and country. Was not Ballard Priest a
chief counselor to them? and did not Bost a Priest keep counsel (at least)
as he lately confessed? If then Teachers and Scholars, Priests and Papists,
concur in seeking and following all opportunities to subvert our State, can
any other end be imagined of Priests, their persuading, and reconciling, but to
prepare their Scholars to join together against Prince and country, when
force shall answer their affection?

10 That the multitude of resolved Papists, be thus poisoned and prepared, let
this be your last consideration for this time, and not the least at any time.
That as the King of Ashur purposing to besiege Jerusalem, sent from Lacish
Rabshaketh 2. Chron. 32. 9. 12. 13.
and others, to weaken the hands of the people, by disgracing their King
Hezechiah, as one without religion, in that he had taken away Altars, and
defaced high places; and by advancing Saneherib, as one that prevailed against
all Gods: So these Locusts, which have faces of men, Revel. 9. 3. 78. 10. 11.
and hair of women, but the stings of scorpions in their tails, to wit,
Priests, who pretend a tender care of saving souls in the beginning, but
intend a cruel destruction of Life and Land in the end, are sent into this
Realm by their King (the Isa. 7. 4.
Angel of the bottomless pit, out of the smoke thereof, namely, by the Pope
in his fume, but without flame I trust) before invasion intended, to weaken the
hands, and withdraw the hearts of the people, from our gracious Queen, by
disgracing her Majesty, as one without religion, in that she has taken away
sacrificing Altars, and defaced religious houses; and by advancing their King,
as one that prevails against all Gods, all States, all Religions. The like
practice of sending Priests to prepare people against the coming in of
Spaniards, is to be perceived in Scotland.

11 What success this device has, is also to be considered. The Pope is
certified by Cardinal Allen, and the King of Spain by Parsons the Priest,
that there shall be found (ready secretly within her Majesty's dominions) many
thousa^ds of able people, that will be ready to assist such power as shall be
set on land. Of whose names they have delivered bead-roles, especially of such
as dwell in port Towns and on the seacoast, with assurance that Priests shall
continue their reconciled people, in their lewd constancy. So has her
Majesty published in her Declaration, Anno 1591. But Philopater denies it,
Sect. 4.
impudently and barely without any reason. But if Ballard Priest sent such a
beadrole into Spain, and Throgmorton had gathered the names of popish Noblemen
and Gentlemen, to the same purpose: It may be (in reason) supposed, that to
Priests intelligence is sent by Priests, what scholars they have persuaded and
prepared for Treason and Rebellion.

To conclude, 1. If the Church proceed not against Priests in Ecclesiastical
manner, before the Secular power execute them. 2. If Priests suffer not for
affirming the Popes Primacy and reconciling, etc. beyond seas. 3. If Priests be
not executed for other points of Popery, no less damnable then these, as they
be religious. 4. But if the Pope by his Bull, has upon pain of
Excommunication discharged her Majesty's subjects of their allegiance. 5. If
Papists be dispensed with, for obeying her Majesty till time serve to the
contrary. 6. If Priests come of purpose to reconcile and teach according to the
Bull expounded. 7. If it be a Catholic doctrine, that subjects having force,
ought to depose their Prince, maintaining Religion contrary to the Church of
Rome: and 8. In that case to join with foreign power. 9. If masters and
scholars have from time to time attempted to put the said Bull in execution.
10. If Priests be sent before invasion to prepare the people: and 11. If
thousands be notified even by Priests prepared: then it may be avouched, that
Priests are not executed for affirming the Popes Primacy and reconciling, etc.
as they be religious, but as they be traiterous, or dangerous to the State in
civil consideration.

FINIS.

