AARONS BELLS A-SOVNDING.

In A SERMON, tending cheiftly to admonish the ministry, of their charge, and
duty.

Preached by M. SAMVEL HIERON at a general visitation near Bristow.

And now published by them to whom his copy was entrusted after his death.

Mal. 2.1. And now o Priests this Commandment is for you.

PRINTED. 1623.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
IT was said of old, Ier. 23.15.
that from the Prophets of Jerusalem, was wickedness gone forth, into the whole
land: And, it may be said, as truly this day. that, the Sins of the ministers,
have infected, the whole Estate.

Now indeed, by the rule of the Gospel, it must needs be so: If the light
(says our Savior) which is in thee, mat 6.23.
be darkness, how great is that darkness? If the calling, which should give
direction to others, be it self corrupted how great must that corruption be?
If the founteine be poisoned, all, that drink thereof, must needs be in
danger. I am, by the mercy, of him that has called me, a Christian:
therefore, cannot but even honor, the feet of Gods messengers: I am a
minister, Romans 10.15.
and also am bound, to maintain the credit, of the calling: but let my tongue,
cleave to the roof of my mouth, rather then I shoule use it, to the licking
over those sores, which, except they be launced to the quick, and searched to
the bottom, can never be cured. And wretched is that kindness, which goes
about, to heal the hurt of the church, with sweet words: saying, all is as it
should be, when the garden of the Lord, lies, like the field of the Sluggard,
and his vineyard, like the vineyard of him that is idle: and Sion, even now,
Jer. 4.31.
as in time past, sigheth, and stretches out her hands, and cries, woe is me,
my soul faints, because of the murderers!

What man can see, the desolation of the Lords house, by dumb Idols,
incroaching Simoniacks, drowsy Demasses, job. 32.18
ubiq uitarie Non-residents; but his spirit with in him, (if he have but a
dram of zeal) will even compel him, to lift up his voice, and cry a loud,
against those, Esaias. 58 1
who have no remorse, over their souls, for whom Christ died? The earnest
desire, to further by all good means, the speedy reformation, of these gross
corruptions, stirred up, the worthy Author, of this fruitful Sermon, being
called to preach at a general visitation) to employ part, of that precious
gift, where with the Lord, in a large measure, had endowed him, to that most
necessary, important purpose. As the text was excellent, for the thing
intended: so has he handled it: I speak my opinion, and doubt not, but thou will join with me, when thou shall peruse it: except, thou art forestalled,
either against the man, or against the matter: his handling of it, as may be
seen, was such, as neither wrung in ought, that might be thought impertinent;
nor omitted any observation, which the words, kindly, and voluntarily, might
not afford. The sense, is delivered soundly: the division made artificially,
the doctrines raised naturally, prooved substantially, 2. tim 2.15.
and applied powerfully; here is art: the words cut a-right, here is
learning, the declaration of the truth, here is eloquence in the plain
evidence of the spirit, 1. Cor. 2 4
here is zeal allayed with mildnes of the spirit, and sharpnes of reproof,
tempered with sweetness of exhortation.

Such, as thou see his Sermon to be, were his weekly exercises: such was his
doctrine, such was his life, for gravitie, admired: for amiablenes, for
readiness, either to admonish, or exhort, according to occasion, for bowels of
compassion, to the poor, even a continual Sermon. Few such Elthues, so full
of matter: such Timothes, so nourished up, in the words of faith, job, 32.18.
1. tim. 4.6 Esaias. 57.2
and of good doctrine, which he continually followed. And as he walked, before
God, in his life time: so now he rests from his labors, in him: and is
joined to the company of innumerable Angels, Rev. 14. Heb. 12.22.23. mat. 9.28.
phil. ^.23.24. Esaias. 57.1
and to the spirits of just and perfect men. It was to the churches great
loss, that in this scarsity, of faithful laborers, he abode no longer in the
flesh: but, as for him, it was a benefit, to be so soon dissolved, being
thereby taken from the evil to come: and gone to Christ which is best of all.
But, I will hold thee no longer, from perusing this, his after-worke, which by
Gods providence, comeing to my hands, I thought my self bound in conscience,
to impart unto thee.

I pray God the reading it, may so work with thee, that, if thou be a
minister, it may either reform thee; or encourage thee; according as, thou art
either liable to the reproof, or, capable of the comfort herein contained: or,
if thou be a private Christian, it may both beget, and increase in thee, a
reverence, to the ministers of God: and such a deep detestation, of these
enormous corruptions, here taxed: that thou may become a daily suttour, at
the throne of grace, that the Lord, for his own name sake, and for his poor
churches sake, would vouchsafe, speedity to reform them, Amen! *

A postscript to the Reader.
CVrteous Reader, we must renew the common, and ordinary request, at thy
hands: namely, to conceive the better, of such, as had the perusing, and
printing this Sermon: when thou shall meet with some few places therein (for
they are not many) more difficult, then can be well understood: and other,
petty, small faults, of the press.

For the one, know, the Copy came to us miserably written, which therefore
craved a necessity of retranscribing, wherein were some places hard to be
read: yet being loath, to leave out any sentence, or piece of a sentence, which
we could make English of, we put some words down, at a venture.

For the other, know, that it was printed, where, our language is a stranger:
and by such, as could neither understand nor speak the same: and therefore, it
could not be, but that more then ordinary slips, and solaecismes, in our
tongue, must be committed: but stick not thou, at these triffling errors;
make use of the solid, and substantial matter, thou shall find in the work:
and give God the glory of his own truth, tho in the light thereof, a little
obscured, with the motes, of humore frailety, from shining, altogether so
clearly to thee. Fare well.

A Fruitful Sermon preached by a faithful servant of God, and minister of the
gospel at a general visitation.
The text Col. 4. 17. And say to Archippus, take heed to the ministry, which
thou have received in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.


AFter the Apostle Paul in the first part of the Epistle had set down the
sum of the Christian doctrine, and therein showed what Christ was, both
concerning his person, and his office, and how we are made partakers of the
benefits of both; and in the second part thereof had disputed with the false
Apostles, and confuted their false doctrine and corruptions: and in the third
place had set down precepts concerning manners and exhortations to a
Christian, adding in the end of all, freindly and brotherly salutations: he
comes to admonish them of a duty which they were to performs to Archippus
their minister, in these words. Say to Archippus take heed to the ministry
etc. It appears by these words that Archippus was a minister of the church
at Colossia; and because he was negligent in his duty, or at least not so
diligent and faithful as both he should and might have been, he therefore
wills the Colossians to admonish him of his fault, and to stir him up to a
careful dis-scharge of his ministry. Say to Archippus take heed to the
ministry etc. As if he should have said: be vigilant and circumspect, be
careful and watchful, diligently consider, and mark earnestly what thy
calling is, and of what great accounte it is: it is the ministry, the
preaching of the word, the instructing of the people, which thou have received,
not of man, but of the Lord: both, of the Lord who is the author of the
ministry, and for the Lord who is the end of the ministry. Thou have
received it by his grace, thou have received it for his glory; let not this
grace be in vain in thee, let not this glory be neglected by thee but so walk
in thy ministry that thou fulfill it: absolve and perfect, and finish, and
discharge that charge, which is laid upon thee. The sum then of these words
is a rousing of negligent ministers: wherein we may note two things: first, the
persons commanded to do this duty. Secondly, the manner how, namely by
exhortation, wherein observe two things further.

First, whereunto they must exhort him to a fulfilling of his ministry.
Secondly, the reason whereby they stir him up to the same drawn from the
authority of God who is the author of the ministry. Thou have received it
in the Lord.

Say to Archippus:] who must say to Archippus thus, namely the Colossians to
whom Paul writes. Therefore it is the duty of the people to admonish the
minister of his ministry, Doct. 1.
and to put him in mind of the discharge of his duty if he be negligent
therein. For otherwise Paul might have admonished Archippus himself by writing
unto him some particular letter, but in that he bids the Colossians to do
it, he shows it a duty belonging to the people to iogg their minister in the
ellbowe as it were, to put him in mind of his charge, and bid him remember his
office and ministry and by exhortation to excite and stir him up to a
faithful dis-charge of his duty.

A strange and unreasonable doctrine may some men say; for what should the
stones come tumbling out of the quarrie, and say to the builder come cut me
and square me, and hew me thus? or should the tree come dancing out of the
wood and say to the Carpenter cut me and plain me, or frame me thus, or thus;
that I may be fit for the building? what shall the sheep come to the shepherd
and put him in mind of his duty? So, should the people come and admonish the
minister, and tell him of his ministry? right even so; 1. Pet. 2.5.
for they are no dead stones that lie in the quarrie, but as Peter calls them
they are living stones which can turn themselves to the hammer, and trees of
righteousness (as the Prophet calls them) which offer themselves to the
Carpenter: Esa. 61.3.
they are reasonable sheep, Romans 12.^
which can bring their cause to the Shepherd. Their souls are committed to
the care of the minister to be taught and instructed, and comforted, and
therefore as they regard their own souls and salvations, they must regard the
ministers duty. As was the case of that ship which was covered with waves when
Christ was a sleep, such is the case of a congregation when the minister is
idle and negligent, as lulled a sleep in the cradle of security. The
disciples feared lest through Christ's sleepeing, they should have been drownea:
and that congregation may fear lest through their Pastors negligence, it be
damned. Therefore as then the disciples, in love of their lives went to Christ
and a woke him: so it behooveth the people for love of their souls to go to
their Pastor, and awake him, and stir him up that he look about him. In
other matters we are careful to put him in mind with whom we deal to deal
faithfully with us, and shall we be less careful in this which is the maine
point? In the hand of the Miller we loose but our meal, of the Farrier but
our horse, of the Taylour but our garment, of the Lawyer but our money, of the
Physician but our bodies: but in the hands of an unfaithful minister a man
loses his soul and his everlasting portion in heaven. If then we say to the
Miller, look to my meal: to the Farrier, have a care of my horse: to the
Taylour, spoil not my garment: to the Lawyer, tender my case: to the
Physician, regard my health: how much more should we say unto the minister (if
he be unfaithful) look to oursoules and take heed to the ministry which
thou have received in the Lord.

2. Kings 4 3^.
[When the Shunamites son was dead she went to the Prophet to tell him of it
that he might come and restore her dead son to life again: the Prophet sent
his servant Gehazi, with a staff but she would not be content with that but
took hold of him and would not leave him, but he himself must come. As
careful as the Shunamite was for her dead child: so careful ought the people
to be for their dead souls: as she went to the Prophet to have her dead son
raised: so must they to their minister to have their dead souls quickened. As
she did not content her self with the Prophets servant but took hold of the
Prophet hinselfe so must the people not content themselves with ignorant
substitutes of others, but take hold of the Pastor himself and he shall have
enough to recover their dead souls to life, though he goes himself, and
puts mouth to mouth.

This being the duty of the people toward their minister to bid him take heed
to his ministry what if I should expostulate with you that are to your
minister, as these Colossians to Archippus? Use.
Tell me you that complain of your minister that he is ignorant, or negligent,
or unfaithful, did you ever say unto him take heed to thy ministry! did you
ever stir him up, and incite him thereunto? alas no! your own consciences
tell you that you have failed herein! and there has been both in the minister
toward you: and in you toward the minister, a carelesnes by consent each with
other: he, not regarding whither he did dis-charg his ministry or no: and
you, not careing whither you did admonish him or no, and thus Archippus has
been long a-sleepe because the Colossians did not awake him. Thus the ministers
have neglected their duties because you have not said to them as here the
Colossians must say to Archippus take heed to the ministry etc.

Say to Archippus]

The Colossians must admonish Archippus and Archippus must be content to be
admonished of the Colossians. Therefore.

The minister must not refuse to be admonished, Doct. 1.
and put in mind of his duty by the people whom he should teach: but as it is
his duty to teach others, so he must show himself teachable, and willing to
be instructed of others: still remembering though honorable his calling be,
excellent his authority, great his power, yet he is not exempted from laws,
nor privileged from the admonition of his people, but both may and when
occasion is offered must be admonished, even of them that are as inferior to
him, as the Colossians were to Archippus. 2. Kings 5
As when Elisha commanded Naaman to wash himself seven times in Jordan he
turned about in a snuff, and went away in displeasure, but his servant came
unto him and said: Father if the Prophet had commanded thee a greater matter,
would thou not have done it? how much more, when he says unto thee wash and
be clean. Then went he down and washed himself, 2. Kings 5.13.14.
and was cleansed. Surely if this noble man had disdeined the admonition of his
servant, he would have continued a leaper still, and had never been cleensed:
so if the ministers in the pride of heart should scorn the admonition of
their poor Parishioners, surely they should continue negligent still, and
would never be reformed. Therefore as he with a good heart endured the voice
of his servants, and did as they counseled him: So shall it be good for you (
men and brethren as many as are negligent in your duties) to hear the
admonition of your people, and to obey them. Moses that man of God, though
endued with the H. Ghost, though magnified with the gift of workeing wonders,
though acquainted with policy, and managing matters of state, as may seem by
his bringing up in Pharaohs court, yet disdeined he not to be better
instructed in the manner of good government by Iethro, Exodus 18.17.
inferior to himself. The eye cannot say to the foot I have no need of
thee, nor the head to the hand I have no need of thee, nor the Pastor to the
people in matter of admonition, I have no need of you. Away then with that
proud, haughty and disdeinfull mind that is not ashamed to be negligent in his
ministry and yet scorneth to be admonished of his people, and to be put in
mind of his ministry? away then with these scornful speeches (the very
signs and tokens of a proud heart) shall I be reprooved by him? or shall a
taylour or shoemaker come and tell me my duty? a hatter or mercer or such
like, admonish me of my ministry? why, I doubt not but among these
Colossians, there were both taylours and shooe-makers, and of most occupations,
and yet does Paul will them to tell Archippus of his duty: and without doubt
he would feign have Archippus contented there withal.

Therefore let us of the ministry send home this pride to the Eldest son of
pride, the beast of Rome, Use.
that man of sin that child of perdition, who sits in his chair of
mischeife, mooveth like an oracle, and both thinks in his heart, and speaks
with his mouth, that no man may say to him: Domine quid it a facis! Sir, why
do you thus? let us rather remember that Apollos though an eloquent man and
mighty in the scriptures, though fervent in spirit, and a diligent Preacher,
yet he refused not to be taught more perfectly the way of the Lord by Aquila
and Priscilla: Act. 18, 25.26.
an handy craft man, a poor tent-maker, nay of Priscilla a woeman, and wife of
Aquila. And if he was contented to be taught, and instructed of them in his
duty, let none of us disdeine to be admonished, or stirred up in his duty by
those that are committed to our charge.

Thus much of the persons admonishing and such as are to be admonished; now of
the admonition it self. Take heed to the ministry which thou have received
in ye Lord.

This ministry which he must take heed unto, contains all the duties of
the ministers of God, which may be referred to these general heads.

Mat. 28.19.20.
First to the preaching of the word. Go pteach the Gospel, have a care and
regard that all the commandments be kept teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I command you.

Secondly to the administration of the Sacraments. Baptizing them in the name
of the Father, the Son, and the H. Ghost.

Thirdly, to private inspection by reprooveing Sinners by admonishing,
exhorting, by comforting the afflicted and those which are cast down, and all
to this end, that the elect whom sin has loosened, and disjoynted from
Christ their head, may be restored to their place again: joined both to Christ
their head by the Spirit, and one to another by love, which is it Paul speaks
of Ephesians. 4.12.

That also (says he) the body of Christ may be edified and built up, and come
unto a perfect man in Christ. Which shall then be, when all the elect shall be
gathered together by the ministry of the word: which the Apostle there
calls the work of the ministry, not an idleness, but a work, not a
lordlines, but a ministry.

This duty may further be seen by the titles which are given to the ministers
in the Scriptures. Ephesians. 4.^^.
They are Pastors and therefore their duty is to feed the people of God that
depends upon them.

1. Cor. 3.9
They are Husbandmen and therefore in duty must till Gods ground, and sow his
seed.

(...) 1.17.
They are Watchmen and therefore must give the people warning of ensuing danger.

^ Cor 4.1
They are dispencers of the mysteries of God to deliver that to the people which
they have received of him. Called stewards of Gods house, (...) 12.^
and therefore must give every man his portion of meat in due season.

They are the light of the world, Mat. 5.14.
and therefore their duty is to shine forth by heavenly doctrine to enlighten
Gods people.

They are the Salt of the earth, Mat. 5.13.
and therefore their duty is to season with wholesome doctrine, the weak
souls that bend to corruption.

They are builders, 1. Cor. 3.10
and therefore must edify the body of Christ, the house of God.

They are Captains, Heb. 13.17.
and therefore it is their part to fight Gods battles: and as good leaders
and cheifeteines to instruct Gods people well in this spiritual warfare.

They are called Ambassadors, Ephesians. 6.2^
and therefore their duty is to declare Gods message to the people.

And all this is but their ministry, now for the fullfilling and dis-charge
of this ministry, two things are required.

First Knowledge. Secondly faithfullnes.
First that he be able, and secondly that he be careful, and diligent to teach
Gods people. Concerning the first, the minister of God must not be only as a
Spence or store-howse, wherein God has laid up knowledge, as a good
howse-holder does Corn in a garner, signified by that in the Prophecy of
Malachie, Mal. 2.7.
that the Priests lips must preserve knowledge, and for want thereof God has
divorced him from the honor of the ministry, and has pronounced him to be
no Priest for him, because thou have refused knowledge, Hos. 4.6.
I will also refuse thee thou shall be no Priest to me.

But he must have the wisdom of a wise steward, Luc. 12.24.
that knows how to give Gods children, or howsehold, their portion of meat in
due season as Christ speaks: ministering milk to those that are but babes, and
yonglings in Christ, and strong meat to those of riper age.

2. Tim. 2.15.
He must be one that can divide the word of truth aright, being as skillful in
divideing the word of God, as the Levites were in cutting a broad the beast for
sacrifice, whence that phrase of divideing the word seems to be borrowed. He
must not only be learned himself, 1. Ti. 3.2.
but which is more, apt and fit to teach others as Paul speaks. This
skilfulnes of the minister in teaching others was signified in the old
Testament, not only by that urim and Thummim on the breast plate to signify
his knowledge and holiness: Ex. 28.30.
but also by the bells which did hang on the skirts of the Priests garments*
Ver. 33.
meaning as by the Pomegranates he should smell sweetly with the odours of a
good life, so by the bells that he should sound unto others by preaching of
true doctrine, by the sound of which bells he was to be heard when he went into
the holy place, and when he came out upon pain of death. And what else in the
N. Testament did the H. Ghost in the likeness of tongues signify? he descended
upon the Apostles, not in the likeness of hands, Act. 2.3.
whereby to overcome the world by wordly fear, nor of feet, whereby to flee
from the rage of persequuting ennimies, nor of eyes and ears fit instruments
to learn: but in the likeness of tongues, to teach the people their duty in
being the tongues of God to them. And what else do all their names declare,
being so many arguments to enforce this point? For how can they be called
light, if being dark themselves they cannot send out the blaze of true th to
enlighten others? Or salt of the earth, if being vnsavourie themselves they
cannot season and preserve Gods people from sin and corruption? Or Pastors
if they cannot feed the flock of Christ with the food of life? Or
Husbandmen and cannot plowe Gods ground, and sow his feed? Or Stewards if
they cannot, or do not rule his howsehold? Or Messengers and Ambassadors if
they cannot speak in his name and declare his message, and embassage unto his
people? Or builders if they cannot build up Gods spiritual house? Or Capteines
if they know not how to fight Gods battles. Neither let any man think that
if a minister be able to read he has sufficient knowledge, Mat. 9.36.
and that bare readers are sufficient ministers, Christ greived to see the
multitude dispersed as sheep without Shepherds, and yet had they Moses read
in their Synagogues even every Sabbath day, and the Prophets, as may be
gathered by Luke in the Acts. Act. 13.


Implying that readers were no sufficient Pastors, for else the Jews in their
Synagogues (as we have in our churches) had not ben without Pastors and so not
so miserable, as he greived they were, when he considered what was requisite in
a minister, namely to bring back that which is gone a straye, and to preserve
from danger, to heal the broken, to bind up the wounded, and the like. For
which cause he sends his Apostles, by their preaching to perform that which
they by their reading, could not do. And if to have the law and the Prophets
read had been enough, then had the Jews known Christ, for Moses wrote of him
Ioh. 5.39.46. Ioh. 5.39, 46.


And among the Prophets, Esaias so plainly that Jerome sticks not to call him an
Evangelicke and yet the nobleman when he read Esaias could not understand, Act.
8.30.31.
but he was in need of Philip to come and preach unto him, and to instruct
him. And if this instruction did not need, but that the ignorant by bare
reading, might understand the meaning of the word (which yet is impossible) yet
these of greatest knowledge may, and often be so overtaken, and surprised with
passions and infirmities, that they have need of others (by applying of the
word) to heal their diseases. Whither Moses were read in David's time we cannot
certainly affirm, yet certain it is that David whose whole delight and study
was in the law of God as appears Psalm. 119. was well skilled therein: so that
his knowledge would serve him to conclude, that he has committed murder and
adultery, and as sure as God lived, was the child of God and yet he had need
of Nathan to apply this word unto him, and to tell him he was the man. 2. sam.
12.
So that we see how necessary it is that a minister should have, not knowledge
to read only (for that children, and women have) but to preach, and also to
apply the word to the souls and consciences of the hearer.

Use.
The more lamentable is the state of the church in whome-soever the fault lies,
whither in them that should provide sufficient living, and will not, as it is
in some Parishes, or in them that should make sufficient ministers, and do not
as in some Bishops: or in them that should present able Pastors, and care not,
as in some Patrones. But in whomesoever the fault is, lamentable is their
state, that are yet as sheep without a shepherd, as an army of simple
Soldiers without a conducteur. If the estate of Israel was in danger, when
through the tyranny of the Philistines, even in the days of battle, there
was neither spear, nor sword found in the hand of any of the people, but only
in the hand of Saul, and Jonathan: how, not dangerous, 2. sam. 13.22.
but almost desperate, is the estate of any thousands of our people, who not
only themselves are vn-armed of the knowledge of God, but even Saul and
Jonathan toe, even the leaders and Commanders want the armor of God, and skill
how to use it, even the ministers themselves want the knowledge of Gods word,
and skill how to preach it. Numb 4.2.
What marvel then though the people perish? The Lord commanded that the Arc
should be carried by none but Levites, for so he speaks, and David repeates
it, none (says he) ought to carry the Ark of the Lord but the Levites. 1.
chro. 15 2.
For the Lord had chosen them to bear the Ark of the Lord, and to minister to
him for ever, therefore when this ordinance of God was not observed, but the
Arc was put upon the Cart, and drawn by Oxen, the Oxen did shake it, 2. sam.
6.
and the Ark of God had almost fallen to the ground: right so has God
commanded that the care of the church should be upon the shoulders of preaching
ministers only, and if this ordinance be not observed, but neglected, (as we
see it is) and the arc be drawn by oxen, the care of the church be committed
to ignorant men, void of sound knowledge, skandalous to the word, the
dis-grace of the ministry, the bane of religion, and the shame of the church,
what may we look for, but the danger of a great downe-fall, surely the oxen
will shake it.

Pharaoh so feared the hurt, and regarded the good of his Cattle, as that he
thought none fit to be their ruler, but men known to be men of activitie,
Genesis 4.7.
for so he speaks, if thou know that there be men of activitie, make them
rulers over my cattle: speakeing to Joseph concerning his brethren. And shall
Pharaohs cattle have men of activitie, and shall not Gods people have men of
knowledge? will Pharaoh have none to be his Cow-heards but men skillfull in
that trade? and shall we think men of no learning fit to guide, and teach Gods
people, which is a trade of trades and an art of arts? If we be to travel we
seek the chiefest men of skill to direct us, if to go by sea, we desire the
best Pilot to conduct us, if we be sick we wish for the most excellent
Physician to cure us: and shall we be so sence-les, and infatuated, as to
think any minister (be he never so ignorant) good enough to teach us? if you
think so, then look and behold the misery that is upon the mounteine of
Samaria, behold the black countries of ignorance yet among us, void of the
light of Gods word! how many of our land are compassed with confusion of
hellish darkness as a people vowed to destruction! how many be like dragons and
serpents in the deep caves of the earth! how many sleep in ignorance like
Molles and battes in the holes! how many as the Assyrians in Samaria, who know
not the manner of the God of our land, whose estate is black and a dismal day
upon them, unless God send them Pastors after his own heart, which may feed
them with knowledge, and understanding; the want whereof let the Popish
idolatry and gross superstition, let the heathenish, profane, and palpable
blindness of the common people, their vnreverent, and irreligious behavior in
things concerning God, let their Sybaritical feasts and banquets consecrated to
Flora, Crispin, Clement and Bacchus, and such bouzing drunken Patrones, let the
excess, and most loathsome vomit of whitson-ale, and Pentecost Lords; let the
entrance of popery into England again, with a maine stream, as of the
Romans into Jerusalem, speak and cry alowde in your hearts and ears: and
moove you to inward pity and compassion of Gods church. And as for you which
entered into this calling, and have not knowledge to dis-charge your calling, I
say not as the Colossians to Archippus, take heed to your ministry, but take
heed of the danger, which you incur by starveing Gods unspotted lambs, with
golden fleeces. Remember, that you have not the charge of oxen, sheep, but of
the most brittell, and dangerous things in the world, even the souls of men
that are ready to be moved by every temptation: of tho most choice and
precious things in the world bought with the greatest price, even the blood of
Christ, whose charge is so great that the Apostle well weighing the same,
cries out as a man under a heavy burden; and who is sufficient for these
things? 2. Cor. 2.16.
and if he being qualified from above, having excellent gifts of the spirit,
did so highly esteem of the same, as to judge himself insufficient for all
that: what base conceit had you of the ministry? how easy did you deem it
to be, when you entered thereinto! no man will presume to teach an art before he
have learned it himself. Consider how you dis-grace the ministry, and the
profession of divine studies, by your ignorance. For as in times past the
people having a Ghost in great admiration, thought that to be wanting in the
religion, which was wanting in him; so the people which follow you to be
instructed by you, seeing the lamentable looks of your ignorance, think that
to be wanting in the minister, which is wanting in you. Consider the great
danger both of your selves, and the people whom by your ignorance you keep in
continual ignorance, and therefore both may fear that fearful doom
pronounced by Christ. mat. 15.14.
If the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the ditch. If Bezaleel and
Aholiah when they were to work in the tabernacle, had not knowledge enough
(though they were workmen before) but had need to be filled with the Spirit
of God in wisdom, Exodus 31.2.3, 6.
and understanding, in knowledge and workman-ship: then much more think you in
the secrets of your hearts, what knowledge is required of you who work not in
an earthly Tabernacle, but in the building up a temple for God to dwell more
specially in, even in the hearts of the people, in reareing up a chair of
estate for Christ Jesus to sit and rule in, even in the consciences of men,
and in frameing a school for Christ to teach even in the souls of men? Sit
down and consider that which Christ showed, before you entered into this
calling, to be considered of, whither you be sufficiently armed to meet your
enemies that come against you: if not, let not ten shekels and a suit of
apparel, and meat and drink, which was the wages Micha gave to his wandering
curate, Judge. 17.10.
that went up and down to seek a service, nay let not a thousand times so
much prevail with you to encourage you herein, as the fear of that fearful
speech terrify you: when you admonish not a wicked man of his wickedness. Nay,
that wicked man shall die in his sins, but his blood will I require at thy
hands. Ezekiel. 3.18.
So that if any perish through ignorance, your soul stands for their souls,
both shall go to hell together, therefore take heed to your ministry.

The second thing which the ministry requires at a ministers hand, is, not
only that he be skillful, but also faithful and watchful, which, Luke 12.42.
Act. 20.20. Tim. 4.2.
as Christ commanded in a Steward that gives his howse-hold meat in due
season, so Paul practiced as a faithful Steward, teaching openly, and in every
house, laying it to the charge of Timothy, with witness, saying: I charge thee
before God, and before the Lord Jesus Christ, Who shall judge the quick, and
the dead at the day of his appearing, and in his kingdom.

Preach, that is his office, be instant in season and out of season, that is
the time. In season to them that will, out of season to them that will not.
How? reproove exhort, correct, with all long-suffring, and doctrine, that is the
manner.

And this duty Christ enjoined Peter unto, Ioh. 21.1.
he says not, be thou a Pastor, or a Bishop, or a Prelate, but feed thou
because many Pastors in name, are but idols in deed, which either devour
them, or fleece them, Mat. 9.3.
but feed them not. Therefore says Christ the harvest is great, and there
are, what few few Prelates, few ministers, or few learned men? no, but there
are few laborers, few workmen.

Whereunto serves that of the Apostle. If any man desires the office of a
Bishop, or a minister he desires a good work a good duty, not a good
dignity, not a good delight, not good riches, not good revenews, but a good
work.

And to this end were Aaron, and his sons anointed, not only to be Priests
to the Lord and to stand as many do like Cyphres in Augrum; but to execute the
Preist-hood and as the phrase is often repeated, to serve in the Priests office
before the Lord. So that, a minister must not only be skillful in his
ministry, but faithful and diligent, and painful, in his ministry: and
consider the faithfulness of Jacob in keeping Labans sheep I was (says he)
consumed with heat, and the frost by night, and my sleep departed from mine
eyes. If he be so careful for Labans sheep: how much more careful and
watchful should we be for the sheep of Gods fold and fear neither the
pinching cold of adversity, nor the parching heat of persequuting Tyrants to
procure their good.

1. Chr 18: 14.15.16.
We may read in the book of Chronicles, that in David's house there were
Officers appointed to every charge: particular Officers for his treasures, for
his sheep, for his vines etc. that no man should be oppressed with too great
charge, but that every man should be careful, and faithful in his place. So
in Gods house has he appointed particular officers. And what are David's
treasures to the Lords? Gods treasure is David's heart, and David's treasure but
dust: David himself one of Gods sheep* and David's sheep simple beasts: David
is a branch of Gods vine, and David's vines but vanity.

^se. 2.
Then this is just reproof to all such to whom the Lord has given gifts fit
to teach and yet are negligent, and idle, and slothful, and will not teach
being like faithles Capteines who receive continually the Lords pay, and yet
never fight the Lords battles whose knowledge is wrapped up in an idle brain
without practice as Go^^ahs sword in cloth without use. 2. sam. 12.5. Prove.
11.26,
If the people curse him that with-drawes his Corn from the market: how much
more shall they be cursed, who by keepeing the corn of Gods word, from the
congregation of his people, bring upon themselves so fearful a sin? Who
when as they should by preaching the word, distill on the people, as the dew
upon the grass, and as the rain upon the herbs, (like clouds which sweat
themselves to death) vanish away in vanity, like breasts without milk, and
clouds without water, who when they should in the womb of the church, begett
many children of glory to God, deserved to be fined of our Gouvernours as the
old and single men of Rome were by their Censors cast out because they brought
no children to the commonwealth.

And now hearken what the Lord says to the idle of idol shephearde. Thus
says the Lord God unto the shepherds of Israel that do feed themselves:
Ezekiel. 34.2.
should not the shepherds feed the flocks? therefore says the Lord I will
come against the shepherd, and will require my sheep at their hands: and his
blood that dies without warning will I require at the watch-mans hands. For
what, should the Porter sleep when the thief seeks to enter? Or the Pilot be
careless when the ship is in danger? Or the Captain secure when the enemy is
at hand? Or the minister be negligent, when his people be ignorant, and like to
perish for want of vision? and the devil ready to destroy at all advantages?
Far be it! for what were this, but even to betraye Gods people into the hands
of Pirates, thieves, and robbers?

But what shall we say to them that have a cure of souls in one place, and
live in another: like fugitive Capteines forsake their Ensign and Company at
Barwicke and flee to Dover who being with Jonah commanded for Niniveh, s^^e to
Tar^hish: who being placed in the country, run to the universitie. Who leave
their charge, as the Ostrrich does her Eggs in the earth, Job 39.17.
and sands: forgetting that either the soote might scatter the^, or the wild
beast break them showing her self cruel to her young ones, as if they were not
hers: and is with fear, as if she travailled in vain: Or at the least,
leaved her eggs, as the Cue^ow does, to be hatched of a sparron, or some other
bird. Do they not every hour fear lest God should meet the^ where they are,
and have unto the^ as Eliab did to David, 1. sam. 17.28.
why came thou down hither? and with whom have thou left those few sheep
in the wilderness? Or fear they not lest that befall them which befell David,
who when he fought Gods battles as the sworn Captain of God, was secured
from the ambushes of Satan and fortified against the corruption of his own
nature, but when he gave up the administration to others, without just cause
and sat himself down to rest in Jerusalem, and was not resident in his
Camp: then was the H. Ghost not resident in his heart but he fell into those
gross sins of adultery and murder. Or lastly fear these not lost in their
absence their unlearned and for the most part ungodly Vi-Curates should bring a
great sin and consequently a great punishment as Aaron the first Vicar of the
Synagogue as Parisiensis calls him (tho a Vicar of Gods own choosing) brought
on Israel who when Moses had been absent from them but only forty days, and
not as he does add in the Court with a Prince, nor in the Palace with a
Bishop, but in the mount with God: at his return he found the fools of Israel
dancing a Morice-dance about a Caife. Consider then how ignorance irreligious
popery and prophanenes, creeps into the charges of those men who are absent
not forty days only as Moses was but forty weeks together: not with God
in any calling of his, as the same Moses in the mount, but like enough either
in the Court, or in the Palace as was spoken before out of Parisiensis: or else
where regarding little their duty Gods glory, or the peoples gooe.

And to these may be added those, who seeking their own, and not that which
is Jesus Christ's, are content to live, and wax rich with the spoil of the
church, and the destruction of Gods people. They who are Capteines of two
armies, Pilots of two ships, shepherds of two flocks, Pastors of two churches
yea and more toe, when a Godly painful man, making conscience of his duty,
groans under the burden of one but they travailing at one time with two
children, Gen ^^*
harder to bring forth then Jacob and Esau were, cry not out in sense of any
pain, as Rebekah did seeing it is so why am I thus? but think that their
presence in one place excuses their absence in the other, and the rather,
because they supply that by their Vicars, or Curates; which in their own
presence they cannot dis-charge. But consider I beseech you as many as be here
faulty in this particular is your absence excused because by others your places
are supplied? what then is the election of ministers but a scorn, and mockery
(as Dominicus Soto speaks writing hereof at large. Lab. 10.
) If a man may take a benefice and dis-charge it by an other man? and seeing
Christ sends you as Laborers, Teachers, not ordeiners of Laborers and
Teachers in your places, De vit^ Cap. 22.
what is it as Parisiensis speaks writing much to to this purpose, but as if
a man should marry a woeman under hope to obtain issue of her, but by another
man?

what is it but a cross practice to that of the Samaritan, and of Christ: Luke
10.35. Ioh. 21.15 Joh. 19.26
of whom, the former did not commit the care of the wounded man, to the
Innkeeper, till he was to depart himself. The Lord did not commit his sheep
to Peter, nor his mother to John, till he was now ready to commit his soul to
God, and his body to the ground: as Alphonsus de Castro discoursing hereof at
large, speaks: unto whom it you be not yet resolved hereof, you may add
Buffus and Dumeus de sacris Ecclesiasticis ministerijs: but especially
Dominicus Soto, who prooveth this NON-RE sidencie to be unlawful by the law of
nature, by the law of man, by the law of God: by Counsels by Fathers whom he
reckons up. And, if I did want matter, many more things might here be spoken
from him: but I only repeat that sentence of Damascene (which he he has) in
an Epistle of his, which he calls a golden Epistle: where (I take it) he
compares those that leave their charge to others, to cruel harlots, that set
forth their children to nurse, the sooner, to fulfill their inordinate lusts:
So do they set forth their charges to others, that they may go whither they
will the more freely: and entangle themselves in secular affairs. To conclude,
what is it but to send Gehazi with a staff, that can never recover a dead
soul to life?

You, your selves must put mouth to mouth, and preach the word unto them; you
must put eyes to eyes, and enlighten their minds; you must put hand to hand,
and show them all good examples, in your own persons; which if you will not
do, but still think your Curates presence can excuse your absence, Ezekiel. 44.1.
then go to the Prophet Ezekiel and put your finger in the print of the
Prophets speech that you may not still be unfaithful, but believe: that it
fully concerns you: You have not kept the ordinances of my holy things says
God but you have set others to take the charge of my Sanctuary. As if he
should have said: you have received the oblation of my holy things: but you
have not kept the ordinances of my holy things, and as if you were the Lords of
my heritage, you have put others under you, to take the charge of my
Sanctuary, which yourselves should have dis-charged.

Thus does the Lord plainly reproove you, for substituting others under you:
and therefore may you justly fear that which Claudius Espencaus, a Papist, is
bold to write, which I am even a-frayd to speak: that God shall serve you
heareafter, as you serve him now: you shall be saved by your vicars, but damned
in your own persons. And now further, men and brethren, if that blind buzzards
only which know not the price of souls, were guilty of this sin, I would
not have marveiled: or if the purple Cardinal of Rome only, with that
accursed rabble of that Romish Court, were guilty of this sin, I would have
held my peace: but that learned men, men of judgment and understanding, which
read and profess to know the Scriptures, and these words pronounced against
them, no milder then gall and worme-wood; should be so sore blinded, by that
love of the world as to seek their own ease, their own proffit, their own
pleasure: but not that which is Jesus Christ's, not his glory, nor the salvation
of his people. o ye heavens be ashamed at this! and thou o earth conceal not
this iniquity! Cry out thou hunger-starved-soule, as the Souls of the
slain, under the altar: let not your tongues cleave to the roof of your
mouth, until the Lord, holy and true, avenge your blood, on them that slay
you, as beasts in the midst of the street! and thou blood of the soul
al-ready dead: dead in respect of any spiritual vegetation, and dead in
everlasting malediction, never be dried up, but cry louder, then the blood of
Abel against Kaine for vengeance, against this sin! and you that are the
Lords faithful ministers on earth, regard the souls, and salvations of Gods
people, and let them be as dear to you, as they were to him that bought them,
with no less dear a price, then the price of his own blood. And you Fathers,
and brethren, who in the ministry live in this city, and have now long
nailed your ears, to the doore-posts thereof; I say not as Bishop Latymer
sometime said, to his fellow-Bishops, let the example of the Devil moove you,
who is ever diligent, and never Non-re sident in his great Parish, but I humbly
beseech you, if there be any place for beseechig left, let the commandment of
Gods word moove you, who wills you to look to your calling, and abide in
that; let the example of Christ, and regard to his glory, moove you, who
himself came to seek the lost sheep, and finding it, put it upon his
shoulders, and himself brought it home: let the example of the Levites, and
all good overseers incite you, oh let the ignorance of the people, and dread
to murder their souls which Christ has purchased with his blood, provoke you:
yea, let the care of your own quiet, and the peace of your own consciences,
which shall heareafter greivously rue it, enjoyne you: and let the assured
persuasion of Gods goodness, who has promised to maintain you, and will
perform it, constreine you to redress all vnfaithfulnrs: and think on those
temptations which hold you therein; are they not gross, and such as the shame
of the world might shift of? how much more should Gods spirit prevail
hereunto! think on the gain you get by spiritual promotions, joined with
spiritual ^^structions, are they not more shame-full, and infa^^^s, then the
gains of the usurer and promotour? let (...) be enough that there be those in
hell al-ready, who ^urse the day that ever you were borne, through whose
cruelty they are fallen into these unspeakable torments: and from hence forth
take heed to your ministry and to the faithful dis-charge of your duty.

Let it never be said that you loved the Lord, as Laban loved Jacob, only to
get riches by him, or as Saul loved David, to get honor by him, and not for
any love to the person of Jacob, or David; but let your love be seen by your
pains in the ministry of Christ Jesus.

Let it never be said, that a good benefice is as a white mark in a green
medowe, seen a far of, and fair to shoot at, but let it be said, that the
souls and salvations of Gods people, is the thing you aim at. Remember this
admonition, take heed to the ministry, forget not that of Paul in his
Visitation Sermon at Ephesus; Act. 20.28.29.
Take heed to your selves and to all the flock whereof the H. Ghost has made
you overseers to feed the church of God which he has purchased with his own
blood.

Take heed to the ministry thou have received in the Lord. Archippus did
receive his ministry in the Lord: that is, of the Lord. Therefore he did not
thrust himself into the ministry, but had his calling of God, and his
example is to be marked of all the ministers of the word: Doct.
That they have not only a calling from man but a calling from God: as all the
Prophets of God had: all the Apostles of Christ had: whose commission unto
them, was a brazen wall, to secure them: and as a fortress, and rock to stand
upon. If they have a calling from God, they shall see a seal of their
ministry i^ the conversion of some souls at least; but if t^ have received
their ministry from man, and not front the Lord, Ezekiel. 13.6.
they receive a curse in sted of a blessing, a woe is denounced against them:
and their people continue without proffit: as God shows in the Prophecy of
Jeremiah: saying I will come against them that Prophesy false dreams and I
sent them not, Ier. 23.32.
nor commanded the^ therefore they bring no proffit to this people, says the
Lord, therefore the people are not bettred, their souls are not converted,
their lives are not amended, God is not glorified, because they came, and God
sent them not, they had a ministry, but not of the Lord: but says God in the
same chapter, verse 22.
if they had stood in my counsel, and had declared my word, to my people: then,
they should have turned them from their evil way, and from the wickedness of
their inventions. Behold a blessing that should have followed their labors, if
God had sent them. Read, 1. Kings. 22. 2 King 3. jer. 6.14. Amos 7. Psam. 12.
Mat 14
and consider, what made Micajah so confident with Ahab? what made Elisha, a
worm of the earth, so bold with Jehoram? what made Jeremy, so plain with
Priest and Prophet? what made Amos so stout against Amaziah? what made Nathan
so free with David? what made John Baptist so zealous, to reproove Herod? what
did open the mouths of the Apostles, and made them speak the word with all
boldness of speech, but this warrant of their calling. They had their
minifierie not of man but of God.

These are the faithful ministers of God, whom God has called, and armed
from above, to this service.

These are they, to whom he has given Crowns of authority, and lincks of
iron to bind the Princes, and nobles of the earth: the rest have no courage, no
power, no zeal at all, whom the Devil fears not, but espying the wants of
their commission, Act. 19.15. use.
says to them, as he once did, to the Sonns of Sceva: Jesus I acknowledge, and
Paul I know, but who are ye? let every minister that hears me this day,
enter into his own heart, and examine his inmost affection, and try whither he
has received his ministry of the Lord, or no: which he has not, unless he
has gifts, in some tolerable measure, to dis-charge that ministry: for God
sends no blind guides, unless it be in judgment to punish the people. We
read in the book of Esiber, that none might come into the presence of the
King, unless the King did hold out his golden Scepter unto him: how shall they
then be punished of the Lord, that come, not into Gods presence, but into Gods
place, where God himself is; even the Father, full of Majesty, the Son of
God, replenished with glory, and the H. Ghost great in power: and presume, to
take the place upon them, without any warrnt from the Lord? They are the vipers
of the church, which stay not the appointed time of nature, but break out of
their mothers bellyes, before their time, tho their mother pay for it. They
will not stay, till God opens them a door, but will run in another way.
what will you give me? what shall J give you
And Judas with his quid vos dabitis mihi? on the one side: and Simon Magus
with his quid ego tihi dabo? on the other side: make wicked bargains together;
and without any calling from God, enter into the charge of Gods people. But let
them look, that they who set them a-worke, pay them their wages.

As many as have their ministry of the Lord, can say as Paul did, when the
Gospel was committed unto him, you know of the grace which was given unto me:
but for the rest, we see the ministry in them, but we know no grace in them,
neither in their word, nor work.

Which thou have received of the Lord, or in the Lord. Hence we learn again.
That the Lord is the author of the ministry. Doct. 4.


It was he that sent forth Prophets, and Apostles, and Evangelists, Ephesians.
4.11.12.13.
as extraordinary, and for a time: and it is he which sends forth still both
Pastors, and teachers, which be ordinary, and forever, as Paul shows.

1. cor. 4.1. 2. cor. 5.20
And therefore are they called servants, and ministers of Christ, and
Ambassadors for Christ: to whom, not man, but God, did commit the ministry
of reconciliation.

excellent matter for minister and people. For minister, he has received his
ministry of the Lord: and therefore he must give account of his ministry,
to the Lord.

Take heed (says Paul to the Elders of Ephesus) to your selves, and to the
flock whereof the H. Ghost has made you Overseers: not man, but the H. Ghost
to whom you shall be accounteable for all the flock and therefore take heed
to the charge.

This should be as a thousand Spurrs to our sides to moove us to the
performance of our duties, when we consider the Majesty of him, who has
committed the ministry unto us: when we consider, the price of souls, that
depend upon us: when we think on that account. which we, one day must make:
when Peter shall come before God, with his converted Jews: and Paul with his
Gentills; Andrew with Achaja; John with A^iaz Thomas with India. Whom shall we
bring with us? what souls shall we present to God as our Crown, and our
glory? where shall we find the seal of our ministry? or, if we have none, by
reason of our negligence and ignorance; how shall we dare, to appear before
the Lord, the fearful judge, of quick and dead; when he shall say; come give
an accounte of thy steward-ship.

Secondly; the ministry should hence learn, this lesson of instruction: that
because the Lord is the author of this ministry; therefore they must in
their ministry, seek the Lords honor; and not their own: they must seek
to enlarge Gods church, and not their own livings; to winn glory to God, and
not gain to themselves: for, they have received their ministry in the Lord;
by his grace, and for his glory.

A just reproof, to those, who in the ministry aim not at this end; nay,
whose consciences tell them, they thought not thereupon; but on their own
ease, such, and such a benefice, such a prebend-ship, such a common, such a
Bishopric, such credit, and countenance in the world: and intend this end in
their ministry, and not the other.

A just reproof of those, who preach themselves, and not the Lord: speaking to
the ear, and not to the conscience: seeking, rather by a painted eloquence, to
set forth themselves, and to get the name of Scholars, and learned men; then
to set forth the knowledge of the truth: being like to adulterers, (as
Gregory co^pareth them) who delight in the company of women, not so much to
get children, as to satisfy their own beastly lusts: So do these, delight to
preach, now and then; once a month once a- quarter, or so: but not so much to
get children to God, as to satisfy, their own vainglorious humor: as he,
that comes into the field, to fight with a posie of flowers, in stead of a
sword: and a plame of feathers in stead of a buckler: comes more like a
Carpet-knight, then a man of arms: so may we rightly judge him, that comes
into Gods place, with curious phrases, and invented words, of man's wisdom,
thereby to get applause of the simple: rather like a wanton man-pleaser then a
faithful Preacher.

ministers, comfort themselves herein; tho men be against them, yet, they have
their calling, from the Lord: he will back them, and bear them out: he will
give power unto them. They are stars in Gods right hand; God will defend them.
Fear not therefore, the faces of men; seek not to please men, Gal. 1.10.
for, if you do, (as Paul speaks) you cannot be the servants of God. You have
your ministry from the Lord, seek therefore, to approove your selves, not to
the wicked, but to the Lord, who will defend, Revel. 11.3.4.5.6.7
and give power unto you, as he promises, to his two witnesses, in the
Revelation.

Now, for the people: here is also a lesson for them to learn: the Lord is the
author of the ministry, therefore, honorable is their calling, and they are
to be had, in singular accounte, for their works sake: not, for their livings
sake, nor degrees sake, nor, their persons sake, nor, their friends sake: but,
for their works sake. The work of their calling, their honorable calling. For
this cause, 2. Tim. 3.1^.
the minister is called, the man of God, as if he should say, Gods Ambassador
and legate, and lieutenant, on earth. If then, it be an honorable thing, to be
a Princes Ambassador; how much more, to be Gods Ambassador, Revel. 3. revel.
12.4
King of heaven, and earth? Therefore, called Angels, and Stars, to show, the
excellency of their calling: which Paul considering, he cries out in a wonder:
how beautiful are the feet, that is, the coming of them, romans 10.15
which bring glad tidings of peace? As if, he should have said, I cannot
express, how beautifuil, and excellent, how lovely, and amiable, their coming
is. See what accounte, Elizeus made of, Elias; who being taken up, Elizeus
looks after him, and cries out: Oh the Charriots of Israel and the horsemen
thereof! signifying, that Elias being gone, 2 King. 2.12.
the very beauty, and strength of Israel, was gone.

If this were well regarded, then the ministry of God, would be more
regarded, less despised, less dis-graced, more honored, more reverenced,
more esteemed then it is: but for want of this consideration, the ministers of
God are accounted now a days, as the Apostles were before them; 1 cor 4.13
the very filth and off-skouring of the world: the very off alls, and refuse,
of mankind. And, if by our dishonouring God, in our places, and our unfaithful
walking, in our calling, God has justly dishonored us, and made us base, and
vile; abject, and contemptible, in the sight of the people; let us blame our
selves: but if any, do esteem thus, of Gods ministry, and account, the
calling of his ministers, dishonorable; they dishonor, not us, but God, whose
messengers, and Ambassadors, we are: as God said to Moses: Number. 14 17. 1. sam.
8.7
they have not murmured against thee, but me: and, so he said to Samuel: they
have not rejected thee, but they have cast me away, from being King over them.
Let them remember, that fearful speech; he that despises you, despises me.
Christ, shall take that dishonor, done to his minister, as done to himself.
And therefore, if David would not put up that dis-grace which was offered to his
messengers by Hanun: certeynely, Christ will not put up that dis-grace, which
is offered, to his messengers, and ministers. Wherefore, I here dare, all
Papists, Atheists, Libertines, Newters, Machiavells, and, all profane Epicures
whosoever, to contemn the ministers of God: if thou dare dishonor them,
dis-grace them, mock them, and laugh at them: Call them, pestilent fellows,
as Tertullus did: and troublers of the state, as Ahab did Elias, a troubler of
Israel: Call them mad-fellowes, as Erastus did, Act.
in his mad mood: Call them, railing preachers, seditous preachers: assure
they self, who ever thou art, that; thus think in thy heart: or, speak
with thy mouth: the Lord, of whom, we have received our ministry, shall not
forget this contempt: but, tho base be our persons, poor be our livings,
dishonorable be our estimation: he shall remember, and he shall revenge it.
And therefore, fear to vilify, any of those, who have their ministry from the
Lord. Men we are, as you are: and that is for your good, for you could not
hear the voice, of God himself, and live: or, of any of those blessed; and
glorious Angels of his. Sinful we are, as ye are: and that is, because we are
men.

Mortal we are, as you are: and that is, because we are sinful. Yet still,
tho men, sinful, and mortal, we are the messengers of God, and Ambassadors
of Christ. If you love us not, in regard of our persons, yet love us, in regard
of our office: we are indeed, but earthen vessels; but we have precious
treasures in us: if, you esteem us not, because we are vessels, and of earth,
yet honor us, for the treasures sake. Our ministry is not ours, but the
Lords, we, and thrice we be to him, that scorueth it.

The last thing, comes to be considered, Doct. 5.
in this verse. That thou fulfill it. It is here required of the minister,
that, he think it not enough, to dis-charge his duty, coldly, and
perfunctorily, and for fashion (as it were) but, he must set himself to it,
earnestly, zealously, and fervently, that he may even fulfill it: that he may,
as Paul speaks, make his ministry fully known: 1. Tim. 4.
and, approove himself, the true minister of Christ: and make it appear, by
all means, that it is his hearts desire, to fulfill his ministry: So did
Apollos, preaching fervently, and teaching diligently, the things of the Lord.
First, he spoke fervently, and then taught: noting thereby, that many speak,
who do not teach, because they speak not fervently, as Apollos. Thus did Paul,
burn in Spirit, and then, he testified to the Jews, that Jesus was the Lord.
Thus did Christ preach: ^oh. 7.
of whom, the Pharisees messengers, gave this testimony, and ingenuously
confessed; never man spoke like this man: because, he spoke zealously, and with
authority, and, mat. 7.
not coldly, and faintly as did the Scribes.

Tho a man, had all knowledge, of all Fathers, tongues and arts, yet unless he
have zeal, Act. 2.
he can never fulfill, the ministry of Christ. Therefore, did the H. Ghost
descend, in the likeness of cloven tongues, like fire; to signify a zealous, a
hott, preaching ministry. John was a burning, as well as a shining light: ioh.
So must we burn with zeal, if we will fulfill the ministry.

If this be so, what shall we say, of these cold, comfortles
morrall-philosophy-lectures, (rather then Sermons) without zeal, of
formall-preaching ministers, which shame the heat, by which men should be
quickened; being as Bernard speaks luciferi, but, not igniferi, having, some
light of knowledge, in their heads, but, no fire of zeal, in their hearts,
who, speaking the word of God, do weaken the power thereof, by dulnes, and
f^a^nes of Spirit; bringing forth their doctrines, as many women do their
children; still-borne, without sense, without feeling, without motion; using
doctrine, without application; application, without zeal, like men without
souls, or Images without lives. Such were, the intolerable cold, collations,
of the Scribes, and Pharisees, whereby, they did loose their Auditors, and,
made their Synagogues, desolate: and such are the Sermons, of those ministers,
whose minds are drowned, in wordly matters, whose spirits are frozen, and
pitifully benumbed, with woldlines, and sensuality.

And, so dull are their own hearts, by want of holy meditation, that, they
have no life, in their ministry, nor power in their preaching, more, then
when, a little boy, 2. tim. 1.6.
says grace. Wherefore, as Paul bids Timothy, to stir up, anadsopurem.
the graces of God in him; to blow them, as it were with bellows, as, the
Greek word, imports: so must we, and endeavor, to Godly vehemence; in our
preaching, that, we may enforce our doctrine, to the hearts of the hearers,
and, may make our ministry, known to Gods people.

And lastly; that our ministry, may be fulfilled; let us be, 1. Tim. 4.12.
to them that believe, as Ensamples, in word, in conversation, in love, in
spirit, and in pureness, as Paul speaks to Timothy: let us labor, to be
unreprooveable, and without blame, that, we set an edge, on our Sermons, (...)
may, by our own life, authorice our doctrine; let us first, be confirmed, as
Peter was, and strengthen others; let us first, observe the commandments of
God, and then teach them others to observe; let us first, labor to be the
servants of God, as Paul was, and then, the Apostles of Jesus Christ; let us
have in our breast plate, both urim, and Thummim, both knowledge, and holiness,
and, in the outmost borders, of our garments, let there be, both, bells, and
pomegranates toe, both, soundnes of doctrine, and sweetness of conversation.
Take away the reproach of the people, that has, a great while taken up, romans 2.
that speech; Thou that teach another, teach thou not thy self?

You are in the face of the people, a fault in you, is, as a stain in the
face, and a blow in the eye: as most perspicuous, so most dangerous, in the
hand, the glove may cover it: in the feet, the shoes may cover it: in the
body, the clothes may cover it: in a child, his age: in a woeman, her sex: in
a private man, his ignorance may excuse it: in you, that must be Ensamples to
others, in all kind of conversation, nothing can excuse it. Therefore, if there
be here, any lizards, that, do wipe out with their tail, the print of their
feet, made in the dust: any preacher, who, by the unclean tail, of a loose
life, wipes out the print, of true doctrine; if any have Jacobs voice, and
Esaws hands, if any, that carry the bellows of preaching in the one hand, to
kindle, and the water of ungodlines, in the other, to quench it: let them not
deceive themselves, by their preaching, their ministry, is not fulfilled, and
therefore, they shall have their portion, with that servant, that knows his
masters will, and does it not.

And now to Conclude all, I say unto all take heed to your ministry: for the
devil your adversary, [there is his dread] as a lion, [there is his power] as
a rouring lion [there is his desire to hurt] goes about, [there is his
industrie] and seeks [there is more then ordinary diligence, not what, but,
whom, he may devour: Even the souls of men, that is his preye. His force,
very great, his wiles, and advantages, not unowne, his malice experienced, his
cruelty, such as as hell can afforde; therefore, take heed to your ministry.
The wicked, your enemies, are Eagle-eyld, to look into you, and spy you, as
narrowly, as the Romans did Cato, or the Pharisees, Christ; to find a fault, and
having found, either your ignorance, or, your negligence, or, the pride of your
ambition, or, your covetousnes, they have enough, to talk of, with joy on
every ale-bench. Others see your faults, and weep, in secret, for your sins,
that Gods glorious gospel, that sweet ointment, should be carried in such
filthy boxes, as some of you are. Take heed to your ministry you have
received in the Lord: you have received of the Lord: to him, you must give
account, you have received it for the Lord, to him you must perform your
duty, shame not him, that has called you, walk worthy of the Lord, approove
your selves, as workmen, that need not, to be ashamed, in fulfilling this your
ministry: for, if you have been faithful, there is laid up for you, a Crown
of glory, which, God, the righteous judge, shall give you at that day: if
unfaithful, go many fathomes, deeper into hell, then other men, because you
have been, the Soule-murderers of them, whom you should have saved. Thus, as
the Colossians must say to Archippus, so I to you, every one, take heed to
your ministry, which you have received in the Lord that you fulfill it.

Even so good Lord, grant unto the ministry, of thy chosen ones all gifts,
fit for their calling, give unto them, increase of knowledge, give them
faithfulness give them zeal, that they may teach thy people, in thy truth!

And reform, all them; that either, for ignorance cannot: or, for negligence,
will not; or, for fearfulnes, dare not; or, for wickedness, and ungodlines,
ought not, to preach thy word: that true Pastors, being placed in, among thy
people, which may feed them, with knowledge, and understanding, thy church may
grow up, in perfect beauty, to the glory of thy name! Amen!

FINIS.

