A POSITION MAINTAINED BY I.B. BEFORE THE LATE Earl of Huntingdon:

viz. Priests are executed not for Religion, but for treason.

printer's device of a griffin with a winged orb suspended from a stone or book
(McKerrow, no. 246), copied from Sebastianus Gryphius, 1493-1556, and possibly
passed to Richard Field in 1588-9

Newly imprinted. 1600.

A POSITION MAINTAINED BY I.B. BEFORE THE LATE EARL OF HVNTINDON, viz. Priests
are executed, not for religion, but for treason.
IT is not to be denied, that Priests are executed for affirming the Popes
primacy, and reconciling to the pretended Church of Rome, etc. which are points
of their supposed religion: But yet they are not executed for these (or like)
points or parts as they be religious, but as they be traiterous, or dangerous
to the state, in civil consideration.

1 For, if Priests were executed for these, or like points, as they be
religious, then the Church would proceed against them in Ecclesiastical manner,
before the secular power execute civil punishment. As against Anabaptists,
and other in this Queens reign, has been performed. So that Priests their
case differs from Hackets only Secundum magis and minus, the one being more
dangerous in civil consideration then the other.

2 Secondly, they should be executed as well for affirming the Popes primacy and
reco^ciling, etc. (as Story for his misdemeanure, though) beyond seas. For such
affirming the primacie and reconciling, etc. are as damnable in religious
consideration on one side of the seas, as on the other, but not so dangerous to
our state in civil consideration.

3 Thirdly, they should be executed as well for other points of popery: as
giving the glory of the Creator (to wit prayer and praise) to creatures,
Angels, Saints, stocks, and stones, etc. being no less damnable then such
affirming the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. in religious consideration,
but not so dangerous to the state in civil consideration. As may appear by a
like case propounded.

If Anabaptists, denying magistracy, and that Christ took flesh of the Virgen
Mary, should swarm in England, and if Magistrates should punish in a more
civil manner of proceeding, not the latter (though no less damnable, as it is
religious) but the former, being more dangerous to the state in civil
consideration, who would say, that Anabaptists did suffer for religion, and
not for treason or felony?

4 That affirming the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. may appear directly
to be dangerous to the state in civil consideration, and therefore traiterous;
it is to be known and considered, that Pope Pius Quintus (by his bull
declaratory) pronounced our gracious and Christian Queen an heretic, and
excommunicated all such as yield obedience to her. If then the Popes authority
be persuaded as as a matter of conscience, and if by reconciliation her
Majesty's subjects become vowed members of such an head as is her capital
enemy, we may be assured that so many as are so persuaded and reconciled, are
prepared to obey the Pope, and disobey the Prince. Is not then such affirming
the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. dangerous to the state, in civil
consideration, and therefore traiterous?

5 In that I say (prepared) it is yet further to be known and considered: that
whereas the Earls had ill success in executing the said bull, other devises
were frustrated, and the hope of Papists their present prevailing much failed,
Parsons and Campion (English Priests) being to come into England to urge the
said bull, and doubting that (in the rigor thereof) it would not be readily
obeyed, did crave and obtain of Pope Gregory the thirteenth, this exposition
more plausible to Papists, but more dangerous to the state: That the said bull
may always bind the Queen and heretics: but Catholics (that is Papists) in
no sort, things standing as they do, but then only, when there may be public
execution thereof.

Philopater a lover of his country (as he pretends by that fained name) no
Englishman (if ye will believe him) yet descended of the English nation (as he
says himself) in a poysonfull and traiterous book, often printed in diverse
places beyond the seas (such liking find such books with such subjects as
Papists be) grants that Priests are sent, with authority from the Pope,
Sect. 3.
to pardon, excommunicate, reconcile, and teach (according to the bull
expounded) that subjects are not to obey the Queen in spiritual matters, but
in civil, and that for the present-state of things.

7 What is implied in this last clause, Philopater himself discovers when he
says, Sect. 3.
that it is agreed among diverse Lawyers and schoolmen, that if a Prince fail
from the Roman faith, and endeavor to withdraw other, subjects may and ought
oppose themselves, and depose their Princes, if they have force. Which prouiso,
he inculcateth and urges with this reason: Least religion should be
indammaged, and advanced, attempts not prevailing.

8 The same Philopater does peremtorily pronounce as tyrannical, this question
moved to Priests, fugitives, recusants, and such like: If the Pope, or other in
his behalf and cause of religion, should invade the land, what part would you
take, the Popes or the Princes? His reason of mislike is, because a rich Papist
cannot answer freely thereunto, without offense to God or Caesar. As if God
were offended, if Caesar defended against the Pope.

By which exposition of the bull, doctrine of the Priests, and mislike of a
question so necessary, it does clearly appear, that the end of affirming the
Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. is to prepare her Majesty's subjects to be
ready (upon pain of excommunication) to join with such forces as shall be
employed against our Queen and state, in a pretended cause of religion. Is not
this dangerous to the state in civil consideration, and therefore traiterous?

Let the affects and effects of such teachers and scholars be observed, and
the truth of this assertion will be so evident, as that nothing can be more
manifest. To let pass their broad speeches, when and where they dare: their
concealing and abetting traitors, and traiterous designs, as they may
(possibly) without danger, their rejoicing at, and spreading abroad news,
importing success to the Pope, though danger to the Prince, etc. To omit (I
say) these and many such arguments of their traiterous affection, the shameful
practices of many, bewray the Popish preparation of most, if opportunity once
serve. Many have been the conspiracies against her Majesty's person, to take
away her life. But o Lord have mercy upon us, to perserue her. Many have been
the treasons against the land to destroy it. But o holy one of Israel defend
this thine inheritance. Who have been the authors and actors of all these
tragical attempts, but such teachers and scholars? What were the rebels in
the North? And were they not provoked to rebellion by Nicholas Morton Priest,
sent from Pope Pius, to urge the execution of his bull? What were the rebels in
Ireland? And was not Nicholas Sanders a Judas (that is) a leader to the Popes
army, that came in pretense to relieve the^? Parry and Sommeruile went about to
murder her Majesty. The one was encouraged in his devilish enterprise, by
Cardinal Como, in the name of the Pope: and shall we think that the other
wanted the holy counsel of Hall the Priest arraigned? Babington and his
accomplices, conspired against Prince and country. Was not Ballard Priest a
chief counselor to them? and did not Bost ^ Priest keep counsel (at least)
as he lately ^onfessed? If then teachers and scholars, Priests and Papists,
concur in seeking and following all oportunities to subvert our state, can
any other end be imagined of Priests, their persuading, and reconciling, but to
prepare their scholars to join together against Prince and country, when
force shall answer their affection.

10 That the multitude of resolved Papists, be thus poisoned and prepared, let
this be your last consideration for this time, and not the least at any time.
That as the king of Ashur purposing to besiege Jerusalem, 2. Chron. 32.9.12.13.
sent from Lacish Rabshaketh and others, to weaken the hands of the people, by
disgracing their king Hezechiah, as one without religion, in that he had taken
away altars, and defaced high places; and by advancing Saneherib, as one that
prevailed against all gods. So these locusts, which have faces of men, and
hair of women, Revel. 9.3.78.10.11.
but the stings of scorpions in their tails, to wit, Priests, who pretend a
tender care of saving souls in the beginning, but intend a cruel destruction
of life and land in the end, are sent into this realm by their king (the
Angel of the bottomless pit, Esa. 7.4.
out of the smoke thereof, namely, by the Pope in his fume, but without flame I
trust) before invasion intended, to weaken the hands, and withdraw the hearts of
the people, from our gracious Queen, by disgracing her Majesty, as one without
religion, in that she has taken away sacrificing altars, and defaced religious
houses; and by advancing their king, as one that prevails against all gods,
all states, all religions. The like practice of sending Priests to prepare
people against the coming in of Spaniards, is to be perceived in Scotland.

11 What success this devise has, is also to be considered. The Pope is
certified by Cardinal Allen, and the king of Spain by Parsons the Priests,
that there shall be found (ready secretly within her Majesty's dominions) many
thousands of able people, that will be ready to assist such power as shall be
set on land. Of whose names they have delivered bead-roles, especially of such
as dwell in port Towns, and on the sea coast, with assurance that Priests
shall continue their reconciled people, in their lewd constancy. So has her
Majesty published in her Declaration, Anno 1591. But Philopater denies it.
Sect. 4.
How impudently and barely without any reason. But if Ballard Priest sent such
a bead-role into Spain, and Throgmorton had gathered the names of popish
Noblemen and Gentlemen, to the same purpose: It may be (in reason) supposed,
that to Priests intelligence is sent by Priests, what scholars they have
persuaded and prepared for treason and rebellion.

To conclude, 1. If the Church proceed not against Priests in Ecclesiastical
manner, before the secular power execute them. 2. If Priests suffer not for
affirming the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc. beyond seas. 3. If Priests be
not executed for other points of popery, no less damnable then these, as they
be religious. 4. But if the Pope by his bull, has upon pain of
excommunication discharged her Majesty's subjects of their allegiance. 5. If
Papists be dispensed with, for obeying her Majesty til time serve to the
contrary. 6. If Priests come of purpose to reconcile and teach according to the
bull expounded. 7. If it be a catholic doctrine, that subjects having force,
ought to depose their Prince, maintaining religion contrary to the Church of
Rome: and 8. In that case to join with foreign power. 9. If masters and
scholars have from time to time attempted to put the said bull in execution.
10. If Priests be sent before invasion to prepare the people: and 11. If
thousands be notified even by Priests prepared: then it may be avouched, that
Priests are not executed for affirming the Popes primacy and reconciling, etc.
as they be religious, but as they be traiterous, or dangerous to the state in
civil consideration.

FINIS.

