TROIA BRITANICA: OR, Great Britains Troy. A Poem Divided into XVII. several
Cantons, intermixed with many pleasant Poetical Tales. Concluding with an
Universal Chronicle from the Creation, until these present Times.

Written by Tho: Heywood.



Et prodesse solent, and Delectare Poetae.

LONDON; Printed by W. Jaggard, 1609.

To the Right Honorable Edward Earl of Worcester, Lord of Chepstoll, Ragland,
and Gower, Knight of the most Noble order of the Garter, Master of the Horse,
and one of the Kings most Honorable Privy Council.
TO you, whose Favor gave my Muse first breath,
To try in the Air her weak unable wing,
And soar this pitch, who else had tasted death
Even in her birth, from the Castalian spring
She dedicates her labors (as they are)
Though as you see, poor, featherlesse, and bare.
Your Noble hand, to her, supportance gave,
Even in her Pen-lesse Age about to fall,
Her Cradle then had been her Infant grave,
Had not your power and Grace kept her from thrall:
Then by the Muse, by your hie bounty raisde,
You Are by your Merit and my duty praisde.
Her power (though weak) yet to her sickly strength
Is willing, your past Graces to record,
Though smothered long, yet she finds time at length
To show her office to her Patron-Lord,
Wishing (for your sake) that vpholds her still,
Her worth, had correspondence to her will.
Then had her Theme, that treats of foreign deeds,
Been only tunde to your desert and Merit,
And you, from whom her nonage Art proceeds,
Should by her Pen, Eternity inherit:
But since (great Lord) her best fruits are but words,
Prise what her heart, not what her Art affoords.
It Is fit those Lords which we from Troy derive,
Should in the Fate of Troy remembered be,
For since their Graund-sire virtues now survive,
And with the Spirits of this Age agree,
It makes us fill our Cantons with such men,
As liumg now, equaldtheyr virtues then.
Homer (long since) a Chronicler Divine,
And Virgill, have redeemd old Troy from fire,
Whose memory had with her buildings line
In desolate ruin, had not their desire
Snatched her fair Title from the burning flame,
Which with the Towhe had else consumde her name.
Had they surviude in these our flourishing days,
Your virtues from the ancient Heroes drawn,
In spite of death or black obliuions rage,
Should live for ever in Fames glorious fawn,
Rankt next to Troy, our Troy-novant should be,
And next the Troyan Peers, your places free.
Nor let your Honor my weak style despise,
That strives to Register your names with theirs;
For could my numbers like blind Homersrise,
I would create you, Fames eternal heirs:
Accept my strength, (my weakness I bewray)
Had I like Art, I would as much as they.
Your Honors ever faithfully devoted,

Tho: Heywood.

TO the twofold Readers: the Courteous, and the Critic.
THe favorable and gracious Reader, I salute, with a submisse Conge both of
heart and knee: To the scornful, I owe not so much as an hypocritical
entreat, or a dissembled courtesy. I am not so unexperienced in the envy of
this Age, but that I know I shall encounter most sharp and seucre Censurers,
such as continually carpe at other men's labors, and superficially pervsing
them, with a kind of negligence and skorne, quote them by the way, Thus: This
is an Error, that was too much streacht, this too slightly neglected, here
many things might have been added, there it might have been better followed:
this superfluous, that radiculous. These indeed knowing no other means to have
them selves opinioned in the rank of understanders, but by calumniating other
men's industries. These Satyrists I meet thus: It were (in my opinion) more
honor and honesty for them, to betake them seriously to the like studies, and
the time they wast in detracting others, rather spend in instructing
themselves, and by some more excellent work (molded out of their own
brains) give the foil to others of less Fame and consequence: This were a
commendable and worthy detraction, sauouring of desert; the other, a mere
rancorous folly, grounded on nothing but malicious ignorance. For who more apt
to call coward then the most tymerous, but he only merits a name among the
valiant, that has actually and personally won his reputation by some deed
of same and Honor. But since these Critics are a general Subject in the
front of subject book, I am content to neglect them, as those Ireguard not,
and to the friendly and best judging Reader, thus turn my Apology.

I have adventured (right Courteous) to publish this Poem, and present it to
thy general acceptance; If it be gently received, and favor ably ceusured, it
may encourage me to proceed in some future labor; if any way distasted, I am
so far from troubling the world with more, that I shall hold this little,
much too much. Yet if you understandingly consider this project, you shall
find included herein a brief memory or Epitome of Chronicle, even from the
first man, unto us, this second time created Britons, with a faithful
Register, not only of memorable things done in Troy and this Island, but of
many, and the most famous accidents happening through the World, In who se
reign and what year of the world they chanced (with which we have conferred
the Histories of the Sacred Bible) and the truth of the times so eeuen, that
who so ever will daigne the perv sall of these, shall not only perceive such
things were done, but be also-satisfied in whose Reign (then successively
governing in the kingdom of Britain) they happened. In all which, I have
taskt my self to such succinctnesse and breuity, that in the iudisiall
perusal of these few Cantons (with the Scolies Annexed) as little time shall
be hazzarded, as profit from them be any way expected.

Accept then (I entreat you) this mingled Subject (as well home-borne as
foreign) and Censure it as favorably, as I have offered it freely. Though
something may perhaps distaste, something again I presume will please the most
curious Palate: Let that which pleases, mittig at the harshnes of the other.
He that speaks much, may (excusably) speak somewhat Idely, and he that in
unknown Climats trauayles far, may (by misaduenture) wander out of the way:
but where the main intent and purpose is honest and good, it is pardonable to
expect the best. And in that hope, I prostrate these my barraine industries to
your kindest and gentle Constructions.

Proemium.
I Hold it necessary as a Preface to this general History, to remember some
Antiquities touching the ages of the World, with the first peopling of
kingdoms, and of the four Monarchies which may illustrate this Poem, if in
any place it appcate dark and intricate. Theye are 16 56. from the Creation,
Noah entered the Ark, and the Vntuerse was destroyed by the Deluge, with all
mankind ( Noah and his family excepted) of his three sons Sem, Ham, and
Iapheth, were all Nations procreated. The posterity of Sem inhabited Carrion.
the East by the River Euphrates; Cham, the places near Irodan and Nyle,
toward the Meridian; Iapheth, the less Asia toward the West, whence many
Nations of Europe proceeded.

Sems sons were five; Elam, of whom came the Persians, from him Xenophon
Xenophon.
deriueth Cyrus. Assure, of him came the Assyrians. Ninus, of him the Niniuttes
and Badilonians. Arphaxad, of him the Caldeans, and from his Nephewe Fber, were
d^riued the Herbrues; (the word signifies Travelers or Strangers) Of this
line came Abraham, David, and the Messiah. Aram, of him the Syrians descended,
of which Damasco is the metropolis; therefore it was thus written; The head of
Aram is Damascus.

The posterity of Came was Chus, of whom came the Aethiopians in the farthest
Ptolometes.
Coasts of Aphrica, and the Libians called to this day Chirsita: The sons of
Chus were Saba of whom the Sabaans, and Euila, of wheme the Indians descended.
Nemrod first raignd in Babylon, Misraim occupied Egypt, which the Arabians and
Turks to this day call Mizri: The sons of misraim were Lydas, who pcopled
Lydia, a Nation that after seated themselucs in some parts of Itahe, and Labain
of whom the Sunburned Lybians are thought to descend: Of Eua^m came Pin^us.
Herodo^. Pliny
the Cyrenians, who built the City Cerenaica, of who came the Mauritanians,
and of him a famous River that still bears his name. Of Canaan came the
Sydonians and Tyrians: Heath built Hebron where Abraham dwelt and was buried:
Iebuseus possessed Gaba and Jerusalem. Iapheths sons were Gomor or Togerma, of
whom the Cinerians take their original, They are seated beyond Thrace, near
the Meotiden Fenne, where the Bosphort inhab te, not far from Cimbrica
Chersonessus: Of Magog came the S^thians, and of them the Turks: and to prove
the Turk to be in God and Magor, Ezechiell says, the Nations of Magog lie
toward the south, which in the latest days shall seek the fall of Israel.
And the Apocalip. Magog H^dotus
shall lastly Emperise the world: Of Madai came the Medes: Of Iauan or Iabu,
the Iouians or Graecians, The sons of Iauan, were Elisa, of whom came the
Aeolians in Asia minor. Tharsis. built Tharsis the chief City of the
Cilicians: Of Cethim came the Macedonians: Of Adodanim the Dodoneans in Epire.
Iauan, was that Ianus that raignd in Italy. Of Tubal came the Hispani and
Iberi. Of Mosoch came the Muscouites. Of Tyrus the Thrasians. The Sons of Gomer
were Ascanes, Riphat, and Togorma. Of Ascanes came the (...), who after shifted
themselves Apollonius in Argonant Justinius posthum. Isliad. 2 (...).
into other Provinces, and ofthem came the Cimbrians, the Bythinians, the
Cancoues, the (...), and Heueti: Of Riphat came the Riphei, Giants that
inhabited the Riphean Hills, where the Sanromass then lived. By the (...) are
meant all such as speak in the (...) tongue: From Riphat came also the
Paphlagonians, these (...) themselves into Europe, some inhabiting Russia,
Lytuania and Polonia, from the Adriaticke shore unto Illusria. Likewise
Fistula, Albis, and Bohemia, (...)
where before lived the Hermaduri and Boij.

Among the Sons of Sem Gether is numbered, of whom came the Getes, Paralip:
they were called Gotti or Goths, who inhabited Wallachia, these speak the
Almain tongue, and mixed themselves with the Germans, whose name is derived of
Gerim and Any, which signifies, miserable Strangers. The French are called (...)
(...).
of Wallen, which in the Almain tongue signifies, Wanderers. From Brute came the
Britons, since called Angli.

In Nemrod was the first Monarchy established, he lived a hundred years after
the Flood, after 200. years Ninus built Niniuy in (...), whose wife Semiramis
First Mon.
after his death erected the walls of Babylon. Ninius her son succeeded, in
whose time Abraham came into Palestine, Him succeeded Amraphel king of Sennaar
or Babylon, Of these Assyrian Monarchs Sardanapalus was the last, whose proud
name we thus derive; Sar, a Captain; Dan, a ludge; (...), a Destroyer; He was
overthrown by phul-Belochus a Babilonian, and Arbaces a Medean when Osia
raignd in Judah, phul belochus reigned over the Babilonians and Ninevites forty
years. Arbaces over the Meades and Persians. Belochus warred upon Israel, whom
succeeded his Son Phal Assure, called in the Scriptures Tiglat Peilassur: He
reigned 23. years, him Salmanasser succeeded, and reigned ten years, he
besiedged Samaria, of him Hosea speaks, Chapter 10. (...) succeeded
Salmanasser, who besiedged Jerusalem, and reigned ten years, his Army was
overthrown by the Angels: Assure haddon next ruld, ten years. In him Esaias. 39.
Kings, 4. 23 Paral. 35 I eremy 39 Daniel (...)
declined the Monarchy of Assiria, and Merodach became Monarch over the
Chaldees, Benmerodach reigned after his Father 21. after him Nabuchednezzar
Primus 35. He warred against Aegipt, Nabuchadnezzar Magnus reigned forty, in
Zedechias time he besiedged Jerusalem, a (...) and six months, him succeeded
evil Merodach, who releast Ieconias: he dead, Balsaar succeeded fourteen
(...), he was a greet Blasphemer. In his time Babylon was raced, and the
Monarchy transferred to the Persians: he himself being slain by Cyrus. The
kings Died: (...)
of Egypt in the times of this Monarchy, were these. Osyris with his Wife
Isis, who lived in the time of Abraham. Orus, Bochoris, Busyris, Miris, (...),
who Herodotus.
lived in the time of Samson. pherones, of whom all the Kings of Egypt were
Kings 3, 14 (...) 46
called pharoes. Proteus whom some call Cetes, to him Paris and Hellen sailed
in their return from Greece. Rampsinitus, Cephus, or Cheops, Cephris,
Mycerinus, Anycis. Sabachus, called in the Bible Sesach, Sethen, Psamneticus.
Nechos who overcame Iosia by the City Megeddo, and was after slain.
Nabuchadnezzar, (...), Apries, who sacked (...), and slew the Prophet Jeremiah.
Amasis, in whose time the Monarchy came to the Persians.

In Greece in the time of this Monarchy lived Iapethus, the Son of Noah,
after who^ reigned Hellas, now was the expedition of the Argonats, Erictheus,
Perseus and his Acts. The wars of Troy. (...), with the Theban History,
notorious in Oedipus and Iocasta, with the deaths of the two Brothers
Eleocles, and Polynices. Now were the (...) famous. Rome in the time of this
first Monarchy, Lactantius. Dionisius (...). (...). The second Monarchy.
was bullt the tenth year of Achas, King of Judah, It was (...) by Kings 6244
years. Rhomulis reigned 38. Numa 43. Tullius Hostilius 32. Aucus Martius 2 4.
(...) (...) 37. Seruius Tullius 44. In the last part of his reign began the
Persian Monarchy: (...) the proud 25. He was repulst his Kingdom by the
Consul Brutus, because his Son Sextus had (...) ravished (...), the wise of
Collatyne.

The Persian Kings were, first Cyrus, who reigned 29. he overcame Cresus of
Metasthenes. Xenophon. (...).
Lydia, besiedged Babylon, and was after slain by Tomyris, Queen of Scithia
In his time lived Thales Milesius, Pithagoras borne in Samos, Solon, and Draco,
who first ordered the year, (...) the months, added the Epact, and collected
first the Poems of Homor. Cambises the second King, who reigned 7. years, added
Egypt to his Empire, and covered the Judgment Seat with the skin of his
false Judge Sisamnes. The third Darius he by the neyhing of his (...), was
elected Emperor, reigned 36. He by the craft of his Friend Zopyrus, wan
Babylon, and added to his Dominions the Getes, Cymerians, and (...). Now lived
Hippias, the Son of Pysistratus in (...), and Miltiades. This Darius was the
Son of Histaspes, called in the Scripture Ashuerosh, Husband to Hester,
called by (...) Aristona, as the Name of Vasts was Atossa. Some refer the
History of Judith to these times, Fourth Xerxes reigned 20. He (...) Greece
with (...).
an Army of 10000000. Soldiers, his cheese Captain was Mardonius, his chief
Counselor Artabanus. He was first repulsed by Pausanias of Sparta, after (...)
expeld Greece by (...). In these wars were famous, Artstides and Cimon. 4.
Artaxerxus with the long hand ruld 40. He was thought to be the Son to Darius
and Hester. In his time lived Esdras, Haggeus, Zachartus, and Nehemiah. About
the time of the Pelloponesian War. And now was Rome governed Demosthe.
by the (...) form of government infamous, in the lust of (...), to the chaste
Roman Lady Virginia. Darius Nothus reigned 19 In his time hued famous
Alcibiades: and Sophocles, and Euripides, two famous Tragedians. Artaxerxes
Memnon 40. he loved the famous Lady Aspatia, the Noblest Greeks in his days
were Clearchus, Anaxilaus, Lisander, who conquered Athens (after governed by
30. Tyrants) who were suppressed by the (...) of Thrasibulus. Now happened the
Wars between the Phocenses and the Locri: with (...) Leuctricum. And now (...)
Conon, and (...) Epamamino^das in Greece, about the (...) that English Brennus
sacked Rome. Artaxerxes Ochus next Memnon, reigned 26. In his time happened the
War which was called Bellum sacrum. (...) reigned four years, he was slain
by Bagoas. Him Darius succeeded, and in the sixth year The third Monarchy.
of his reign, was slain by Alexander the Great, in whom began the third
Monarchy translated to the Gracians.

Alexander by his Father Phillip deriueth his birth from Hercules, by his
Mother Olimpius from Aeacus, He conquered the World, reigned as Emperor 12.
years: In the 32. of his age. He dead, the Monarchy was d^ded into four parts,
Aegipt, Syria, Asia Mynor, and Macedon. The Kings of Egypt after Alexander,
were these: Ptolomeus the Son of Lagus: Ptolomeus, Philodelphus, Alexander,
Philopater, Epiphanes, Philometer, Euergetes; Phiscon, Alexander, Lathurus,
Auletes, Father to C^patra, Dionisius her Brother, in whom ended the race of
the Ptolomees, and now Egypt came under the I^risdiction of the Romans.

The Kings of Macedon were Perdicas, Craterus, Antipater, Cassander, Antigonus
1. Antigonus 2. Demetrius, Philippus, and Perseus, who was surprised by the
Romans.

The Kings of Syria, who after the death of Alexander possessed Babylon, Syria,
and Asia Minor, were Antiochus Soter, Antiochus Theos, Antiochus Magnus, who
had these three Sons, Seleucus Philopater, Antiochus Epiphanes, and Demetrius.
Demetrius after his Brothers decease, had two Sons: Demetrius Nicanor, and
Polibises
Antiochus Sedetes. The Son of Nicanor was Antiochus Griphus. The Son of
Sedetes was Antiochus Cyzenius. These having slain each other, from their
Issue, Tygranes King of Armenia re^t the Kingdom of Syria, which first
Lucullus, and after Pompeius Magnus annexed to the Roman Empire.

These in the time of the third Monarchy, were Captains and Governors among
the Jews. Nehemiah, Ioconias, Selathiel, Zorobabel Resa Mesollam, ^ohanna Ben
Resa, Judas Hircanus primus: (in his Dukedom Alexander flew Darius.) Josephus
primus, Abner Semei, Eli matathai, Asa mahat, Nagid Artaxad, Haggai, Eli Maslot
Nahum, Amos Sirach, Matathia Siloah, Josephus Iun^r, Ianua secun^s Hircanus.
And then began the race of the Machabees in Matathias, whose Sons succeeded
him, Judas, Ionathas, Simon, Johannes Hercanus. The Kings of that line were
Aristobulus, son to Hercanus, Alexander I^neus, Queen Alixandra his Wife,
(otherwise called Salome.) The Sons of Alexander, were Hircanus and
Aristobulus, in their death ended the line of the Machabees. Succeeding these
in the 30. year of the reign of Herod Tetrache, was borne the Savior of the
World, unto which we have studied to reduce the best known Nations of the
Earth, leaving the 4. Monarchy among the Romans, who by this time awed The
fourth Mo^hy.
the Earth, whose wars and Fortunes being so commonly from many worthy
Writers, translated into our modern tongue, We here om^ letting this short
Epitome onley serve in the Front of our Book, to instruct your memories, and
guide your thoughts through those unknown Deserts, in which without this
direction, many Readers may loose themselves: be this therefore their Pylot to
direct them to the harbor of these latter Ages more familiarly known.

Argumentum
The year of the Lord above the line.
TYTAN and Saturn differ, their great strife, The year before Christ under
the line.

Is by their careful mother (VESTA) ended:
Saturane, his Sister Sybill takes to wife,
And the heyre-males that are from the^ descended
He doomes to death: fair Sybil saues the life
Of Jupiter, grim Saturn is offended,
And to the Oracle at Delphos hyes,
Whiles Titan through the earth his fortune tries.
ARG. 2.
The Worlds Creation, gold from the earths veins,
Neptune and Plutoes birth, ALPHA conteines.
CANTO. 1.
THis VNIVERSH with all The opinions of the old Philosophers touching the
creation. Thales Milesi. Haraclitus
therein contained,
Was not at first of Water fashioned,
Nor of the Fire, as others often have fcyned,
Nor of the Air, Hyppasus
as some have vainly spread.
Nor the four Elements Anaxamines
in order trained.
Nor of Vacuitie and Atom's bred. Empedocles

Nor has it been Eternal (as is thought Epicurus

By natural men) that have no further sought.
2
Neither has man in perpetuity bin, M^rdorus

And shall on earth eternally persevere
By endless Generation, running in
One circuit; (In corruption lasting ever)
Nor did that Nation first on earth begin, Di^dorus

Under the mid Equator: some endeavor
So to persuade; that man was first begun,
In the place next, to the life-giuing Sun.
3
Neither was he of Earth and water framed, Empedocles

Tempered with lively heat (as others write;) Anaximander

Nor were we in a former world first named, Democritus

As in their curious Problems (some recite:)
Others, more ripe in Judgment, have proclaimed, Z^

Man framed of clay, in fashion exquisite;
In whom were breathed sparks of Celestial fire,
Whence he still keeps his Nature, to aspire.
4
But this most glorious Universe, was made M^yses

Of nothing, by the great Creators will;
The Ocean bounded in, not to invade
Or swallow up the Land, so rests still
The azure Firmament, to ouer-shade
Both Continent, and Waters, which fulfill
The Makers word, one God does sole extend
Without beginning, and shall see no end.
5
That powerful Trinity created man
Adam, of Earth, in the fair field Damask,
And of his rib he Euah, formed than,
Supplying them with all things they can ask;
In these first two, Humanity began;
In whom, confinde IHBHOVAHS fix-da^es task.
From Adam then and Euahs first Creation,
It follows we derive our British Nation.
6
Inspire me in this task ( Ihoues seed I pray)
With Hippocrenes drops besprinke my head,
To comfort me upon this tedious way,
And quicken my cold brain nigh dull and dead;
Direct my wandering spirits, when they stray,
Least foreign and forbidden paths they tread:
My iourney's tedious, (blame not then my fears)
My voyage, aims at many thousand years.
7
Oh give me leave, from the Worlds first Creation,
The ancient names of Britons, to derive
From Adam, to the Worlds first Inundation,
And so from Noah, to us that yet suru^e:
And having of Troyes Worthies made relation,
Your spurs the Chariot of my Muse must drive
Through all past Ages, and precedent times,
To fill this new World with my worthless rymes.
8
Oh, may these Artlesse numbers in your ears,
(Renowned JAMES) seem Musically strung,
Your fame (oh IOVES-star'd Prince) spread every where,
First gave my still and speech-lesse Muse a tung:
From your Maiestike virtues (prised dear,)
The infant life of these harsh meeters sprung;
Oh, take not then their industry in skorne,
Who, but to emblaze you, had been yet vnbo^e.
9
Not let your Princely Peers hold in disdain,
To have their Auncestry stild'e and inrolde
In this poor Register, a higher strain
Their merits ask, since brazen leaves unfold
Their neuer-dying Fame, yet thus much daine,
Not to despise to hear your virtues told
In a plain style, by one, whose wish and heart,
Supplies in zeal, want both of Skill and Art.
10
Times faithfully conferd, the first invention
Of most things now in use, hear you shall find,
Annexed with these, the use and comprehention
Of Poes^, once to the Gods desceind,
Suffer our bluntness then, since our intention
Is to good use, sent from a zealous mind.
If Stones in Lead set, keep their virtues: then,
Your worth's the same, though blazed by a rude Pen.
11
In the Worlds Childhood, and those Infant-daies,
When the first earth was in her strength and prime, The Golden Age.

Ofher own nature yiedling plants and Spraies,
Flowers, both for smell and Medicine: when each time
The cheerful beams of the bright Sun displaies, Hessed. in operibus and
disbus.

To ripen fruits in their convenient time;
Before the laboring Swain with'is iron plow,
Made furrowed wrinkles in the Earths smooth brow.
2
When men were gouernd more by Will, then Art, Pherecrates.

And had their appetites by Nature swayde,
When Fraud was vnbegot, and had no part
In the worlds Empire; before Coin was made, Tremigistus.

When man his mutual fortunes did impart
Without Extortion, Guile, or Usurers trade;
Before smooth Cunning was to ripeness grown, Marcil. ficinns.

Or devilish Wax and Parchment yet were known.
3
I mean the golden world, the purest Age, Tibullus.

That knew not brazen war, or fatal steel,
For war was in his cradle: iron age
Bred but his teeth: yet did the world not feel
His ravenous phangs, no man did battle wage,
Or try the inconstant course of Fortunes wheel;
There was twixt king and king no grim defiance,
Nor bands (save of affection and alliance.)
4
Then lived Vranus a great Lord in Creet, Vranus and Vesta. 1954.

To Aethra and great Demogorgon heir,
He married with a Lady bright and sweet,
Vesta through all those climes (sur-nam'd the fair) 2009. Hiberius son of
Iubal governed Spain. Nynus Assyria Mogus Gallia

With two young lads she did her Husband greet,
Tytan and Saturn, at two births she bare:
Tytan the eldest, crooked, and il-fac't,
Saturn well shaped, fair spoke, and comely graced.
5
Vranus, in his hopeful issue famed, Vranus called also Creet.

Begot on Vesta two fair Daughters more,
The first Sibilla, the last Ceres named,
Fairer were never seen in Creet before.
Both were by Nature in her cunning framed,
Out of her beauties choice, and purest store:
Tytan, was for his ugly shape abhord,
But Saturn, for his comeliness adord.
6
This Saturn, was the first by whose invention
The Earth was Til'd, and Eared, and gave increase,
Before his fruitful days, was never mention
To sow, or plant; Till then a general peace
Was made twixt the earth and us, our apprehention
Strecht not to know her secrets: Now began cease
Blind Ignorance in man, Saturn first found,
To till, to plow, to sow, to reap the ground.
7
He likewise was the first that strung the bow,
And with a feathered Arrow pierst the Air,
Ph^bus at first, admired, and did not know
What new made Birds could fly so swift and fair,
Mistaking Saturnes shafts, for who would trow,
Man's wisdom could invent a thing so rare,
(Being Earth-bred) to stretch his brain so hie,
As teach his shafts way through the empty sky.
8
And now began th'amaz'd Earth to admire,
To see such strange fruits in her bosom growing;
To see her head wear such unknown attire,
To see the Swains, some planting, others sowing;
Now first began the birds to perch them hier,
And shun man's sight, still wondering, but not knowing,
How men below on the earths verdure lying,
Should reach into the air, and sttike them flying.
9
To kill the Sauadge beast he likewise taught,
And how to pierce the Serpents skale from far,
By him, the wilde-swift-running Heart was caught,
He first devised for us the use of war;
He showed which mines of earth be good, which naught,)
Which be the veins of Gold, which silver are;
He Minerals first found, and from the mold,
To deck his Palace, brought refined gold.
10
Yet some great Saturnes glory would deface, Pliny.

And say, that Cadmus first this metal found
In high Pangeus, a huge hill in Thrace,
Else Thoas and Eaclis searched the ground Herodotus

For gold ore; and Panchaia was the place,
Known in such precious metals to abound:
Some, twixt Erichthon and Ceacus divide,
Finding bright silver (first in Athens tried.)
11
Idei Dactili Iron metal wrought
In Creet: some deem, two Jews in Cipres made it,
Selmentes and Damnameneus brought Clement.

The Ore from thence, and to their use assaide it;
For yellow Brass the fly Pannonians sought,
The Scithian Lydus, with the fire allaid it, Aristotle.

And taught it first to melt; which some suppose,
The Phrigian Delos did by Art disclose. Theophrast.

12
Midacritus a Mineral more then these Strabo.

Brought from a Province that belongs to Spain,
Lead: from the Islands Cassiterides,
Which some would Attribute to Tuball-Caine.
Glaucus all Metals brought beyond the seas
Taught how to sother, (else their use were vain.)
The first Smiths-forge, the black Calibians made,
And after taught the Ciclopes their trade.
13
Cyniras: the Stythee, lever, Tongs and File, Polycron. Polidor.

Pyrodes was the first from flint stroke fire,
Which how to keep in matches longer while
Prometheus taught: This Vulcan did acquire:
The bellows: Anacharsis in the Isle
Called Scithes, and thus men did still aspire
For knowledge; and in several Countries nursed
These Arts, of whom we hold king Saturn first.
14
Therefore the Cretan people much esteemed him,
And called him God on earth for his rare wit;
Much honor he received which they beteem'd him,
And in their populer judgments held it fit
To burn him Mirrhe and Insence, for they deemed him
Worthy alone amongst the Gods to sit,
Persuaded such a high inuentious strain,
Could not proceed from any Mortals brain.
11
As these rare gifts the giddy Commons noted,
So in his mothers heart they took Impression,
Who on her sons perfections inly doted,
Making for him her daily intercession,
Thus in a Sea of sweet content he floted;
For who, but of his virtues made confession?
In process, and the chief of Saturnes pride,
The old Vranus crazed, fell sick and did.
12
After a few sad funeral sighs and tears
By Vesta, over her husbands body shed,
In crooked Tytan, to the world appears
A strong intention, to impale his head
With his dead fathers Crown: This Vesta fears,
And calling Saturn, thus to him she sed:
My dearest son, it is by the Lords decreed,
That in Vranus Prince-dome, thou succeed.
13
Thy brother Tytan, though in Age before thee,
Yet in thy wisdom thou have him out-stript;
Thou have the popular love, they all adore thee,
His blasted hopes, are in the blossom nipt;
With Coin, with Men, with Armor, I will store thee,
Let him stand fast, or he shall sure be tript:
Both Lords and people, join with me thy mother,
To invest Saturn, and depose thy brother.
14
With that, before her son could make reply,
Where they were speaking, rusht bold Tytan in,
A storm was in his brow, fire in his eye, Difference twixt Tyta^ and Saturn.

After some tempest, he does thus begin:
Must then young Saturn reign? Oh, tell me why?
Am I a Bastard, and begot in sin?
Has Vesta played the strumpet with my Father,
That you despise me, and elect him rather?
15
Was I not of that Virgin-wombe the first?
And lay I not as near your heart as he?
Was I not of those breasts before him nursed?
And am I not his Elder in degree?
What have I done, you should affect me worst?
Your Mayden-birth, and your first progeny:
Before him I was borne, and to be plain,
(By all the Gods) I will before him reign.
16
Had I not in your womb, the selfsame being?
Am I not of the selfsame blood created?
Is not my Royalty with his agreeing?
Is not my birth before his Anti-dated?
Is elder Tytan, now not worth the seeing?
Must in my right, that young boy be instated?
Has he so well, or I so ill deserved:
No: first I came, and I will first be served.
17
And turning to young Saturn, with an eye
Threatening revenge, and ruin to his life,
Prin-cox (quoth he) must you be placed so hye,
The only darling of Vranu wife?
Can thou so soon out-leape me? Thou shall die,
And in thy fatal obits end this strife;
Then, with his fatal blade he blessed his head,
Had the blow fallen, it had struck Saturn dead.
18
But Vesta staide it coming, and withal
Came Ceres and Sibilla thrusting thither,
They hug young Saturn, but on Tytan fall,
Thundering on him with clamors, altogether,
The younger brother they their Sovereign call,
And bid the elder pack, they care not whither:
The people second them: thus in disgrace,
The Stigmaticke is forced to leave the place.
19
But having better with himself advised, Erythea Sibylla.

Tytan and Saturn thus the strife decide,
That Tytan (for his shape so much despised)
Should leave the Scepter unto Saturnes guide, Their strife compounded.

And so to stint all malice enterprised;
But after Saturnes death, the Crownet'abide Lu^.

To Tytan and his heirs, by his last will;
So Saturn swears all his heirs male to kill.
20
King Saturn must not let a son survive Apollonius li. 2 Argonant.

To keep his brothers I ssue from the Crown,
Only his Daughters he may save alive,
These Covenants are betwixt them both set down:
Henceforth, no more these haughty brothers strive,
For either by Indenture knows his own:
The Crown is Saturnes, due to Tytans seed,
To make which good, all Saturnes sons must bleed.
21
The elder brother, thus o'reswaide with might,
Cannot endure that Clyme, but seeks another,
To see his younger throned in his right,
Or to be called a Subject to his brother,
And therefore full of anger and despite,
He leaves his Country, Sisters, and his mother;
And to be rid at once of his disgraces,
He seeks adventures strange, in foreign places.
22
Where Fortune his attempts so much befrended,
That many Warlike Nations he subdud'e,
No quest, save Arms and valor, he intended,
And how by Usurpation to intrude
Into the rightes of others, who defended
Their Honors, both by strength and multitude:
Thus he of many Islands reigns sole King,
And all the World, of Tytans Acts does ring.
23
Yet into Creet he daily sendes espiall,
To know if Saturn made his Covenant good,
Forcing his slye skouts (mauger all denial)
To bring him word, how Saturnes glory stood,
Whether of Marriage he had yet made trial,
Or having Children male, had spilt their blood;
Knowing himself to be sufficient strong,
By force of Arms, to right his former wrong.
24
So with his five and forty Sons makes thence, Diod. S^lus.

With fair Tytea, mother to seventeen
Of that large brood; all these with rage dispense,
And by their late atonement, Exiles been.
With patience they depart (but with pretense)
Hoping well Armed once more to be seen,
And with their brood of Tytanois to meet,
And tug with Saturn, for the Crown of Creet.
25
Rhea (of all the beauteous daughters fairest)
Brides with Hiperion, her best-lou'd Brother:
He likewise, for his feature was the rarest
Of Tytans sonns (there lived not such another)
Oh sweet Hiperion, thou in shape comparest
With all the Giant issue of thy mother;
At feuerall byrths, two Babes she childed soon,
The male she called the Sun; Female, the Moon.
26
The the other Tytans fearing, to these two
Their Fathers Conquests should in time descend,
A monstrous Act they have intent to do,
Whose scandal shall beyond both Poles extend,
And none but Parricides would yield unto,
For they that should their Brothers life defend
Conspire together, and against right or reason,
In dead of night, they seek his death, by Treason.
27
But first they take his little son, the Sun, Pausanias in Corinthiacis.

And to the flood Eridanus (well known,
That streams along their Coast:) In have they run,
Where the young Lad amongst the waves is thrown,
This, when his tender Sister knew was dun,
From a high Rock, her self she tumbled down:
In pity of whose beauties, grace, and years,
The Gods translate them, to the brightest Spheres.
28
Mean time, the new made King of Creet's renown
Increast so much, that he was termed a God, Of Tytan mor Can 3 stan. 27

He was the first that ware a Laurel Crown,
The first that venter'd on the Scas, and rod
In triumph on the waters; (this being known)
They held them happiest, that could make abod
In his blessed Province, which being well conducted,
Kings sent their Sons to him, to be instructed.
25
Saturn in those days was held only wise,
Many young Princes in his Court were trai^d,
He taught them both the use of Seas and ^es,
And what h^d wealth within the Earth remained;
Then began he Cities build, and Laws devise,
for an Irregular people he disdained:
The mynerall mountaine-veines he vnder-minde,
And was the first, that perfect Gold refinde.
26
Yet never did this King in ought miscarry,
Having what Earth, and Sea, and Air could yield,
Happy in all things, save, he durst not marry,
He sees the gorgcous house, he late did build
Shine with reflecting Gold (his objects varry)
He sees his ripe corn, growing in the field,
He sees the wild Birds by his Archers caught,
Pierst with those shafts, whose use before he taught.
27
He sees the vast Seas, by his Oars divided,
And the decepe waters, without danger past,
By Art of Sail and Rudder, they are guided,
(What greater happiness could Mortal taste?)
But when the Covenant long before decided
Twixt him and Tytan he records, at last,
It pierst his heart with sorrow: for his life
Seems to him tedeous, led without a wife.
28
What boots him all his Honors and rich state?
His wealths-increase, and all his worldly pleasure?
For whom does he rise early, and sleep late?
Having no heir, to inherit all his Treasure:
He knows he has incurred his Brothers hate,
Yet must his seed, make of his kingdom seazure:
He enuyes his own wealth, because he knows,
All his life time he toils, to enrich his foes.
29
He loves his Sister Sybill (yet not so
That if she ch^dren have, their bloods to spill)
And yet his timorous passions howerly grow,
Nor can he on her beauty gaze his fill:
Feign would he marry her, and yet does know
If she have Issue, he her sons must kill,
So that he wishes now, (but all too late)
That for his vow, he might Exchange his state.
30
In this distraction many days he dwelt,
Till Love at length in Saturnes heart prevailed,
Such fervent passions in his breast he felt,
That spite his Oath, (which he so much bewailed)
He feels his soft thoughts in his bosom melt:
(Needs must he yield whom such fair Jookes assailed)
And now upon this desperate point he stood,
To wade t'her bed, though through his childrens blood.
31
This can great Apis witness, who that time
Peloponessus governed: This records
Iubalda, who the Spanish seat does clime;
This Craunus kneeled to by The Italian Lords:
This Satron, who the Gauls ruled in his prime,
Now to Semiramis Assyria affords
The Monarchy: who after Ninus did,
Married her Son, and perished by his pride.
32
The marriage rights with solemn feasts are done, Saturn marries his Sister
Sybill.

Sybill both wife and sister; the first Queen
That reigned in Creete, has now conceived a son,
Never has less applausiue joy bin seen 2000.

At such a Brides Conception: the time's come 1963.

The long suspensiue days expired been:
For if a male, his blood the Earth must stain,
A male she brought forth, and the Lad was slain.
33
For so the King commanded, being a King,
He thought it base if he should break his word,
Oh golden days, of which the Poets sing,
How many can this Iron age afford
That hold a promise such a precious thing,
Rather to yield their children to the sword,
Then that the world should say, thy oath thou brakest,
Or wast so base, to eat the word thou spakest.
33
Such difference is twixt this, and that of gold,
We in our sins are stronger; Virtues weaker;
Words tide them fast, but us no bonds can hold;
They held it vil'd, to be a promise breaker;
A Liar was as strange in times of old,
As to find out amongst us, a true speaker:
Their hearts were of pure metal, ours have flawes,
Now laws are words; in those days, words were laws.
34
The Funeral of the first slain infant ended,
And the sad days of mourning quite expired,
At which the pittious Queen was most offended,
But now her spirits with dull sorrows tired,
The King a second metting has intended,
And the Queens nuptial bed again desired;
Sibill conceiues, and in her womb does cherish,
More children, ready in their birth to perish.
35
And growing near her time, the sorrowful father,
Displeased to see his wife so apt to bear,
Who for his vowes-sake wish her barren rather,
(The murder of his first son touched him near,)
Sends through his Land, a kingly train to gather,
And makes for Delphos, hoping he shall hear
Some better comfort from the Delphian shrine,
Whose Oracles the king esteems divine.
36
He therefore first his sacrifice prepares,
And on Apollos Altar Incense burns,
Then kneeling to the Oracle, his prayers
Mount with the sacred sum, which near returns,
Tell the pleased God acquainted with his cares
Looks down from heaven, and sees him how he mourns,
Desiting that his power would nothing hide,
But tell, what of her next birth should betide.
37
With that there fell a storm of Rain and Thunder,
The Temple was all sire, the Alter shook,
The golden roof above, and pauement under,
Trembled at once, about began Saturn look,
To see what heavenly power had caused this wonder,
Feign he the holy place would have forsook,
When th'Oracle thus spoke: thy wife grows great,
With one that shall depose thee from thy seat.
38
For from her royal womb shall one proceed,
That in despite of thee in Creet shall dwell;
So have the neuer-changing fares decreed,
Such is the Oracles (thrice sacred) spell;
A son shall issue from king Saturnes seed,
That shall enforce his father down to Hell,
This heard, the discontented king arose,
And (doubly sad) away to Creet he goes.
39
What shall he do, fair Sibils time draws near,
And if the Lad which she brings forth survive,
The news will stretch unto his brothers ear,
To whom he swear to keep no male alive,
Besides a second cause he has to fear,
Least he his father, from his kingdom drive,
Then, to prevent these ils, he swears (on hie,)
Inspight of fate, the infant borne shall die.
40
Yet when the King his first sons death records,
In his resolved thoughts it breeds relenting,
The bloody and unnatural act affords
His troubled thoughts, fresh cause of discontenting,
None dare approach his presence, Queen, no^ Lords,
That to his first child's death had bin consenting:
The first unnatural act appears so vilde,
The king intends to save his second child.
41
So often as he the murder calls to mind,
So often he vows the second son to save,
But thinking on his covenant, grows unkind,
And doomes it straight unto a timelesse grave;
Again, the name of son would pity find,
And for his oath some refuge seeks to have:
But when the Oracle he does recall,
The very thought of that, confounded all.
42
So dear to him his Crown and state appeared
That he his pomp before his blood preferred,
It joys him to command, and to live feared,
And now he thinks his foolish pity erred,
And setting light his issue, seems well cheared,
His fortune to the Gods he has referred,
Rather then loose his Scepter, it is decreed, Sib^ versus.

Had he ten thousand brats, they all should bleed.
43
Resolved thus: news is brought him by his mother,
That Sibell (late in travel) is delivered The birth of Iupitey and Juno.

Of two fair Twins, a Sister, and a Brother,
At this report, his heart is well nigh shiuer'd, 2014.

Go, spare the ^one (quoth he) and kill the the other;
Alas (says she) we women are pale-liuer'd 1946.

And have not heart to kill: no beast so wild Abraham enters Cana^ 24, years
after Circumcision was commanded: and Sodom and Gomorrah burned.

Or brutish, but would spare so sweet a child.
44
And shall a father then so madly fare
With his own issue, his child's blood to spill?
And whom the Tigers and fell beasts would spare,
Shall reasonable man presume to kill?
The birds more tender ore their young ones are,
Fishes are kind unto their issue still.
Fish, bird, and beast, in sea, Air, ^arth, that breeds,
Though reasonlesse, her tender young ones feeds.
45
Further she was proceeding, when the son, Lycophron.

An irefull frown upon his mother threw,
Away (quoth he) and to Sibilla run,
And let the same hand that my first borne slew
Destroy this to, for as we have begun,
We will persist, the Lady sad, withdrew,
Affraide and grieved at once, to see him moved,
Whom, as her King (she feared) her son; she loved,
46
No sooner was she out of fight, but he
One of his trusty servants calls on hye,
Who waits his pleasure on his bended knee,
Quickly (quoth Saturn after Vesta fly,
Say, if the brat survive, Sibill and she
As Traitors to our person, both shall die:
He Is gone, and little in the King does lack,
At his departure to have called him back.
47
Twice was the word half out, and twice kept in,
Feign he would have it done, and feign neglected,
He thinks damned Parricide on ugly sin,
But worse he thinks from State to be dejected,
Never has Prince in such distraction bin,
His blood he loved, his kingdom he affected:
But since he cannot both at once enjoy,
His state he will save, his issue he will destroy.
48
Ambition to his fiery rage gave fuel,
He now remembers not his Sibils tears,
Whose tender heart laments, to lose her Jewel,
No spark of pity in his look appears,
It sports him only to be termed cruel,
At name of Father, now he stops his ears;
Had not his Crown, more then his covenant te^mpted,
Sybill, thy son had bin from death exempted.
49
But the command is gone, and in his breast
He now reuolues the vileness of the deed,
Scepter, and Crown, and life he does detest,
Within him, his remor cefull entrails bleed;
And now at length, the King would think him blessed,
Might he together perish with his seed:
And that which most his Melancholy furthers,
He knows, the world condems him for his murders.
50
No joy can cheer, no object make him glad,
The days in sighs, the nights in tears he spends,
Nothing can please him: (be it good or bad)
His troubled and crazed senses it offends,
That he is now surnamed, Saturn the Sad,
He sets not by alliance, strangers, friends;
Here leave him in the depth of his dispaires,
A melancholy King, composde of cares.
51
And to the Queen return who sadly waits
Her Infants execution or rep^ue,
Did Saturn see this boy (she thus debates)
That he would kill him, I can scarce belecue?
Alas: poor infants borne to woeful fates,
What corsicke heart such harmless souls can grieve;
Thus lies the Queen, til from her Lord she hear,
Half cheered with hope, and half destroyed through fear.
52
In Vesta comes; her sad cheer Sybill spies,
And in her bed (though weak) her self sh'aduanced,
She might have read the Message in her eyes,
For as upon the smiling Babe she glanced,
She filled the chamber with loud shreekes and cries,
At which the woeful mother was intranced:
The Grandam, in her eyes the kings will showing,
The mother, by her looks, her meaning knowing.
53
Not long in this strange sorrow they remained,
But the kings servant among the women presleth,
A general flush the Matrons cheeks has stained,
And his own blush ^ng with theirs, confesses
That place unfit for him; yet none complained,
For every one his cause of coming gesseth;
Knowing the gentle knight, would not present him
In such a place, unless the king had sent him.
54
On whom, as more attentively they gaze,
Thus wills the king (quoth he) my son shall die;
In vain with sorrowful tears your eyes you glaze,
Or fill this chamber with a general cry,
He for the heart of his young infant stays;
Which if his mother, or his Queen deny,
They shall abide like doom, he will have their hearts;
The message ended thus: the knight departs.
55
So long in sorrows simpathy they mourned,
That with excess of grief their souls were tired,
Now for a space they have their fears adiourn'd,
And of the kings displeasure more inquired,
At length their mourning into madness turned,
(Quoth Sibell) no base murderer shall be hired
To work this outrage, so the king has wild,
And by my hand the ^weete babe shall be killed.
56
With that a knife the wrathful Sibell snatched,
And bent the point against the infants breast,
Thinking to have his innocent life dispatched,
And sent his soul unto eternal rest;
The Lad his mother by the bosom caught,
And smiling in her face, that was addressed
To strike him dead, away she hurles the knife,
And faith (sweet babe) that smile has saved thy life.
57
Then give it me quoth Vesta, for take heed,
My son has charged us on our lives, to slay him,
The infant by his Grandams hand shall bleed,
So wills the king (what is she that dares gainsay him?)
My aged hand shall act this ruthlesse deed,
And I that should protect him, will betry him,
She aims to strike, at which the infant smilde,
And she instead of killing; kissed the child.
58
Are you so timorous (quoth the Midwife by?)
Or do you count this babe so dear a treasure?
Know you not, if we save him we shall die,
And shall wehazard death in such high measure?
Though you would slight it, by my life not I;
I am more fearful of the kings displeasure:
With that, a keener blade the Beldam drew,
The babe still smild, away the knife she threw.
59
When they behold the beauty of the Lad,
They vow within themselves his life to save,
But then the kings Iniunction makes them sad,
And straight (alas) they doom it to the grave;
Now with their blades in hand, like Beldams mad,
They menace death: then smiles the pretty knave,
Then fall their knives, then name they the kings will,
And then again they threat the babe to kill.
60
Three times by turns the Infant past their hands,
And three times thrice, the knives point touched his skin,
And each of them as often confounded stands,
(Such pity did his smiling beauty win)
That more then they estecme their lives or lands,
They all abhor the vileness of the sin;
At length they all consult with heedfull care, Jupiter saved.

To save the^ own lives, and the child to spare.
61
Says Vesta, in the bordering Province dwells Melliseus king of Epyre.

Old Mellisseus, a renowned King,
His daughters I brought up in sacred Spells,
And taught them Chares, to sow, to weaue, to sing,
No Lady living these bright Dames excels
In virtuous Thewes, good graces, euery^ thing;
To these my little Graund-child I will send,
And to their trust, this prectious charge commend.
62
Fair Almache and Mellissee I know, Alias, Advastea, and Idas

(For so these virtuous Ladies have to name)
Will when they understand what Queen does owe Apollon. Rhod. lib. 3. Arg.
Pausanias in Messemacis. Lactan. lib de falsa religione.

This royal issue, and from whence it came,
Their best and choysest entertainment show,
And to no ear our secret Act proclaim;
Thus they conclude, all needful things are fatcht,
And on her way a trusty maid dispatched.
63
Who in the City Of on safe ariuing, Apol. Atheniensis gramat.

To the two Sisters she her charge presents,
They glad to hear of Vesta still suruiuing, Eusebius.

Yet grieved at her cause of discontents,
Welcome the Damsel, In their honors striving
To cheer her, who as doubtful still laments,
Not knowing yet how the young Prince shall speed,
Or what the provident sisters have decreed.
64
The courteous virgins, hearing the sad story
Of virtuous Sybill and her son related,
Both for the mother and the Son, are sorry,
And having with themselves a while debated,
They hold their womanish pity much more glory
Then to be rude, and cruel estimated,
And now their studies are, the Babe to hide,
And for his careful fostring to provide.
65
They bear him to a Mountain, in whose brow,
A C^ue was dig'd, the round mouth was so strait,
That at the entry, you of force must bow,
But entered once, the room was full of State,
This Cauerne for the darkness, they allow
To sh^eld the Infant from the Fathers hate;
Which being selected as a place most meet,
The Damsel is again sent back to Creet.
66
With milk of Goats they nursed him for a space, Paus^ in Ar^as

Till Fortune on a time so well provided,
That when to still the Babe (who cride apace) Aratus^ in phanomenis.

They sounded Cymbals, and with tunes divided
Struck on their Tymbrels, by some wondrous grace, ^nus in Sacri^

A swarm of Bees was by, that Music guided
Into the place, who made the Cave their Hiue, Virg. 4 Greg. 2. sastor.

And with their Honey, kept the Child alive.
67
By this the Damsel is returned again,
And all the news to Vesta ha^ related,
What provident care the royal Dames have tan^
To save the Prince, how well they have requited
Her former love; still Saturn thinks it sla^ne,
Being with the terror of his death affrighted,
Which in the Kings opinion, to make good,
Vest a salutes him with a cup of blood.
68
An Abbest stone into the bole was brayed,
It showed like the Babes heart, beaten to powder,
The Dowager in funeral black arrayed,
With re^erence to her Son and Sovereign bowed her,
(Women have tears at will) their wiles to aid,
And she has plenty to ber plot allowed her;
See here (quoth she) and as she more would say,
Grief strikes her mute, and tu^s her head away.
69
Again she would proceed, again she fails,
But the third time begins her sad Oration:
See here thy son, whose loss thy wife bewaileth,
Murdered and massacred in piteous fashion;
In vain against the froward fate she raileth,
In vain she tears her eyes in extreme passion,
Saturn has to this cruel act constrained her,
And see of thy young son the poor remainder.
70
Now may thou keep thine oath with Titans feed,
Yet that thou cruel art, I needs must tell thee,
Never did Tiger father such a deed,
In tyranny the Wolves cannot excel thee?
Now may thou safely wear thy imperial weed,
(Can this thy issue from thy throne expel thee?)
This blood can never govern in thy sted,
Alas poor Grandchild, thou too late have bled.
71
Th'vnwelcome news seem welcome to his cares,
And yet he wishes they awhile had staide;
That the vil'd deed is done, he glad appears,
Yet in his gladness, he seems ill apaid:
She moves the king with her laments and tears,
(What cannot weeping women men persuade?)
The king in sorrow of his son late dead,
Vows ever to abjure Queen Sibels bed.
72
And whilst the warm blood reck't before his eyes,
No wonder if he purpost as he spoke,
But when the beauty of his Queen he spies,
Her graces moved him, and his vow he brake:
Such charming virtue in her beauty hes,
That he forgets the rash oath he did make;
And rather then his nuptial sweets forbear,
He Will sac^ce a young son every year.
73
These storms blown over, and their sorrows spent
(For violent tempests never long remained)
The king young Juno to Parthemia sent,
There amongst Princes daughters to be trained,
To do her honors, is his whole intent,
Since his sons blood by timelesse Fate is drained:
Nor marvel, if to honor her he strive,
Knowing (save her) no Issue left alive.
74
Time keeps his course, the King and Queen often meet,
And once again she has conceived a Male,
The Lad in secret is conveyde from Creet
To Athens, in a vessel swift of sail;
The Athenian King, they with the Infant greet,
Who the Babes fortunes sadly does bewail,
And the young Neptune fairly does entreat,
And traynes him like the son of one so great.
75
The husband-King, who no such guile surmised,
Is by the crafty women mocked again;
New tears are coined, a second trick devised,
To make him think that Issue likewise slain:
Once more the King with sadness is surprised,
Once more appeasd (for tears he knows are vain,)
Again the King and Queen are met in bed,
And in small process, she again is sped.
76
A son and daughter at this birth she bare,
The son she hides, the daughter she discloseth, The birth 9f Pluto and gla^a

The son she Pluto named, the wind stood fair,
And him into The ssalia she disposes,
The messenger applies with earnest care
Her tedious journey, for no time she lofeth:
Wh^st the twin-brother she is forced to hide,
Her daughter Glauca in her childhood did.
77
Neptune was nursed by Aruo, after growing
To manhood, fairefoot Amphitrite he
would have espousde, but she her beauty knowing,
Despisde the Sea God, thinking to live free,
wherefore he sends the Dolphin, who straight showing
His masters thoughts, the Lovers soon agree, Higinius in fab Stellarum.

For with the Dolphins sign to Heaven was ^orne,
And plast on hye, not far from Capricorn.
78
The untamed Genn^t he did first bestride, Pausanias in Arcadicis.

And made him servant to the use of Man,
(Before him) no man durst presume to ride,
(Famous alone he was in Athens than)
He coupled first the Steedes, and curbd their pride,
And by his Art, the armed Chariot ran: Pam^. Himnographus.

Therefore, as greatest honor to his state,
The Horse to him was freely consecrate. S^phocles

79
And when he travels o'rc the foamy waves,
With four Sea-palfreys he is drawn along,
By sundry Nymphs and Girls, (whose love he craves,) Apollen. lib. 4.

Four-score fair sons he got, surpassing strong, Zezes in by. (...).

Who Cittyes built, and mena^ Hostile braues Plutarch

Against Tyrants, that usurped their States by wrong: Herodotus.

He Riders graced, and Seamen gladly cheared,
And by his hands, the walls of Troy were rear^d.
80
To him three Temples consecrated were, H^. in (...).

Of great Magnificence; In Isthmus one,
In Tenarus a second did appear, Plut. in vita Pompeia.

A structure (in that Isle) famous alone,
A third to him the stowt Calabrians rear, Hom. lib. 5. odis

Semblant to these, through all the world were none;
Upon these shrines to make his glories full, Virg. 5.

The people used to sacrifice a Bull.
81
Pluto (whom some call Mammon) God of gold, Pau. in Atticis^ Atticis

Who (after) did the Tartar kindome seize,
As ^oue a Scepter in his hand does hold,
Neptune the Trident, so he graspes the Keys:
Some think this God inhabited of old
Hiberia, him the Pyren mountains please, Hiberia called Spain.

Of whom and Proserpine his ravished Btide,
Desist; to speak what Juno did betide. Strabo lib. 3. Geographca.

82
Thus eldest I^piter lives in a Cave
Near Oson, nursed with Honey from the Bees,
The Athenian King did the young Neptune save,
In Athens, where great Clearks have taken degrees; 2250.

Athens the well of knowledge, and the Grave 1913.

Of Ignorance, where Neptune safety sees
Pluto the youngest of the three, does dwell
In lower The ssaly, since termed Hell.
83
The time these lived, was Patriarch Isaac borne,
In Lybia Affer raignde, Brigus in Spain,
By Inachus, the Argiue Crown is worn:
Aratus does the Assyrian state maintain;
Now Sodom and Gomorrha to ashes turn,
Pelloponesus does Aegidius gain,
Germania is vpheld by Herminon,
And Aethyopia swayed by Phaeton.
84
Saturn, that of his three sons nothing knew,
Doted on lovely Juno, and often sent
Unto her place of Nurture, where she grew
Fair and well featured, there her youth she spent,
Whose soiorne in Parthemia Saturn drew
To visit her (on earth his sole content)
Many rare presents, and rich guists he brought her,
Where leave him in Parthemia with his daughter.
Our Poem, though familiarly known to them of judgment and reading, yet
because it may not seem intricate to the less capeable, I thought it not
altogether impertinent to insert some few observations to the end of every
Caate.

Touching this Vranus, from whom our History takes life, some Writers (and
those not of the least authority) think in him to be figured Chanaan, son of
Cham, son of Noah, whom Noah cursed, but spared his son Cham, because God
had once blessed him.

This Canaan for sundry benefits by him bestowed upon many Nations, was called
by some Ogyges, by others Fenix, as also Coelum, Sol, Proteus, Ianus, Geminus,
Iunonius, Quirinus, Patulcius, Bacchus, Vortumnus, Chaos, Ileton or the seed of
the Gods. Also his wife Vesta, for her bounty, they called Tellus, Opis,
Aretia, and Cibilla, the mother of the Gods

And these lived in the third generation after the Flood. From this Vesta, came
the virgin Vestals in Rome. This Cham father to Canaan, was called Aegiptian
Saturn, and Nemroth, Babilonian Saturn. Cham was also called Saturn in
Italy, who came thither to dwell, in the time that Comerus the Scythian usurped
there: a neighbor to old Ianus that dwelt in Laurentum: And this was in the
year of the world 1898. the year before Christ 2065. but rather then enter
too deep into antiquity, the sequel of our history we derive from Saturn of
Creet.

There were two Jupiters, the first Jupiter Belus, from Cicero de natura deorum.
whom Nilus descended and first Idolatrised to him: the second Jupiter of
Creet, who was after instiled Olimpian Jupiter, and supreme king of the Gods.

Tytan, Saturnes brother, is often by the Poets taken for the Sun, he is
likewise called Hiperion, and ruler of the Bochas.
Planets: but Bochas writes Hiperion to be Tytans son, and not a name soly
attributed to the Sun.

Where Saturn makes his expedition to the Oracle: I read of two Oracles, one
spoke in Delphos from the mouth of Apollo, the other in Egypt, from Jupiter
Belus, who is likewise called the Son of Saturn, and the second Emperor of
Babylon after Nemroth.

Oson a City and mountain in Epyre where Jupiter was nursed. This Epyre is a
Country in Greece, having on the North Macedonia, the East Achaya, the West
the sea Ionium: It cannot be the mountain Ossa, because Ossa is in Thessaly.

Saturnus was the first father of the Gods, who begatte Lactantius.
Jupiter, Juno, Neptune, Pluto, and Glauca, by his wife Ops, otherwise called
Sybilla.

Demogorgon, signifies Earth, and Aethra Air, supposed Vranus father and
mother.

Cadmus son to Agenor king of Phenicia, who being sent by his father to
seek his sister Europa whom Jupiter in Ovid. meta. 2.
the shape of a Bull had ravished, and not finding her, durst not return to
his Country but stayed in Boetia, where be built the famous City Thebes,
brought letters first into Greece, and found the casting of metals in Pangeus
a promontory in Thrace.

Panchaia a sandy country of Arabia, where is plenty of Frankincence. In a
high hill of this Country, Thoas and Aeaclis first found out gold Ore.

Erichthon other wise Erichtheus, he was nursed by Minerua, after instated king
of Athens, he first invented the Chariot, and is supposed to be the first that
tried mettalles, part of which skill, some take from him, and attribute unto
Ceachus.

Idaei Dactili otherwise called Corybanthus, were certain priests of Cibell,
these are sayae to find out the use of Iron.

Salmentes and Damnamenecus, two Jews, S. Clement speaks of, who first found
out the use of Iron in Cipres.

Lydus the son of Atis, and brother to Tyrrhenus, of him Lidia took the
name: he first melted brass, and made it pliable to the hammer: a cunning
which Theophrastus would bestow upon one Delos the Phrigian, but Aristotle
yeildes it to Lydus.

Cassiterides are ten Istandes in the Spanish sea, in these Midacritus (by the
opinion of Strabo) first found out the use of Lead.

Cynaras, aritch King of Cypres, who unawares lay with his daughter Myrrha,
and on her begat Adonis. He first devised the Stithce, Tongs, File and Leauer.

Pyrodes was son to Cilix, of whom Cicilia took name, and Cilix was son to
Phenicia, he was the first struck fire from the flint.

Prometheus son to Iapetus, who for stealing Fire from heaven to inspire life
in his Images, was by Jupiter tide unto the mount Cancasus, where an Eagle
still gnaweth his entrails.

Anacharsis a great Philosopher, borne in Scythia, he first devised the
Bellows, and as some suppose the Potters wheel.

Apis King of the Argioes, he taught first the plantinge of vines, and after
his death was worshipped in the shape of an Ox.

Iubalda governed Spain.

Craunuis Italy.

Satron the Gauls.

Semiramis Assyria. At the same time Saturn married his Sister Sybill. This
was in the year of the World 2000. and the year before Christ 1963. Seven
years after this, which was 250. years after the Deluge, Noah paid his due to
Nature.

Almache and Mellisee, are supposed to be Adrastea and Isde.

THus it is our purpose to be are along with us the best known Kingdoms of
the World, that the truth of an Hystory being countenanced with their credit,
may purchase the better belief.

The end of the first CANTO.
Argumentum
Young Dardanus his brother Iasius slew,
And leaves the Country where he sought to rain
War twixt the Epirians and Pelagrans grew,
Lycaon is by Jove exilde, not slain:
Jupiter of Calisto taking v^ew,
A votresse, and one of Dians train;
Loves, and is loathed, the Virgin is beguild,
Clad like a maid, he gets the Maid with child.
ARG. 6.
TH'Epirian slain: Troys first foundation laid,
Chaste Dians vows in Dcta are conveyed.
CANTO. 2.
OH blind Ambition and desire of Reign,
How camst thou by this rule in mortal breasts?
Who gave thee this dominion ore the brain?
Thou murdrest more, then plagues or fatal pests;
Thy drink Man's blood, thy food dead bodies slain,
Treason and Murder are thy nightly guests:
Ambition knows no law, he that aspires,
Climbes by the lives of brothers, sons, and Syres.
2
Corinthus, of whom Corinth took first name, 2425.

Electra daughter to King Athlas married,
From Lybia has he fetched the lovely Dame, 1538.

And thence to Naples this rich purchase carried:
Corinth and Naples are indeed the same,
One City; though by Time their names be varried:
These dying, left behind them to succeed,
Two Princes, Lords of many a vahant deed.
3
Whilst Corinth there, Memnon all Egypt swayde,
In Italy Atleus: Harbon Gaul,
Hesperus Spain, the Argine King was made
Crassus: in France King Ludgus governed all
Arming himself against such as did Invade,
Syrus in Syria: Assyrias crown does fall
To Mancaleus which whilst he maintaind,
Orthopolis in Pelloponessus reigned.
4
Moses was borne the selfsame happy year,
That fair Electra was made hapless Queen:
Who spoke with GOD, and saw the bush burn clear,
By whom the Israelites delivered been
From Pharaohs bondage, whom the fiery sphere
Guided by night, when in the day was seen
The Cloud to usher them: In whose blessed days,
Corinthus issue their proud fortunes raise.
5
One Dardanus, that other Iasius hight, Dardanus and Ias^s.

Who strongly for their Fathers Crown contend,
And to their aids assemble many a knight,
By force of Arms their challenge to defend,
But Arms nor bloody battle; force nor fight Now Cecrops built Athens.

Can unto this unnatural war give end:
Till (at the length) a Treaty was appointed,
Which (by accord) should be the King anointed.
6
Iasius to Parlee comes unarmed: his brother
Under his Robes of peace bright Armor wore:
And being met, his vengeance could not smother
But slew him dead; The Lords his death deplore,
Thus pitiously the one has kilde the other:
Iasius unto his Sepulcher they bore,
But Dardanus that him so basely slew,
Unto the Pallaee Royal they pursue.
7
The people such a Traitorous practice hated,
And vow his blood shall for his murder pay,
Such as loved Iasius, the rest animated,
And round begirt the place where Dardan lay,
Who calls such friends as on his person waited,
And in the dead of night steals thence away,
For well he knows, they Iasius loved so dearly,
That they his murder will revenge seucrely.
8
Before the dawne of day they shipping take,
The darkness of the night, their purpose aideth,
Through the vast Ocean a swift sail they make,
But as the morning rises, and night fades,
The stern Corinthians to their fury wake,
And every man th'vngarded house inuadeth,
But when they entering, found the brother fled,
They curse the living, and lam^ the dead.
9
Long they their weary Fortunes have in chase,
Still in the mercy of the Seas and wind,
But where to harbor they can find no place,
Or in the seas wild deserts comfort find;
At length they touch at Samos Isle, in Thrace,
A soil, which yet contents not Dardans mind,
Ballast, fresh water, victuals he takes in,
And hoysing sail, seeks further shores to win.
10
By this the Asian Seas his ships has past,
And now within the Hell spont he rides,
The Mariners the shore discry at last,
Where calling all their Sea-gods to their guides,
To their discovery they apply them fast,
And now their vessels near the cost abides,
Not long about the briny beach they houer,
But Dardan lands, the Island to discover.
11
He finds it fruitful, pleasant, and a soil
Fit to inhabit, hie woods, champion fields,
He holds this country worth her former toil,
The place he likes, and to this clime he yields,
And after all his travel and turmoile, 2485.

He plants himself: a City here he builds, 1478. The first foundation of Troy

He casts a huge Ditch first, then lays a frame,
And after calls it Dardan by his name.
12
The time the groundsils of great Troy were laid,
Was Lacedemon built (by computation)
In Athens Ertchthonius King was made,
And Danaus ruler ore the Argiue Nation:
Hercules Dasinas, Phenitia swayde,
Egiptus Egypt; now the first foundation
Of great Apollos Temple was begun
By young Eristhones, King Cecrops son.
13
In process is much people there conuented,
Being a City, well and fairly seated,
And all such people as this place frequented,
Were by him and his followers well entreated,
No stranger, from the King past discontented;
No Merchant in his traffic was defeated:
In time, his wealth and people both abound,
And here in Dardan, Dardanus lives crowned.
14
This Dardan on Candame got a son,
Eruton hight: who the same state maintained,
Time keeps his course, away the swift hours run,
The second King, in Arts and Wars is trained,
Imagine seven and forty Winters dun,
So long Eruton in this City reigned:
Troos his son the kingdom does enjoy, Troy named of king Troos

And of this Troos, came the name of Troy.
15
A puissant King in Arms, his valors fame
Through all the Asian confines stretched far;
Kingdoms he does subdue, Invadors tame,
By him the two first kings ecclipsed are;
And the Dardanians change their ancient name,
And of King Troos, so renowmd in war
Are Troyans called, for so King Troos charge,
And with his fame, his new-built town enlarges.
16
Now all the Grecian Cities Troy out-shineth,
Whose glory many neighbor kings envy,
Yet none so bold, that outwardly repineth,
Or date in public terms, king Troos defy:
The strongest people he by love combineth,
The weaker he by arms does terrify,
King Tantalus that lives in Phrigia crowned,
Most enuies Troy should be so far renowned.
17
But leave we him in envy, Troy in glory,
For envy still looks upward, seldom down,
And turn to that which most concerns our story,
How Jupiter attained his fathers crown;
How Sybill ^oyfull was, but Saturn sorry
To hear his sons suruiuing in renown;
How Tytan war'd on Saturn, how Ione grew,
And in his fathers aid, his Uncle slew.
18
Twixt the Pelagians and Epiriens rises
Contentious war, in Epire reigned then War betwixt the Epiriens and
Pelagians.

King Milleseus; who in arms surpriseth
Certain Pelagians, king Lycaons men:
Lycaon with his watlike troops advises,
By policy of war, both how and when
He may awaite the Epiriens the like damage,
And make their king unto his state do homage.
19
At length Jove's Guardian, the great Epyre king,
Unto the son of Titan offers peace,
In sign whereof they Olive branches bring,
To signify their hostile Arms surcease: Ly^aon.

Lycaon son to Tytan whom wars sting,
Had likewise gald and spoild his lands increase;
Applauds the motion, swears to this accord,
Conditioned thus, to leave an Epire Lord.
20
An Epyre Lord, as Hostage straight they take,
And in Pelagia with Lycaon leave him,
There to abide, till they amends shall make
For all the spoils, the Eperiens did bereave him,
The King the days does watch, the nights does wake,
Least his Epirien hostage should deceive him:
Lycaon of his covenant naught does slack,
The time expires the Lord should be sent back.
21
And to that purpose Melliseus sends
Ambassadors, from Epire to Pelage,
Who to Lycaon bears his kind commends,
Lycaon full of spleen and warlike rage
To quit his former in^ury, intends,
And with much pain his fury does assuage,
Yet gives them outward welcome, they desire
Their Hostage Lord to bear back to Epire.
22
Unto a Morrowes banquet he inuites them,
Saying they shall receive him at that feast:
The morrow comes (full ill the kings requites them)
He makes th'Epirien to be killed and dressed,
Part to be sod, part to be roasted, which incites them
To horror and amazement, they detest
So hor^ible an object: Then the King
Thus says; Behold your Hostage here I bring.
23
Young Jupiter was at the Table seated,
Sent with the rest, by his great soster-Father
On th'Ambassie: he having heard repeated
A deed so monstrous, or inhumane rather,
As one that brookt not to be so in^reated,
His lofty spirits he to his heart does gather:
And rising from the Table, draws his sword,
And bears away the mangled Epyre Lord.
24
Into the Market place his load he bears,
Before the amazed people to dis^lose it:
The bold undaunted Worthy nothing seares,
But bears the body, and in public shows it;
Some roasted, and some sod, some baked appears,
And cucry soul abhorres the deed that knows it:
Who wondering whence so vilde a mischief came,
Behold (quoth he) your King Lycaons shame.
25
Behold the prince, the son of Titan kept,
Upon his honor safely to deliver,
Some were ashamed, some threatened, and some wept,
Some of their trembling ^arts with terror shiuer,
Which Saturnes son espying, forth he stepped,
And says: shall such a Tirant and badliuer?
Shall such a bloody and insatiate devil
Unpunished escape, for practice of this evil?
26
The infamy of this inhuman act,
(...) to you; it has defamed your nation,
Where ^re report shall blazon this base fact,
Of our Epi^tan murdered in such fashion,
It will appear that you the Tirant bact,
And that it was your deed; This short Oration,
Took such effect, that each man blushed w^hin,
Feeling himself touched with that horrid sin.
27
Much more he spoke, to bring the king in hate
With such his subrects as had never loved him,
That fell Lycaon but usurped his state,
And brought a scandal on them all, he proved him,
Thus of his murdrous act he does dilate,
To which his tirany and ranker moved him,
His ^ormer cruelty, this bloody sight,
And Jove's persuasions, makes them bent to fight.
28
Saturnes bold son will no adu^ntage leese,
But with his many tirannies proceeds,
He makes such burn, whose hearts before did freeze,
At the recital of his bloody deeds:
Then bears again the course, which none that sees
But his heart fires with rage, or Inly bleeds,
Then cries aloud: you bound that would be free,
Cast of your servile yoke, and follow me.
29
You whom the bloody Tirant has oppressed,
Now (whilst you may revenge you) arm, and strike,
You that have seen th'Epirian killed and dressed,
Let him not on your bodies act the like:
Aim all your weapons against the Tirants breast:
With that, this caught a Iauelin, that a Pike,
One takes an Axe, another snatched a Spade,
Some Swords, some Staves, the palace to invade.
30
Their youthful Captain they attend, and meet
With the fierce Tirant, armed and well prepared:
They Barricado both ends of the street,
Then to the battle (where they no man spared)
By this Jove lays Lycaon at his feet;
And there had slain him, but his spleen was barred
By one of his best Captains, who did bring
Happy supply, and so preserved the king.
31
The Enraged multitude esteemed naught
The dancing Courtiers when they came to blows,
They watily, the people madly fought,
And every man his dauntlesse courage shows,
Whilst all about, young Jove his kinsman sought,
And still the clamor of the battle rose
So loud, that it rebounded against the skies,
And heaven it self did Echo with their cries.
32
Yet Jove triumphant in the first rank stood,
His foes fixed battle he by force displaces,
It raines sharp Arrows till the ground flows blood,
And yet no knight his honored fame disgraces:
It did th'Epiriens and their Captains good
To see the streets pau'd with their enemies faces:
In this high tumults heat, Lycaons fled, Lycaon va^quisht by Jupiter

And sprightly Jove left Conqueror among the dead.
33
The Tirant when he saw his servants slain,
To save his life, works for his secret escape,
And to the forest flying from his train, Hecatcus Mileseus lib. 2.
genealogiarum.

He strangely feels himself trans-form`d in shape,
Both woluish form and mind, he does retain,
And in the woods he lives by spoil and rape:
He lived a Tirant whilst his kingdom stood,
And changed into a Wolf, still thirsts for blood.
34
Where we will leave him in the desert Grove,
Trans-formd in body, but not changed in mind.
And as my story leads, return to Jove
Who sees Lycaon fled, none left behind,
But such as whilst they breathed, in valor strove,
And dying, to the fire there corpse resignd:
To the Pelagians turning he thus says:
Be yours the Conquest, but to heaven the praise.
35
But they his honors back to him resign,
And with a general shout their caps up fling,
Saying (o Jove) thy valor is divine;
And thou of us Pelagians shall be king, Jupiter made king of the Pelagians.

They guard him to the palace, and in fine
The Crown and Scepter to his hand they bring:
And after search, finding Lycaon fled,
They Saturnes son invested in his sted.
36
King Jupiter had not yet raignd an hour,
But with his trusty followers searches round
About the Palace royal, for the power
Of king Lycaon, but he no man found;
(Death spares the king, that does his folk devour,)
Yet jealous of his state, like kings new crowned,
To abide all future garboiles and assaults,
He searches all the Sellers, nookes, and vaults.
37
And breaking up a strong bard iron door,
He spies a goodly chamber richly hung,
Where he might see upon the catelesse flower,
A discontented Lady rudely flung:
Her habit suting with her grief she wore,
Her eyes rained tears, her Iuory hands she wrung:
Herrobes so black were, and her face so fair,
Each other gracst, and made both colors rare.
38
The Virgin looked out of her sad attire,
Like the bright sun out of a dusky cloud;
Her first aspect set the kings heart afire,
Who vailing first his bonnet, he low bowd,
And to have seizd her fingers preaseth nyer,
But she at fight of strangers weeps alowd,
Her drowned eye she to the Earth directs,
And no man save her own sad woes respects.
39
The youthful Prince whom Amorous thoughts surprise,
With comfortable words the Lady cheeres,
Supports her by the arm, entreats her rise,
And from her bosom to remove her fears,
Yet will not she erect her downe-cast eyes:
Nor to his smooth-sweete language lend her cares,
Till from the Earth he raised her by the arm,
And thus with words, begins her grief to charm.
40
Bright Damsel, did you know the worth of all
Those precious drops you prodigally spill,
You would not let such high-prizd moisture fall,
Which from your heart your Conduit-eyes distill;
Oh spare them though you count their value small,
To have them spar'de I Will give you (if you will)
Although not in full payment, yet in part,
A Princes favor, and a Soldiers heart.
41
You dim those eyes that sparkle fire Divine,
By whom this melancholy room is lighted,
The place were dark, and but for their bright shine,
We in this Dungeon should be all benighted:
Oh save your beauty then and spare your eyes:
Why should you at our presence be affrighted;
we come not with our weapons drawn to fear you,
But with our comfortable words, to cheer you.
42
But say, our hostile weapons were all bent
Against your breast; yet why should you be mated?
Bewty's sword-profe, no forceable intent
But by a face so fair is soon rebated,
Your beauty was unto your body lent,
To be her Secretary; where instated,
It is as safe as if a wall of Iron
Impreguable, your person should inuiron.
43
With that the woeful maid vplifts her eye,
And fixed it first upon the Princes face,
But there it dwelt not long, for by and by
It wandered wildly round about the place,
Yet coming to her self, when she began spy
Her self among strangers with a modest grace,
Having her raging grief awhile restrained,
Thus blushing, she her sad estate complained.
44
My father, oh my Father, where is he?
To whom these Subjects should of right belong:
You are the Limbs, the head I cannot see,
Oh, you have done the king some violent wrong,
What Stranger's this that does solicit me?
How dare you thus into my chamber throng?
And fright me, (being a Princess) with your steel,
Or where is the King, that to this youth you kneel?
45
If King Lycaon live, why do you bow
Unto a stranger, he suruiuing still?
If he be slain, why am I hindered now,
Upon his Coarse my Funeral tears to spill?
I may lament by Law, no laws allow;
Subjects by Treason their liege Lords to kill,
My tears are natural, and come in season, '
Your treacherous act is mere unnatural Treason.
46
By these her words, the Amorous Prince does gather
This Lady to be king Lycaons daughter,
It grieves him now he has exiled her father,
And once again of favor he besought her,
But she all sorrow now entreats him rather
To leave the Chamber, since his coming brought her
Nothing but news of death, and words of care,
Her Fathers ruin, and her own despair.
47
By many fair persuasions the Prince moves her,
To stint her passion, and to stop her tears,
He whispers in her ^are how much he loves her,
But all in vain, his tongue he idly wears:
By all Rhetoric and Art he proves her,
Which makes her at the length lend her chaste ears,
And thus reply: I cannot love, until
You one thing grant me, the Prince swears he will.
48
Remember (quoth the Lady) you have sworn,
Being a Prince, to break an oath were base:
Were in a Peasant, it were hardly borne,
But in a Prince it seems a worse disgrace:
The greater you are, the greater is your scorn,
If you should taint your honor in this case:
It Is nothing if a poor Stars beams be clouded,
But we soon miss the Moon in darkness shrouded.
49
Princes are earthly Gods and placst on high,
Where every common man may freely gaze
On them, the peoples universal eye,
Is howerly fixed to scan their works and w^ies,
They look through spectacles your deeds to spy,
Which makes the Letters of your shame, or praise
Grosser to be discernd, and easier scand,
(A king should be a light to all his Land.)
50
These words sight out, have fan'd the amorous fire,
Which did the breast of Saturnes son inflame:
He that at first her beauty did admire,
Now wonders at the wisdom of the dame,
And museth how from such a deuilish Sire
As king Lycaon, such an Angel came:
Now he entreats her ask, with spirit undaunted,
For as he is a Prince, her suit is granted.
51
Be it (quoth he) the fortunes of this day:
Be it my self, my self sweet Saint am thine:
Be it this kingdom, and this Scepters sway,
Behold my interest I will back resign;
We have no power to say such beauty nay,
Being but mortal, and that face divine,
What Is your demand (sweet Saint?) It is quoth she,
That I a consecrated maid may be.
52
Oh, had she asked more gold then would have filled
Her fathers Palace, packt up to the roof,
Or in her sad boon had the Lady wild,
Of his resolved spirit to see large proof,
Monsters he would have tamde, and Giants killed,
And from no stern adventure kept aloof,
In hope to have won her love: but being thus coy,
This one request, does all his hopes destroy.
53
The Prince is bound by Oath to grant her pleasure,
Yet from her will, he seeks her to dissuade,
Hoord not (quoth he) unto your self such Treasure,
Nor let so sweet a flower ungathered vade:
Nature her self has took from you fit measure
To have more beauteous Creatures by you made,
Then crop this flower before the prime be past,
Loose not the Mould that may such fair ones caft.
54
Let not a Cloister such rare beauty smother,
You Are Natures may ster-peece, made to be seen;
(Sweet) you were borne, that you should bear another,
A Princess, and descended from a Queen,
That you of Queens and Princes might be mother:
Had she that bare you still a virgin been,
You had not been at all: Mankind should fade,
If every Female, lived a spotless maid.
55
You ask, what you by no means can defend,
In seeking a strict Cloister to enjoy,
Ye wish to see the long-liu'de world at end,
And in your heart you mankind would destroy,
For when these lives no further can extend,
How shall we people The Earth: Who shall employ
The Crowns we win? the wealth for which we strive?
When dead our selves, we leave none to survive.
56
You might as well kill Children, as to hold
This dangerous error: Nay I Will prove it true:
For Infant-soules that should have been cnrold
In Heavens predestin'de book, begot of you,
Are by your strangeness, to oblivion sold,
You might as well your hands in blood imbrew,
Nay better too, for when young Infants die,
Their Angel souls live in Eternity.
57
And so the Heavens make up their numbers full,
You (Lady) heaven and carths right disallow;
What Gods conclude, shall mortals disannull?
So many as you might have had ere now:
So many Angels from heavens throne you pull,
From carth, so many princes by your vow:
Now could I get a son, but you being coy,
Fair murdresse (that you are) have killed the boy:
58
Much more (but all in vain) the amorous youth
Thinks in his smooth sweet language to dissuade her,
But nothing that he pleads she holds for truth,
Though by all gentle means he sought to have staid her,
She urges still his oath: he thinks it ruth
To have such beauty cloistered, and had made her
Virginity, for Venus sweets to have changed,
Had not his Oath that purpose soon estranged.
59
Now fair Celisto by Jove's gtaunt is free Diana

To be admitted one of Dians train,
Dian a Huntresse, the broad shadowy tree
The house, beneath who roof she does remain,
Venson her food, and Honey from the Be,
The flesh of Elkes, of Bears, and Bores new slain,
Her drink the pearled brook, her followers, maids,
Her vow, chaste life, her Cloister, the Cool shades.
60
Her weapons are the Iauelin, and the Bow,
Her garments Angel like, of Virgin-white;
And tuckt aloft, her falling skirt below
Her Buskin meets: buckled with silver bright:
Her Hair behind her, like a Cloak does flow,
Some tuckt in roules, some loose with Flowers bedight:
Her silken vailes play round about her slack,
Her golden Quiver falls athwart her back.
61
She was the daughter of an ancient king
Called Jupiter, that swayed the Attick scepter,
To her as suitors, many princes bring
Their Crowns: which scorning, she a virgin kept her,
Yet as her beauties fame abroad does ring,
Her suitors multiply, therefore she stepped her
Into the forest; meaning to exempt her
From such, as to their amorous wills would tempt her.
62
This new religion famous in a Queen,
Of such estate and beauty, drew from far
Daughters of Princes, they that late were seen
In Courts of kings, now Dians followers are,
Where they no sooner sworn and entered been,
But against men and love they proclaim war:
Many frequent the groves, by Dians motion,
For fashion some; and some too for devotion.
63
The old Plateenses holding her divine,
Gave her the sacred name of Euclia, Plut. in Arist.

Their maids ere married, offered at her shrine,
And then they freely chus'd their marriage day,
Without her leave they never tasted wine,
Or durst in public with their husbands play: The Temple of Diana at Ephesus.

Whole Asia joined to make a Church of stone,
Built by the Architector Chersiphrone.
64
To this th'Aegiptian hie Pyramides,
Nor the great Iouiall portract could compare, The 7. Wonders.

Mausolus Tomb the Manes to appease,
Reared by the Carian Queen, but trifles are:
The huge Colossus that bestrid the seas,
And made Rhoades famous for a work so rare:
Great Babels Tower, nor Pharos stately I Will,
Could rank with this, for cost, or height of style.
65
Two hundred twenty years it was in framing,
In length, four hundred five and twenty feet;
In breadth, two hundred twenty: Thus proclaiming
Their fear of her, they chaste Diana greet:
Of all fair Damsels her the Goddess naming,
And to her service, in her Temple meet:
A Fabric famous, both for height and length,
Proportion, beauty, wormanship, and strength.
66
A hundred seven and twenty Collumbs great,
All of white Marble, in fair order stand:
Six hundred feet in height, both huge and neat,
The like were never wrought by mortal hand:
Princes of sundry Kingdoms that entreat
Her Divine grace, and yield to her command:
Each one, a high and stately pillar bringes,
Full thirty six, reared by so many Kings.
67
All these contend, which should the rest exceed
In large expense, to make it more admired,
Herostratus that never did glad deed,
Neither with wit, nor gracious Thewes inspired,
Knowing no means his own renown to breed,
In deuilish spleen, this royal wonder fier'd;
The purpose why he did this deed of shame,
Was, that the world should Chronicle his name.
68
This when dispoiled Ephesus once knew,
They made a law, with fine to him that brake it,
To make him lose the fame he did pursue,
His very name, was death to him that spoke it,
For many years it did, but times renew
And from obliuious dusky Caves awake it,
Elce had their scilence from these ages kept,
This strange report, that long amongst them slept.
69
The world, the very day it lost the grace Plutarch in vita Alexand.

Of this rare work, another Wonder bred
Greater than this, from royal Philips race,
That then took life, when this in fire lay dead:
In Macedon, a much renowned place,
Young Alexander in that Temples stead
Entered the world, whose glories did aspire
Above this structure, then consumd with fire.
70
Now is Calisto one of Dians train,
And to the Arcadian Forest newly flitted,
Her beauty can scarce equald be again,
Among all the Huntresses where is she is admitted:
Mean time Ihoue cheeres his friends: Inters the slain,
And all his business is by order fitted:
The State established, Time in triumph spent,
And news of all, by posts to Epire sent.
71
His great affairs determined: the Prince now
Has leisure to bethink him of that face,
To which his future actions he does vow,
Now he remembers each particular grace:
That Love that makes the Idle spirits bow,
Still gives occasions way, and business place:
Abandon sloth, and Cupids bow vnbends,
His brands extinguist, and his false fire spends.
72
For idleness makes Love, and then maintains
What it hathmade, when he that well employes
His busy hours, is free from Venus trains,
And the true freedom of his thoughts enioyes:
He had no time to sigh, that now complains,
The good his business did, his sloth destroys:
Love from the painful flies, but there most thriues,
And prospers best, when men lead slothful lives.
73
Being alone, Calistoes shape impressed
So deeply in his heart, lives in his eye:
She Is lodged both in the Forest, and his breast,
And (though far off) she is imaginde nie,
Phabe abroad beholds her among the rest,
Young Ihoue at home, in his blind fantasy:
And now too late he wishes (but in vain)
Her still at Court, or him of Dians train.
74
He haunts the Forests and those shadowy places,
Where fair Dyana hunteth with her Mayds,
And like a Hunts-man the wild Stag he chases,
Only to spy his Mistress among the shades:
And if he chance where bright Calisto traces,
He thanks his fate, if not his Stars vpbraids,
And deemes a tedious Summers day well spent,
For one short sight of her, his souls content.
75
At length, he thus concludes: I am but young,
No downy heir upon my face appear,
I Will counterfeit a shtill effeminate tongue,
And d'on such habit as the Huntresse wears,
When my guilt Quiver cross my breast is hung,
And Bore-speare in my hand such as she bears:
My blood being fresh, my face indifferent fair,
Modest my eye, and never shorn my hair.
76
Who can discover me? Why may not I
Be entered as an Ancresse among the rest?
This is the way that I intend to try,
(Of all my full conclusions held the best)
My habit I Will bespeake so secretly,
That what I purpose never can be gest,
My Lords assemble, and to them show reason
Why I of force must leave them for a season.
77
Th'excuse unto the Nobles current seems,
He takes his leave and travels on his way,
Of his intended voyage no man deemes,
Now is he briskt up in his brave array,
So preciously his mistress he esteems,
That he makes speed to where the Virgins stay,
And by the way his womanish steps he tried,
And practiced how to speak, to look, to stride.
78
To blush and to make honors (and if need)
To pule and weep at every idle toy,
As women use, next to prepare his weed,
And his soft hand to Chare-workes to employ:
He profits in his practice (heaven him speed)
And of his shape assumed grant him joy,
Of all effeminate tricks (if you will believe him,)
To practice tears and Sempstry did most grieve him.
79
Yet did he these among many others learn,
He grows complete in all things (saving one)
And that no eye can outwardly discern,
Unless they search him, how can it be known?
But come unto the place, his heart does earne,
Twice it was in his thought back to have gone:
But I am Jove (quoth he) and shall I then
Of women be affraide, that fear no men.
80
With that he boldly knockes, when to the gate
A royal virgin comes, to know his will: Atlanta that first struck the
Calidonian Boar.

This Lady after was a Queen of state,
And in Arcadia the fierce Boar did kill:
Atlaula she was called, admitted late,
Who thinking to have there remained still,
King Meleager in Achaya reigned,
And to his nuptial bed this Queen constrained.
81
Fair Virgin (quoth Atlaula) what is your pleasure?
Jove, after bows and Cuttsies, thus bespake her;
Bright Damsel, if you now retain that measure
Of grace, you have of beauty from your maker,
Pity a maid, that has nor Gold, not Treasure,
And to your sacred order would betake her:
Know, from a Noble house I am descended,
That humbly pray to be so much befrended.
82
Prefer me to the Mistress of these shades,
Diana, whom I reverence, not through folly,
But as diuinest Goddess of all maids,
To whose chaste vows I am devoted wholly,
Atlaula says she will, and straight inuades
Diana thus. Oh thou adored soly
Of Virgins: (fairest Cinthia) will you daine,
To make this stranger Lady of your train.
83
Diana takes her state, about her stand
A multitude of beauties, among the rest
As Jove about him looks, on his right hand
He spies Calisto, Dians new come guest,
She, for whose sake he left th'Epirian Land:
At sight of her, fresh fires inflame his breast:
And as he stands, wal'd in with beauteous faces,
He most commends Calisto for her graces.
84
So many sparkling eyes were in his sight,
That hedged the sacred Queen of Virgins round,
That with their splendour have made noone of night,
Should all at once look upward, the base ground
Might match the sky, and make the earth as bright,
As in that eeuen, when Ariadne crowned,
was through the Galaxia in pomp led,
Millions of stars all burning over her head.
85
Diana, Ihoue in cuery part surueyes,
Who simpers by himself, and stands demurely,
His youth, his face, his stature she does praise,
(A brave virago she supposed him surely)
Were all my train of this large size (she says)
Within these Forests we might dwell securely:
Among all, that stand or kneel upon the grass,
I spy not such another Manly Less.
86
So gives her hand to kiss: Ihoue grace does win,
With Phabe and Atlanta, who suppose
Him what he seems, and now received in,
With all the Maids, he well acquainted grows,
They teach him how to Sow, to Card, and Spin,
Calisto for his bedfellow he chose:
With her all day he works, at night he lies,
Yet cuery morn, the maid, a Maid does rise.
87
For if he glaunst but at a word or two
Of Love, or grew familiar (as Maids use)
She frowns, or shakes the head (all will not do)
His amorous parley she does quite refuse:
Sometime by feeling touches he would woo;
Sometime her neck and breast, and sometime choose
Her lip to dally with: what hurt's in this?
Who would forbid a maid, a May de to kiss?
88
And then amidst this dalliance he would cheer her,
And from her neck, decline unto her shoulder,
Next to her breast, and thence discending nearer
Unto the place, where he would have bin boulder:
He finds the froward Gyrle so chastely bear her,
That the more hot he seemed, she showed the colder,
And when he grew immodest, often would say:
Now fie for shame, lay by this foolish play.
89
Alas (poor Prince) thy punishment's too great,
And more than any mortal can endure,
To be kept hungry in the sight of meat,
And thirsty, in the sight of Waters pure:
Thou seekst the food thou most desirs't to cate,
Which flies thee most, when most thou think it sure,
It Is double want, among Riches to be poor,
And double death, to drown in sight of shore.
90
Besides, the Prince too boldly dares not prove her,
As ignorant, how she may take his offer,
Nor dare he tell her he is Ihoue, her Lover,
Though she at first might deem, the Prince did scoff her:
Yet if she should his secrecy discover,
He fears what violent force the Queen might profer
To one, that with such impudence profane,
Should break the sacred Orders of her train.
91
He therefore a convenient season watched,
When bright Diana the wild Stag would chase,
The beauteous Virgins were by couples matched,
And as the lawnes they were about to trace,
Their pointed Iauelins in their hands they latcht
About their necks, in many a silken lace
Their Bugles hung, which as the groves they trip,
Were oft-times kissed by every Ladies lip.
92
And in their ears the shrilling Music tingled,
Which made the ecchoing hills and Vales resound,
Ihoue and Calisto among the rest was mingled,
Until the youthful Prince occasion found
To shrink behind: him fair Calisto singled,
And throws her self by Ihoue upon the ground,
And says: how coms it you so soon are tired?
(Oh Ihoue thou now have, what thou long desired)
93
He chose a place, thick set with broad-leau'd bows,
Which from the grassie earth skreend the bright Sun,
Here never did the wanton he-Goat browze,
Nor the wild Ass for food, to this place run,
This seat as fit for pastime he allows,
And longs withal until the sport be dun,
For whilst the game flies from them, here he lags,
Covered with trees, and hemd in round with flags.
94
Nor are they within heating of the cries
Of the shrill Bugles th'Huntresse Virgins wear,
When the bold Prince does against Calisto rise,
Resolved to act what he did long forbear,
Nothing to hinder his attempt he spies,
Being alone, what should the bold youth fear?
Now with his Love, he once more gins to play,
But still she cries; nay prithee (sweet) away.
95
H^ gins t'vnlace him, she thinks it is for heat,
And so it was for heat, which only she,
And none but she could qualify: His seat
He changde, and now his dalliance grows more free,
For as her beauty, his desire is great,
Ye^ all this while no wrong suspecteth she:
He heaues her silke-coats, that were thin and rare,
And yet she blushed not, though he see her bare.
96
Ihoue takes the advantage, by his former vow
And force perforce, he makes her his sweet prize: Calisto deflou red.

The Amazed Virgin (searce a virgin now)
Fills all the neighbour-Groues with shriekes and cries,
She catches at his locks, his lips, his brow,
And rends her garments, as she struggling lies:
The violence came so sudden and so fast,
She skarce knew what had chaunst her, till it was past.
97
As when a man struck with a blast of Thunder,
Feels himself pierst, but knows not how, nor where,
His troubled thoughts confusd with pain and wonder,
Distracted twixt amazedness and fear,
His foot remoues not, nor his hands does sunder,
Seems blind to see, and being deaf to hear,
And in an ecstasy so far misled,
That he shows dead alive, and living dead.
98
Even so this new-made woman, late a maid,
Lies senseless after this her transformation,
Seeing in vain she had implored heavens aid,
With many a fearful shrike, and shrill Oration,
Like one intranc't upon the ground she is laid,
Amazde at this her sudden alteration:
She is she knows not what, she cares not where,
Confounded with strange passion, force and fear.
99
Ihoue comforts her, and with his Princely arm,
He would have raisd her from the settled grass,
With amorous words he feign her grief would charm,
He tells her what he meant, and who he was,
But there is no amends for such shrewd harm,
Nor can he cheer the discontented Less,
Though he often swear, and by his life protested,
She in his Nuptial bed should be invested.
100
But nothing can prevail, she weeping swears,
To tell Diana of his shameful deed,
So leaves him, watering all her way with tears,
Young Ihoue to leave the Forest has decreed,
He would not have it come to Dians cares,
And therefore to the City back does speed:
She to the Cloister with her checkes all wet,
Alone, as many, as when first they met.
IAsius reigned in Italy, at whose marriage, the famous Egyptian Io was
present. This was in the year of the world 2408. It was just six years after
that Moses at the age of forty, having slane the Egyptian, sledde from the
sight of Pharao.

Eleven years after Moses departed out of Egypt, the two brothers Dardanus
and Iasius waged wars in Italy: Iasius was assisted by the Ianigenes (so called
of Ianus,) Dardanus was aided by the Aborigines, so called by Sabatus saga, who
succeeded Comerus Gallus the Scythian in certain conquered Provinces of Italy.

At this time Lusus raignd in Spain, Allobrox in france, Crothopus the 8. king
of the Argiues, now reigned: Craunus the second king of Athens: and at this
time Aaron was consecrated high Priest among the Israelites.

Iasius was slain in the year of the world 2457. in whose place Coribanthus
his son succeeded.

Dardanus soiourned certain years in Samothracia, and erected his City
Dardan called Troy, in the 31. year of the Dukedom of Moses, receiving that
Province where his city Barotus
was erected, from Atho prince of Moeonia.

About the same time, by equal computation, Archas and Calisto subduing the
Pelagians (by the help of Jupiter) called the whole province Archadia.

Tantalus ruled the Phrygians, who were before his time, called Moeones: This
Moeonia is now called Lydia, under which clymate Arachne was borne, by Pallas
turned into a Spider.

Diana was thought to be daughter to an ancient king called Jupiter of Atticke,
which Itake to be Jupiter Belus before spoken of. She was the first that
instituted a professed order of Virginity. The Poets call this Diana Cinthia, and
phaebe, figuring in her the Moon, and that her brother phoebus and she, were
borne of their mother Latona, daughter to Caeus the Giant in the Iste of Delos.

Atlanta was daughter to Iasius, sister to Coribantus, she first wounded the
Calidonian Boar, and was after espoused to Meleagar son to Oeneus the king
of Calidon, by his wife Althea.

Lycaon was the son of Pelasgus, the son of Jupiter and Nyobe, and of
Melibea, or as some think Cillene. He had many sons by many wives, Moenalus,
Thesprotus, Nectinnes, Caucon, Lycus, Maeuins, Macareus. In Archadia, Menatus
that built the City Menatus. More leneus that built Moeleneus not far from
Megapolis. Acontius, that built Acontium. Charisius, that gave name to
Charisium, and Cynethus to Cynetha: he had besides Psophis, Phthinus,
Teleboas, Aemon, Mantinus, Stimphelus, Clitor, Orchomenus, and others.

Some reckon them to the number of fifty, others to many Apollodorus.
more. Amongst all these, he had but two daughters, Calisto and Dia.

Touching Ariadnes crown, it is thus remembered, Arat. in astron
At (...), corona nitet clarum inter sidera signum,
Defunct a quem banchusibi dedit esse Ariadnae.
being for saken of Theseus in the Isle Naxos, whom before she had delivered
from the Mynotara, she was espoused by the God Bacchus, and by him had Thoas
oenopio, Staphilus, Exanthes, Latramis, and Tauropolis. Theopompus.


The end of the second CANTO.
Argumentum
CAlista known to be with Child, is driven
From Dians Cloister: Archas does pursue
His mother: unto him Pelage is given,
Now termed Archady: when Tytan knew
Saturn had sons alive, his heart was riuen
With anger: he his men together drew
To Battle: the two brothers fight their fills,
Jove saues his Father, and his Uncle kills.
ARG. 2.
TRans-formed Calisto, and the Gyant-kings,
Jove's Combat with great Tipho^, Ga^ma sings
CANTO. 3.
1
WHen I record, the dire effects of War,
I cannot but with happy praise admire
The blessed friends of Peace which smoothes the scat
Of wounding steel, and al consuming fire,
Oh, in what safety then thy Subjects are, King James.

Royal king James, secured from Wars fierce ire,
That by thy peaceful government alone,
Studrest divided Christendomet'attone.
2
To thee, may Poets sing the'r cheerful lays,
By whom their Muses flourish in soft peace:
To thee, the Swains may tune eternal praise,
By whom they freely reap the earths increase;
The Merchants through the earth applaud thy days,
Wishing their endless date may never cease,
By who they through the quartered world may traffic.
Asia, Europe, America, and Affricke.
3
Thy Liege-men thou have plac'st as on a hill,
Free from the Cannons reach, from far, to see
Divided Nations one another kill,
Whilst thy safe people as Spectators be,
Only to take a view what blood they spill,
They near to ruin, yet in safety we
Alone in peace, whilst all the realms about us,
Envy our bliss, yet forcst to fight without us.
4
So did the Newter Londoners once stand
On Barnet-Heath, aloof, to see the fight
Twixt the fourth Edward, Sovereign of this land, Warwick and Oxford.

And the great Duke of Warwick in the right
Of the sixth Henry, in which, hand to hand,
Brave John of Oxford a renowned knight
Made many a patting soul for liues-breath pant,
And vanquished many a worthy Combattant.
5
So stood the Kentish men to view the maine,
In the year Eighty eight, when The English fleet The Spanish Armado, sent to
invade Enland.

Fought with the huge Armadoes brought from Spain,
With what impatience did they stand to see it
On the safe shore, willing to leave the train
Of such faint Cowards, as think safety sweet
In such a quarrel, where inuaders threat us,
And in our native kingdom seek to beat us.
6
Where Royal Englands Admiral, attended
With all the Chiualry of our brave Nation,
The name of Howard through the earth extended
By Naual triumph over their proud Invasion,
Where victory on the Red-Crosse descended,
In Lightning and Earths-thunder, in such fashion
That all the sheafed feathered shafts of Spain,
Headed with death, were shot them back again.
7
It showed as if two Towns on The Ocean built,
Had been at once by Th'eauens lightning fired,
The shining waters with the bright flames guilt,
Breathd Clouds of smoke, which to the spheres aspired,
The blood of Spanish Soldiers that day spilt,
Which through the Port-holes ran, Neptune admired,
And took it for the Red Sea, whilst the thunder
Of English shot, proclaymde the Sea-gods wonder.
8
But least this Ordinance should wake from sleep,
Our ancient enmity, now buried quite,
The grave of all their shame, shall be the deep,
In which these peopled Sea-townes first did fight;
Yet that I may a kind of method keep,
And some deserving Captains to recite:
Live famous Hawkins, Frobisher and Drake, S. Fran Drake S. 10 Hawkins S. Mart.
Frobisher.

Whose very name, made Spaines Armadoes quake.
9
Now to return unto Pelagia back,
Which Ihoue has made to him and to his seed,
Then takes his leave: the people loath to lack
The Prince, that from a Tyrant has them freed
Who of their lives and Honors sought the wrack,
would change his purpose, but he has decreed
Pelagia to forsake, and I must leave him
To Epires King, who gladly will receive him.
10
And to the Forest to Calisto turn,
Whose sorrow with her swelling belly grows:
Alas, how can the Lady choose but mourn?
To see her self so necre her painful throws:
It Is August, now the scortching Dog-starres burn,
Therefore the Forrest-Queene a set day chose
For all her train to bath them in the flood,
Calisto among them by the river stood.
11
The Queen with jealous eyes surueies the place,
Least men or Satyrs should be ambusht by them,
The naked Ladies in the flood to face,
Or in their cloth-lesse beauty to epsy them,
Now all at once they gin themselves t'vnlace:
(Oh rauishing Harmony) had I bin by them,
I should have thought so many silken strings,
Tutcht by such white hands, music fit for kings.
12
They doffe their upper garments: each begins
Unto her Milke-white Linen sinocke to bare her,
Small difference twixt their white smocks and their skins,
And hard it were to censure which were fairer:
Some plunge into the River past their chins,
Some fear to venture, whilst the others dare her,
And with her tender foot the river feels,
Making the waters margent rinsh her heels.
13
Some stand up to the Ankles, some the knees,
Some to the Breast, some diue above the Crown,
Of this her naked fellow nothing sees,
Saving the troubled waves, where she slid down:
Another sinkes her body by degrees,
And first her foot, and then her leg does drown,
Some their faint fellows to the deep are craving,
Some sit upon the bank their white legs lauing.
14
One only discontented, shrinks aside,
Her saint vnbracing idely the does linger,
Full feign the Lasle her swelling breast would hide,
She pins and vnpins with her thumb and finger,
Twice Phabe s^nds, and musing she denide
To bath her: she commands the rest to bring her,
Who betwixt mirth and earnest, force and play,
All but her Cobweb shadow, snatched away.
15
Dian at first perceiues her breasts to swell,
And whispers to Atlanta what she found,
Who straight perceived Calisto was not well,
They judged she had her Virgins belt unbound,
But when her veil beneath her navel fell,
And that her belly showed so plumpe and round,
They little need to ask if she transgrest,
Calistoes guilty blush, the act confessed.
26
Therefore she banished her, nor suits nor tears,
Can with the Queen of Damsels ought prevail,
Who when by strict inquiry made, she hears
`Of Jupiter and his deceitful stale,
Who seemed so like a Virgin: Phebe swears,
Because her judgment thenceforth shall not fail,
And to avoid occasion of like venture,
To search all such as to her train shall enter.
17
Thus is Lyc^ns daughter banished now
The City, by her late assumed profession,
Banished the Cloister by her breach of vow,
For by no prayers, tears or intercession;
Diana her reentrance will allow
After exilement, for her late transgression,
Therefore ashamed, through dark shades she does run,
Till time expires, and she brings forth a son,
18
So did our Cynthia Chastity prefer, Qu Elizabeth.

The most admired Quee^ne that ever rained;
If any of her Virgin train did err,
Or with the like offense their honors stained
From her Imperial Court she banished her,
And a perpetual exile she remained,
Oh bright Elisa though thy dated days
Confine: there is no limit to thy praise.
19
Calistos son immagine seven years old,
Brought up among Lions, Tigers, Wolves, and Bears,
The savage impe grows day by day more bold,
And (half a bruit) no beast at all he fears,
He brooks both Summers heat and Winters cold,
And from the Woolfe his pray by force he tears,
Upon a time his mother crossed his will,
Whom he enraged pursude, and saught to kill.
20
She flies, he follows her with furious rage,
Till she is forest the Forest to forsake,
And seeing no means can his spleen assuage,
She does the way unto the city take,
The neighbor City which is called Pelage,
Where Jupiter by chance did merry-make;
Whose hap it was, then crossing through the street,
The mother and the enraged son to meet.
21
Calisto spies Jove, and for help she cries,
And at his Royal feet she humbly throws her,
He stops the savage, and with heedfull eyes,
Viewing Calisto well, at length he knows her,
Though clad in bark and leaves, (a strange disguise)
For a kings daughter, and a Realms disposer:
Help Jove (quoth she) and my pursuer stay,
Archas thy son his mother seeks to slay.
22
Jove gladly does acknowledge the bold Lad
To be his son, for all the gifts of nature,
Pattern'd and shaped by Jupiter he had,
And of him nothing wants, but age and stature,
He caused him in rich garments to be clad,
And then he seemed to al, a goodly creature,
For being attired in cloth of Gold and Tissew,
He may be easily known to be Jove's Issue.
23
The strife betwixt the mother and the child,
Is by the father and the husband ended,
Calisto has again her self exiled,
Scorning the grace that Jove to her extended:
She hies her to the groves and forests wild,
With general mankind for Jove's sake offended,
But in her flight as through the fields she ranged,
She feels her figure and proportion changed.
24
Her upright body now began forward bend, Hecateus,

And on the earth she does directly stare,
And as her hands she would to heaven extend,
She sees her fingers claws, o're-growne with hair,
And those same lips Jove did of late commend
To be for color pe^relesse, kissing rare,
Are rough and stretched in length, her head down hangs
Her skins a rough hide, and her teeth be fangs.
25
And when she would her strange estate bewail
And speak to heaven, the sorrows of her heart,
Instead of words she finds her Organs fail,
And grunts out a harsh sound, that makes her starr,
She fears her shape, and over hill and dale
Runs from her self, yet can she not depart
From what she flies, for what she most does fear
She carries all the way: the shape of Bear.
26
And though a perfect Bear, yet Bears affright her, Calisto transformd into a
Beat.

So do the Wolves, though among their savage crew
Her Father lives, how should a Wolf delight her
Unless Lycaon in such shape she knew?
Mean time young Archas proves a valiant fighter,
And in all Martial practice famous grew, Pauson, in Arcadicis.

Adding seaueu Summers more unto his age,
He seats him in the kingdom of Pelage.
27
Where leave him reigning in his Grandsiressted, Pelagia called Archadia of
Archas.

Changing his kingdom and his peoples name,
Whether by love or fate (I know not) led
Themselves Arcadians they abroad proclaim,
After the name of Archas now their head
Pelage a City too of ancient fame,
They Archad call, a style that shall persevere
Unto the people and the Town for euet.
28
Archas in Archad lives, in Epyre Jove,
Saturn in Creet, the God of Earth proclaimed,
Tytan through foreign Seas and Lands does roue,
Having by Conquest many Nations tamed,
For time still gave him Conquest where he strove,
which made him through the world both feared and famed
Yet with a world the Tyrant seems not pleased,
Till he have Creet his Native birthright cea^.
29
By strict inquiry, heat length has found
His perjured Brother has kept sons alive,
against the covenant he by oath was bound,
Which was, that no male issue should survive:
This of his future war must be the ground,
He vows in Irons his Brothers legs to give,
His hands to Manacle, his neck to yoke,
In just revenge that he the league has broke.
30
His sons all Giants, and by nature strong,
He sends to assemble to this dreadful war,
Who like their father apt for rape or wrong,
Without the cause demanding gathered are, Tytons sons all Giants.

Unnumbered people in their armies throng,
Brought by the Big-bon'd Titanoys from far,
Where he and all his Gyant-sonnes assemble,
They make the groaning earth beneath them tremble.
31
Lycaon was not there, him Jove before
Had from the Arcadian kingdom quite put down,
There was the Giant Typhon, he that wore Typhon.

The Ciprian wreath, and the Cicillian crown, Briarius.

Huge Briareus that the scepter bore
Of Nericos, a monster, at whose frown
Nations have quak't, whole armies stood aghast,
And Gods themselves shook till his rage were past.
32
Coeon likewise king of great Coeas Isle, C^on.

A fellow of a high and matchless size,
Who the rough Ocean calmed with a smile,
And with a frown has made the billows ^ise, Aegeon.

Aegeon too that has enlarged his style
Through many a kingdom: from whose raging eyes
Bright lightning flames have in his furious ire,
Before a storm of thunder flasht out fire.
33
Of him the great Mediterranean Ocean
Is called the Aegean Sea, it does divide
Europe from Asia, and has further motion
a long the greatest part of Greece: beside,
This Giant to the Gods scorned all devotion,
Therefore was called Brianchus for his pride:
The next Hyperion of the selfsame breed;
All these have sworn the death of Saturnes seed. Hyperion.

34
There likewise came unto these wars Japetus,
( Calum and Terraes son) in Tytans aid, Iapetus

He brought with him his son Prometheus,
Whom Tytan the first hour a Captain made,
His brother Athlas too, and Hesperus,
Their royal Ensigns in the field displayed, Promesheus.

And over diverse seas their armies ferried,
From Mauritania, Lybia, and Hesperied.
35
Their Randezvouz in Sicily they made,
And thence by sea they rigge a royal sleet,
The flourishing realm of Saturn to invade,
In time, their countlesse host takes land in Creet,
Vall^es by them are filled, hills even are laid,
Towns burnt, high Castles leuel'd with their feet,
Where ere they turn, fite from their eye-bals flashes,
Which towns and villages consumes to ashes.
36
Saturn their bold invasion much admires,
Not knowing whence their quarrel may be grounded,
He calls his Counsel, and of them inquires
How their immense ambition may be bounded,
How with his enemies blood to quench the fires,
And by what power the so may be confounded,
Advise is given to make a general muster,
To beat them back that in such numbers cluster.
37
And as the king throned in his chair of state,
Sits in his palace, all his chief Peers by him,
On these affairs to Counsel and debate,
In thrusts a Knight from Tytan, to desie him,
And among the Lords that bout him circled fat,
He rudely throngs, and presses to come me him,
But being kept back, aloud he lifts his voice,
And thus greets Saturn from the Tytanoys.
38
Thus says imperious Tytan, Saturnes Lord,
Like a low vassaile from my Throne descend,
Or I shall chase thee thence by fire and sword,
And with thy glory, to thy days give end,
For thou have broke thy oath and Princely word,
And therein made an enemy of thy friend:
My Crown I but resigned upon condition,
And thou those bands have broke by thy Ambition.
39
Whilst Saturn his male-children kills: so long
He is the King of Creet, but that neglected, The occasion of this wa^e.

He wears the Cretan Diadem by wrong,
Thy perjury is to the world detected,
And therefore with an army great and strong,
Shall Saturn from his high throne be dejected:
Thus Tytan does the king of Creet defy,
And by these Summons, to submit or die.
40
Bold spirited Saturn doubly moved appears,
At his proud Message, with disdain and wonder,
Disdain; as being a Prince that nothing fears
To hear his scorned enemy-threatnings Thunder;
With admiration: when he strangely hears
Of sons alive, which makes him deeply wonder,
And taking Sibell by the hand thus say,
(Having commanded first his train away.)
41
Sister and wife, I charge thee by the zeal
Thou owe to me thy husband and thy brother,
The truth of all this practice to reveal,
And what I next demand thee nothing smother,
Since it concerns the estate of all our weal,
Art thou of any living son the mother?
The trembling Queen, low kneeling, thus repli'de,
You charge me deep, and I will nothing hide.
42
I am a woman, and full well you know,
A woman has a soft and tender breast,
But more, I am a mother: can you show
A mother that in this kind has transgrest?
Stranger may stranger kill: Foe murder foe,
Which mothers to their children most detest:
Was it for murder you espoused me first,
To be a wife, of all good-wiues accursed?
43
I Would rather be a pittious mother held,
Then through the world a Murdresse be esteemed,
Be my self murdered rather, then compeld
To murder those for whom this womb has teemed:
This womb with three fair Princely sons has sweld,
Which dead to Saturn and the world are deemed,
Yet all three live, but cruel husband where,
Saturn shall never know, nor Tytan hear.
44
The Amazed king immagines by her look,
Her fervent tongue does on her hart-string strike,
Necessity at this time; makes him brook
What his disturbed soul does most dislike,
Without reply the sad Queen he for sooke,
It pierst his heart as if an enemies pike
Had by the aim of some strong hand bin cast,
And side to side through all his entrails past.
45
He comes where all his Lords in counsel sat,
And tells them of three sons preserved to life,
The Peers at first seem much amazed thereat,
Yet all commend the pity of his wife,
And praise her virtue: (intermitting that)
They next proceed to Tytans hostile strife,
And thus conclude their enemies to expel,
Whom they know Barbarous, bloody, fierce and fell.
46
When calling him that the defiance brought,
This answer back to Tytan they return,
That they his brauing menace set at naught,
That their own bloods shall quench the towns they burn
That their immediate ruins they have sought,
And they no longer can revenge adiourne,
But the next son shall see strange vengeancetane
Of all his Cretan subjects they have slain.
47
The Messengers dismissed, while they prepare
Arms and munition for the Morrowes field,
Mean time great Tytans sons assembled are,
Who all their Fortunes on their fury build,
Their hauty looks their spleenfull hearts declare,
Each brandishing his sword, and ponderous shield,
Longing to hear from Saturn such reply,
That on his men they may their valors try.
48
Nor do they tempt the Deities in vain,
They have what they desire: to them behold
The bassled messenger gallops amain,
But ere the Knight his message has half told,
So much the Giant kings their braues disdain,
That with their scornful feet they spurn the mold,
Their brows they furrow, and their teeth they grate,
And all the Gods blaspheame, to show their hate.
49
Now has the Sun slid from his fiery Car,
And in cold Ister quenched his flaming head,
Black darkness risting from the earth afar,
You might perceive the welkin to orespread,
Orions blazing locks discovered are,
Pale Cinthia gouernes in Apolloes stead,
Boots his waine, about the pole has driven,
And all the stars borne bright that spangle heaven.
50
The morning comes, Tytan in field appears
In complete harness, armed from head to toe,
Next him Aegeon, who no Corslet wears The Armor of the giants.

Or coat of Arms to encounter any foe,
Unarmed as he is, he no man fears,
A plume does from his gilded helmet flow,
Made of the Peacockes train, his arms is strong,
In which he shakes a skeine, bright, broad, and long.
51
Creous huge sinnowy Arms, and brawny thighs
Are naked, being tawnied with the sun,
Buskins he wears that boue his ankles rise,
Puffed with such curled silk as Arachne sp^n,
A coat of Arms well mail'd that fits his size,
Laceth his body in, these Arms he won
Of a huge Monster, in the Isle of Thrace,
Whose weapon was a weighty iron mace.
52
His knotted beard was as the Porphir black,
So were the fleecy locks upon his crown,
Which to the middle of his armed back,
From his rough shaggy head descended down,
His fiery Eie-bals threaten Saturnes wrack,
Stern vengeance roused her self in Caons frown,
His shield, a broad iron door, his Lance a beam,
Often with his large stride he has Archt a stream.
53
Typhon in skins of Lions grimly clad,
Next his too Brothers in the march proceeds,
The hides of these imperious beasts he had,
From th'Erithmanthian forest, where his deeds
Live still in memory, like one half mad
The Giant shows in these disguised weeds,
The Lions jaws gnawing his Helmet stood,
And grinning with his long fangs stained in blood.
54
And yet his own fierce visage lowering under,
Appears as full of terror as that other,
Two such aspects makes the Saturniens wonder,
Next him appears Euceladus his Brother,
Whose eye darts lightning and his voice speaks Thunder
(This was the only darling of his mother,)
His weapon was a tall and snaggy Oak,
With which he menac'st death at every stroke.
59
Hiperion in an armor all of Suns,
Shines like the face of Phoebus over the rest:
This Giant to his valiant Brothers runs,
Crying to Arms, base lingering I detest,
Damned be that Coward soul that damage shuns,
Or from apparent peril shrinkes his breast,
Behold where Saturn among his people crowned,
His horns and Clarions does to battle sound.
56
Saturn appears as great Hyperion spoke,
Borne in an Iuory chair with bright stones stoodded,
Among which in trailes ran many an Anticke flake,
With rich Inamell, azur'd, green and rudded,
At the first push their enemies ranks they brake,
He fought till his bright Chariot was all bloodded:
About him round their bows his Archers drew,
A fight which yet their Foe-men never knew.
57
The big-bon'd Giants wounded from a far,
And seeing none but their own soldiers by them,
Amazed stand at this new kind of war,
To receive wounds by such as came not nie them,
From every wing they hear their looses jar,
They knew not where to turn, or how to fly them,
The showers of Arrows rained so fast and thick,
That in their legs, thighs, breast, and arms they stick
58
So long as their strong Bows of trusty Ewe
And silken strings held fast, so long fresh rivers
Of Crimson blood the Champion did imbrew,
For every shaft the Archers Bow delivers,
Or kills or wounds one of their countlesse crew,
But when they once had emptied all their quiuers,
And that the enemy saw their arrows wasted,
To blows and handy-strokes both armies hasted.
59
Thou famous English Henry of that name Henry the 5.

The fifth: I cannot but remember thee
That wan unto thy kingdom endless fame,
By thy bold English Archers Chiualry,
In Agin-Court: when to the Frenchmens shame, Agincourt.

King, Dolphin, and the chief Nobility
Were with the ods of thousands forcst to yield,
And Henry Lord of that triumphant field.
60
But such success king Saturn had not then,
He is in number and in strength too weak,
His people are but one to Tytans ten,
Nor are his guards so strong their spleen to wreake,
The Gyant-Kings with infinites of men,
Into their foes Battallions rudely break:
Their Polaxes and Clubs they heave on hie,
The Kings surpriz'de and the Saturniens fly.
61
The Tytans brandish their victorious Glaues,
and enter the great City ( Havoc crying)
In Cretan blood they drown their Chariot Naues,
And slaughter all the poor Saturniens flying,
One hand sharp steel, the other firebrarnds waves,
In every place the groans of people, dying
Mixed with the Conquerors showts, to heaven aspire,
and in their harsh sound, make a dismal Quire.
62
The Citty's ceizd, Saturn and Sybill bound,
Whilst Tytan Lords it in the Cretan Throne,
His reuelling sons for Pillage ransacke round,
And where they hear Babes shrike, or old men groan,
They showt for joy; mean time King Saturnes wound
Sybill binds up: and being all alone
In prison with her Lord, to him relates
The fortunes of her sons, and their estates.
63
She tells him that young Ihoue, in Epire famed
For Martial triumphs, is their natural son:
He that Lycaon queld, Pelagia tamed,
And many spoils for Milliseus won:
No sooner did the King hear young Ihoue named,
But he repents the wrongs against him done;
and proud of such an Issue so far praisd,
Hopes by his hand to have his Fortunes raysd.
64
He therefore by the careful Damsel sends,
(The selfsame Damsel that to Oson bore him
as from a sorrowful father kind commends)
The Damsel having found him, kneeles before him,
And the whole project she begins and ends
Of Saturnes fall, and prays him to restore him:
Ihoue (that till now) a father never knew:
amazed at first, himself a space withdrew,
65
And having in his heart her words debated
And every thing conferd: his birth unknown
Which from his infancy the maid related
Even to the time that he to years was grown,
Knowing the day and hour exactly dated,
His mothers pity, and his fathers frown,
To which her words she does as witness bring
The two fair danghters of the Epyre King.
66
The youthful Prince is to the full persuaded,
It glads him to be son to one so great,
He swears his Uncle shall be soon disgraded,
And tumbled headlong from his Fathers seat,
And all that have the Cretan Clyme invaded
Shall be repulst with scandal: In this heat
The Epire King he does of aid implore,
And Archas, whom he late had crowned before.
67
Were he a stranger, yet he holds it sin,
Not to pursue his rescue being oppressed,
But being his father, and his next of Kin,
That by a Tyrants hand is dispossessed,
His mother to, that had his ransom bin
And kept the bloody weapon from his breast:
All these incite his valor, and the rather
To seem kind son, to so unkind a Father.
68
Posts are to Archas in Archadia sent,
His father with two thousand men to meet,
Who musters up his troops incontinent,
Proud that his valor shall be known in Creet:
The bold Parthemians likewise to Ihoue sent
Of their own voluntary minds a Fleet
Of ships well stored with men, who both admire
His valor, and his amity desire.
69
The men of Oson round about him flock,
Glad by so brave a Captain to be guided,
Known to be issued from a Regal stock,
Mean time King Milleseus has provided
His stout Epiriens, who have vowed to block
The Cretan streets, with trunkes of men divided,
So with the remnant of their forces troop
To make proud Tytan and his Issue stoop.
70
Their Army they transport, and on the beach
Of the rich Cretan shore securely land it,
No man appears their entrance to impeach,
The selfe-opiniond Foe so slightly mand it,
They think their fortunes out of dangers reach,
And that their power's so great, none can withstand it,
The covetous Princes more intend the spoil
Of one rich town, then loss of all the soil.
71
But when the watch from the high City walls,
Sees all the neighbor playnes with Armor spread,
Alowd to Tytan and his sons he calls,
To arm with speed: the Giants straight make head
Tidings of bloody broils them naught appalls,
With courage they their business managed,
And having each addressed his sword and shield,
Issue from forth the gates, and take the field.
72
Into three Battles Jupiter diuides
The Royal Army he conducts: The main
King Melliseus by appointment guides,
The Osoniens and Epyriens fill his train,
Some from Alacre he received besides,
A City subject unto Epires reign:
Ihoue the Parthemians in the vaw does bear,
Young Archas with the Arcadians leads the rear.
73
Syx Battles Tytan makes, the great'st he leads,
And in the other five his sons employes,
It cheeres him when he sees his Army spreads
So many furlongs, led by his bold boys:
He swears, the ground whereon his enemy treads
Shall drown the host that he this day destroys
In their own gore: and after in small while,
Yield to their mangled trunks a funeral pile.
74
By this young Archas twixt the Camps appears,
A trumpet all the way before him sounding: Jupiters Embally to (...)

For Tytan through the army he inqucers,
The Tyrant with all pride and spleen abounding
Admits him, in the presence of his Peers,
Legions of armed men his person rounding:
His sudden coming, much amazement breeds,
When Archas with his message thus proceeds.
75
Thus says Prince Jupiter, king Saturnes son,
Stay there (quoth Tytan) for thou have confessed,
That what I do, is all by Justice done,
And by good right my self I here invest:
The Cretan Crown I have by conquest won,
In which I have a filial Interest:
The name of Saturns son, Saturn excludes,
And Tytan justly enters (not intrudes.)
76
When Archas thus replies: Great Saturnes seed
And issue Male suruiues, to see thee slain,
The blood thou sought to shed, shall make thee bleed,
And all the Giant Princes of thy train,
So has the Epire King with Ihoue decreed,
Therefore before your bloods this verdure stain
Leave (these usurped Confines) and release
My Graundfire King, that hostile arms may cease.
77
Else, thus thy Nephew Ihoue by me has sworn,
By me his soon Archas, the Arcadian King,
To pluck that Crown from off thy brows, in skorne,
And thee from that Tribunal headlong fling,
and such as thy usurped state suborne
He shall to tuyne and destruction bring:
Tytan, whose rage darts fire out of his eyes,
Thus to the bold undaunted youth replies:
78
Princox, Thou think by thy despightfull brave
To daunt us, but thou give us greater spirit:
Thou comst from Saturnes son: Thou do deprave
In that one word, his Title, not my Merit:
Thou telst us we our natural Kingdom have,
Which as our fathers eldest we inherit,
For just so old as Ihoue is, just so long,
Satarne usurped upon my right, by wrong.
79
Go tell thy Father, that his life is mine,
And I that life am now come to bereave,
So is thy life too which thou must resign;
When he got thee, he should have asked me leave,
His death was at his birth due, so was thine,
Which then deferd, you now come to receive:
Reply not: the proud braucs thou have commenced,
Has us and all our Issue much incenccd.
80
Archas departs: Tytan his Soldiers cheeres,
And tells them the directnesse of his cause;
That it is Tranus Scepter which he bears,
And he his eldest by all Natures laws,
The true successor to the Crown he wears,
They sign his Aue with a shrill applause,
And by these motive arguments persuaded,
Threaten their lives, that have his Clyme invaded.
81
So thoue and Milleseus having heard
His peremptory answer, both prepare
For iminent vengeance, not to be deferd,
Loud showts and cries from both sides pierce the air, The Battle.

In cuery battle dauntlesse rage appeard,
The Champions in their hot blood proudly fare:
A confusd noise drums in their halfe-deafe ears,
Of trumpets, drums, shouts, swords, shields, splintered Spears.
82
Out of this Battles Chaos and confusion,
Of vndistinguisht valor Prince Ihoue springs,
And where he Tytan spies makes rough intrusion,
Maugre the strength of all the Gyant-kings:
This prologue was to some the full conclusion
Of that days Tragedy: their darts and Slings
From cuery part with envious hands they cast,
And Ihoue through thousand weapons points has past.
83
Proceeding still, his sword prepares the way
Even to the Chariot where his Uncle sat,
And spite of those that would his violence stay,
He strikes him on the Helm, and lays him flat,
There had he slain him dead, but to the fray
Encelad coms, and much enraged thereat
Assayles the Prince, whilst he the fight intends,
The rescude Tytan his high chair ascends.
84
The noise of his surprisall, in small space
Was spread through every wing of this large field,
Such as beheld him fall, ran thence apace,
And to his sons reported he was killed:
In have they draw their forces to this place,
And Ihoue is round incompast (Heaven him shield)
Saturn from his high turret looked, and wondered,
To see one Knight hold battle, against an hundred.
85
And calling Sybill to the Battlement,
From whence they might the doubtful skirmish view,
They may perceive how Ihoue incontinent,
Twenty tall Soldiers of King Tytans slew:
Amazed they stand at his great hardiment,
One asked another, if this Knight they knew:
When noting well the bold deeds he had done,
(Quoth Sybill) may not this be Ihoue, our son?
86
Whilst in this hopeful doubt they stand confounded,
Behold, young Archas having understood
His Father Ihoue with thousand foes was rounded
And among the Giants fought, all gul'd in blood,
He causd a loud charge to be shrilly sounded,
And thither makes where Ihoue inuiron'd stood:
Now grew the battle hot, bold Archas pierses
Through the mid-hoast, and strewes his way with herses.
87
And at first shocke, breaks through th'Iron ring
Of armed men, that had his Father pend,
Whose sword by this emboweld the proud King
Enceladus, and to his days gave end:
But when he saw his son fresh succors bring,
And to large proof his dreadlesse spirit extend,
With such essential joy the Prince does cheer him,
Each blow deals death and not a man dares near him
88
Save Tytan, who among many Corses lying,
Over which his Armed chariot swiftly ran,
Amongst the rest Euceladus espying,
The blood forsook his cheek, his face looked wan,
He stampes, he stares, he strikes, still vengeance crying,
And in disordered fury spares no man,
Pl^mmets of Lead, he from his Chariot threw,
And many of the bold Archadians slew.
89
Jove wondering whence so great a cry should grow,
Or who so many of his men had slain,
Spies Tytan coming on, him Jove does know,
And with all speed makes toward him again:
Now is the war at height, for many a blow
Deals wounds and death, thick shewers of arrows rain,
Quarters of men, and heads, with Helmets battered,
Half hid in blood through all the fields are scattered.
90
Tytan encounters Jove, Jove him defies,
And from his Steely Burgon beats out fire,
By Tytans side does proud Hyperion rise,
Against him Archas does the field desire,
And now each other bravely does despise,
They combat son to son, and Sire to Sire,
But Jove and Archas best in power and skill, Tytan and Hyperion slain.

Old Tytan and the young Hyperion kill,
91
Just as they fall, comes Typhon, having late
King Milleseus and his battle chaced,
His enemies swords had hewd off many a plate
From that iron coat in which his sides wear laced,
Who letting out the nails that bound him strait,
Waikes in a cloud of his own smoke, unbraced,
And as upon his fathers trunk he gazed,
He pluckes his bold foot back, and starts amazed.
92
But when he further looking, began espy
The proud Hyperion weltring in his gore, The Combat twixt Jupiter and (...)

And huge Enceladus besides him lie,
He quite forgets their Obits to deplore:
The Earth he curses, and blasphemes the sky,
And from his knotty head the black locks tore:
With that inrag'de, his Axe alost he heaued,
And Ihoues broad shield justin the middle cleaued.
93
Both armies give them field-roome, two such spirits
Beget in their encounter preparation,
If Ihoue survive, King Saturn Creet inherits:
If Typhon live, great Typhon rules that Nation:
Both parties stand Spectators of their merits,
To view this Combat with high admiration,
Forgetting fight, their weapons down they bend,
To see these two (the best on earth) contend.
94
Huge Typhon is vnweeldy, Ihoue more quick,
and better breathed, does oft-times trauerse round,
(To speed him with a blow, or with a prick)
Till he has worn a bloody circle, round
about his bulky foe: Typhon strikes thick,
But his vain blows dig Trenches in the ground,
Had they fallen right, they to the waast had cleft him,
and both of Father, Crown, and life bereft him.
95
Two tedious hours lasts this renowned fray,
Yet neither Victor: with this fight compard
All the days bloody broyle appeard but play,
Both ward, both strike, both skorne to be out-dard,
Ihoue with one blow, quite through his Targe makes way
It cuts the steele-bars, the guilt studs it pared:
Typhon to be aueng'de of this disgrace,
Aims a stiff stroke full at his armed face.
96
It crossed his Visor, and so down it glanced,
And only rac'st his Gorget: when Ihoue stands
A Tip-toe with his arms on high advanced,
Holding his conquering sword in both his hands,
He falls it on his Beauer as it chanced,
The massiy stroke vnreuets all the bands
That locked his Helm, his wounded face appears,
He mad, with his sharp nails his Armor tears.
97
And now both strike at once, steel against steel,
And armor against armor: their loud strokes
Make the woods tremble, and the earth to reele,
Such blows, cleave Rocks, and fell the mountain-Oakes,
At length they close and grapple, Typhons heel
Twines about Ihoues mid-legge, his arms he yoakes
about his Gorget: active Ihoue lets slip,
and by fine slight, caught Typhon on the hip.
98
The Giant scapes the fall, and both let go,
Their weapons lost, they buffet fist to fist,
and at advantage lie: now hie, now low:
To close again, Ihoue caught by Typhons wrist,
Typhon by his, both tugge, both cunning show:
Typhon makes play, Ihoue caught him by the twist,
Heaues him alost, and in his arms he brings him
To a high Rock, and in the Sea he flings him.
99
Typhon thus dead, their bands disordred fly,
Ihoue, Archas, and the Epyre King pursue them,
Aegeon scapes, hereafter kept to die
By him that with his brothers fought and slew them,
Bri'reus, Iapet, Athlas, Hespery,
Prometheus too disguised, that no man knew them,
Fled with the rest: Ihoue tired in the chase,
Returns to Creet, his parents to embrace.
100
Oh in what joy was Sybill boue the rest,
And Grandam Vesta freely to behold him,
They weep their tears of Joy upon his breast,
And thousand sighs in their strict arms infold him,
Saturn for Juno sends, with Ihoue to feast,
And his two sons (of whom his wife has told him)
With Archas and the Epyre King to meet,
At general Triumphs, to be made in Creet.
HEr virgin belt unbound, Stanzo 15. It was the custom in those days, the day
of every virgins marriage, to have her girdle loosed, by him that should be
her husband.

In the 26. Stanzo, where Calisto is said to be turned into a Bear,
Phurnutius says, that the Lady hunting, was devoured of a Bear, and being
seen no more, was thought to be metamorphosed into a Bear. There be two
Bears in the heavens, the greater and the less, into which Ovid says, Atchas
and his mother were translated: one of them Nauphus first observed, the other
Thales Milesius. Homer calls them Helicopes.

The wars twixt Jupiter and the Tytanoys, is called by the Poets
Gygantomachia, Of which Ovid the first of his Metamor: Aff: class ferunt
regnum coeleste gigantes,
Attaque congestes struxisse ad sidera mantes, etc.
Of this there are diverse Fables extant.

Briaceus they called Centimanem Gigantem, the Giant with a hundred hands,
alluding to his valor and his creditious strokes, which he gave so thick, as
if he had struck with an hundred hands at once.

And of Typhon, Ovid in his Metamorph. 5. most ingeniously thus speaks; Vasta
Gyganteis Iuierta est Insula memoris,
Tynacris and magnis subiectum motibus vrgit,
Aethercas ausum sperare Typhocaledes,
et sic deinceps


Iapetus is certainly thought to be son of Iaphet, the 3. son of Noah.
Eusebius. 2. eu^g. prepar.


Tantalus some think to be the son of Jupiter and the Nymph Plota: Others,
of Jupiter and Plutus: as Johannes Diaconus and Didimus: Others have thought
him to be the Lucian in dial. de dipsad.
son of Imolus King of Lydia: as Zezes: Others, the son of Aethon. Talia
far Puto quoque Tantalou aethone natum,
Qui nullo potuit font leuare sitim
Tantalus being to feast the Gods, for the more magnificence of the banquet and
as the richest dish, slew his son Pelops, and served him in: which the Gods
knowing, all refused to Pind. in Olimp.
eat, only Ceres, almost distraught with the loss of her daughter, rashly
eat of the shoulder: The Gods pitying the murder of his son, floung al
his limbs intoa Caldron, which Lycophron.
boiling a space, they restored him again to life, whom because he came out of
the Caldron younger then when he was slain, he was called Pelops, but when his
shoulder wanted (of which Ceres had hungerly fed) the Gods made up the place
with Isacius.
Iuory, which shoulder of Iuory, was after, a badge of all the Pelopidans. Of
his torments in hell, the report is common. His children were Broteus, Pelops
and Niobes.

The end of the third CANTO.
Argumentum,
IHoue Esculapius kills, Apollo drtues
To keep Admetus sheep in Thessaly,
And next his beauteous sister Juno wives,
At her return from Creet to Parthemy,
The father with the son in battle strives,
But by his puissance is insorst to fly:
Acrisius keeps his daughter in a Tower,
Which amorous Ihoue skales in a golden shower
ARG. 2.
To divine physic: Gods made first of men,
And Perseus birth, swift Delta guids my pen
CANTO. 4.
THou divine Art of Physi^ let me sing
Thy hononred praise, and let my pen aspire
To give thee life, that unto life can bring
Men half departed: whether thy first Sire
Was that Prometheus, who^om the Heavens King
Stole by his skill part of the vital fire
That kindles life in man, thereby to save
Sick men, that stand with one foot in the grave.
2
Or whether Aesculapius was thy father,
Son to the Sun-god, by whose lively heat
Symples and Plants, their saps and virtues gather,
Let it suffice I know thy power is great;
And my unable muse admires thee rather,
Then comprehends thy worth, let them entreat
Of thy perfection, that with fame profess thee,
And in their Arts unto the life express thee.
3
As famous Butler, Pady, Turner, Poe,
Atkinson, Lyster, Lodge, who still survive:
Besides these English Gallens thousands more,
Who where they come, death and diseases drive
From pale sick creatures: and all Cordials know,
Spirits spent and wasted to preserve alive,
In this with Gods and Kings they are at strife,
Physicians Kings and Gods alone give life.
4
Some hold young Mercury deuisd the skill
Of Physic first, and taught that Art abroad,
Some unto Arabus impute it still,
Someyeild that honor to the Egiptian God, Arabus son to Apollo.

Called Apis or Serapis, others will
Apollo chief, what time he made abode
With king Admetus, but mostvoyces run,
The first renowned was Esculap his son.
5
Hippocrates reduced it to an Art,
Gallen and Auicenna him succeed,
Cassius and Calpitanus too, impart
His sovereign skill, Rubrius taught first to bleed,
Antonius Musa cheered the wasted heart,
Aruntius too helped every grief at need:
Archagathus professed this first in Rome,
But all submit to Noble Gallens doom.
6
The first that did this sacred Art renown,
And gave it fame on earth was as I read, The tale of Aesculapius.

Great Aesculape who tracing up and down
To gather Simples in the flowery Mead,
Hard by a rock that wears a bushy crown,
And boue the neighbor champion lifts his head,
He spies a Swain in habit neat and brisk,
Hold battle with a dreadful Bassiliske.
7
A monster that kills only with his eye,
Which from th'vnarmed Shepherd shrunk and ran,
Apolles son with wonder stands him ^e,
And thinks, or that no beast, or this no man,
Admiring by what hidden Diety
The piercing Cockatrice out-gaze he began,
Unless by chance there lodged a Virtue rare,
In some one simple in the wreath he ware.
8
All the strong armor against this horrid beast,
Was but a Chaplet which begirt his brain,
Which Esculape suspecting, much increast
His Ardency, to know what hidden strain
Slept in strange working herbs (thus being possessed)
He begs the Garland from the ignorant Swain,
Who now vnwreath'd, again the beast defies,
Who straight returns, and kills him with her eyes.
9
Apolloes son by certain proof now finds
Th'inuertued herbs have against such poison power,
To combat with th'eie-killing Beast he minds,
(Thirsting for fame) the wreath with many a Flower,
And herb, and plant, about his brain he binds,
And so with speed hasts to her Rocky tower,
Skales her foul den, and threatens present war,
T'out-gaze her near, who seeing, kills from far.
10
The big-swolne Serpent with broad eyelids stares,
And through the air her subtle poison flings,
The Sunnes-hearbe charmed, soon her venom dares,
And shrinkes not at her persaunt eie-bals stings,
The Basiliske in her own strength dispaires,
And to fly thence, she shakes her flaggy wings,
But his Dart takes her as she meant to rise,
And pierst her heart, that pierst hearts with her eyes.
11
Proud of this Trophy, he returning sees
The harmless Swain upon the ground lie dead,
Whom pitying, he discends unto his knees,
Taking the vertued Chaplet from his head,
And herb by herb into his mouth does squeeze,
And down his throat their powerful liquor shed,
But when the juice of one pure herb was draind,
The new departed life it back constraind.
11
Nor wonder if such force in herbs remain,
What cannot juice of divine Simples bruisd?
The Dragon finding his young Scrpent slain,
Having th'herbe-Balin in his wounds infusd,
Restores his life and makes him whole again.
Who taught the Heart how Dettany is used?
Who being pierced through the bones and marrow,
Can with that herb expel th'offensiue arrow.
13
Who taught the poor beast having poison tasted Dictamum.

To seek th`hcarbe Cancer, and by that to cure him?
Who taught the Bore finding his spirits wasted
To seek a branch of Iuy to assure him?
The Tortois spide a Dragon, and straight hasted Sauory or Maioram.

For Sauery, armed with which he can endure him,
Chyron found Centery, whose use is holy,
Achilles Yarrow, and great Hermes, Moly.
14
The Storke having a branch of Orgamy,
Can with much ease the Adders sting eschew,
And when the little Weasill chaste, does fly
The Dragon, he defends himself with Rue,
Much might be done by their rare purity,
By such as all their opperations knew:
No marvel then if such as know their skill,
Find by their practice, Art to save or kill.
15
The Basiliske and the revived Swain,
With all the powerful herbs that life restore,
He bears to Paphos: they beholding slain
So horrible a Monster known before,
Perceiving likewise how he called again
Men dead to life: his person they adore,
Now Esculapius name is sounded hie,
Through the vast compass of the spacious sky.
16
And whether envious of this Princes name,
Fitting the humorous world with such applauses,
Or whether for receiving such as came
From the last field: or at what carping clauses
Jove was agrieu'd at Esculapius fame,
I find no certain ground but for some causes
Unknown to me, he Paphos does invade,
And great Apollo to his son gives aid.
17
But Saturnes seed preuailes: much blood he spils
To quench the heat of his incensed ire,
Paphos he sackes, and Esculapius kills,
Oh, where is the Art that made thy name aspire?
Whose fame, Sea, Earth, and Heaven with clangor fills,
To others thou gave life, now life desires,
(In vain alas) when heaven has doomd thy date,
Prepare thy soul, all physic comes too late.
18
Besides this sentence, I pronounce or hie
There is no strife with heaven: when their hours call,
Physicians must as well as patients die,
And meet at the great judgment general,
Paphos is spoiled, Apollo forcst to sly,
The Cretans him pursue, he scapes them all
Disguised, and is in exile forcst to keep
In Thessaly, the king Admetus sheep.
19
I told you erst, how Saturn reinuested
Into Parthemia, for bright Juno sent
There, with her unknown Brothers to be feasted,
And how Athenian Neptune had intent
To meet with Pluto there. Things thus digested,
Triumphant Jove, now full of grief Ostent,
For his late conquest, in his breathed defiance,
Is in all pomp received by his alliance.
20
Chiefly by twin-borne Juno, not alone
His Sister, now his troth-plight Queen and Bride, Jupiter matied to Juno.

Their long divided bodies they atone
And enter amorous parley, which espide
By Saturn, speedy Purseuants are gone
To all the bordering Kings to them alide,
Unto their solemn spousales to inuit,
King, Prince, Duke, Marquess, Baron, Lord, and Knight.
21
Metis the daughter of Oceanus Apol. lib. 1. bib.

They say, was Jove's first wife, whom being great
He swallowed: least of her being childed thus, Hes^odus.

One should be borne to lift him from his seat; Ibo. Draconus.

By this the God grows more then Timpanus,
And swelling with the same, with throws did sweat,
Till after anguish, and much traveling pain,
The arrned Pallas leapt out of his brain.
22
Metis deuout'd, he Themis takes to bed,
Espousing her within the Gnossean Isle, Orpheus in arg.

There where the flood Theremus lifts his head, Paus^n corint.

His third wife Juno, whom he wan by guile,
Jove knowing it unlawful was to wed
His sister: by his God-hood in small while
Transformes himself, and like a Cuckoo flies; Apol. Rhodius.

Where Juno tastes the pleasure of the skies.
23
But at his beck the King of Gods and men,
Commands a storm the Welkin to orecast,
At which the Cuckoo trembling, shrinketh then
Her legs beneath her wings, Juno at last
Pitties the fearful Bird, who quakes again,
And wraps it softly, till the storm was past,
In her warm skirt, when Jove within few hours
Takes heart, turns God, and the fair Queen deflours.
24
After which rape, he takes her to his Bride,
And though some think her barren without heirs.
Some more judicious, have such tales denide,
(Gods that know all things, know their own affairs)
And what they will, their powerful vvisedomes guide, Hermesinax eleg.
scriptor.

Their children Preces were, whom we call Prayers,
These dwell on earth, but when they mount the spears
Have free access to Jove their fathers ears.
25
Imagine all the pomp the Sea can yield,
Or air afford, or earth bestow on Man,
Seas-fish, Ayres-Fowle, beast both of Park and field,
Rar^eties flowed in abundance than,
Nature and Art strive which is deeplier skild,
Or in these pompous Nuptials better can:
Twixt these (being more then mortal) seem small ods,
And the high sumptuous shows made by the Gods.
26
Night coms, a daughter is begot, and named
Hebe, the long-liu'd Feast at length expires, Hebe.

Great Jupiter and Juno are proclaimd
Parthemian King and Queen: Neptune desires
To visit Athens, being likewise named
Th'Athenian King, (his blood Ambition fires,)
Pluto departs, in Tartary to dwell,
There founds a deuilish Town, and calls it Hell.
27
No day so clear but dark night must ensue,
Death is the end of life, and care of pleasure:
Pain follows ease, and sorrows joy pursue,
Save (not to want) I know not what is Treasure,
The Gods that scourge the false, and crown the true,
Darkness and Light in equal balance measure:
Tides fall to ebbes, the world is a mere graunge,
Where all things brook decay, and covet change,
28
Not long these triumphs last, when Saturn seeing
Parthemian Ihoue such general fame atchieue,
Out-shining him, he envyes at his being,
(Still fear is apt things threatened to believe:)
But when the Oracle with this agreeing
He calls to mind: his Soul does inly grieve,
For this is he whom Delphos did foretell,
Should Saturn from his Crown and Realm, expel.
29
Now turns he love to hate: his Joy to Sadness,
His Fathers-pitty, to a Foe-mans spite,
His pleasure to despair, his mirth to madness,
In tears he spends the day, in sighs the night,
To spleen his fears convert, to grief his gladness,
And all to Melancholy is sad affright,
Nor can his troubled senses be appeased,
Till as a Traitor he Prince Jove has ceased.
30
He therefore musters up a secret power War twixt Saturn and lupiter.

Of his unwilling Subjects, to surprise
Jove in Parthemta, Jove ascends a Tower
At the same time, and from a far espies
Their armed troops, the fields and Champions scowre,
From every quarter clouds of thick smoke rise,
No way he can his eyes or body turn,
But he sees Cities blaze, and Hamlets burn.
31
More mad with anger, then with rage dismayed,
From that high Tower he in have discends,
To know what bold foe dares his realms inuaid,
And against his peaceful kingdom envy bends,
Tidings is brought, great Saturn has displaid
His hostile fury, and his wrack intends:
But Jove, that in his Fathers grace affide,
Swears he shall die, that has his name belide.
32
It bears no face of truth, no shape of reason,
A father should a guiltless son pursue,
A son that has his father saved from Treason,
And but so late his dangerous enemies slew,
From whose embracing arms he for a season,
With much unwillingness himself withdrew,
All things well poys'd, he cannot yet debate,
How such hot love so soon should change to hate.
33
But whilst he argues thus, behold his foes
With armed ranks begirt Parthemia round,
Among whom the prince his father Saturn knows,
And hears his warlike tunes to battle sound,
He now forgets the filial zeal he owes,
And cries (to arms) their fury to confound,
But then again into himself retiring,
He to his Father sends, his peace desiring.
34
Twice his submission to King Saturn came,
Twice his submission he returns in skorne,
Then Ihoue his protestation does proclaim,
That with unwillingness his Arms were borne,
Loath with his Sire to fight, more loath with shame
By his bold foes, to have his Kingdom torn:
Which to make good as Saturn erst had vowd'e,
They charge and ( cry Assault) with clamors loud.
35
Since no entreaty can prevail, he rather
Then trust to certain death, must battle wage,
Archas with him their stern Parthemians gather,
And issue boldly, to withstand the rage
Of their known malice: Twice Ihoue meets his Father,
Twice gives him place, yet nothing can assuage
His settled hate, he threats the Prince to kill,
Who whilst he strikes, bears off, and guardeth still.
36
And seeks out other Conquest among the troops,
Of men vn-numbred, where his valor shines,
The strongest Champion to his fury stoopes,
And where he profers war his stand resignes,
That now the pride of Saturn flagges and droops,
Archas his forces with Prince Ihoue combines,
And make one host of able strength and fear,
Before them as they fight the field to clear.
40
So have I seen a storm of hayle and rain,
With thick tempestuous clouds of night and smoke,
Before it lay the fields of standing grain,
And top the stiff bows from the tallest Oak:
So where they come these Princes smooth the plain,
Making the green leaves wear a Crimson cloak:
The skarlet drops that from the wounded slide,
Into deepered, the spring-tydes livery did.
38
They still pursue the slaughter, Saturn flies,
Him Archas hotly to the Seaside chaces,
But in a Creek a new-rigd ship he spies,
And skapes by sea, his swist steps Archas traces,
But all in vain, the gentle gusts arise
and bear him from the sight of his disgraces,
Leave we the conquered Father basely fled,
The conquering son, triumphant among the dead.
39
Who from Parthemia posts in have to Creet,
To ceize unto his use his Fathers Crown,
The Cretans him with Olyue branches meet,
(For who at prosperous Fortunes dare to frown?)
The Scepter and themselves too, at his feet
With one consent and voice they prostrate down,
His person with applause they circle round,
Thus Ihoue and Juno, King and Queen are crowned.
40
So without threatened arms or rude hostility,
In greater pomp, and more degrees of State,
By Englands Commons, and our high Nobility,
Was Royal James among us received of late, K. James and Queen Anne

With his Queen Anne, to the Realms large vtility,
Oh, may their days on earth have endless date:
In stead of Olyue branches, enterteined
With zeal, with loyal thoughts, and hearts unfeigned.
41
Some say, Ihoue guelded Saturn, and surrendered
His procreatiue parts into the Ocean,
Of which the Goddess Venus was engendered,
Betwixt them and the Seas continual motion
I think such superstitious people tendered
Unto these idle dreams too much devotion:
Else by this Morrall, signify they would,
He among his Soldiers dealt his Fathers gould.
42
And from this plenty surfets among them grew,
Lascivious gestures, Lust that had no measure,
And in this kind, appears the Morrall true:
For ost excess, begets unlawful pleasure;
And so the Froath-borne Venus might accrue,
and be begot by Saturnes gelded treasure:
So sacred spells are writ in parchment Tables,
So golden truths are meant, in Leaden Fables.
42
Opinion, strongly among the Heathen reigns,
And has continued from the longest season,
I searched the Judgments of some idle brains,
(That no Religton like, but built on Reason:)
To know what strength it has, when it restraines
Some men in loyal bonds, fills some with Treason:
But found their censures vary from the right,
For thus th'Irregular profanely wright.
43
Opinion judges all by apparition,
And from Opinion, shame or Honor springs, The opinion of some idle discontents.

( Opinion) Thou that art all Superstition,
Thou make Beggars, or pronouncest Kings,
For why should man to man, make low submission;
Since each of us, his line from Adam brings?
Having at first, one Father, and one mother,
What duty owes a brother to a brother.
44
What Is wealth to him that nothing does esteem it?
What Is to the dunghill Cock the Pearl he found?
Give him a grain of Barley and he will deem it
A richer prize: What differs gold from ground
To him that has no judgment to esteem it?
Or Diamonds from Glass? Search the world round,
Nothing is precious held, but what is thought best,
Nothing acquired, but what is in most request.
45
Opinion's all: Say, I this man adore:
He is to me a King, (though but a Slave,)
Or if a King, of him that bows no more
Or holds him none, the style he cannot have.
Religion is Opinion too: Before
Religion was, Man worshipped every Grave,
And in these days, through all the worlds dominions,
We see as many Churches as Opinions.
46.
Opinion first made Kings, first founded Laws,
First did divide the Gentle from the Base,
First bounded Man in compass for, because
Men thought it good, they gave Opinion place:
From this comes all contempt and all applause,
Reverence to some, and unto some disgrace:
This, Peace compounds, or Concord turns to ods,
This, first damned Devils, first created Gods.
48
This, breeds the Atheists skorne, the Christians fear,
The Arrians error, Pagans misbeliefe,
This makes the Turk his Alcoran to hear,
Breeds in the bold, presumption: penitent, grief:
This made the Jews their Saniour Christ forswear,
Despising him, choose Barrabas the Thief:
Hence came the Persian Haly (long agone)
Diffring from him the sect of Praester-Iohn.
49
Hence comes the Protestant to be divided
From Triple-crowned Rome: a long-liu'd war
Not yet by arms or Arguments decided:
Hence came the Catholics among themselves to iar,
Hence, diverse orders, diverse ways are guyded:
Some Iacobins, and some Franciscans are:
Templers, Capoochians, Friars both black and gray,
Moonks, and the Jesuits, bearing the most sway.
50
In our reformed Church too, a new man
Is in few years crept up, in strange disguise
And called the selfe-opinion'd Puritan,
A fellow that can be are himself precise,
No church supremacy endure he can,
No orders in the Bishops Diocyse:
He keeps a starcht gate, wears a formal ruff,
A nosegay, set face, and a poted cuffe.
51
He never bids God speed you on the way,
Because he knows not what your bosoms smother,
His phrase is, Verily; By yea and nay,
In faith, in truth, good neighbor, or good brother,
And when he borrowes money, nere will pay,
One of the elect must common with another,
And when the poor his charity entreat,
You labor not, and therefore must not eat.
52
He will not Preach, but Lector: nor in white,
Because the Elders of the Cburch command it,
He will no cross in Baptism, none shall fight
Under that Banner, if he may withstand it,
Nor out of ancient Fathers Latin cite,
The cause may be, he does not understand it,
His followers preach all faith, and by their works,
You would not Judge them Catholics, but Turks.
53
He can endure no Organs, but is vexed
To hear the Quirristers shrill Antheames sing,
He blames degrees in the Accademy next,
And against the liberal Arts can Scripture bring,
And when his tongue has run beside the text,
You may perceive him his loud clamors ring
Against honest pastimes, and with pittious phrase,
Rail against Hunting, Hawking, Cocks, and plays.
54
With these the Brownists in some points cohere,
That likewise hold the marriage ring profane,
Commanded prayers they will not endure to hear,
and to subseribe to Cannons they disdain:
They hold more sin a cornered cap to wear
Then cut a purse: leave these as vilde and vain,
By thee ( Opinion) Realms have bin confounded,
What dare not thou, where thou art firmly grounded?
55
To the first world now let my muse retire,
And see how strong thou wast Opinion then,
To create dieties I must aspire
And give eternity with my frail pen,
Such as the world did in those days admire,
It deified, and so made Gods of men:
The Cretan Jupiter, to heaven translated,
And Saturn, sire of all the Gods instated.
56
Made Juno Queen of heaven, Venus of pleasure,
Ceres of Corn, and Bacchus God of wine,
Cupid of Love, Mars War, and Mammon treasure,
Pallas of wisdom, and of speech divine,
God Mercury: men did their God-hoods measure
By their own thoughts, and unto such resign
Their special honors, in whose hearts they guest
Most power in that, which they on earth professed.
57
This made the Heathen kings by Jove to swear,
Their Queens at Iunoes sacred Altar kneel:
Childbearing women, chaste Lucian fear,
Soldiers at Mars his shrine, to hang their steel,
The Swains to honor Ceres, by whose cheer
Their grain decaide or prosper'd: this made kneel
Drunkards to Bacchus, Orpheus strung his Lyre
To Phoebus God of Music, and of Fire.
58
To Esculapius the Physicians prayed,
Shepherds to Pan, and Poets to the Muses,
A God of Neptune Nauigators made,
And he that gardens loves, Pomona chooses,
Chaste Virgins still implore Dianaes aid,
And who that loves, God Cupids name refuses,
Vulcan commands Smiths, Flora Flowers,
Aeolus winds, and Pluto infernal powers.
59
The Poets write, three brothers lots did cast
For the Vn^uersall Empire: To Jove fell
The Olimpicke heavens, which all the rest surpast,
Great Neptune with his three fork't Mace must dwell
Within the bosom of the Ocean vast
And guide the Seas, black Pluto gouernes hell,
Opinion, whence these Gods build all their glory,
Must be the Base, to our succeeding story.
60
Whilst thus Egiptian Belus was instated,
The reverend Moses in Mount Nebo died,
And Captain Iossua second Judge created,
The Thractan Boreas, from his Mothers side
Stole fair Orithia, having long awaited,
To make the beauteous Virgin his sweet Bride,
From whose rude arms she never could be freed:
But leaving these, of Belus we proceed.
61
The blustering winds before they had a king
To lock them fast within his brazen Caves,
Great deuestations ore the earth did bring,
Tossing black tempests on the curled waves:
It Is said rough Boreas shook his flaggy wing,
Against his three brothers with opposed braues,
Who with such mortal hate, at variance fell,
They made heaven shake, earth reele, the Ocean sw^l:
62
No Mediterren Sea, before this brall, How the Medeterranean sea first came.

Was known in the earths arms to be enclosed,
The Seas tossed by the winds, brake down the wall,
Which for his bounds the fates had interposed,
At such dissension, the four Brothers fall:
Having the raines of all their gusts vnlos'd,
They cleft the Earth, the Ocean full of pride,
Thrusts in, and two maine Lands shoulders aside.
63
His train of waves by Calpes he brought in,
And through his deep Abismes leads them to war,
He people every place where he has bin
With his broad waters: who are still at jar
With the torn earth, more roomth and space to win,
For his unbounded limits (stretched so far)
That they have p^rst the aged Tellus heart, The middleearth sea that parts
Europe from Africa.

And from Europa, Africa still part.
64
So was Italia and Sicilia one,
Till the rough gusts the Ocean did invade,
Who forcst a channel, where before was none, Valor. Flaccus lib. 1. Argon.

And twixt these kingdoms large irrnp^ion made,
Therefore the Gods th'vnbrideled winds t'attone,
That their commaundlesse furies might be staid,
Surprisd them, and to Aelous bound in chains
Gave them, and he their roughnes still restraines.
65
With Jove's lascivious pastimes I proceed,
As cheefely to the fall of Troy allide,
Oh you Jove's daughters borne of heavenly seed,
My brain and pen by inspiration guide,
That what the fates have against Troy decreed
Of Priams glory, and Achilles pride,
Of Hectors valor, and bright Hellens fate,
With all your aids I may at large delate.
66
Not how on Semele, Jove Bacchus got,
Nor in the shape of Bull Europa stale,
Of Swan-transformed Loeda speak I not,
Nor of Mnemosine frame I my tale,
Nor how Esopis did her honor blot,
Nor Astery by Jove turned to a Quail,
Nor how for Nicteis he himself transformed,
Nor Ioes rape, at which Queen Juno stormed.
67
But how he ravished Danae that bright Less,
By many suitors (but in vain) assailed,
How she was closed in a Tower of Brass,
Which with a golden Ladder the prince skaled:
What cannot gold? whose brightness does surpass,
How often has Gold boue women's strength preualed?
Laps that have had against all temptations power,
Have spread themselves wide, to a golden shower.
68
From Jupiter of Archad, and a dame
Called Isis did one Epaphus proceed,
To him was borne a son of ancient fame,
Hight Belus, who great part of Egypt freed
From tirrany; and after swaide the same,
He had a Sister too, who soon decreed
Archad to change for Affricke, and her name
Lybia, from whom the grim Busyris came.
69
Belus two children had (so the fame runs) Dena^s. Egiptus. 2409.

Danaus and Egiptus: Danaus he
Had fifty girls, Egyptus fifty sons,
Twixt whom, these Brothers a full match decree, 1473.

All parts are pleased, not one the marriage shunnes,
False Danaus, with his daughters does agree,
As with their Bridegroomes in their beds they lay,
The fifty husbands in one night to slay.
70
(Save young Ypermenestra not a maid,)
But in her husbands bosom sheathed her knife,
And she alone the bloody plot bewraid,
And to her Linceus proved a loyal wife,
Of all Egistus sons, he by her aid,
Alone did from the murder escape with life,
Of whom, as they in nuptial love remained,
He Abas got, Abas in Arges reigned.
71
Abas Acrisius got, from him descended The tale of l^ pit^r and Danae.

Bright Danae, of whom we now entreat,
Whose beauties fame is through the earth extended,
Acrisius jealous of his Fathers seat
To Egypt hies, and there his prayers commended,
Offering large quantities of Gold and Wheat.
At the God Belus his great Grandsires shrine,
Of his fair daughters fortunes to divine.
72
This answer he returns: Away, be gone
Thou son of Abas, Danae forth shall bring
A gallant boy, shall turn thee into stone,
And after thee in Arges rain sole-King:
Acrisius now has turned his mirth to moan,
From whence his joys should grow, his sorrows spring,
His hoped Issue and successiue heir,
Late, al his pleasure, now is all his care.
73
He intimates that from her womb shall rise
A gallant boy, that shall his Grandfire kill,
And Arges Crown by force of arms supprize,
He swears the maid shall live a Virgin still,
And to prevent his fate, does straight devise
A Tower impregnable, built on a hill, The building of Barreia tower

Strong of it self: but yet to make it sure,
He girts it with a treble brazen Mure.
74
The guiltless Lady wonders at the state
Of this new work, not knowing why it is built,
To see sharp Pynacles themselves elate
So high toward heaven, the Arches richly guilt,
Huge Marble collumnes to support the gate,
In every place rich tinctures largely spilt,
The Tarras with white Iuory pillars railed,
And the Crosse-ebon bars, with guilt stoods nailed.
60
It seems too strong for pleasure, and for war
It shows too neat: but now the work is ended,
Who that beholds it shining from a far,
But with admiring thoughts the work commended?
The nearer you approach, the more you are
Inflamed with wonder, not a staire ascended
But of white Marble, not a door but Brass,
The windows glazed with Cristals, not with glass.
61
All things prepared, the King will Danae carry
To view the Tower, she gives it due with praise,
He thus proceeds; Child thou shall never marry,
But in this place of pleasure end thy days,
And in this brazen circuit ever tarry,
The Lady starts, and thinks too long she stays
In that loathed place which now to her appears
No Palace, but a dungeon full offeares.
62
And asking why she must be kept a slave,
Or how she has deserved so strict a doom,
To be so young put in her Marble grave,
(For what is a Prison, but a living Toombe?)
Or for what cause she may no husband have,
But live an Ancresse in so strict a room,
Knowing her self a Princess ripe and sit,
Wronged (as she thinks) not to be married yet:
63
Acrisius tells her what great Belus spoke,
When he with Orisons kneeld at his throne,
That from her womb the world a son should take,
That shall his Grandsire change into a stone,
She interrupts him, and thus scilence brake,
Oh would you be eternal lived alone?
And never die? What would Acrisius have,
More then an heir to lodge him in his grave.
79
Did you not into stone great Abas turn,
And Abas to his Father Linceus so,
Their funeral trunkes to sacred ashes burn,
Over which their monumentall marbles grow,
Oh Father, no man can his Fate adiorne,
Shall these your eyes be closed up by a Foe?
Or can you deem your own blood shall betray you?
Who are more fit within your stone to lay you?
80
What you did to your Father, let my son
Performe'to you: successively succeed:
Your Fathers glass is out, yours must be run,
Leave then your Crown to one of Abas breed:
In vain (quoth he) we cannot thus be wun,
To alter what is unchangeably decreed;
Here shall thou live, but royally attended,
Like a bright Queen, and from a King descended.
81
So leaves her guarded with a troop of Mayds,
And envious Beldams that were past their lust,
These, with rewards and threats the King invades
In his high charge, to be severe and just,
But most the Matrons, (fittest for such trades)
Rather than wanton wenches, he dare trust:
Lovers may Lovers favor, Crones are past it,
and envy, but not pity those would taste it.
82
So does the full-fed stomach meat deny
Unto the famisht: So the Drunkard spils
Wine in abundance, which would cheer the dry,
Cold age the appetite of hot lust kills,
Danae thy beauties fame is sounded hie,
Among many other Kings: Ihoues ears it fills,
He loves her by her fame, and longs to see her,
Nor are her thoughts at peace before he see her.
83
A thousand bracelets, Jewels, Pearls and Rings,
With gold of sundry stamps, the King prepares,
And having readied all these costly things,
In a poor Pedlers trusse, he packs his wares,
So hies to Danaes Tower (love gave him wings)
Hope sometime cheeres him, sometimes he dispaires:
At length arriues there, in an evening late,
And falls his rich pack at the Castle gate.
84
Where two lean wrinkled Crones stand Centinell,
To give the watchword to Acrisius guard,
Appointed straight to ring the larum Bell,
If any man once near the Castle dared,
The Peddler asks, who in that palace dwell,
Or how they call the place? Have thou not heard
Of Danae quoth the Beldam (looking sower)
Whom Arges King, closd in this-brazen Tower.
85
He viewes the place, and finds it strongly seared,
Not to be won by arms, but skal'd by slight,
I came from Creet, quoth he, and was entreated
Here to deliver tokens of some weight
From great king Jupiter: their cold bloods heated
With hope of gain, they cheer their age-duld sight,
And with a covetous longing, earne to view
What precious knackes he from his Hamper drew.
86
A thousand several Trinckets he displaies,
If this be Danaes Tower quoth he, then these
Belong to you: the Crones his bounty praise,
And in their hands two costly lewels cease,
The younger Ladies now are come to gaze,
Not one amongst them but he seeks to please:
Some Gold, some stones, some Rings, some Pearls he gave,
And all have something, though they nothing crave.
87
Blear'd with these gifts, their charge they quite forget,
And every Ladies e^e dwells on her prize,
Coming fore Danae, she beholds them set
With sundry brouches sparkling in her eyes,
And asking whence they had them, they bid fet
The Peddler up, who has of fairer size,
Brighter Aspect, and for a Queen to wear,
In worth not to be valewed, yet not dear.
88
Danae commands him up, he glad ascends,
And through their bribed hands freely is admitted
Even to her chamber: Gold, thy might extends
Beyond all opposition, the best witted
Thou can corrupt; diue through the hearts of friends,
By thee are wal'd Towns entered, skonces splitted,
By thee are armies swayed, Camps overrun,
Children the Fathers spoil, and Sire the son.
89
No wonder then if Gold the Peddler brought,
To enter, where besides him, no man came,
Behold the Goddess this great King has sought,
Oh how her bright eye does his soul inflame!
Pearls, Jewels, Rings, and Gold, he sets at naught,
yea all the world, if valewed with this Dame,
Variety of costly gems he shows her,
And makes her of them all, the free disposer.
90
So wills the Cretan King, not will he take
One mite in way of Chaffer or set price,
She thanks the Peddler for his Masters sake,
And how to please him, asks her maids advice,
But they so much of their own Ouches spoke,
Whose brightness did their thoughts imparadice,
That they contend whose Jewel rarest glisters,
Whilst Jove in Danaes ear, thus softly whispers.
91
Behold what love can do: that King of Creet
That prizes Danae above any rate,
Wrapped in course Garments (for a King unmeet)
(For Danaes Love and grace, despising state)
Proftrates himself at thy Imperial feet,
Resolud before he entered Darrains gate,
Thy beauty, virtue, youth, and fame to save,
Buried already in this brazen grave.
92
For Lady, to what purpose are you fair?
as good to have a tan`d and vvrinkled hide,
Why is your hands so white, your brovv so rare?
An Ethiops face maskt, shows as full of Pride,
These brazen walls that only Judges are
Of your bright looks, al wonder are denide,
Your Goddesse-shape is to the senseless stone
No better than the beauty of yon Crone.
93
What difference makes the dead twixt grace and skorne?
What luster gives Apollo to the blind?
What are the choyseft dainties if forborne?
What Is music to the ears whom deafness bind?
What is the costlyest garment if not worn?
Or being worn, if none his riches mind?
What shewe's in Jewels hid behind a skreene?
What Is state unknown? what is beauty if not seen?
94
The Princess sighs, as knowing all is true,
When Jupiter proceeds: Renowned Dame,
Set this rich beauty to the broad-worlds view,
These rare perfections let the world proclaim,
Whom thousand Kingly Suitors shall pursue,
Unmask this beauty: to that end I came:
Oh, lead not here a base condemned life!
That may abroad, live a free Queen and wife.
95
Pity yout servant Jupiter, whose treasure,
Whose life, whose Crown, whose fortunes are al yours,
Rob not your self of all earths glorious pleasure,
Pity your youth, whose pride a gayle deuours,
A dungeon takes of such perfections ceasure,
That should command all free enthroned powers:
And die not here, t'eternal bonds betraide,
Robbed of all sweets, that for your taste were made.
96
You are a woman desperate here, and lost,
Kept from man's sight, for which you were created,
And beauteous Princess (which should touch you most)
Your gealous father by the world is rated
As one that coopes you but to spare his cost,
And envying you a Queen fhould be instated,
A Tyrant, that prefers his gealous fears,
Before your virtue, beauty, youth and years.
97
Grant me your love (oh grant it) blush not Queen,
That love, shall be your ransom from this place,
This prisoned beauty shall abroad be seen,
and Empresses shall homage to your face,
and then this Gaile where you have cloystred been
You will despise, and term Acrisius base,
That gold in Brass, and pearl in stone would shroud,
Muffling the bright Sun in so base a clowd.
98
Her tender heart relents, his amorous shape
Appears out of his base unknown disguise,
and if her heart his sweet words cannot escape,
No wonder if his feature charm her eyes,
She knows no Peasant dares attempt her rape,
Nor any base thought aim at her surprise:
and save King Jupiter by fame held peerlesse,
She knows no prince so bold, so rich, so fearlesse.
99
But as she would reply, her Virgin-guard
Began to leave their conference, and draw near them,
Which Jupiter espying, straight prepared
His bounteous pack with more rewards to cheer them,
and whilst they asked the Princess how she fared,
He ransacks for more trifles, and does bear them
Unto the female waiters, Danaes train,
So with fresh toys he bribes them once again.
100
They throng about him round, to be served first,
and as they taste his bounty start aside,
Comparing which is best, and whose the worst,
More words and wagers must the strife decide,
and whilst these gemmes are by the Ladies pu^st,
and none near Danae and the King abide:
She viewes the amorous Prince with more satictic,
and he the Princess courts with fresh variety.
101
She neither gives him promise, nor denial,
Neither repulse, nor grant, (so Women use)
When men (in sight of others) make their trial,
They will not say you shall: least you abuse
Their friendly grant, but take them free from spyall,
And say withal, they shall nor will, nor choose,
Then you shall find them weakly, fighting fall,
And willingly, unwilling prostrate all.
102
Give lovers opportunity, their loves
Are half won to their hands without more suit,
The man that verbal Court-ship only moves,
Shall all his life time in vain words dispute,
When one that proffers fair, and fine force proves,
Speeds with his Action, though his tongue be mute,
For every maid, takes one thing from her mother,
Whilst her tongue one thing speaks, to think another.
103
The night grows old, and the bright Lamps of heaven,
Are half burnt out: the Beldams call to rest,
What shall the Peddler do, so late be driven
Out of his Inn, the lodge that likes him best,
To lie with Charles-Waine, and the Hyads seven,
He has deserved more grace they dare protest,
To turn him out at this time might seem cruel,
That bought his bed with many a high prized Jewel.
104
And yet to harbor him, they needs must fear,
Because they shall incur Acrisius ire,
If such a tiding should arrive his care,
Their bodies all were doomd unto the fire,
But by what means can King Acrisius hear?
Beside, what pesant peddler dares aspire
To Danaes bed? and all their lives betray,
Feign they would have him gone, and feign to stay.
105
His bounty has prevailed, and he provided
A private lodging in a place remote,
Danae unto her Princely couch is guided,
So much her Handmaids on their favors dote,
They careless pluck her door too, the lock flided
Besides his fastening place, which none does note,
Then take their toys, and to their beds they bear the^,
Longing for day, that they in sight may wear them.
106
A general hushtnesse has the world possessed,
And all the Tower surpised with golden dreams,
Alone King Jupiter abandons rest,
Still wishing for Apolloes Golden beams:
Desperate of hope, he knows not what is best,
When rising, from a far he spies bright gleames
Pierce from his window, as from Danaes Tower,
In th'humid nights most taciturnall hour.
107
He knows sad sleep has ceased upon the many,
He hears no waking clock, nor watch to jar,
He venters forth, and searching, finds not any,
And in his way to this new blazing-starre,
He lays his ear to every ri^t and crany,
Till he with fearful strides has won so far,
That he must now these Marble steps ascend,
Which led unto the bower of his fair friend.
108
Where coming, with a soft and trembling pace,
To touch the door, he feels it yield him way,
And freely gives him entrance to the place
Where his diuinest Mistress Danae lay,
He kissed her finger, hand, neck, breast, and face,
And every thing the white sheet durst betray,
That done, into her silver arms he crept,
And all this while the amorous Virgin slept.
109
Imagine how she waking grew amazed,
Imagine him a double Rhetoric using,
Action and words: sometimes her self she raised
To call for help, his dalliance quite refusing,
Imagine then how he his love imblazed,
He at her scorn, she at his boldness musing,
His gifts, his name, his love, plead on his part,
Against him, her fame, her fear, and her chaste heart.
110
Love makes him eloquent, and sweet occasion,
Makes him bold too, she is bashful, and withstands,
He lays to her both battry and persuasion,
And much ado she has to pass his hands,
Being girt in Arms, how can she escape invasion,
Or break the compass of his Iuory bands:
She would be gone, he wooes her to lie still,
So he will no violence use, she says she will.
111
Oh banquerupt Ihoue, in midst of all thy blisses
Ioylesse, and yet with pleasures ^ing'd about:
He wooes again with Court-ship mixing kisses,
A thousand batteries, Danae has held out:
And still the siedger his irruption misses,
They parley, but conclude not, both are stout:
Sometimes he strives, then she begins to threat,
Then he from striving, falls again t'entreat.
112
What, cannot opportunity and place
Bed-fellowship and love, if they conspire?
A comely feature and a Courtly face,
Cour^-ship and Name of King to win desire?
All these in Jupiter entreat for grace:
All these have set her amorous heart a fire,
And against all these, the least of which command,
Save bashfulnesse, sh'hath nothing to withstand.
113
And that's too weak against things of their ability,
Yet is it of a temper, not to yield,
For though it be subdude with much facility,
It Will proudly seem still to maintain the field:
It reigns in many that profess ciuility,
Who all their pleasures on compulsion build:
For bashful women long since ^arnt this skill,
What they would give, to grant against their will.
114
Women are weak, and weak ones must obey,
Fair Danae is but woman, and must fall,
Her glory is, that she has held him play,
And kept her friendly so^ so long from all:
What should she do, the Prince will have no nay,
Her guard's asleep, if she for help should call:
What with compulsion, lou^, force, and fair words,
She lies confused, and he the Princess bords.
115
This night the warlike Perseus was begot,
And now the early day star gins to rise, Perseus.

Who calls the Prince up, least the Beldam trot
Should find his night-walke with her gealous eyes,
But she their private sport suspected not,
Nor knew the King in his assumd'e disguise:
Tears when they part are in abundance shed,
When he must leave the Princely Danaes bed.
116
It is compounded and between them sworn,
That Ihoue must come in Arms by such a day,
By whom the Less must be from Arges borne;
So takes his leave, he dare no longer stay,
The Sun is called up by the early Morn,
High time, to send the Peddler on his way:
They praise the largess of their bounteous guest,
But of his Jewels, Danae keeps the best.
117
Leave Ihoue toward Creet, and Danae in sad plight,
For his departure, whom she tenders dearly,
She never loved until this Ominous night,
And now to see him part, she rises early,
Gladly with him she would have taken her flight,
But fears her father would revenge seuearly
Her bold attempt, and back return her weeipng,
To spend her future youth in stricter keeping.
118
Besides she s^ares (that which indeed was true)
That she (of Ihoues seed) might conceive a son,
Which if the gealous King Acrisius knew,
At these sad tidings he would frantic run:
The Princess to her charuber now withdrew,
Armed with this hope, that Ihoue the deed had done:
The Only renownd, rich, puissant, and of power,
By force of Arms, to free her from the Tower.
119
Now to record what I remembered erst,
How Troos in Troy his neighbor Kings out-shined,
And in the same place where it was reuerst,
How all Troys fame King Tantalus repined,
But how the Phrigian forces were dispersed
By Troas: is to another place assignde:
Here should I speak how Troy to fame aspired,
But my Muse flags, and my dull pen is tired.
ESculapius the son of Apollo and the Nymph Coronis Homer bymno. P^son. in
m^ssemacis.
others think, of Arsiona the daughter of Leusippus. He was taught his
Physic of Chiron the Centaur, which Zezes chil. 10. and Lactantius lib. de
falsa Religione, Me^nus.
both affirm he had a sister called Eriope, a wife, Ep^one, and a son
Machaon and Podilarius. He was called Antonius, Orpheus in bym
Medicus oucaeata, Leuctricus, Cortineus, Corilaeus, Agnitas Booueta, and he
was borne among the Epidaurians.

Jupiter wan from Ae^culapius the ^sle Paphos, and gave it to his daughter
Venus. Paphos was built by Aeos son to Typhon.

In Saturn ended the golden world, and in his son Jupiter began the Brazen
age.

Acolus was son to Acesta and Jupiter, because the clouds and mysts rising
about the seven Eolian Islands, of which he was king, did always portend
tempestuous gusts and blasts, therefore the Poets feigned him to be king and god
of the winds.

Epaphus the son of Isis and Jupiter Belus, builded the famous Egyptian
Memphis, the year before Christ came into the world 1492. Orosius writes, that
the fifty marriages concluding in nine and forty murders, was the year before
Chr: 1473. for which Daunaus was expulst his Realm, and fled to the Argiues,
where he spent the remainder of his age. The year after this unnatural
massacre, Aaron deceased amongst the Israelites.

By Isis some say is meant Io, and by Jupiter Belus, Jupiter of Creet, Ovid in
his metamorph: Hince Epaphus magni genitus de semine tandem,
Creditur esse Ihouis.


Epaphus and Phaeton, the one the son of Jupiter by Io, the other the son
of Phoebus by Clymenen, being at some difference about their bloods, Phaeton
leaves his mother to travail to the Palace of the Sun, where asking his
unhappy boon as a sure testimony of his descent from phoebus, he by his
rashness and pride fired the world, and was struck headlong from the Chariot
of the Sun, by one of Jupiters thanderbolts.

Of Jupiter it is thus remembered, of Europa he begot Minoes Calimachus de
coaditis insulis.
and Rhadamant, Archas of Calisto, Pelasgus of Niobe, Scarpedon and Argas of
Laodomeia, Hercules of Alcmena: Taygetus of Taigetes: Amphion and Zetes of
Antiope: Castor, Helena, Pollux, and Clitemuestra of Laeda: Perseus, of Danae:
Deucalia of Iodoma: Britamart of Archelaus lib. de fluminibus.
Carme the daughter of Eubulus. Aethilius the father of Endimion of Protogenia.
Epaphus of Ione. Aegina of the daughter of Asopus. Arcecilaus and Carbius of
Terrebia: Colaxes of Ora: Cirnus of Cirna, Dardanus of Electra, Hiarbus of
Garamantius: Preces, Proserpina, and the Titiae, with infinite others, too long
to recount. Fit Taurus Cignus satyrasque aurumque ob amorem,
Europa, Laedes, Antiopae, Danaes.
Zeus kvknos Tavros Satvros krusos di e'rata
Ledes, Evrotes, A'ntiopes, Danaes.
Apollo exilde by Jupiter kept Admetus sheep, which Pindarus in pithicis
affirm, or his Oxen, as Horace 1. carminum. Lucianns in dial. Calim. in hymn.
And therefore he had the title to be called ever after, the god of pastures.
As Virg. 3. Georgic.

Te quoque Magne pales and te memorande Canemus pastor ab Amphriso.
The end of the fourth CANTO.
Argumentum
KIng Tantalus before the Trojans flies,
Saturn arriues in Creet and by Troas aided
Once more intendes his Kingdom to surprise,
Creet is by Trojan Ganimede invaded,
In aid of Jupiter the Centaures rise,
Aegeons ful-fraught Galleys are disladed:
Danae and her young son are turned afloate,
By Arges King, into a Mast-lesse boat.
ARG. 2.
PElops, the two Atrides and Aegeon,
Vulcan the Gorgones in Epsilon.
CANTO. 5.
1
WHose inspiration shall my heavy brain
Implore, to make my dull Invention light,
Or to a loftyer key my pen constrain,
Or raise my Muse, that takes so low a flight,
Thou Ihoue-borne Pallas over my numbers rain,
And musical Apoll^ give me spright,
With the bright rays that from thy temples shine,
To show me way unto the Muses nine.
2
Of whom the eldest Clio first deuisd
To Chronicle the Royal gests of Kings,
Strutting Melpomene in Gules disguisd
In Theaters, among Tragic Actors sings,
But soft Thalya has such strains despisd,
And to her Commicke scenes shrill laughter brings,
Wind Instruments Entirpe best affects,
Terpsichore the stringed Lyre directs.
3
The Geometricke figures Erato
Has in her charge, as first by her disclosed,
But from Calliope hie Stanzoes flow,
For the Heroik numbers first composed,
The course of stars are by Urania know,
And how the Planets we above disposed,
But Polihimnia smooth Rhetoric chooses,
The youngest of Jove's daughters, and the Muses.
4
All these at once their sacred gifts aspire,
That may give beauty to my task in hand,
Affoording help when I their aid desire,
To guide my tost-Bark to desired Land,
A slender bark, slow sailed, and apt to tire,
And founder in the Sea: weak, and vnmand,
Apollo with the rest, my voyage speed,
Whilst to Troyes fatal ruin we proceed.
5
King Tantalus the son of Jupiter,
That rained in Attique, brought an host before Troy,
Which his son Pelops led: how can he err,
Being directed by so brave a Boy
That undertakes his army to transfer,
And Troos with his new City to destroy,
This Pelops with the King of Elis ran,
And in the course bright Hyppodamia wan.
6
Her Father Oenemaus was betrayed
My Myrtolus his treacherous Chariot-driuer,
And in the race slain, Pelops by his aid,
Of many suitors dead the sole suruiuer,
After the goal obtaind, inioyes the maid, 2617.

Intending with all pompous state to wiue her, 1346. Eliud of the tribe of
Benjamin, slew Eglon K. of Moab.

Th'espousals ended, Time with swift pace runs,
And she in process, has producst two sons.
7
Thyestes and Atreus named: the first
Ore-come with burning lusts insatiate heat,
Ravished Atreus wife (oh deed accursed)
For which Atreus does him home entreat,
And takes his Children where the Babes were nursed,
To dress their bodies for their fathers meat,
Some baked, some roast, some sod (oh bloody deed!)
To make a father on his own child feed.
8
Atreus two sons had, the eldest hight
Agamemnon, who was after Mycenes king, The progeny of Menelaus and Agamem non.

And Greekish General of the ten years fight,
Twixt Greece and Troy, which we must after sing:
The second Menelaus, in whose right,
The Argiue Dukes their puisant Armies bring,
Husband to Hellen, when prince Paris sought her,
And Hellen, Jupiter and Laedaes daughter.
9
But we digress: against Pelops and his Sire
Ilion and Ganimed from Troy appear,
These are the sons of Troos, many a bold squire
They led with them to Ilion, the first year
He rained in Troy in bright celestial fire,
Came the Palladium down from heavens high sphere,
Which Ilions Towers long after did enjoy,
Continuing till the utter sack of Troy.
10
Their hostile Instruments to battle sound,
Ten thousand hands at once to heaven are raised,
Which in their falls, as many strike to ground,
Cowards are scorned, none but the bold are praised,
The Troyans have begirt the Phrygians round,
Pelops above the rest his fame imblazed,
And Ganimed that does bold Pelops see,
Fights, as if none need kill a man but he.
11
Such was the valor of this Trojan youth,
Though Troos and Ilion both did wondrous well,
He only stands, defends, breaks, and pursues
Their standing battles: by his valor fell
The Phrigian host, now murdered without ruth:
Charon is tired, with ferring souls to hell:
The Trojans follow with victorious ^ries,
Whilst Tantalus and valiant Pelops flies.
12
This was that Tantalus bright Plota bare,
(Whom for a special grace) the Gods admit Tantalus in Hell.

To their high Counsel, where they often repair,
He blabs their secrets, therefore they held fit
To punnish him in hell with torments rare,
In Laethe chin-deepe he must ever sit,
Hungry, whilst Apples touch his lips: and dry,
Whilst from his thirsty chin the waters fly.
13
And this that Pelops whom his father slew, Pelops death and life. 1642.

And hewd his body into gobbets small,
Whose Massacre the Gods in mercy rue,
And gathering up his limbs to match them all, 1321.

They miss that piece to join his body new,
Which from the throat does to the shoulder fall;
Which they with Iuory piece, and who more bolder
Then new-made Pelops, with his Iuory shoulder.
14
And yet inforst to fly: but had his men
B^n every one a Pelops, none had fled,
He was the last in field, preferring then
Fore Coward runners, the resolved dead,
But what can one alone against thousands ten?
Led by so brave a Prince as Ganimed,
Leave we triumphant Troos, now let our hand
Direct sea-toyled Saturn safe a Land.
15
Who from his son in the last battle flying,
his Grandchild Archas to the seaside chaste, Saturnes arrive in Troy.

We left him in a ship the Ocean trying,
Where he has plowed strange Seas: great dangers past:
Now entering the Hellespont, from far espying
(After his tedious course) a Town at last;
His Martiners to shore their sails employ,
And Sea-beat Saturn touches land fore Troy.
16
Which Troos amidst his plausiue triumphs seeing,
With Ilion, Ganimed, and thousand more,
Makes toward the harbor, whilst old Saturn freeing
His men from ship-bord has impressed the shore,
He makes his habit with his style agreeing,
The Troyans wonder at the state he bore:
Himself so well prepared, his ships so fair,
Both to the barbarous Trojans seeming rare.
17
So small a number can no war pretend,
Therefore their strange arrive they need not fear,
As far as does their Hemisphere extend,
They view the sea, but see no shipping near,
Which makes the King salute him as a friend,
And ask the reason of his landing there,
Saturn replies: Behold poor strangers thrown,
To unknown people, on a Land unknown.
18
Yet would you have his Country, Nation, name,
That knows not on whose earth his bold feet tread,
Nor with what breath he may his style proclaim,
From his own Native air so far being fled:
If you perhaps have relisht Saturnes fame,
Whose glory lives, although his state be dead:
Then view that Saturn with respective eyes,
Whose far-spread beams set, at his sons vprise.
19
Saturn has spoke enough, whose longing ears
Have not bin filled and cloyed with his renown,
The Heavenly music of th'Harmonious spheres,
Climb to his praise: by him the fields are sown,
(The Archers shoot) and Childing-Tellus bears,
In what remote climb is not Saturn known,
By him are seas past, heady ships contrould,
He first Tild, Ploud, Sowd, Reapt, and fined Gold.
20
He need not of his Ominous wars possess him,
Troos knows his issues triumph, and his flight,
Inspired with supernatural gifts they gesle him,
And hold themselves heaven favored in his sight:
He vows in Creet again to r^pollesle him,
Where Ihoue vsurps against all paternall right,
After few days in feasts and triumphs ended,
A puisant host is to his charge commended.
21
Of twenty thousand soldiers, Trojans all,
Commanded by the valiant Ganimed, Ganimeds war against Jupiter.

A better war-exployted General
Never appeared in sight of Ersignes spread,
They pass the Egeon seas (which men so call)
Of the Grand Thief Egeon, he that fled
From Jupiter, when all the Tytans perished,
Now on these Seas by murdrous Pirates cherisht.
22
Saturn directs their landing, as best knowing
The safest harbors: and their army guided
Through many furlongs of his ancient sowing,
Never till his days by the Plough divided;
But as their host to Creet is nearer growing,
With hope to take the Cretans unprovided,
King Jupiter is by the skouts discride,
With many Centaures that on horseback ride.
23
But not expecting any hostile power,
Or to beat back inuaders, does he gather
This puisant host, he is for the brazen Tower
Where Danae lives, coopt by her ruthlesse father,
But now that host the Cretan soil must scour,
Which amorous Ihoue would have conducted rather
To scale the brazen for^sse, the dark skreene,
Twixt courtly freedom, and his cloistred Queen.
24
To this employment the stout Centaures came
Under Ixions conduct, twice two hundred,
Who first devised Thessalian steeds to tame,
They seemed at first, half horse, half man vnsundred,
At whose strange manage, and admired name,
(Unknown till now) the amazed Trojans wondered,
The battles join, and both the hosts discover,
About Ihoues Tent, a Princely Eagle houer.
25
He takes it for an Ominous sign of good,
The Trojans for some heavy sad presage,
By this, a thousand quarters swim in blood,
And from both sides the heated Champions rage,
In a deep red they die the neighbor flood,
Never did bolder spirits battle wage,
The dying groan, the feare-confounded shrike,
The wounded bleeding fall, the standing strike.
26
The Centaures boldly fight, the Prince of Troy
Shines both in Arms and valor above all,
Having both Art and strength his steel to employ,
And many halfe-dead limbs about him sprall, The Combat twixt I^ne and Ganimed.

To him Ihoue makes, and is re-met with joy,
On either part whole troops before him fall,
So have I seen two burning Meteors fare,
Breaking through diverse clouds to tilt in the air,
27
Two fiery Meteors I may call them right,
For they were both in gilded Armors laced,
And had they fought in a dark cloudy night,
With such rough blows their shields and helmes they raced
And forcst from them such store of fiery light,
With steel encountering steel, and blows well placed,
The two maine Armies might have fought in view,
By the bright sparks that from their Armors flew.
28
This Monomachy lasted not, for yonder
Comes Saturn on the part of Ganimed,
On the other side, the hoofed Centaures thunder,
And Character deep half Moons where they tread,
By whom the Champions are inforst assunder,
And all confused that was in order led,
Thus in this tumult and disordered brall,
By scotes and hundreds they drop down and fall.
29
Saturn assailes his son, but is refused,
He shuns th'vnnaturall combat with his Sire,
Amongst the Trojans he his Champions chus'd,
The Hostile stranger shall his worth admire,
Against whose Armies he such valor used,
That force, p^force, their vaward must retire:
Mean time Prince Ganimed King Saturn righting,
Alone, is midst a hundred Centaures fighting.
30
Encountering Eson, armed at every piece,
Eson well mounted, against the Trojan ran,
This Eson. son was after known in Greece, Jason.

It Was he that did the stately Arges man,
And in his bold quest of the golden fleece,
With the rich Sheep deep speld Medea wan,
Who after old, decrepit, weak, and hored,
Was by his daughter to his youth restored.
31
Him Ganimed unhorsed, and in despite
Of the bold Centaures mounted on his steed,
Proving the manage of this unknown fight,
And in the proof mad^ many Centaures bleed,
(But all in vain) his troops are put to flight,
Saturn is shrunk, and left him at his need,
And ^o there ships in t^oopes his sould^s fled,
Whose shameful steps, the Prince of force must tred.
32
The Centaures and the Cretan king pursue them
Unto the Oceans Margent, and even there,
Twixt Sea and shore, in countlesse heaps they slew them,
Such as escape, their course to Troy-ward bear,
For Saturnes men, the Cretans cannot view them,
Another unknown tract (alas) they steare:
Whether the winds and waves their vessaile drive,
Twice driven from Creet (against heaven in vain we strive)
33
Jupiter and the Centaures such ships take,
As should have bin imploid for Darraynes Tower,
And after Ganimed to Sea they make,
Pursuing them to Troy with all their power,
They Land at once, the fearful Trojans quake,
Doubting if earth or sea, shall them devour,
Troos with an host discends, as one that guessed,
The Prince his son, was by his foes distressed.
34
The battle is renewed, the king intends
To rescue son and Subjects in such state,
But (over valiant) Ganimed extends
His valor beyond wisdom, all too late
The King of Troy his puissant fury bends,
In rescue of his son, now in sad fate:
The Cretans him surprise, and he being taken Ganimede taken.

With this rich prize, they make to Sea again.
35
Leave Troos and Islion mated at this cross,
The pride of Troy is not to be re-won,
He ra^s him much above his kingdoms loss,
And all Dardania mourns for his son,
How in the guard of those that from Molesse
Came with Ixion, and on horseback run,
Jove gives command (being at Sea assured)
The Prisoners to be cheered, the wounded cured.
36
And calling now to mind the Bird that soared The first ensign borne in
Battle.

About his rich Pauillion, he ordained
Her picture should be drawn and quaintly skored,
Upon a Crimson Ensign richly stained,
Which since that fight, to all that Mars adored,
As a perpetual instance has remained:
Till then, they bore no flags, no Scutchions drew,
Jove's Eagle was the first, in field that flew.
37
He now remembers Danae, and commands
His Pylots to direct his waftage thither,
But what the king inioynes, the wind withstands
With boisterous gusts it foulds their sails together,
And hurries them along by diverse Lands,
They bear their wandering course they ken not whether Aegeon.

At length, they in the sea, Aegean wander,
Of which, the Thief Aegeon was commander.
38
The blustering tempest has diuorst their Fleet,
Only the Ship wherein the Centaurs sail,
With Ihoue and Ganimed, the Pirates meet,
The rest were straide, and of their Voyage fail,
Yet some amongst the rest take land in Creet,
Some bandied too and fro, by every gale,
Yet all their barks live, none so near to die,
As this the Pirates from the shore discry.
39
Six Gallyes they disanker from the Isle
Called Desert, and their Bark incompasse round,
Ihoue and the Centaurs arm them in small while,
And al their Martial notes to battle sound,
Which the bold Trojan hearing, began to smile
In scornful guise, to see his arms fast bound:
Oh when (quoth he) stood Ganimed thus still
To hear the Martial music of Kill, kill?
40
Is my opinion of known Arms so weak?
My name so poor, the Centaurs scorn mine aid?
Did we for this their maine Battallions break?
And with our Armed breast their hoasts invade?
Why may I not in this case boldly speak?
Shall I stand still, to see my life betraide?
Although a Prisoner, yet this favor show,
To guard mine Honor, against a common foe.
41
Not fighting against Troy, we are a friend,
These Pirates with your honors cou^ mine:
Oh let the King of Cre^ such grace extend,
That by his side I may in Armor shine,
To see how well I can my head defend:
Some desperate Act unto my charge assign:
They hale us near, our ship the Pirates board,
For Honors sake, give me my Arms and sword.
42
These words charm Jupiter, and draw a veil
Betwixt his heart and Ganimeds disgraces,
The King relents, the Princes words prevail,
His bands he loses, and with kind embraces
Swears to him friendship that shall never fail,
Armd as they are, they take their pointed places,
Ihoue in the Prow, the Centau^s at his beck,
To face their foes, guirt round their vpmost deck.
43
Their golden Eagle is displaide: the Galleys
Grapple on every side their hooked steel,
Some from the Beak-heads, some the wast make sallies,
But those the Centaurs make like Drunkards reele,
And drop down to the Sea, here no man dallies,
Some, with long pointed Irons bare their Keele
To sink them, others by the Ship sides crall,
The Centaurs lop their hands off, down they fall.
44
Twice they are forced t'vngrapple and vnhooke
Their double chains: To this I may compare, Sir Richard Greenvield.

Thy boording (valiant Greenvild) thou did brook,
A hotter skirmish then the Pirates dare,
Who keeping one good Ship, skornst to be took
By a whole Fleet of Spanish men a-warre,
Fighting till powder, shot, and men were wasted,
And these consumed, even til thine own life lasted.
45
As often as they boorded thee, so often
Bravely repulst, their sides bored through and through,
And three times with thy three Decks blown aloft,
As high as heaven (what more could valor do?)
Now thy proud Ship has al her Ensigns doft,
Those sails the Amorous winds with courtings woo
To tinder burnt: thou profferd life despising, Revenge, one of Q. Elizab.
ships Royal.

Leau'st thy ( Revenge) even with the waters rising.
46
The Gallyes fasten still: (a watchword given
By Jupiter,) at once they headlong skip
(Dispearst) into such vessels as were driven
Within their teach, and leave their Cretan Ship,
Now many a Pirates skull is bruised and riuen,
Some heau'd ore board, some softly slip
Into the sea for fear, their lives to smother,
So, by avoiding one death, seek another.
47
Th'vndaunted Gyant-Theefe-Egeon now
Kens Jupiter, him Jupiter espies,
And facing him in his own Galleys prow,
Thus with undaunted language he defies:
Behold thy fate, see Ihoue thy ruin vow,
Whom thou by Coward-ods sought to surprise,
Thou, that by land my ruthlesse fury fled,
Shall now by Sea be forced to abide me dead.
48
I am the son of Saturn, by whom fell,
Tytan, with all the Earth-bred Giant seed,
Thy Sire and brothers I have sent to Hell,
and thy destruction I have next decreed:
At this, th'inflam'd Egeon began to swel,
Rage makes his language lagge, his fury speed:
Action proceeds his words, before he spoke,
With his huge Axe upon Ihoues helm he struck.
49
The blow was put to loan, while they two strive,
Prince Ganimed has all the Gally cleared,
and among them all he leaves not one alive,
Save the graund-theefe, who now not to be feared
Ihoue has subdude, and gins his legs to gyeue,
Since in the Giants rescue none appeared,
Bulk, hands, legs, thighs, the Prince at once inuirons Egeon ^nrprised.

and leads him with an hundred chains of Iron.
50
In these the harmless Travelers he bound,
(Now his own plague) they that survive are fled,
and on the Seas dispersed, now does Ihoue ground
His love upon his new friend Ganimed,
He enters his own ships and wanders round
The spacious Vast, where wind and waters led,
Crossing both Torrid and the frozen lines,
By this the Sun had compast all the Signs.
51
The Ram of Helles, and Europaes Bull,
Castor and Pollux, Cancers burning Sign, The 12. Celestial Sign^.

The Herculean Lion, and the Virgin-Trull,
The skale of Justice, and the Scorpions line,
Chyron the Centaur, with the horned skull
Of watery Capricorn, next whom does shine
The Trojan lad, that from his lauer powers,
Last the two Fishes drilling Southern showers.
52
And at the years end taking land in Creet,
After his tedious progress on the stream,
Queen Juno welcoms him with kisses sweet,
His subjects kneel to him as their supreme,
Five hundred Steeds presenting at his seet,
But he whose thoughts harp on another theme,
Prisons Aegeon, Ganimed sets free,
And in his grace (save Juno) who but he?
53
But Juno, when his mind on Danae ran,
Showed like a Crow unto a silver Dove,
Rose to a Black-berry, Raven to a Swan,
It makes him mad he cannot aid his Love,
Twelve Moons are filled and waind, since hapless man
The day expired, he should his valor prove,
And now (though late) he will try his best endeavor,
To fetch her thence (for better late than never,)
54
But lo, amidst his hosti^e preparation, The rest of the history of Danae

By chance a Lord of Arges rode that way,
Who, known to be a stranger of that Nation,
The King demands of Danae, to bewray
What he has heard: he gins a sad Oration
Which does the Princes host from waftage stay,
In what remote Clime, if by Rumor blown,
(Quoth the Arges Lord) was not bright Danae known?
55
When she was Danae, and whilst Darrain Tower
Enclosed earths-Beauty in her brazen hold,
But now she is cropped, and that sweet smelling flower
Is vaded quite and withered, wrapped in mould:
The King at this lost all his vital power,
His blood forsakes his heart, his brain grows cold,
His thoughts confuse, his soul within him bleeds,
When the Arges Lord of Danae thus proceeds.
56
Of the Tower, Darrains strength, Acrisius guard,
Within how many gates of brass enclosed,
Of their nocturnall watch, Diurnall ward,
Twixt man and her, what strong bars enterposed
To keep her chaste, what deaf man has not heard:
Yet al these locks are with those bolts unloosed:
Oh heavens! what mortal wit? what humane skill
Can keep a woman chaste, against her will?
57
Thou gealous fool, why do thou gayle thy wife?
When Darrains strong Tower cannot love expel? The fruits of Gelousie.

Better thou had to grant her a free life,
If she be honest, she will guide it well:
If otherwise adicted, vain is strife
Though in the circuit of Brass walls she dwell,
Inmure her body fast as thou can think,
She Will make thee Cuckold, be it but through a chinke.
58
Perhaps her body in strict bonds thou have,
Yet can thou not the thoughts within her stay:
Not she that dares not sin, is counted chaste,
Not she that's matched, and cannot step astray:
Not she that fears, is among the virtuous placst:
"Alone she is Chaste, that will not, though she may:
Their Natures are, to covet things demde,
And in forbidden paths to tread aside.
59
Often have I seen a Steed would keep no Tract,
But fling, and bound, when he was too much raynde,
But when he felt his curb and bridle slackt,
Play with the Byt, that he so much disdaind,
And so that Steed by gentle means is backed
Which brooks no Ryder, being much constraind,
So does a sick man still, though he be chid,
Most covet, what the Doctors most forbid.
60
Had Danae among a thousand suitors played
And reueld in her Fathers palace, then
I doubt not but she still had been a maid
And (as she did before) despised men:
Her ruthlesse Father her fresh youth betrayed,
When he enclosed her in her brazen den:
Though thousand gates and doors her beuty smother
Love breaks through al, to make the maid a mother.
61
Her time expires, her father spies her great,
And threats the Beldams to consuming fire;
New Guardiens are appointed in this heat,
Acrisu^ does by sundry means inquire
Of her, and of her guard, by no entreat
Or forced torment, made to glut his ire:
Will they confess, the Ladies all dare swear,
(Sa^th' unsuspected Peddler) none came there.
62
Nor will bright Danae yet disclose her shame,
Until the long lamented hour draw near,
Nine Moons o'repast, her hour of Childing came,
Denial boots not, when such signs appear;
And now against Cretan Ihoue she gins t'exclaime,
And against all them that will themselves forswear: The birth of Perseus.

A child is borne, the Lad she Perseus names,
Cleares all her maids, and on her self exclaimes.
63
The Offended King has doomed them both to die,
And (being inexorable) that doom stands;
The Seas they in a mastlesse boat must try,
Where both The Imperious wind and wave commands,
The pitteous Mar^ers themselves apply
To their unwilling task: In their loath hands
They Perseus take, and the fair Danae guide,
To taste the mercy of the rigorous tide.
64
The Argiue Lord here sighs, but here Ihoue rages,
Threatening Acrisius, cursing his delay,
But Ganimed at length his spleen asswages,
And aims his threatened thoughts another way,
Having lost Danae quite, he now ingages
His love to Juno, and beside her lay,
Of whom he got a son; In small time after,
From his Aunt Ceres he derived a daughter.
65
None comes amiss to him, stranger nor kin,
Of his own Nation, or of climes remote,
His daughter Venus tells him it is no sin
For men to practice dalliance where they dote,
Prince Ganimed that long in grace had bin,
And did this looseness in his Hauior note,
Demanded how he could his thoughts divide,
To love so many, thus the King repli'de:
66
I will not in my own vain errors stand,
Nor boldly that (which some condemn) maintain,
The fault is great, if it be truly scand,
I knew it bad, but can it not refrain;
For madman like I strive to plow the sand,
In seeking my free humor to restrain:
I burn, and seeking ease, run to the fire,
I loath my fault, and yet my guilt desire.
67
I want the power to govern mine own will,
My headstrong appetite bears all the sway,
I know my ways loss, yet I wander still,
I see the path, and yet I turn astray:
Thus like a Ship misguided without skill,
Whom a stiff violent Tempest bears away,
To wrack it on some Rock or shallow sounds,
I am transported quite beyond my bounds.
68
I love, but yet I know not in what fashion,
I love a thousand, for a thousand reasons,
My moving thoughts abide in no firm station;
My heart is subject to my blind thoughts Treasons,
For every sundry Less I enter passion,
And am of love provided at all seasons:
That wench is modest! oh she is in my Books,
I only love her for her modest looks.
69
Yon less is bold, (see, see) my heart she eases,
I like her, she is not like a Milke-sop bred,
And straight this thought my apprchension seyseth,
She will be much more plyant in the bed,
This is a Shrew: her sharpness my soul pleases,
Because no sheep, I would the Damsel wed;
And in that thought I skale her amorous fort,
Sharp Noses are all Shrewes, yet apt for sport.
70
Is she a Scholar? Then her Art delights me:
Is she a Dunce? Her simpleness contents me:
Does she applaud my love? Her praise incites me:
Or discommend me? Yet she represents me
With matter of new love: Admit she spights me,
I love her: for her spite no whit torments me;
For though her words be rough, smooth is her skin,
What in the first I loose, the last, I win.
71
Has she a tripping gate? Her short steps move me,
And in her quicker motion I take Pride:
Takes she large steps in going? As you love me
Let me have her, I like her for her stride:
Sings she? I am enchanted, let her prove me,
I on her lips can quauer and divide:
Is she vnwe^ldy? Yet my heart she charms,
And may be much more active in my arms.
72
Her I affect, she is so sweet a Singer,
And I love her, though she can tune no note:
She plays upon the Lute, that n^mble finger
Would please me better in a place remote:
Yo^ dances; I affect a lusty springer,
And on such capting legs who could not dote.
This cannot dance; yet when she lies in bed,
She will find Art to have thy fancies fed.
73
All things Inchant me that these Ladies do,
And in my frozen breast bright bon-fires make;
Thou art a Bona-roba, and I woe
Thee for thy breadth and length: thy Stature sake:
Thou art a little Less, I like thee too,
And were I sleepy thou would keep me wake:
Not one can come amiss, I can find sport,
Both with the fat and lean, the long and short.
74
You Lady manners wants, I straight suppose,
Would she learn Court-ship, how it would beseem her:
This court-ship has, and I must needs disclose
What love I for her manners can bet ^me her,
That has a whitely face, and a long nose,
And for them both I wondcrous well esteem her:
This the green sickness has, I long to prove her,
This looks not green, but black, I therefore love her
75
Is her hair brown? So lovely Ladaes was,
Brown trameld locks best grace, the brightest hew:
Are her locks yellow? Such Auroraes glass,
Presents in her attyring to her view:
Is haite orient bright? It does surpass,
If Chesnu^ colored? Such do I pursue:
My eyes still aim at beauties rare perfections,
and I all colors love, and all complexions.
76
My love can fit it self to every story,
I love a young girl, and a woman staid,
Her fresh years please me, and I should be sorry
To loose her youth: who would not love a Maid,
another looks are Matron-like, I glory
In her: and I her person must invade:
To end as many as the world can hold,
M'ambitious love likes, be they young or old.
77
Now to proceed of Danae and her son,
Long tossed upon the Oceans ruthlesse streams,
at length her bark the Apulian shores has won,
about the hour when Phoebus dons his beam,
and to ascend the Eastern hill begun,
When she new wakt out of her horrid dreams:
Her self half dead with cold, her Babe near frozen,
Finds that her bark has a fair harbor chosen.
78
Which a poor Naples Fisherman espying,
Kenning a Bark that had nor Oar nor sail,
He leaves the nets that on the shore were drying,
and puts to Sea the mastlesse boat to hale,
Which boording on the bare plankes, he sees lying
A beauteous Goddess, covered with a veil,
And on her knee a babe, or dead, or sleeping,
To which she sange not, but was softly weeping.
79
It moved the poor man to behold her tears,
He sees th'extremity they both are in,
Her sailesse boat unto the Land he steares,
And her young infant that was bare and thin
A wraps in his Capootch, and softly bears
Unto his cottage, where no Prince has bin,
He makes a cheerful Fire, and in a while,
The halfe-staru'd babe does on his mother smile.
80
And being refresht with what the Cottage lent,
Their Native beauties repossest their faces,
Whose rareness the poor man admiring; went
To acquaint the King with one so full of graces,
Who sends for her to Court incontinent,
And having seen her beauty Danae places,
In his throne Royal, swearing by his life,
The bounteous seas have sent him this rare wife.
81
This King Pelonnus hight, who gently prays,
To acquaint him with her birth and fortunes past,
The blushing Dame her modest eye began raise,
And to his fair demand replies at last,
She tells him she has spent her youthful days
In Arges: next how she to Sea was cast:
Of Darraines Tower, of her untimely fate;
Of Jupiters forged love, Acrisius hate.
82
Discoursing orderly the sum of all,
At which the King often wept, her fortunes ruing,
blaming the cause of her untimely fall,
At every Inter-medium love renewing,
He thinks Acrisius hate too great: too small Pelonnus ma rieth Danac and
begat Danaus.

^houes love, that left such beauty for pursuing,
he wooes, she yields, that did the King besot,
And married, Danaus is between them got.
83
Of whom and of young Perseus forbear,
To speak of Saturn through the world notorious,
And Jupiter subduing Climats ncare,
As Cecill, Lemnos, Cipres (still victorious)
Piercing large Italy, and welcomed there
By Ianus, for among Kings his style was glorious,
This Ianus byfrons was of ancient name,
Of him our January took first name. Iaunary.

84
Ianus tells Ihoue King Saturn dwells them by,
Teaching rude Nations Tillage, there unknown
And held in reverence, for the Princes nie
Receive his exilde people as their own,
He shows him plowes, teemes, yokes and harrowes lie,
And fields of ripened grain, already grown:
This King at length brought Saturn to Ihoues view, (...) and I^piter accord.

And by his means, atonement twixt them grew.
85
The good old Ianus in Taurentum raignde,
So did Euander in Mount Auentine, Ianus E^der.

Since one of Rooms seven hills, and proudly named
By these King Italus of ancient line,
This Italus from Ciracuse constraind Italus.

Built the great City Albe, by which shine
Bright Tyber Streams, al these at once desire,
Peace and accord between the son and Syrc.
86
Saturn surrenders Creet, having erected
A City, where Rooms Capitol now stands,
And a chaste Virgin to his wife elected, Saturns second m^are.

Philicis called, colleagued in nuptial bands,
Of whom he Picus got, Picus protected
That City after Saturn, and commands
The Realm adjacent, Faunus was his son,
and from this Faunus did Latinus come.
87
The Poets make this Faunus for his care
Over husbandry, the ancient Sire and Father
Of all the Rural-gods: His Queen was fair
And Fatua hight, who would have bedded rather
With Hercules supposed Amphitrites heir,
But our dispersed story we must gather,
And of Nicostrate, wife to Euander,
A little speak, before too far we wander.
88
Who dotes on Jupiter, and laughed him charms,
With Negromanticke Charracters, in which
He expert grows, and having left off arms,
Studies the black spells of this sorcering Witch,
Abandons horrid sound of shrill alarmes,
Now only labors to be wise and rich,
And leaves the Iatian Kings, where long he staid,
After the league twixt him and Saturn made.
89
To Ce^t returning, where Queen Iun^ was The birth of Vulcan and Proserpine.

Delivered of a foul misshapen Lad,
Called Vulcan, Ceres of a lovely Less,
Hight Proserpine: the envious Queen grows sad,
To see her Aunts child in bright looks surpass
Hers in deformed foulness: Ihoue's more glad
Of Proserpine then Vulcan, which espide,
The jealous Queen does with her husband chide.
90
She chafes, he laughes, she blames his wanton ryat,
He gives her liberal scandal a deaf ear,
She counts her self food to suffice his diat,
and tells of all his scapes, how, when, and where,
That he is forced to keep his Queen in quiat,
To marry Ceres to a great Lord there,
With whom he gave t'augment his name and power
Sicill and Syracusa for her dower.
91
To Vulcan he the Isle of Lemnos gave,
To be instructed in his Geomancy,
In the deep bowels of the earth to rave,
To learn the force of fire in Pyromancy,
Taught by Beroutes, and Piragma grave,
The third Sceropes red him Negromancy,
Himself the God of Smiths, Lemnos his seat,
Where these three Cyclops on his Anuiles beat:
92
And frame Ihoues trisulck thunders, some dcuine
Lame Vulcan in his birth was straight and fair,
And being in Ihoues lap where Planets shine How Vulcan became lame.

And stars like golden studs stick round his chair,
The Mansion of the Gods, th'heauens Christaline,
Dandling his smiling babe, he spies the air
Al in guilt flames, earth burn, the Meteors drink
The boiling Seas, and heavens huge Collumes shrink.
93
For Phaeton had set the world on fire,
At which Ihoue rising from his throne in have,
To thunder-strike the youth that durst aspire,
Down drops his son toward earth, and falling, past
Through all the Planets, by Apollo hier
Then all the rest, So by the Moon at last,
Twixt heaven and earth, who can describe the way?
When he was falling a long Summers day.
94
He lights in Lemnos, nor can Vulcan die
By this occase, being borne of heavenly seed,
Though on the earth amazed the infant lie
He breaths at last, (so have the Fates decreed)
Of Vulcans craft, and how he did affie
Venus (Loves Queen) how Mars did twixt them breed
Strife and dissension: how the winged boy
Was borne, belongs notto the tale of Troy.
95
Yet that I may not slightly let them pass,
Without some small remembrance of my pen,
Whose history so often recorded was,
By ancient Poets, hie-renowned men,
To Thracian Mars, and the bright Paphian Less
A little space we must look back again;
And speak how she her bridal bed did blot,
The very night young Cupid was begot.
96
When Mars and Venus made appoint to meet,
And to that end a private Conclaue found,
To dally out the hours in kisses sweet,
And sports in which the loues-Queene did abound,
That no sly tell-tales should their pastimes greet,
The obscure Cave they first perused round,
To shun disturbance til their game was done,
Jealous of all: but fearing most the Sun.
97
Knowing his searching eye is prying still
Through every Casement, loope-hoole, chinke, or crany,
Therefore to blind him they must use their skill,
The blabbing Phoebus they dread most of any:
A noble youth on Mars attended still,
Whose secrecy he had preferred above many:
Gallus they call him, whom God Mars will have
To watch the Sun at th'entrance of the Cave.
98
The Lovers enter, Gallus stays behind,
All the night long his eyelids never close,
But toward the Dawne, dull sleeps his senses bind
In their soft chains: his powers to rest dispose;
He neither fears Fawnes, Nimphs, stars, moon, or wind,
Nor any other eye: the Sun God rose,
And in his mounting through the Olimpick sky,
He that sees all things, did the Lovers spy.
99
The Tel-tale Sun straight to the Smith discouers
Th'adulterate practice of this amorous pair,
Who straight devised a net to catch the lovers;
Mean time Mars wakes, sees Venus lie all bare,
(Both ouer-slept themselves) for Phoebus houers
Over their cave, and in his face does stare:
Th'astonisht War-god knows not what to think,
Seeing the Sun still peeping through a chinke.
100
Th'astonisht God first gently Venus wakes,
Who blushed to think the Sun their stealth had spide,
Then by the curled locks he Gallus takes,
And thus he says; Since then we are descride
By thy default, behold (poor Gallus quakes
Before his sentence, and his face would hide)
be thou transformd, thou that have wrought our shame
Unto a bird, that still shall bear thy name.
101
This new made Bird (the Cock in shape translated)
Yet in his heart his ancient thoughts retains,
For every morn the Sun by him is rated;
He by his crowing to God Mars complains,
Before the Sun is in his chair instated,
Or in his hand takes the Celestial raines,
He against his sides still with his wings, is drumming,
And tells to all the world the Sun is coming.
102
Of Perseus next, and of the Gorgon slain,
And of Acrisius, by young Danaus aid
Restored to Arges, and the Tower Darraine,
And of Andromede the lovely maid
My muse sings next: In Hespery called Spain,
Porcus (supposed a Sea-god) often preyd
On harmless Strangers, who their voyage bore
Along by Spain, upon th'Hesperian shore.
103
This Porcus three sweet daughters leaves: Medusa,
Euriale, and Scennio, their names; The Gorgons.

All fair at first: the glorious eye of day
Saw never three more bright and stately dames,
These did the spacious Dorcad Islands sway:
The eldest against Mynerua war proclaims,
At which the Goddess high displeasance takes,
And turns their golden heirs to crawling snakes.
104
She leaves them all no more save one broad eye,
Plac'st in Medusaes forehead, and to shine
Like sulphur, whose Aspect infects the sky,
Parches the grass, and blasts both Rose and Spine,
It has the Basiliskes true property,
To kill far off, her head is Serpentine:
And by the pest, that on her forehead burns,
All that behold her face, to stones she turns.
105
About her Palace thousand pictures stand,
Once men, now Images of senseless stone;
Of all that in the Dorcad Islands Land,
If by these Gorgons seen suruiues not one:
More then Medeas rod, or Circes wand,
her poisonous eye-ball has trans-form'd alone:
armies of men have compast her at ones,
Armies of men her eye has turned to stones.
106
Throughout her kingdom you may people see
Dispersed and taking stands in sundry places,
But neither move hand, arm, head, foot, or knee,
For they have stony limbs and Marble faces,
That oft-times Trauellors deceived be,
To see dead stones retain such lively graces:
Some asking them the climate, some the way,
Others to know th'vncertaine time of day.
107
Nay sometimes quarrels have betwixt them grown,
Receiving to their answers no reply,
one angry fellow draws upon a stone,
And swears deep Oaths he will make it speak or die,
others more patient yet displeased are gone,
And say they skill no points of honesty:
Nor wonder if these strangers so mistook,
When every dead face had a living look.
108
Hear one was going, and in going spide
By Adder-haird Medusa, and so stays,
Even as one leg did fore another stride,
and as his hindmost heel he began to raise
To draw it after, both his legs abide
Fixed to the earth, his arms beside him plays:
his body forward bends, the picture showing,
The shape of one on earnest business going.
109
Another digging as the Queen came by,
Stoopes still with one Hand boue the other placst,
The right foot fixed, the left advanced hie
To drive the dull Spade in, another facst
the Gorgon-monster, as his love past by,
Who spreads his amorous arms t'infould her wast:
and smiling in her face, his Image stands,
Laughing with halfe-shut eyes, and broad-spread hands.
110
Here stands a Fisher by the waters brinke,
The Angle-hand stretched forward to the ri^er,
And there a Sheapheard heau'd his hands to drink
On his black bottle, both his lips vnseuer,
His head bends back, legs stride, and you would think
He drank still, but this draught must last for ever:
His bottles gone, still stands he strangely faring,
Hands heau'd, neck bent, mouth yawning, eyes broad staring.
111
Of Marble Statues many thousands more,
In Field, Groves, orchards, Highways, houses, streets,
Some naked, others in the robes they wore,
So hardly does she deal with all she meets,
This man she takes conferring, but before
He can conclude his tale, his spirit fleets:
Some she finds chafing, laughing, striking, riding,
Al ^urn'd to stones in selfsame shape abiding.
112
I fear my pen has with Medusa met,
For on the sudden it grows stiff and dull,
And cannot now defray my promised debt,
And with the Gorgons stain this Margent full,
Here therefore this days journey shall be set,
And blame me not, if my tired hand I pull
From his Diurnal task, at our next view,
I bring him on this stage, that Gorgon slew.
IXyon was King of Thessaly, who being by Jupiter taken up into Heaven, and
comforted of certaines griefs there, fell in love with Juno, which Jupiter
perceiving, deceived him with a cloud, made in the likeness of Juno, of which
Ixion begat the Centaurs: After adjudged by the Destinies to be tortured with
the wheel in hell.

I hold Ganimed rather surprised by Jupiter in battle, then as some write to
be stolen by him as his minion, and after this rape made his Cup Bearer.

Apulia where Danae was cast upon the shore, is now a part of Italy bordering
upon the Adriaticke sea.

Vulcan was Jupiters Smith, an excellent workman, on who^ the Poets Father
many rare works, among which, I find one, not unnecessary to be remembered,
which Ovid speaks of, and I thus English.

This Tale is blazed through heaven, how once unware
Venus and Mars were took in Vulcans snare: Mars and Venus.

The God of War does in his brow discover
The perfect and true pattern of a Lover:
Nor could the Goddess Venus be so crewell
To deny Mars: (soft kindness is a Jewel
In any woman, and becomes her well)
In this the Queen of love does most excel:
(Oh heaven) how often have they mocked and flouted
The Smiths polt-foote (whilst nothing he misdoubted)
Made Jests of him and his begrimed trade,
And his smoog'd visage, black with Cole-dust made:
Mars, tickled with loud laughter, when he saw
Venus like Vulcan limpe, to halt and draw
One foot behind another, with sweet grace
To counterfeit his lame uneven pace.
Their meetings first the Lovers hide with fear,
From every iealons eye, and captious ear.
The God of War and Loves lascivious dame,
In public view were full of bashful shame;
But the Sun spies how this sweet pair agree,
(Oh what bright Phoebus can be hid from thee?)
The Sun both sees and blabs the sight, forthwith,
And in all post he speeds to tell the Smith:
(Oh Sun) what bad examples do thou show?
What thou in secret see, must all men know?
For silence, ask a bribe from her fair treasure,
She Will grant thee that shall make thee swell with pleasure.
The God whose face is smoog'd with smoke and fiar,
Places about their bed a net of Wiar
So quaintly made, that it deceiues the eye
Straight (as he feignes) to Lemnos he must hie,
The Lovers meet, where he the train has set,
And both lie fast caught in a wiery net:
He calls the Gods, the lovers naked sprall
And cannot rise, the Queen of Love shows all:
Mars chafes, and Venus weeps, neither can flinch,
Grappled they lie, in vain they kick and winch:
Their legs are one within another tide,
Their hands so fast that they can nothing hide:
Amongst these high Spectators, one by chance
That saw them naked in this pitfall dance:
Thus to himself said: If it tedious be
Good God of war, bestow thy place on me.
Of the Gorgons, because there are many opinions, we will a little insist upon
their particular discovery. Of them there is a Hesiodus in Theogon.
double; kind some hairy, some bald, yet al born of Phorcus and Cetus. These
three Sisters had but one common eye, and one Aeschilus in (...).
common tooth to feed with. The Latins call them Lamiae, a gutteris
amplitudine, which Lamia some think to be the (...) in Phoricis.
daughter of Neptune, and the first Prophetess, called Sibilla among the
Aphrians. They were also called Pemphrado Prito Athen. Apollodor. lib, 2.
and Dino, to whom some have likewise added Iaeno, whose name both Aeschilus
and Hesiod in their works remember. Melanthes lib, de mysterijs.
They were called Greae, and live in the utmost Islands of Iberia Apollod.
Menander lib, de mysterijs.
toward the West. Some likewise number Silla amongst the Gorgons; Others
describe them not with snaky locks, but Nimphodorus Theopompus. Poleme.
heads of Dragons and Girdles (about their wastes) of Vipers. All concluding in
this, that their sight was immediate death, which Aeschilus signified in this.
Sunt tres sorores his volucres non procul
Serpentibus dir^sque comptae Gorgones
Quas intuens nemo diu spirauerit.
The Beast Nomades in Libia has likewise the name of Gor-gon, Alexander,
M^dius lib, (...) (...).
somewhat resembling a sheep, which others describe more like a Sea-calfe, It
is said this monster by the infection of his eyes kills what beast soever he
meets. His hair couers his brows. Many of Marius Soldiers marching against
Iugurth, followed (...), 2
this beast, mistaking him for a sheep, and presently fell down dead: by
these Greae, Phorci, these Gorgons and mo^sters of the sea, is understood
nothing else but that knowledge and wisdom, which is acquired by experience,
to purchase which it behooved Perseus to use the aid of Pallas, the helm of
Pluto, and the sword of Mercury, by virtue of which, he subdude those monsters.
Which the Poets have amongst others thrust into hell. Centauri in foris
stabulant, (...); biformes.
Et centum geminus Briareus, ac belua Lernae Virgil.

Hor^ndum stridens, flammisque armata chimaera
Gorgones Harpiaeque and forma tricorporis vmbrae.


Argumentum
PErseus the Gorgon kills, then takes his way
To Ioppen, on his flying horse alone,
Destroys the Monster, frees Andromeda,
Acrisius saues, turns Atlas into stone:
King Pricus Wife, the beauteous Aurai
Doates on the valiant Knight Bellerephon:
The Trojans are with fearful pests annoyde,
By Hercules, great Troy is first destroyde.
ARG. 2.
IN Zeta Phineus falls, Chimer is slain,
Dis acts his rape: Queen Ceres does complain.
CANTO. 6.
1
MInerua, thou that had the power to make
Monsters of them, that thy high Name despise,
To turn a golde-Wire to a crawling Snake,
And change the beauty of bewitching eyes,
The Patronage of all my labors take,
More sacred Names, thy God-hood may comprise
Religion, Virtue, Zeal, we may thee call,
Whose foes are ugly, and with Adders crall.
2
The three foul Gorgons by thy power disguised,
Were Lust insatiate, Avarice and Pride,
These Sisters in Hisperia tyranised,
All looking with one eye, who can divide
Their powers and Natures, being three comprised
Within one head, and Sisters near allide,
All such as on their strength themselves assure,
Senseless of good, as stones they soon obdure.
3
Therefore to arm us against this horrid fiend,
Behooues us to implore Myneruaes aid,
Perseus bright shield unto our arm to bind,
And then we boldly may such foes invade,
His shield was Cristall, and so bright it shind, Perseus kills the Gorgon.
1497

It dimmed the Gorgons eye, and whilst she played
In darkness, and her killing sight forsook,
Her monstrous head he from her shoulders struck: 1466

4
About the time Perseus the Gorgon slew, (...) lib. 3. (...). Theopompus lib
17. Pegasus.

Busyris governed in Egiptia,
Cadmus ruled Thebes: to Komos France was due,
Belochus Emperor of Assyria,
Othoniall Trumpets before Israel blew,
Prince Radamant reigned King in Lycia:
Tyrhenus Italy, and Triton Spain,
Whilst Liber Pater all the East does gain.
5
The Gorgons head with power to turn to stone,
Upon his shield he fixed, and of the blood
That Issued from the wound, swift Pegas shone,
And neigde out of the earth a Stallion good,
Whom Perseus backed, and out of sight is gone,
Flying over Mountain, Valley, rock, and flood,
From Arctos unto Cancers burning tracke,
And from hot Cancer to cold Arctos back.
6
In his high Airery progress over all
The Provinces and Clymes beneath him spreading,
Where ere the purple drops from Gorgon fall,
Adders and Snakes are bred, the people treading
Their secure steps, see ugly Serpents crall,
Their venomous stings, and fearful hisses dreading:
Affrique does Snakes in most abundance store, Africa most abounding with
snakes.

Because he longest did over Affrique soar.
7
Yet whilst his venomous spoils were bleeding new,
But leaving Affrique, forward Pegas flies,
He now the Raemme, now does the Fishes view,
And mounts and stoopes as the winds fall or rise:
At length he leaves the Orient to pursue,
The far Septemtrion keeping still the skies:
Till falling with Hyperion in the West,
He with the day-tyrd Phoebus couets rest.
8
And stooping with the Sun into these Seas,
Where night by night he sleckes his fiery Carre,
And Atlas of that Orchard keeps the keys, Atlas.

Where golden Apples in abundance are;
Thus Perseus greetes him: May your Highness please
To be my royal Host, who come from far:
If greatness may my welcome more approve,
Know thou in me receiuest the Son of Ihoue.
9
If nouelty in strangers thou acquirest,
Behold, my flying steed and covered shield,
Hence groom (quoth Atlas) thou hat rest desire,
Lodge with the waking stars in the broad field,
To thee that to our Palace thus aspirest,
We scorn all succor and relief to yield:
Thou come, as Prophets did long since reveal,
From Hespery my golden fruit to steal.
10
One of Ihoues issue our D^uiners say,
Must perpetrate such theft, and thee I fear, This prophecy had his end in
Hercu les.

Thou lookst like one that aims at golden pray,
And I my Aurea Mala, hold so dear,
That I have stopped up each accessiue way:
Instead of pales, high mountains their heads rear
About mine Orchard, by a Dragon kept,
A wakefull Mon^ter, one that never slept.
11
With that he violent hands on Perseus lays,
To beat him from his Palace, but Ihoues son
The Gorgon-sheild unto the King displaies, Atlas transformed.

Who instantly turns to a hill of stone,
His hairs and beard increase to Trees and sprayes,
His Bulk and Shoulders into hills are grown:
His head a Promontory top, o're-peering
The neighbor Rocks, and other Mountains neering.
12
His bones to stones, his blood to Crystal springs,
And by the Gods decrees he so increases,
And with his growth such height and vastness brings,
That heavens huge weight, the two strong poles releaseth
To rest them on his shoulders: the Lark sings
The Sun his early note, the night surceaseth:
Acrisius Grandchild does with Phoebus rise,
And to his arm his shield Gorgonian ties.
13
His hooked skeyne he fastens to his thigh,
So among the clouds on Pegas back he sores,
The Swain below that filles his wandering eye,
Leaves off his labor, and the help implores
Of powers divine, t'explaine this nouelty,
He passes diverse Seas and sundry shores:
Even to the Ethiopian Clime, and thence,
To where Cepheus makes his residence.
14
There for her Mothers guilt, Andromeda; The tale of Perseus and Andromeda. 2589

By unjust Hammon was condemnd to die,
Whom as young Perseus in his Ayery way,
Did from amongst the racking clouds espy, 1374

Save that the winds her golden hairs display,
And drops of Pearl rain from her watery eye,
He had mistook her, being chained alone,
For some fair Image of white Marble stone.
15
But when he saw no Marble was so white,
Nor Iuory to her skin to be compared,
He raines his winged Steed and stays his flight,
And greedily upon her beauty stared,
To shake his flaggy wings forgetting quite;
He loves, and greeues to see how ill she fared,
And now his tongue no longer he refrains,
But says: oh you, unworthy these rude chains,
16
Much fitter for a lovers kind embrace,
Tell me your stock, your Nation, and your name,
And why such beauty should possess this place?
Or for what crime into these bands you came?
Feign would the bashful girl have hid her face,
Save that her hands were bound: she blushed for shame:
Twice did he urge her, she was silent still,
Yet the third time tells al, against her will.
17
How bright Casseipe her beauteous Mother, (...) in Perseide.

Knowing her daughter to be wondrous fair,
The pride her heart conceived could not smother,
But with Nereides must needs compare, Aratus.

For which they ^l complaind to Ihoues great Brother
Neptune, who with infection taints the air,
Nor can the pest cease, or the Town be spared,
Til she there die, that was with Nimphs compared.
18
But in the midst of her discourse, behold,
Ere she can end her lamentable tale,
A huge Sea Monster with his long train rold
In curled knots, makes the poor Girl look pale,
The frowning billows are by him controld,
Bo^e which h'aduanceth many a shelly skale:
She shreekes: her Sire and Mother, both despair,
The people with shrill outcries pierce the air.
19
Which Danaes son espying, thus he says
Unto the Queen and the lamenting King:
The time you see is short, the Monster stays
Assured destruction to yon maid to bring,
If then Ihoues son his towering fames can raise,
And pierce yon huge Sea-Dragons skaly wing,
Destroy the Monster, and presetue her life,
Shall the bright Virgin be my troth-plight wife?
20
Who doubts, but the sad Parents soon agree?
They paw ne their honors to this sudden motion;
Phineus besides, the Maid does promise free,
Resigning up his right with much devotion;
The Couenantsmade, and now from far they see
The Whaly Monster bear a-brest the Ocean,
And driving with his Fins whole Seas before,
In making to the Virgin on the shore.
21
When suddenly young Perseus mounts the skies,
His shadow danc'st upon the silver waves,
Which when the wrathful Serpent did espy,
Against the idle shape he fumes and raues,
And as his drowned train appears on high
Above the brine, in which so often he laues:
The dantlesse Prince, whose courage never fails,
Strikes with his Faulchion, fire out of his scales.
22
And as you see a towering Eagle, when
She spies a speckled Serpent, soon her spangles
Upon the green breast of some Moorish Fen
Stoopes down, and in the Dragons Crest intangles
Her talents: least his Jaws turning again,
Ceaze her proud Sears, and whilst in vain she wrangles
And threatens ruin to the princely Foul,
She tires on every knot and curled roll.
23
So Perseus sowses on the horrid Beast
He hewes and beats him, till he makes him reele,
Possessing still his back, which much increast
The Monsters fury, such strange weight to feel,
Sometimes above the Sea he lifts his breast,
And Perseus still pursues him with his steel,
Sometime beneath the blood-stained waves he shrinks,
The whilst his wounds like graves, whole billows drinks.
24
Whilst he the Sea, the Prince the Air supplies,
Waiting aloft to see the fiend appear,
Whose yawning chaps above the Billows rise,
Ready to swallow all the Confines near,
Whom as the valiant Prince again espyes,
He makes to him amain, all void of fear:
And on his winged Steed against him tilts,
Shouing bright Harp up even to the hilts.
25
The wounded Whale casts from his hillish Jaws
Rivers of Waters, mixed with purple gore,
But from their force the wary Prince withdrawes,
And strikes behind, on both sides and before,
In many a place his shelly Armor flawes,
Still biting Harp, makes the Hell-hound rore:
And tyrd at length, the brutish Monster drownds,
In the black blood that issued from his wounds.
26
The God of Seas quak't at the frightfull sound
His Monster made: the Gods above look pale,
The waters in the which his bulk lay drowned,
With fear shrunk from him: now the slaughterd whale
Receives from Perseus many an unfelt wound,
Whom Keene-edged Harp pierst from head to tale:
The parents now clap hands: the Maid reioyces,
The people lift to heaven their plausiue voices.
27
And whilst the multitude their wondering eyes
Cast on the Monster, Perseus raines his steed,
And from the Marble rock the Maid vntyes,
By his late valor from the Hell-^ound sreede,
How can Cepheus or his Queen ^enise, Cepheus.

Or the bright Maid to give sufficient meede
To Perseus for his merit, who desires,
With quick dispatch to kindle Hymen's f^es.
28
The year Andromeda from death was freede,
Pheamone first in Pythia propheside,
Cadmus found Letters: taught the Greeks to reed: (...).

Cecrops the Athenian Monarchy supplyde,
Rhomnus the Spanish Scepter (in the weed
Pontificke.) Ranses did through Egypt ride,
Achaio did Achaya first instaure,
Now breathed in Creete, the two shapt Mynotaur.
29
The palace is prepared, in every place
Loud Music sounds, the Bride is richly clad,
The Father his bold Son in Law to grace
Inuites the Neighbor Kings: but Phineus mad,
From this high feast absents himself a space,
Till of his friends, great troops he gathered had,
To force the Virgin, freed on Ioppens shore,
Now Perseus Bride, though plight to him before.
30
Behold, the Palace Court throngd with a crew,
Of men in Armor glistring: The loud sound
Of Nuptial Music, through the Hall that flew,
With shrill confusions on the sudden drowned,
And still their showtes and cries more violent grew,
Till all the Bridal guests, incompast round
With hostile fi^dge, amazedly descend,
To know what foes their powers against th em bend.
31
With wrath untamed, the hurrying multitude
Rages, and grows Impetuous: some cry, bring
That Stranger hither, whom we will exclude
From the fair Court: some cry, lets have the King:
Others the Bride: some among the rest more rude,
Say, come, the Palace to the ground lets fling:
And whilst these several clamors pierce their ears,
Proud Phineus first, before them all appears.
32
And shaking in his hand an Oaken Spear
Headed with Brass: he thus bold Perseus greets:
Behold, th'Auenger of my nuptial Pheere,
Whom thou would force. The Palace Court and streets
Glister in arms, and can thou hope to bear
Andromeda from hence, Him Cepheus meets,
And as he was about his Spear to cast
At warlike Perseus, Thus replies at last.
33
Oh! what will Phineus do? What hellish rage
Mads thee to mischief? Who begot this strife?
Is this for Danaes Son sufficient wage,
Whose valor has preserud my Daughters life?
Why do not thou, thy love with ours engage,
For saving her that should have bin thy wife?
Whom not bold Perseus but the Gods bereft thee,
The fates, and not the prince, has wiuelesse left thee.
34
When she was married to the Marble rock,
The fastening of those chains thy bands untied,
Wa'st not enough, thou borne of Cepheus stock,
Her husband and her Kinsman necre allide,
Saw all this people round about her flock
To see the sea- Whale in his bowels hide
And bury her? Her freedom not pursuing,
Unworthy thou did leave her to her ruin.
35
Is Phineus sorry that she did not bleed,
That her Redeemer he pursues with ire?
Or if thou holdst her such a high-priz'd meed,
Why did thou not her from the Rock desire?
Or else, to him that has my daughter freed,
Why do not yield her? Phineus eyes spark fire:
Doubtful at whom he shall his Iauelin fling,
His Riual Perseus, or his Kinsman King.
36
The uproar like the raging sea increases,
Where thousand Rebels are by Perseus slain,
Till tired with slaughter his tough arm surceaseth,
With multitudes of men to strew the plain,
For not a daring soldier near him preaseth,
But dies by Harp, and yet all in vain
Such throngs of Phineus friends his valor cumber,
That Noble virtue must needs yield to number.
37
Therefore the Prince his Gorgon shield vncases,
And says aloud (since you compel me) see,
Revenge sufficient for my foul disgraces,
For where strength fails we must use policy,
All that are Perseus friends, turn hence their faces,
My foes all perish in their surquedree:
Fright Babes with Bug-beares, quoth the next that stands,
aiming a spear at Perseus with both hands.
38
But as on Gorgons head he casts his eye,
His limbs grow stiff, and he is changed to stone:
Another strikes the next that stands him by,
And pierst him through the breast, who now does groan
His soul to Air: this done, he meant to fly,
But feels his active spirits fled and gone:
His Marble arm has lost his nimble speed,
To draw it from the bulk which he made bleed.
39
Behold a Prince borne by the seauen-fold Nyle,
Crying to Perseus thus: See here thy bane,
Be proud, that we who dallied all this while,
Will at the length vouchsafe thy blood to draine:
And as he spoke such words, a scornful smile
His visage casts, intending to have slain
The Ihoue-star'd prince, his frozen Statue shows
Like one still smiling, and still threatening blows.
40
What? Stand you at the Gorgons sight amazed?
(Quoth Moble Erix;) or has Witchcrafts spell
Such power upon the valiant, who have blazed
Their arms in many conflicts, and fought well?
Lets see what devil in this shape is raised,
Whom my steele-pollax cannot prostrate fell,
But in his pressing forward, he soon feels
Cold leaden numbnesse give his senseless heels.
41
Amongst the rest, one ofbold Perseus crew,
Glancing his eye upon his masters shield
Turned stone: him one of Phineus soldiers knew,
And thought to cleave him standing in the field,
But with the stroke fire from the Marble flew,
His forehead sounded like a brazen shield;
At which the Soldier musing, Gorgon spies,
So stands transformd, with wonder in his eyes.
42
So that at last Phineus repents his spleen
And unjust war made for Andromeda,
Two hundred of his train his eye has seen,
All Statues: unto some he calls ( Away)
Follow to some: Where lives that envious teene,
With which you threatened Perseus? Wherefore stay
Your paces from pursuit? Where Is the defying?
So claps them on the shoulders, Courage crying.
43
But when he felt their hardened limbs offend
His aching hand, and yield it no impression,
And that their mockery shapes did idly bend
Their threatening arms, now finds he his transgression:
His penitent hands he does to heaven extend,
Praying that they would aid his intercession
To great Acrisius Grandchild, who strikes dead,
So many bold sprites with his Gorgons head.
44
Now as with oblique paces, and his eyes
Turned from the conquering Prince, he kneeling, speaks;
Hoping to appease him with submissiue cries,
The implacable Prince his rage thus wreakes,
Behold what doom the Impartial Deities
Alot the wretch that Laws of honor breaks:
So with his shiled Gergonian him pursude,
Hardening the face which he behind him skrewd.
45
At the instant his retorted neck waxt hard,
His spread Arms stiff, his fixed eyes showing fear,
And you would think his shape all sense debard,
Spoke as it stood, words that a man might hear:
These tumults done, and Hymen's rights prepared,
The Prince intends another course to bear:
He takes his leave, consorted with his Bride,
And to his Mother his swift steps applide.
46
In the Midway he youthful Danaus meets,
(His hopeful Brother) who at the first sight
Salutes him and his wife, with kind regreets,
In many a sweet discourse they spend that night:
At length the Murke and Palped darkness fleets
From the skies azurd forehead: with the light
The Princes rise, and speed them to the shore,
To which the mast-lesse boat their mother bore.
47
Now Phrigian Mydas (famous for his ears,
In giving Apolloes honor to God Pan,
And for his golden wish) the Scepter bears
Of Phrigia: In Israel that good man,
Samgor was Judge, whose power so great appears,
He of the Philistyns killed many a man;
And in one battle whilst the Trumpets blew,
With an Oxe-goade six hundred Heathen slew.
48
But in these passages great Saturnes Son,
That with the Trojans was at broad hostility,
At Ganimeds request, a league begun,
Now Ihoue and Troos are one: he whose ability
Could not defend his Troy from being ore-run,
Now can command Troyes foes with much facility:
So, to yield way, rebates the greatest stroke,
So, softest walls, hard bullets soonest choke.
49
T'wixt England and great Spain, two potent Nations,
Like enmity, has long time been commenced, The league twixt Englad and
Spain.

And whilst Eliza lived, her proclamations
Opposed their pride, and her own Province fenced,
But now with mutual kind Congratulations,
All injuries on both sides are dispensed,
And our great Englands Ihoue for Spaines best use,
Has at their suite, granted a termine Truce.
50
Troos yields his due to Nature, him succeeds 2856

Ilion his Son, who Ilions high Towers reard, 1307

More famous for his buildings, then brave deeds,
A royal Prince, and more beloud then feared,
He for a present, sends four milke-white Steedes
To Cretan Ihoue (a Present much indeerd)
Who by the Knight that such a treasure brought,
Re-sends a precious gold-branch quaintly wrought.
51
Much richer gifts in enterchange of state,
Our Sovereign to the lofty Spaniard gave
The warlike Constable, who came of late
From Hespery: a five years truce to crave:
More precious presents and of dearer rate, The L. High Admiral Imb. for Spain.

Bare Englands Admiral: both rich and brave,
When from K. James sent with a princely train,
He was the great Ambassador for Spain.
52
Ihoues branch (called the Palladium) the King plac'st
In Pallas royal Temple, where it stood
Till Troyes proud walls were quite deiect and rac'st,
And Islions lofty Turrets swam in blood:
Great Islion dies, and he that next him grac'st
The Trojan Crown (a prince not all so good)
Laomedon, of whom we here will stay,
To bear the Sons of Danae on their way.
53
Who as they past the desert, from a far
They might espy a goodly Knight lie spread
Upon the grass, he seemed a man of War,
For he was armed at all points (save the head)
On his fair brow appeared no soldier scarre,
It seems he had not Arms long managed:
Exchanges past of many a kind salute,
Thus speaks the ^med Knight, whilft they stand mute.
54
Who has not of the great Acrisius hard?
Acrisius, he^ that built the brazen Tower?
Now Arges King no longer, but debard
His nat^e kingdom by his Brothers power,
His Brother Pricus has against him ward,
And all his glor^s reft him in an hour:
Stay there (quoth Perseus) you have touched me nearly
Acrisius wrongs, King Pricus shall buy dearly.
54
Wear Acrisius Grandchild, and descended
From beauteous Danae, and that fort of Brass
That Lady Rumor has so far commended,
Who in Gold-liquid-showre-drops courted was;
Oh! where was I Acrisius, to have defended,
With Pricus blood to have staind the Argiue grass:
Both Abas sons, a Prince frugall and thrifty,
He, Linceus son, the sole remain of fifty.
56
Is Brotherhood abroad so light esteemed,
That kingdoms can such holy knots vnty?
Let me no more Ihoues Royal soon be deemed
But for Acrisius wrongs, King Pricus die,
He that in all the world austeerest seemed,
And stood upon most points of honesty,
Has proved the greatest Hypocrite: like those,
Without precise: within, religious foes.
57
Assist me Noble Knight in this adventure,
(Quoth the great Gorgon-tamer:) when replide
The armed stranger, by the firm Inde^ture
Of honor, I am elsewhere bound to ride;
But if with me you will my voyage enter
And see what shall my Chiualry betide,
My Noble task atchieu'd, I then will lead you
To Pricus, where my knowledge much may sted you.
58
When I the Triple-shapt Chimere have slain,
Whose dreadful form makes all Sicilia quake, Bellerephon.

Bellerephon will then return again,
And your attempt against Pricus undertake:
The Princes wonder at Chimeraes name,
And that one knight his desperate life should stake
Against such ods, asking what Imposition
Has sent him on this dangerous expedition.
59
Or whether vncompeld he be so mad
To seek assured destruction, and to scale
The Devils den, where nothing can be had
But certain ruin, his tough skin is Male,
A terrible huge Lions head (which drad)
A Chieures body, and a Serpents tale,
Him whose vast gorge whole armies cannot fill,
Why should one desperate Knight attempt to kill?
60
Bellerephon replies, by Pricus doom, K. Pricus Brother to Acris^.

Not my own will I am compeld to go,
Else in my growing years that yet but bloome,
I Would flesh my sword on a more equal foe
But in Sicilia I must seek my Toombe,
Or kill the triple-Monster, dreaded so,
(Says Perseus then) What makes him so severe?
Attend (quoth he) great Princes you shall hear.
61
Oh! Why did Nature frame these Women fair? Bellerephons tale.

And make their outward features Angell-bright?
When their black insides staynd and spotted are,
With Lust, with Pride, Contempt, disdain, and Spite?
Why should the snowy Swans in beauty ^re
Have such black feet? Why should the Lilly white
Bear such rank smell? Can men withstand their fates,
When golden vessailes bring in poisoned cates?
62
I thought I might have gatherd a fresh Rose,
And not have pricked my finger with a Thorn:
Or a sweet flower out of the Garden chose,
But not a Nettle in my hand have worn:
Still, next the sweetest flower, the Nettle grows,
The rarest beauty has the rudest scorn:
The Rouers Ship bears the best promising sails,
The foulest Serpents the most golden skales.
63
By a fair Woman is my youth misspent,
My Innocent youth that never love embraced,
Her deuillish mind to malice wholly bent,
My fortunes has over turned, my Name disgraced,
And I, through her maleuol^t intent
Like a poor exile from my Country chaced:
Oh woman! Made of Envy, Pride, and Lusts:
Woe to the man, that to thy weakness trusts.
64
My hopes (quoth Perseus) I on this have laid,
And think her heart to be her beauties peer,
Nor where I trusted most am I betrayde,
Andromeda I know still holds me dear,
The stranger Knight (quoth she) that does vpbrayde,
Our sex so much, me thinks is too severe,
To blame all women, for one Ladies deeds,
At this all silence made, whilst he proceeds.
65
In Pricus Court my Childhood I have spent,
And there the grace of many Ladies gained,
But I whose thoughts were all on Knighthood bent,
Regardlesse of their looks, their loves disdained:
Among the rest, Queen Aurea often sent
Gifts and smooth Letters, fraught with lines unfeigned:
This beauteous Q. whose thoughts were at such strife,
Was my dread Soueraigns spouse: King Pricus wife.
66
Morethen her rauishing beauty could entice,
Th'allegiance to my King with me prevailed:
The more the wanton Queen incites to vice,
The more her sighs and amorous Courtships failed:
I held my name and honor of more price,
Then basely yield, when womanish lust assailed:
At last, with such hot flames her entrails burnd,
Thar (being disdained) her love to rancor turned.
67
She that before held of my person dearly,
Now damnes my presence to the deepest hell,
And in her heart vows to revenge severely
My loyal scorn (I know no hate so fell
As that which was once Love) It touched her nearly,
Where love once log'd such poisonous hate does dwell,
That now she aims her envy at my head,
Nor can she live, Belerephon not dead.
68
Forthwith she cites me to King Pricus throne,
And as a Rauisher I am accusd,
She swears that when I found her all alone,
I would her royal person have abusd:
And then round pearls about her eyebals shone,
Which dropped down by her cheeks, (such craft she vsd:)
Oh heaven! what cannot cunning women do?
By oaths, and tears, to win their husbands too?
69
I pleaded Innocence, but what (God wot)
Could my weak plea against her tears prevail?
And to accuse her spouse-breach booted not,
Her whom tears helped, could protestations fail?
Besides in honor I could lay no spot
Upon her loyalty, rather bewail
Her want of grace, and the hy-Gods importune,
To assist my Innocence, and guide my fortune.
70
When I asked witness of such foul abuse,
She thus replide, commixing words with tears:
When lustful men aim at such horride use,
They watch all spyal-eyes and listening ears:
Nor can the want of witness plead excuse,
For who (that to a woman fancy bears)
Will, when he seeks t'inforce her against all reason,
First, call his witness, to such hated Treason?
71
Rather he watches the most silent hour,
When man and beast is sunk in leaden slumbers,
And Morpheus he that has on midnight power,
The world with universal darkness cumbers:
When (saving Lust and Murder) all the powers
Of earth lie hushed and charmd: when no man numbers
The iron toongs of Clockes: such a black time
Should have bin guilty of his more black crime.
72
For double witness in this case I stand,
Pricus (you are my Husband and my King)
And where should Aurea if not at your hand
Seek Justice: at that word fresh sourses spring
From her drowned eyes: what need the cause be scand
With more sufficient proof? What needs she bung
More arguments? Since every tear she split,
Persuades her loyalty: my heinous guilt.
73
The King though inly moved with wrath and spleen,
Yet in his calm looks moderates his Ire,
He calls to mind how faithful I have bin,
Since, (when I served as Knight) before (as Squire)
Loath would he unrevenged leave his Queen,
As loath does he my Innocent blood desire:
Therefore twixt both, this rigorous doom he gave,
That the Chimeraes womb should be my grave.
74
His tale thus ended, the two Princes vow
To lend him all assistance: by their aid
Belerephon has made Chimera bow,
Which done, they jointly Pricus Realm invaide:
Acrisius by their arms is raised now,
And Pricus slain: In Arges they are staide
By old Acrisius, who repents at last,
Of Danae, among the ruthlesse Billows cast.
75
The Noble Perseus he adopts his son,
And makes him Heir aparant to the Crown:
Sorry for all the spite against him done,
And now bright Danae he accounts his own,
Sending young Danaus and Bellerephon
With royal gifts (soon to the Princess known)
Showing by these his reconciled heart,
But with the warlike Perseus he will not part.
76
Whom the same day he Arges King creates,
Himself in Darraine lives a life retired, Perseus Issue. Herodot^ in Polimnia.

Perseus, Andromeda his Queen instates
In the like pomp (a Lady much admired)
Five children he begat (so would the Fates)
More valiant, with their Fathers gifts inspired:
Rich Scelenus, great Bachmon, and bold Demon,
Noble Erictreus, and fair Gorgophon.
77
This Gorgophon is held to be the first, Pausanias in (...)

That in those days was known to marry twice,
Her husband dead, alone this Lady durst
Prove second spousals, which was held a vice,
The chasest Matrons her example cursed,
Who held their constant love in Sovereign price:
Our hinder widows, Saint her name in heaven,
Some four, some five, nay some have told to seven.
78
His sons takes wives, Acrisius still suruiuing,
Who glories in his warlike Grand-childs seed,
Their honors from their Fathers acts deriuing,
For by their swords did many Tyrants bleed:
But leave them in their deeds of valor striving,
And of Acrisius timelesse fate proceed:
Forgetting what was told him long agone,
That Danaes Son must turn him into stone.
79
When Perseus had in Arges gouernd long,
Upon a night he much desird to see
Acrisius: and to Darraine that was strong
With triple gates, alone ascended he,
There knocks, the Porters had forgot his tongue,
and with bold words denyde him entrance free:
At which inrag'de, the Prince his Harp drew,
And at first stroke th'Ill-languad'g Guardian slew.
80
The uproar flows apace, Clamors arise
From all parts of the Fort: to the Kings ear
They come at last, who with the Warders cries
Astonished, to the tumult preaseth near,
Thinking to appease the broyle and riotyze,
But hapless man unawares he perished there: 2657.

The enraged Prince that mad-like laid about, 1306.

Struck with a blow, his Grand-sires life-bloud out.
81
Perseus the vnauoyded fates now blames,
And lays Acrisius in his Marble grave,
He that on earth intoyes the hy'st-stilde-names,
Unto their doomes must yield himself a slave,
From all delights the Prince himsefe reclaymes,
In Arges Throne he no delight can have:
But for his sake that the Argiue Scepter bore,
he leaves the Province, near to see it more.
82
His Court unto Mecenes he transported,
But thither did his sorrows him pursue, Theseus inrebus Corinthiacis.

and therefore with a huge host bravely sorted,
himself into the Orient he withdrew:
his army he with warlike phrase exhorted
Against Lyber-Pater, whom in arms he slew,
and where the Eastern Monarchs blood lay spilt,
Persepolis a stately Town he built. Persepolis.

83
He calls the province Persea by his name,
Where Bachmon in the kingdom him succeeds,
Erictreus did all the Nations tame
By the red Sea, and there his honored deeds
Are Chronicled: great Scelemus thy fame
Lives in Mecenes: the Pontificke weeds
Are for thy Royalty reserved alone,
In Thebes, remains twice-married Gorgophon.
84
Alceus and Electrion from his line
Descend, Alceus was Amphitrioes Sire, The genealogy of Hercules

Electrion as Bochas does divine,
Alcmena got, whose face all eyes admire,
Alcmena and Amphitrio combine
Themselves by Hymen's ceremonial fire:
Of this bright Theban dame through Greece commended,
This Monster-tamer Hercules descended.
85
But how great Ihoue with bright Alcmena lay,
Himself transforming to Amphitrioes shape,
Adding three nights together without day:
How Juno envious of her husbands rape,
Alcmenaes Childbirth hindered, and did slay
The unborn infants who with wonder escape
Her Hell-borne charms, how by Galantis smile,
Juno was mocked, Alcmena escaped her guile. Galantis Alcmenaes nurse.

86
How young Alcides in the Cradle lying,
Checked two inuenomed Snakes, by Juno sent
To strangle him: how Ypectens dying ^pectent Herules tvvinne-Brother and son
to Amphitrio

By those charmed Serpents, to Elisium went,
And how the Ihoue-star'd Lad his valor trying
Upon th'Olimpicke mount: disgraced sent
All such as came to have their valors tried,
To leap, to run, to wrestle, or to ride.
87
How by the K. Eristeus he was taught,
Loved beauteous Megera, and famed all Greece,
And through the world renowned adventures sought,
Conquered great Cacus and the golden fleece:
How Achelous he to ruin brought,
Doted on Deianeira that fair piece,
And Iole, who the more fame to win,
Made great Alcides on a distaffe spin. Iole daughter to Cacus.

88
All these we leave as tales too often told,
And rubs that would our running voyage let,
Not that our thoughts despise them being old,
(For to antiquity we owe much debt)
But because Time that has his acts inrold
To many a Common sale his deeds has set,
Therefore (though no part of his worth to reaue him)
We now for matters more allide, must leave him.
89
And now look back to Troy: Laomedon
Intends new walls about his Town to rear,
But wanting coined Gold to deal upon,
Solicits all the Gods, such as dwelt near,
Chiefly those two that rule the Sea and Sun,
Neptune and Phoebus Mony-maisters were,
Of whose rich Priests for so much coin he calls,
As may repair his Cities ruined walls.
90
They dispuruey their vestry of such Treasure
As they may spare, the work now being ended Herodot^.

Demand their sums again: but out of measure
At their request the Monarch seems offended,
And says he means to pay them at his pleasure:
The Gods (by whom Troy was with walls defended,)
Enraged at his ingratitude, conspire,
With joint revenge to vvreake their spleenfull ire.
91
The vvrathfull Neptune first his Billows raisd
Above the high-built-Wals, thinking to drown
Those lofty spires whom all the world has praisd,
Hurrying his brinish waters through the Town:
Now Dolphins play, where barbed Steeds have grazed,
In every pau'd-street Neptunes Billows frown,
Till being weary with the Cities sack,
He draws himself into his Channels back.
92
For by the fates appointment the proud God
Must keep his falling ebbes as well as flow,
Else pale-fac'st Cinthia, at whose dreadful nod
Obedient Neptune shrinkes, her rage will show,
For she commands his waves, and his abod
Is pointed by the Moon, whether below
In his Abisme, or rocks appearing hire,
He guids his looks by her immortal fire.
93
But as he shrinkes his waters at her beck,
He leaves much slimy filth upon the shore,
Now began the God of Fire his beams reflect
Upon the drownded Continent that wore
The sea-Gods wrath, and now must bide his check,
A hot contagious stem (not known before)
Poisons the Clime, and as the heat increast,
The infectious pest consumed both man and beast.
94
Halfe-perisht Troy unable to withstand
Their double wrath, her people from her fly,
Knowing they both offended Sea and Land,
And to abide their vengeance must needs dye,
The King himself that wants power to command,
The all-consuming Plague, fears to come nigh,
The walls he reard, but must to Delphos travel,
To excuse his Pride, that with the Gods durst cauell.
95
His due Oblations ended: it is returned,
That he must seek the offended Gods to appease,
Else the hot plague (his peoples entrails burnd,)
Shall all the remnant of his subjects cease,
Nor must his fearful penance be adiournd:
Nothing can Neptune and Apollo please,
But monthly to a Monster of the flood,
To yield a beauteous maid of the Kings blood.
96
This couenanted, the Troyan King prepares
Allotted Virgins, now the infection slakes,
At length alas (for bold Fate all things dares,) Hesione daughter to Laomedo^

The lot the beauteous maid Hesione takes,
The Kings sole Daughter, Fortune nothing cares
For him, whose hand The Imperial Scepter shakes.
The hood-winckt Goddess dare on all sides strike,
Beggars and Kings, in lots are both alike.
97
Imagine her with thousand Virgins guided
Unto her fearful Toombe, her Monster-graue:
Imagine how the hulky Devil slyded
Along the Seas smooth breast, parting the wave:
Alas poor naked Damsel, ill provided,
Whom Millions, without heavens help cannot save:
Yet see, help coms: behold the pride of Greece
Decked in the conquest of the Golden fleece.
98
Along the glassie Hellespont by chance
Alcides sailing, sees upon the Land
The all-dispoyled Virgin in a Trance,
Wayling her ruin on the bryny Strand,
Above the Waves he sees a Whale advance
His dreadful shape: at whose sight all that stand
Upon the Beach, some sounding, as half dead,
Others dismayde, back to the City fled.
99
Such only, whom the cause concerned most,
And unto whom the Virgin was allyde,
Attend her swallowing, on the Marine coast,
For whom (no Mortal) safety can provide,
Now great Alcides with his Greekish host
Lands on the Continent vnterrifide:
And while the Trojan King with terror shakes,
The Virgins Rescue boldly undertakes.
100
Two barbed Steeds, the best that Asia bred,
Are by the King ordaind the Victors me^d,
By whose strong hand the Sea-Whale shall fall dead,
The Virgin live, and Troy from pest be freed;
Now falls his huge Club on the Monsters head
With such impetuous weight, and violent speed:
As if Heavens greatest Collumne should down fall,
That bears the high roof of th'Olimpicke Hall.
101
The hydious Augur slain, and she releast,
The perjured King, the promised meede denies,
And seeing Troy both wal'd, and free from pest,
Excludes the Greek for his bold enterprise:
Who sails from Greece: after few months of rest
Does burn Larisse, and Tenedos surprise,
Ruinates Troy, expels Laomedon, The first destruction of Troy.

Beats down the walls made by the Sea and Sun.
102
In which atchieuement Philicteles fought,
(Made of Alcides vanquished foe his friend)
The King Eristheus there for honor sought: Cr^on K. of Thebes.

And Creon to this dreadful fight gave end,
The Noble Theseus his assistance brought,
Theban Amphitrio did his arm extend
Against Asiaes pride, and with the rest returning,
Aided great Hercules in Troyes first burning.
103
These as they were a Shipboard, having filled
The vast Wombes of their Barks with wealthy spoils,
Insulting in the Trojan blood they spild,
Discoursing of their fightes and dangerous broils,
And such great victories attained but seild,
Though with more labors, and Insudate toils:
Cups of Greek Wine unto this Conquest crowned,
Thus King Eristheus boards the Princes round.
104
Now the first Vigill of the night is entered,
With some discourse lets overtake the Sun,
Who flying, is by this beneath us centred,
And whilst the waking Stars their courses run,
Discourse, who first the Tartar gates aduenterd,
And by whose hand that bold attempt was done,
Of Orpheus and Euridice, and in fine Pluto and Proserpine.

Of Pluto, and the ravished Proserpine.
105
When Theseus thus: Since you desire to know
The true report of these Tartarian bralles,
Which none can better then Alcides show,
Or Theseus Present: by the Aetnean Walls,
The Waters of Pergusa gently flow,
And thence into the Neighboring Ri^er falls:
Crowned with a grove, through which the lake does run,
Making his bows a Bon-grace from the Sun.
105
Hither fair Proserpine repayring still,
With Daysies, Daffadils, and Lillies white,
Roses and Mary-golds her lap to fill,
And to return home laden (a sweet sight)
Chaplets to make, or Gyrlands by fine skill;
By chance the God of shades in edge of night
In his black Ebon Chariot hurrying by,
Upon the Virgin casts a Rauishers eye.
106
He spies, and loves, and catches up at ones,
The Affrighted Virgin, who lets fall her flowers,
he bears her over hills, Dales, Rocks, and stones,
She, calls on Mother, Friends, and (tears she powers,)
Mother nor friend can hear her shriekes and groans,
Through pooles and Lakes the God of Tartar skoures,
he yerkes his hot Steedes with his wyery strings,
And from his Coach Wheels rusty darkness flings.
107
And calls his Ietty Stallions by their Names,
Whose hard hoofes make the vaulted Center-sound,
his rattling Chariot, through the air proclaymes
his fear and flight, with burnisht Brass shod round,
Nor once looks back the dreadful God of flames,
Or thinks his rape safe on the upper ground:
But with his Ebon-Mace the earth inforces,
Which cleft, sinkes him, his Chariot, and his horses.
108
The Queen of Plenty, she that crowns the land Ceres

With several grain, and Neptunes Kingdom bounds,
Searches about, but cannot understand
Of her fair Daughter, yet the world she rounds,
And day by day she takes this task in hand,
But in her bootlesse search her self confounds:
Aurora finds her in her travels rising,
The setting Sun still sees her, ease dispising.
100
But in our labors we our pen must rest,
Least in her search, we our Invention loose,
Which finding tired with travel, we hold best
A while to cherish, (therefore rest we choose)
Here therefore let us breath, ere we digest
Troyes second fall, as that which next ensues:
Our Muse with Phoebus sets, and with the Sun
To Morrow rising, is our task begun.
THe Gorgons were called by other names, Pemphrado, Erito Apoll^d. Athe^. lib. 2,
Melanthes lib. de mistery^s.
and Dino, to whom was added a third Iaeno.

Pegasus taking his flight out of Helicon, striking the earth with his hooues,
there presently sprung out the pleasant Fountain Hippocrene, after consecrate
to the Muses. Some moralize this winged Horse to a swift-saild Ship, in which
Perseus saild in all his foreign adventures.

Aurea Mala, which the Latins conster golden Apples, the Greeks call golden
Sheep, the word importing so much.

Atlas for his exquisite skill in Astronomy was said to bear heaven on his
shoulders.

Of this Sea Monster S. Augustine speaks in his Book de S. Augustine.
Ciuitate Dei, affirming that one of the bones, was in his time still vncon
sumed and kept.

The monster Chimere described with a Lions head, a Goats belly, and a Serpents
tail, was a mount aine in Sicily, whose top was full of wild Lions, the
middle of Goats, and the foot and lower part swarmed with serpents: This hill
Belerephon by the aid of Perseus, cleared of all these Sauadges, and after
made it habitable.

Where Jupiter is said to put three nights into one, some have ingeniously
imagined it, to be about that time, when at Iosuahs prayer the Sun staide his
Diurnal course (till he had the slaughter of his enemies) which being kept away
from a Country so far remote, must of force lengthen the night by his
absence, as it prolonged the day by his presence.

Galanthis by her craft deceiving Juno, was by her after in ^uid Metamorph.
her anger transformed into a Weasill.

Philocletes son to Paean, and after his surprisall, companion with Hercules
in all his travels, to whom at his death he gave his arrows, poisoned in the
blood of Hydra.

The length of that night before mentioned, may else be alluded to that in the
2. Kings, Chap: xx. where Zedekiah being promised by God fifteen years life
after his extreme sickness, and craving a sign, God commanded the shadow of
the Sun to go back ten degrees, which was incontinently performed in the Dial
of Ahuz: as it was promised him by Isaiah the Prophet.

The Nereides with whom Andromeda was compared, Hes^. in Th^g.
were the daughters of Nereus the son of Oceanus and The-tis: his daughters
were nimphs of the sea: he had by the nymph Doris these three children, Halia,
Spio, Pasithae and Ligea, with others to the number of fifty, whose names
Hesiodus re-members, and Apollodorus.

Laomedon, besides Hesione, whom he best loved, had 3. daughters more, Aethasa,
Astioche, and Medicastes, but Apollodorus Athen.
Hesione being dearest to him, Neptune and Apollo choose her to be devoured of
the Sea Monster.

The end of the sixth CANTO.
Argumentum
EVridia stung with a Snake and dying,
Sad Orpheus travels for her sake to Hell,
Among th'Infernals Musickes virtue trying,
Much honored (even where fiends and devils dwell)
Ceres to Hercules for vengeance crying,
Th'vndaunted Greek, seeks Pluto to expel:
Iasons rich Fleece, and proud Troy once more racst
By Hercules, in our next skeades are placst.
ARG. 2.
WHo Music found: hell sakt: Perithous harms
Eta describes, with great Medeas charms.
CANTO. 7.
1
Music by which the Spheres are taught to move,
And tune their motion to their makers praise,
Approues it self divine: first found above,
After bequeathed frail man, to cheer his days:
Whether it were taught us by the Birds, that prove
Their harmony, in their sweet-Chirping lays,
Or whether found by man: of this I am sure,
It has bin Ancient, and shall long endure.
2
Let Homers Demodocus witness bear,
And Virgils Iopas: with this heavenly skill, Eusebius.

Some say Amphion ravished first the ear,
Which Zephus did with Notes and Crotchets fill,
But others Dionisius hold most dear,
As one that made his Ayers loud and shrill, (...)

Men diversely derive Musickes soft feet,
Some from Arcadia; likewise, some from Creet.
3
On Shalmes Trezenius Dardanus first played, Solinus

On Cranes legs first, but after framed of Reed,
Bright Mayaes son on a parcht Tortoys made
Th'vnshaped Harp: most Writers have agreed
That Tubal gave it form, with pins that staid Mercury:

The tuned strings, to make his Music speed:
Pan found the Pipe, to play at Syrinx suit,
Tymarias, was the first, that strung the Lute.
4
Nables and Regals, holy David found,
Dirceus an Athenian, Clarious shrill,
And these the Lacedemons did first sound,
When the Messenians they in arms did kill:
Unto the Dulcimer first danced round
The Troglodites: after the Rebeck still
The Archadians fought: Pises Tyrhenus was
The first that fashiond Trumpets made of Brass.
5
Which some to Myses attribute, and say
The Haebrewes with a Silver Trumpet led,
Marched, and retyrd: were taught to keep array,
When to fall off, when on; fly or make head: (...)

Dromslades the Romans taught: the Cretans they,
After the Lute their hostile paces tread:
Great Haliattes with his sword and shield,
Marched not without loud pipers in the field. ^liattes king of Lydia.

6
This, as it has the power in dreadful Wars
Among soft effeminate breasts to kindle rage,
and to relenting grace all entrance bars,
So has it power the rudest thoughts t`asswage:
To music move the Plannets, dance the stars,
It tempers fury, makes the wild man sage,
In this consent of stringes, he that can well,
May with harmonious Orpheus enter hell.
7
We left Queen Ceres in her Daughters Quest,
Measuring the earth from one side to another,
Yet can she find no end to her unrest,
Her Daughter lost, she is no more a Mother:
The earth once cherisht, she does now detest,
Against which her spleen, she can no longer smother:
She calls it barbarous, unthankful, base,
And no more worthy of her Souer^gne grace.
8
And much against her ancient pleasure speaks,
For what she favored erst, she now dislikes,
In every place she comes, the Ploughes she breaks,
The laborous Oxen she with Murraine strikes,
Upon the toyling Swains her spleen she wreakes,
Cattle and Men choke up their new-plasht Dykes:
The barraine fields deceive the Plow-mans trust,
The usuring seed is molded unto dust.
9
Which rather in the parched furrow dries,
Laid open unto every rigorous blast,
Else to the theeuish Byrds a prey it lies,
Or if it hap to gather root at last,
Cockle and Tares, even with the Corn-eares rise,
Else by the choking Cooch-grasse it is past:
Thus through her grief, the earth is barraine made,
The hoped harvest perished in the blade.
10
Mean time Euridice, the new made Bride Orpheus and Euridice.

Of Orpheus, with a princely train consorted,
As in a Meddow by a Rivers side,
Unto her Husbands Harp one day she sported,
And by his tune her measured paces guide,
In a swift Hadegay (as some reported:)
She shricking starts, for whilst her Husband singes
Unto his Harp, a Snake her Ankle stings.
11
In Orpheus arms she dies, her soul discends,
Ferryed by Charon over the Stigian Lake,
The woeful Bridegroom, leaves his house and friends,
Vowing with her the loathed world to forsake,
To the Tenarian part his course he bends,
And by the way, no cheerful word he spoke:
But by ten thousand paths, turning does cross
Through Tartary, and through the black Molosse.
12
There is a steep decliuy way looks down,
Which to The Infernal Kingdom Orpheus guides, Molossia a part of Epire, so
called of Molo^us Son to Pyrhus and Andro^ch.

Whose loouer, vapors breathes: he sits not down,
But enters the dark Cauerne with large strides,
With thousand shadows, he is compast round,
Yet still the suffocating Mists diuides:
Millions of Ghosts unbodied, bout him play,
Yet fearelesse, Orpheus still keeps no his way.
13
Hels restless Ferriman with Music paid,
Is pleased to give him waftage too and fro,
The triple Hell-hound, that his entrance stayed,
Charmed with Music, likewise lets him go,
So through the ayry throng he passage made,
(The Immortal people that remain below:)
And tuning by the way his silver stringes,
To the three fatal Sisters, Thus he singes:
14
You powers Infernal, full of awful dread, M: (...) s. rerum Astronomicarum.

Whose dietyes no eye terrestrial sees,
I know all Creatures that are mortal bred,
At first or last, must stand to your decrees,
I come not as a spy among the dead,
To blab your doomes, or rob you of your fees:
I only pierce these vaults (void of all crime)
To seek my Bride, that perished fore her time.
15
By love, whose high command was never bounded
In Earth or Heaven, but has some power below
By your black Ministers: by Orcus rounded Minos, Eac^, Rhodamant.

With Styx, whose pitchy Waters ebb and flow,
By those three Kings, by whom all doomes are sounded,
The Elisian pleasures, and the Lake of Woe:
By all the dreadful secr^ts of the dead,
Fair Parcae knit again her vital thread.
16
I seek not to exempt her from your doom,
This is our general home, hear we must stay,
Though now releast, (as all things hither come)
So must she too, and hear abide for aye,
Grant that she now may but bespeake her room,
And to her death allot a longer day:
Or if th'immoued Fates, this will not do
Before my time (with her detain me to.)
17
This with such moving accents Orpheus sung, Hels torments

That Chin-deepe Tantalus forgot to bow
Unto the shrinking Wave: Ixion hung
Vntost upon the Wheel: and Sisiphe now
Rests him upon his stone. His Harp was strung
With such rare art, the Danaes knew not how:
To use their empty tubbes, Stix breathed not fire,
Nor can the vulture on Prometheus tire.
18
The Sisters weep, Hels Judges appear mild, Clotho, (...) Atropos.

And every tortured Ghost forgets his pain,
Proserpine laughed, and the drad Pluto smild
To see her changed of cheer, no soul^s complain,
Hels Senate to his grace is reconcild,
And all agree, she shall survive again:
Through million-Ghosts, his Bride is sought and found,
And brought to him, still haulting on her wound.
19
He takes her, with this charge at Plutoes hand,
Not to look back till he Auernus past, In Argonanticis.

And the large limits of the Stygian Strand,
Through dark and obscure ways, through deserts vast,
Steep hills and smoaky Caves, his Wife he manned,
Until he came where a thin plancke was pla'st
Over a deep raging Torrent, where dismayed,
Orpheus looks back, her trembling arm to have staid.
20
Which the three-throated Cerberus espying,
Snatches her up, and bears her back to hell,
In vain are all his sighs, his tears, his crying:
Louder then he can play, the Dog can yell,
He blames his too much love, and almost dying
Is ready with his Bride among shades to dwell,
So long upon the barren plains he trifled,
Till with hels vapors he was almost stifled.
21
At length the Rhodopeian Orpheus turns
His feeble paces to the upper earth,
Which now with discontented Ceres mournes
The rape of Proserpine, still plagued with Dearth,
Either the Sun the gleby Champion burns,
Else too much rain does force abortiue birth
To the rank Corn, the world forcst to complain,
With widdowed Orpheus and the Queen of Grain.
22
Who having searched Earth, of her child to know,
She finds her no where on the earth abiding;
And skaling heaven, Heaven can no daughter show,
Therefore both heaven and earth the Queen is chiding,
Only she left unsought the vaults below,
But hears how Orpheus has by Musickes guiding
Past through Auernus and the Stygian fires,
Therefore of him she for her child inquires.
23
He tells her of her Daughter new translated,
Whom in the vaulted Kingdoms he had seen
With Pluto, in the infernal Throne instated,
Where though against her will she reigns as Queen:
Oh Ihoue (quoth she) and has that God (most hated
Of Proserpine) the hellish raptor been!
Monarch of Devils, since thou do constrain me,
Unto the Gods above I must complain me.
24
This was (quoth Hercules) about the season
When Hyppodamia matched with Theseus friend,
Noble Perithous by the Centaures Treason,
Was ravished and re-purchast: But an end,
Our watre-toyld limbs we keep against all reason
From Native rest, I feel soft sleep descend
and close my eyelids with his downy wings,
I must to rest; For this time, farewell Kings.
25
Whether being weary of his hoftile pain
Took in the former fight, he couets rest,
Or whether modesty made him refrain,
To hear his praise where he deserved best:
But his return the Kings entreat in vain,
When Theseus thus proceeds at their request;
Ceres displeasd the hye Olimpus mounts,
And to the ear of Ihoue this rape recounts.
26
Revenge great Ihoue (quoth she) thy wrongs and mine,
And if mine cannot move thee, let thy own,
For ours betwixt us is fair Proserpine,
(By devilish Pluto into Orcus thrown)
Long lost, long sought, my daughter's found in fine,
Rather not found, her loss is certain known:
For how alas can I well term her found
Whom I still lose, kept low, beneath the ground.
27
In the rude arms of the black Dis she is plac'st,
Hels Adamantine gates besides enclose her,
Let not thy Aunt great Ihoue be thus disgrac'st,
But of my own child make me free disposer,
Else let my name be from thy Bed-role rac'st,
and be no more a Goddess, if I lose her:
But Ihoue by fair words seeks to appease the Mother,
and reconcile her to his Stigian Brother.
28
But th'vnappeased Goddess hates the Thief,
That with her daughter all her pleasure stale,
and since heaven gives no comfort to her grief,
She Will try what Mortal can her daughter bale,
She comes where Hercules and all the chief
Of Greece assembled, where she tells this tale:
And weeping, swears to be at stern defiance,
With the Tartarian Dis, and his alliance.
29
Before Alcides on this Journey went
Vnvvares to him, my friend and I prepare,
(Noble Perithous) to this one descent,
Thinking to cheer the Queen oppressed with care,
But fate was opposite to his intent,
We scarce (well armed) had tucht the lowest stare:
But Cerberus, my friend untimely slew,
and me halfe-dead upon the Pauement threw. ^rithous slain.

30
Unto my rescue great Alcides came,
To Hyppodamias husband much to late,
The Ihouiall youth that can all Monsters tame,
Ere he finds leisure to lament our Fate,
Or on the murdrous Hel-hound to exclaim,
He falls his huge Club on the Monsters pate,
Which with such violent fury pasht his brains,
It stounds him, so he leaves him bound in chains.
31
Aduentring forward in his Lions case,
Th'vnbodied Ghosts affrighted from him fly,
Who see such terror in his yrefull face,
Poor souls they fear by him again to die,
Hels Marble gates he beats open with his Mace
And manly might amongst the Devils try,
Who as they stop his way, his Club makes reele,
Whilst Furyes fly him with their whips of steel.
32
Vast hell is all in uproar, Pluto wonders
To see his black-fac'st ministers afraid,
he fears The Imperial Lord of fire and Thunders
Attempts his lower Kingdoms to invade:
From Proserpine, his twined arms he sounders,
Takes up his sable Mace of Porphyr made:
And with his black Guard forward marches still,
where greatest was the press, the cry most shrill.
33
Hell had been sacked, and all hels right displayed,
had not the Fates whom Gods and Men obey,
The fury of th'aduentrous Grecian stayde,
and with their reverent paces stopped his way,
(Those whom the Gods incline to, he obeyed)
In their Brass rols that never shall decay,
Alcides (by their license) reads his Fate,
and arms laid by, more mildly they debate.
34
Pluto inquires the cause of his arrive,
He tells him for the ravished Proserpine,
Whom as he hears, the King intends to wiue,
Whose heavenly face must among Angels shine,
Not be amongst the Devils damnd alive,
Of this the Fate twixt him and his define:
And thus amongst them they compound the cause,
According to their neuer-changing Laws.
35
That if Queen Proserpine has kept strict fast,
And since her entering Hell not tasted food,
as she has once the Stygian river past,
So back to earth she may re-saile the flood;
Inquiry made, the girl alas did taste
Some few Pomgranat grains, which understood,
Her doom the fates amongst themselves compoun d,
That Proserpine must still live under ground.
36
Atonement made with hell, the glorious Greek,
Armed with his club returns the way he came,
Upon the earth archieuements new to seek,
Since hell is filled with his victorious name,
Through many a winding path, and turning creek,
He comes at last where my dear friend lay slain:
I wounded, and the triple Hell-hound laid
Bound in those Gyues which he for others made.
37
To mournful Hyppodamia he presents
The murdrous Dogs with her dear husbands coarse,
She sings his Dirge in many sad Laments,
But at the fiend that slew without remorse
Her husband, she aims all her discontent,
And on his face imprints her womanish force:
here Theseus wept, nor could he longer hide
His private sorrow for his friend that did.
38
This is the Noble Theseus Aethraes son,
By King Egeus, that durst hell invade,
In battle the Amazonian Baldrick won,
And stout Hyppolite his Duchess made,
Who when King Minos closd Pasiphaes Son The lal or inth made to D^alus.

The Mynotaure in the Dedalian shade:
He by her help, to whom she proou'd untrue, Look in the Skolly.

Releast the Tribute, and the Monster slew.
39
Eristheus, and the valiant Theban King,
That knew the Prince Perithous, much lament him,
But with their tears the day began to spring,
They wish the Fates a longer date had lent him,
With kindled Lamps th'attendant Pages bring
The Princes to their Cabins: He that sent him
On this attempt, at parting they desire
To bless their shores, whilst they the seas aspyre.
40
Our thoughts must land them which their Trophyes brought
From ruined Troy, on several Coasts of Greece,
Remembering Jason, who with honor sought
The famed adventure of the golden Fleece,
Duke Aeson in this voyage spared naught,
Many bold Knights well armed at every piece
Assist the Noble Greek in this aduenter,
Off^ng the Argoe with the Prince to enter.
41
Duke Peleas gave it furtherance, to whose Court
Where Jason feasted, then Alcides came Peleas King of Thess^ly, and Uncle to
^son.

With Philocletes, as his dear Consort,
From strange adventures that Imblaze his fame,
Disankring from the fair Thessalian Port,
Accompanied with many Knights of fame:
Castor and Pollux, bold Amphitrion,
Amphion, Zetus, and stern Telamon.
42
Amphion was a fair Harmonious Youth,
Well skild in Music, Zethus was his Brother, Am^ion. Zethus.

Begot by Cretan Ihoue one happy night,
Upon the fair Antiopa his Mother,
She Lychus Wise, yet ravished with the sight
Of Jupiter, her love she could not smother:
These her fair sons built Thebes, with large extent, Thebes.

Two years before they on this voyage went.
43
With all the Grecian chiualry attended
They disimbogue, the gentle B llowes smile,
The Aegean Seas they pass, but late defended
By the Grand Thief, that gave those Seas their style,
No wind or wave their well-tig'd ship offended,
But the calm looking Thetis harbors guile:
Her fawning front she wrinkles with a frown,
And thinks the ambitious Argonants to drown.
44
At the black Evening close, the Sea looked white, A tempest.

The storme-presaging Wave begins to swell,
And blustering Eurus rising now at night
With his flag Wings, upon the waters fell.
The Master bids slack sail, but against the might,
Of his commanded Mates, the winds rebel:
The Boat-Swayne brals, the Mariners are chid,
For what they would, the stubborn gusts forbid.
45
All fall to labor, one man helps to steer,
Others to slacken the big bellied Sail,
Some to the Cap-string call, some pray, some swear,
Some let the Tackles slip, whilst others hale:
Some cling unto the maine-Mast, and cleave there,
Some chafe with anger, some with fear look pale:
Some ply the Pomp (and that which would devour
Their ship in time) Sea into Sea repoure.
46
Sharpe-b^ting winter grows, and on each side
The four sedit^ous Brothers threaten war,
and toss the Billows, who in scornful pride
Spit foaming Brine, the winds with waters jar,
The breaking seas, whose entrance were denyde,
Bea^e against each Pitchy-rib and calked sparre:
and by their Oaken strength denyde Intention,
Fall where they were begot, to mere confusion.
47
Now as the shriking Billows are divided,
Low Vallyes tweene two mighty Mountains fall,
From whose steep breasts the shaken vessaile slyded,
Burying in Sea, Sails, Tackles, Masts, and all:
But ^here remaynes not long, the Bark well guided,
Climbes up those clyffes, a dreadful watty wall:
That to themselves, amazd with fear they show,
Like men in the air surueighing hell below.
48
It seemed as if the Heavens and Seas had Wars,
And that the one the other did defy,
Twixt whom the mutinous winds make greater Iars,
The Ambitious Billows seem to threat the sky,
And fling their brine-waues in the face of Stars,
Who therewith mooud, melt all the Clouds on hye,
And such tempestuous shewers of rain thaw down,
As if their drops meant the vast Seas to drown.
49
The waters both of Heaueu and Earth are mixed,
Flagging their sails to make them brook no blast,
No Lamp of heaven appears (wandering or fixed)
Darkness has over the face of both heavens past,
And left his ugly blindness them betwixt,
Whose horride presence makes the Greeks aghast:
The Heavens bright fire, the troubled Water braues,
sindging with lightninges force the Gulfy waves.
50
Unto these Argonants I may compare
Our Island-voyages, alike distressed, The Islands voyage.

With whelming seas, thick Mists, and troubled air,
Loud claps of Thunder: Lightning from the West,
so dreadful, that their Pilots loose their care,
Through fear, forgetting what should stead them best:
The sea, to quench Heavens glorious Lamps aspyres,
Heaven burns the Ocean with her lightning fires.
51
As brave a General Martiald our great Fleet,
as that bold Greek that sought the fleece of Gold,
hoping by sea an enemy to meet,
Fiercer then Iasons, and more warlike bold,
Renowned Essex, at whose warlike feet
Spaines countlesse spoils and Trophyes have been told,
Who from Hesperia brought to Englands Greece,
More Gold then would have weighed down Iasons fleece.
52
Grim Terror with the Greeks a shipboard lies
All night: some weep, some rage, the boldest fear,
Soliciting the Gods with Prayers and cries,
Seeing their Fates and hopeless ruins near,
They think on Fathers, Children, Wives, Allies,
But whom they feign would see, they wish not there:
Grim terror in the Morning forward sped,
The Sun begins to wake, the tempest fled.
53
Who as from forth the Spanish Seas he raisde
His burnisht locks, and bout his shoulders shook them,
and (as his custom is) about him gazd
To view fair Thetis bounds, and ouer-looke them,
He spies th'Imbarqued Greeks, with fear amazd,
So sore the rough tumultuous Sea had took them:
He sees their Pendants torn, their Sheets all rent,
Their Hatches broken, and their mayne-mast spent.
54
Therefore he angry, Neptune does entreat,
as he would have him guild his silver streams,
Or thaw his frozen Waters with his heat,
Or cheer his cool Waves with his gorgeous beams,
Th'aduentrous Greeks (his charge) not to defeat,
But they may safe re-view their Native Realms:
Neptune is pleased, his Trident calmes the Seas,
And grants them waftage to what coast they please.
55
Who entering the Hellespont acquire some shore
Where they may land, their Fortunes to repair,
at Tenedos they tutch (known long before
By great Alcides, since he battayld there)
Where great Laomedon the Scepter bore,
and to prevent like dangers threatening care,
Re-builds his battred holds, and with supplies,
Man's every Sea-skout, that adjacent lies.
56
These Garrisons, the Grecian Peers deny
Relief or Anchorage, till the Kings mind
Be fully known: Who hears his foes so nigh
That had so late his forces overthrown,
Therefore enraged, he sends them to defy,
And from his Coasts to get them quickly gone,
Or among them all he will leave no living Greek
For golden Pillage on the seas to seek.
57
Undaunted Hercules at this offended,
Swears (by his Father Ihoue) Troyes second wrack,
And with his Argonants had then descended
Mauger the King, but Jason kept him back,
Who being chief Commander, has intended
A golden coarse, the Colcho^s first must sack,
Therefore (though much against Alcides will)
Put from that shore, the Conqueror threatens still.
58
Vowing if Fate afford him safe return,
In whose adventure all the Peers unite,
Troyes walls to batter, and their City burn,
And be the Kings eternal opposite,
To whose disgrace Troy shall in ashes mourn,
Th'vngratefull King be forc'st to death or flight,
And all these lofty Towers, at his next Landing,
Not have one stone upon another standing.
59
Resolved thus, they make to hoyse up sail,
Weigh Anchor, and their tackles hale and pull,
Their lofty spleenes against Troy they now avail,
And only aim at the Phrixean wool,
The God of winds affoords them a calm gale,
Making their waue-washt sheets show swelling full,
Whose gentle Gusts the Grecian Heroes bring Phasis a town in (...) and a
River: Medea.

To Colchos, welcomed by the Phasian King.
60
At whose arrive, Medea Jason viewing,
Oh heaven (quoth she,) what passion's this I feel?
Shall yon fair Grecian youth his fame pursuing,
Die by enchanted fire, or tempered steel?
Oh save thy fame (by this attempt eschevving)
Thy arm wants power to make the Dragon reele:
Thy amorous hand (alas) too soft and white,
with Brasse-hoou'd Bulls (that breath out fire) to fight.
61
More fitter it were a Lady to embrace,
T'imprison beauty in a cristall fold,
Oh why should one that has so sweet a face,
(Made to be loved and love) seek acts so bold?
Too ventrous Greek, for loves sake leave this place,
Thou know not what thou seekst, the fleece of Gold
A royal prize it is, yet amorous stranger,
It has not worth to countervaile the danger.
62
For the least blood shall drop down by thy skin,
Or in the' combat stain the Colchian grass,
Is of more worth then all that thou can win,
Yet does the riches of this Fleece surpass:
But stay: What blind maze am I entered in?
What loving laborinth? Forgetful Less:
Oh can thou to a strangers grace appeal,
Who comes from far, thy Fathers fleece to steal?
63
This Jason is our foe: dwells in a Land
Remote, and of another Clyme indeed,
If thou will love, about thee Princes stand
Of thine own Nation, let this stranger bleed,
Despise him then, and all his foreign band,
That in thy Fathers pillage have agreed:
Instead of love, the amorous Greek defy,
And by th'inchanted Monsters let him die.
64
But shall Medea view that Tragic sight?
And see his fair limbs by her Monsters rent?
Shall his white fingers with grim Hell Hounds sight,
That might Medea in her love content?
Apollo may I never taste thy light,
Partake thy earthly rise, or low descent,
But by my Art I shall so well provide,
To be the Gold-Fleece-conquering Iasons Bride.
65
But how Medea? Will thou then forsake
Thy Country, Father, Friends: All which are great,
and (to thy Lord) a rouing Pyrate take,
One that perchance has no abiding seat?
Fond Girl thou wrongst him these faint doubts to make
A Royal Prince and in all acts complete,
Thy Country, Father, Friends, trifles but small,
And this one warlike Jason worth them all.
66
That he is lovely; witnesses mine eye,
And valiant: what can better record bear
Then this attempt, whose fame to heaven will fly,
T'amaze the Gods that shall this Novel hear,
I leave a barraine kingdom, to discry
A populous Nation, what then should I fear?
In seeking with this amorous Greek to dwell,
I ask Elisum, in exchange for Hell.
67
A Land, where if his people him resemble
Humanity, and all good Thewes are rife,
Who if they love their Lord, cannot dissemble
Their hearts to her that shall safeguard his life,
Th'inchanted Bulls whose bellowing made heaven tremble,
Shall by their ruins make me Iasons wife,
Whom all the fair and potent Queens of Greece,
Shall better welcome then the conquered Fleece.
68
Opinion'd thus; at their next enter-view,
(After their diverse oaths between them past)
That he the famed adventure shall pursue;
Whose conquests with enchantments she binds fast,
And when his hands these monsters shall imbrew,
He to receive her as his Bride at last:
Night passes on, at the next birth of day,
Aurora frights the Feare^ll Stars away.
66
Much confluence of people throng together, Dionis. Milesius.

In the large field of Mars they take their places,
The Princes of the Land in Scarffe and Feather
And Triumph robes, expect the Greeks disgraces,
The burdend earth groans with spectators: whether
The King himself martiald with golden Maces
In person comes, his Ba^ns him inuest
In a high Throne, degr^d above the rest.
70
To such prepared joys the Frenchmen came,
To see the valiant Mount-morensi roon, Charles Bran^on Duke of Suffolk.

against Charles Brandon, who for Englands fame,
Vanquished their Knight, at which their joy was done,
The French, who to disgrace the English came,
Saw how bold Charles at one encounter won
Their Champions arms, the French Qu. to his pheer,
Which changed their promised mirth to sadder cheer.
71
Behold where Polymelaes son undaunted, Jason son to E^on and Po^nela.

against the brazen-hoofed Beasts appears,
How (richly armd) his sword aloft he vanted,
T'incounter with the two infernal steares,
Who as he strikes, still breaths out words enchanted, Antimachus (...). 3.
(...).

The Graecians stand amazed, Medea fears
To see young Jason Lord of her desire,
Betwixt two Bulls, their Nosthrils breathing fire.
72
And least her Incantatious force might fail,
She mumbles to her self more powerful charms,
Still does the dreadlesse Greek those Bulls assail,
Reddy to scorch him in his twice-guilt arms,
His sharp edged sword their horned crests makes veil,
That fire that scaldeth others, him scarce warmes,
(Such power has Magic) the fell Bulls grow tame,
And Jason tugs with them amidst the flame.
73
And first he by the dangling dew-laps takes them,
Who force perforce his valor must obey,
He twixt his sinnowy arms together shakes them,
They bellowing yield themselves his glorious prey,
To bow their stubborn neck, bold Jason makes them,
On which th'obedient yoke he gently lay,
The Greeks applaud his conquest with shrill cries,
The Colchians show their sorrows in their eyes.
74
But alls not furnished yet, he makes them draw
The teemed plow, to furrow up his field,
The rusty iron does the green verdure flaw,
Quite vanquished now, the conqu^d Oxen yield,
Yet more then this the Colchian Princes saw,
The Vipers teeth he cast upon his shield,
And sowed them in the furrows: they straight grew,
To armed men, and all on Jason flew.
75
The Greeks dismay, th'incourag'd Colchians showt,
Only Medea does their joy detest,
With magic she assists her Champion stout,
Her Exorcismes have power to arm his breast,
Those that but late incompast him about,
And with their steel struck Stars out of his Crest,
Seek mutual arms, amongst themselves they brall,
So by seditious weapons perish all.
76
It now remains the three-tongu'd venomous Snake,
The Riuer-waking-Serpent to make sleep,
Whose horride crest, blew skales, and ounces black,
Threat every one a death (unto his keep
The Fleece is put) Medea bids him take
Grass in black Lethe, laid three nights to steep,
Uttering such powerful charms as calm the winds, Apolon. lib. 3.

And the moved Billows in their Channel binds.
77
Those drops being spinkled on the Dragons head,
The words thrice spoke (the wakefull Serpent lies)
Drowned in forgetful slumbers, seeming dead,
and sleep (till now not known) seals up his eyes,
Jason in safety may the Mansion tread
Where Colchos long preserved the golden prize,
and now at length fair Polimelaes son,
Inioyes the Fleece that he with danger won.
78
Proud of this purchase, but of her more glad,
That by the Virtue of a powerful word,
More hy command upon these Monsters had,
Then he in use of his remorslesse sword,
Unto his Argoe he Medea Lad
Commanding all his merry mates aboard
But secretly, least when King Aeta knew,
his daughters rape, he might her flight pursue.
79
Which to prevent the Negerous Lady takes
The young Absyrtes, a fair hopeful youth, Absyrtus Brother to Medea Strabo
lib. 7.

And when her father after Jason makes,
And with rough fury her escape pursuth,
She chops the Lads limbs into bits and flakes,
and in the Kings way strowes him without ruth, Atusilaus. Ph^cides lib 7

And whilst he gathers up with watery eyes
His peece-meale body, she in safety flies.
80
With triumphs they in Greece are welcomd all, Timaut 2. (...) (...).

And Jason famous for his royal Quest,
The Bed red Father will his son install
In his own kingdom, and with him his guest
Deepe-speld-Medea, at whose Magic call
The Seas and winds, or travel, or find rest:
Oh Magic, by thy power what cannot they,
To whom the Seas submit, the winds obey?
81
Amongst those Princes that with Jason went,
and were at home received, the great Alcide
amidst this general Joy seems discontent,
His spleen to Troy he can no longer hide,
To be revenged he holds his firm intent,
He that to their distress relief denide,
Must know whatt'is to scorn his firm alliance,
So through all Greece he breaths against Troy defiance.
82
And with a gallant army taking Land,
attaines the shore perforce, and in his way,
No Village, Fortress, Town, or Tower can stand,
But to his ruthlesse fury must give way:
This hearing, King Laomedon has mand
a Noble army, to make good the day:
Which ere the Sun into the West-sea fall,
Must see ten thousand Trojans killed and thrall.
83
Laomedon remembering what great vvracke
Twelue-labord Hercules before time made,
Recounts to them his wrongs, his Cities sack,
Their tyranies to al whom they invade,
Therefore incites them to repulse those back,
That have too long upon his confines staid:
Behold (quoth he) these would your freedoms bar,
Then with a general showt prepare for war.
84
The host of Greeks that hear their exclamation,
Wait but to hear Alcides watchword given,
Who cheares them thus: You are that warlike Nation
Whose fame fills all the Clymates under heaven,
Sinc^ you are strangers, let your salutations
Be with your swords, not words; for yet ere Even
You standing host in their own bloods we will drown,
And part the rich spoil of yon rampierd Town.
85
Loud chearing Instruments on both sides sound,
The battles join, both Greeks and Trojans sink:
They that but late the firm Earth proudly bound,
Now must below the waves of Lethe drink,
The great Alcides borne to sway the ground,
Against his strength opposd, al mortals shrink:
Who being more then man, must needs have ods.
To fight with any that are less then Gods.
86
Him whom th'all-doming Fates will have to sway,
How can Laomedon in arms subdue,
Though Troy be strong, yet must it Greece obey,
Alcides with his Club whole thousands slew,
By his sole-strength the Greeks obtain the day,
And to the City gates the foe pursue,
Who mingled with their troops, in this adventure,
Slaughter the bold, and with the Cowards enter.
87
So by the English was great Cales suprisd Cales.

And entered, with the Spaniards that retire,
they that at first the generals name despisd,
Now at the last are forc'st his fame t'admire,
English and Dutch in Spanish wealth disguisd, Cales twice taken once by Sir
Francis Drake, since by the Earl of Essex.

Laden their fleet with pillage, whilst bright fire
Consumes the Town, which twice the English take,
As Greece did Troy, great Essex and bold Drake.
88
Stout Ajax Telamon amongst the rest,
Set his first foot in Troy, but him succeed
Ten thousand Greeks, and many a warlike breast,
Pierst with the Argiue weapons, freshly bleed:
They sack the populous Town from East to West,
Troyes second sack is by the Fates decreed:
They sack and ransacke, spoil, and freely kill,
And all the Town with shreekes and clamors fill.
89
Amongst the rest that perished in this broile,
Laomedon falls by Alcides hand,
Whilst every where the conquering Graecians spoil,
No man so bold that dares against them stand,
Great is the booty in so rich a soil,
They pillage all the substance of the land,
Beat down the walls, the Temples ruin quite,
And kill poor infants in their mothers sight.
90
The Matrons in their husbands arms deflow^,
The reverent Virgins in their parents eye,
And such as interdict their awful power,
By their remorselesse bloody weapons die,
Hie looking Troy is ruined in an hour,
Those Towers quite racst, whose sharp spyres mocked the sky
and that proud town the Asian glory ones,
Is now a confused heap of men and stones.
91
Al-conquering Hercules revenged at last
Of Troyes ungrateful Sovereign, takes full ceasure
Of Asiaes Monarchy: his fury past,
amongst his host he parts the Cities treasure,
But Telamonus Ajax most he gracst,
and gave him her that pleased him above measure,
The bright Hesione his valors meed,
The beauteous Virgin from the sea-Whale freed.
92
Well was it for young Priam the Kings son, Hercules Lybicus

That he was elsewhere in the East imployd,
The Lybian else that Asia ouer-ronne
and conquered Troy, had likewise him destroid,
The laden Greeks after the conquest won,
Are fraught with wealth, with pleasure ouer-ioyd:
Poor Troy, whilst they in their full mi^h abound,
Lives desolate, and leueld with the ground.
93
The Monster-maister having filled the sky
With martial clangor in the lowdest strain,
After revenge on Cacus Tyranny,
and the great Giants of Cremona slain,
King Pricus death, King Affer raised hie,
And the two Collumnes that he reard in Spain,
To include in few his many deeds; we thus
In narrow room, his labors twelve discuss.
94
1. The Eremanthion Bore, 2. and the fire-breathing Bull, The 12 labors of
Hercules.

3. The Lernan Hydra. 4, and the winged Hind,
5. Stymphalidus. 6. The Amazonian trull:
7. The Aegean stables, the seventh task assind,
8. The Cleonean Lion. 9. with the scull
Of Diomed, who fed his Steeds against kind:
10. The golden fruit made ripe by bright Heperion,
11. Grim Cerbarus, 12. and triple-headed Gerion.
95
These taskes by Iunoes imposition ended,
Whilst he on Ictes attractiue face
Doted, and her deserts alone commended,
Fair Deyaneyr imputes it her disgrace,
With such great wrongs unto her bed offended,
Because his vassaile had supplied her place.
She sends a shirt, (and means her husband good)
Dipped in the poison of the Centaures blood.
96
The traitor Nessus passing a deep foord
With Deianeyre, away with her he flies,
Alcides cannot reach him with his sword,
But after him his wounding arrow hies,
The dying Centaure speaks this latest word,
Fair Deiancyre, before death close mine eyes,
Receive a gift, in sign I loved thee dearly,
Which though I die, in time may stead thee nearly.
97
I know thy Lord a Conqueror, yet subdude
By women's beauty: therefore when you find,
The lustful Prince among Foreign Queens intrude,
and that their amorous Court-ships change his mind,
Send him a Shirt, with this my blood Imbrude,
The virtue is, to make Alcides kind:
This said, his life he ended in a trice,
She (for it was his last) trusts his advise.
98
Hearing fair Iole the heart had ceasd
Of her dear Lord, and that she kept away,
She feels her thoughts within themselves diseased,
and hopes to call him back that went astray,
The Centaures dying guist the Lady pleased,
Her servant Lychas posts it without stay:
Oh! Thou weak woman, thou his death may vant,
Whom Hell Hounds, Giants, Monsters, could not daunt.
99
Hoping (alas) his favor to regaine,
The Innocent Lady her dear Lord destroyed,
He d'ons her present, whose inuenomed Bane
Cleaues to his bones (Oh! Who can Fate avoid?)
More then a man before he would complain
Alcides bears, and no whit seems annoyd:
Such tortures as the strongest might strike dead
he brooks: yet no part of his color fled.
100
But when he felt such Tortures, anguish, smart,
That Gods above, nor Devils damd could bear,
That stung his breast, and pierst his Noble heart,
he grows Impatient, that could never fear
Infernal panges, Infusde in every part,
he strives the poisonous Shirt away to tear:
But with the cleaving Linnens forced to draw
The Brawnes from off his arms, and leave them raw.
101
The poysond boyles, and he that could confound
Giants, so late to his immortal fame,
Now from the head to heel, is all one wound,
The raging venom-drops his flesh inflame,
Sometimes he grouels on the sencele^e ground,
Sometimes those powerful hands that Monsters tame,
plucks down huge rocks, and cleaues the^ with his strokes
And sometimes by the roots rends up huge Oaks.
102
Mad with these Torments Oeta Mount he traces,
Where creeping in a hole he Lychas spies,
When stalking to his Cave with leasurd paces,
About his head he wheels him in the skies,
And that being done the whole Mount he defaces,
A grove of Trees dispoyld about him lies,
A thousand Oaks he heaps up on a pile,
And kindling them, says with a f^ornfull smile,
103
Whom neither Iunoes wrath, nor Plutoes hell,
Whom neither Lions, Bulls, Dogs, Dragons, Whales,
Whom neither Tyrants grim, nor Giants ^ell,
against that spirit a woman's gift preuailes,
Her jealousy has power that heart to quell,
Whom Serpents fear with their ^uenomed skales,
Since none on earth deserves our blood to spill,
The great Alcides shall Alcides kill.
104
The fire burns bright, he Philocletes calls,
And unto him bequeaths his shasts and bow,
Who at his warlike f^et confounded falls,
The Club and Lions case his bold hands throw
Into the flame, then he whom noughts appalls,
Cries Ihoue I come, and boldly leaps in so: The death of (...).

That life that mortal did the heavens aspire,
Now with Immortal wings climes heaven by fire.
105
Alcides dead, and Priam back returned
From his successful Battles in the East,
He sees his Country spoyld, his City burnd,
His Father slain, which most his grief increast,
These losses with his Sisters rape he mournd,
Nor are such weighty sorrows soon surceast:
we for a while will leave him to his care,
His Sire t'intoombe, his City to repair.
MEdea some think to be the daughter of Eta, some the daughter of the Sun,
some the Daughter of Hecare. Apollod lib. 3. Calls her Aeea. Heraclides writes
her Eripid, in Med (...). Andron Teius. (...). Epist.
to be the daughter of Neaera of the Nereides: Dionisius Milesius, calls her the
daughter of Eurelytes, others of Ipsaea, and that Chalciope was her sister. She
had a son called Medus by Aegeas. Demodocus a Harpers name in Homer, of whom
the Country Medea took name.

Iopas a King of Africa, one of Didoes wooers, a skillful Cithara canitus
(...). per (...) Aurata (...) quae maximus Atlas. (...) canit erra^ tem Lunam
(...) labores. (...) (...) (...) et pecuder vnde imber et Ignes. S. (...).
Timonax in rebus (...).
Musition, Jason committed to the charge of his Uncle Pelius, in his minority,
because Pelus was loath to resign to him his kingdom, devised for his Nephew
the dangerous enterprise of the golden Fleece, which lason contrary to his
Uncles supposition, with his Argonants valiantly achieved.

In memory of Absyrtus, there are still certain Islandes in the Venetian Sea,
called Absyrtides of Absyrtus, there slain by his sister Medea.

Phrixus was son to Athamas, and Brother to Helles, of whom the Ram that bore
the golden fleece, was named Phrixeus: Hell with her Brother Phrixus was
drowned. Of whom that Sea is still called Hellespontus.

Because we only remember (...) and the Mynotaur, and have no further
Traffic in our History with his life, I hold it not much amiss in these
Annoaations, to remember, that History, and how the Mynotaure was begot: Ovid
art Amandi.

Ida of Caedars and tall Trees stand full, Pasiphae.

Where fed the glory of the Heard (a Bull
Snow-white) save twixt his horns one spot there grew,
Save that one stain, he was of milky hew.
This fair Steare did the Heyfers of the Groves
Desire to bear as Prince of all the Droues,
But most Pasiphae with adulterous breath,
Enuies the wanton Heyfers to the death,
It Is said that for this Bull the doting less
Did use to crop young boughs, and mow fresh grass,
Nor was the Amorous Cretan Queen affeard
To grow a kind Companion to the Heard:
Thus through the Champion she is madly borne
And a wild Bull, to Minos gives the horn,
It Is not for by auery he can love or loath thee,
Then why Pasiphae do thou richly cloth thee?
Why should thou thus thy face and looks prepare?
What make thou with thy glass ordering thy hair?
Unless thy glass could make thee seem a Cow,
But how can horns grow on that tender brow?
If Mynos please thee, no Adulterer seek thee,
Or if thy husband Mynos do not leeke thee,
but thy la ^ciutous thoughts are still increast,
Deceive him with a man, not with a beast:
Thus by the Queen the wild Woods are frequented,
And leaving the Kings bed, she is contented
To use the groves, borne by the rage of mind,
Even as a ship with a full Eastern wind:
Some of these strumpet-Heyfers the Queen slew,
Their smoking Alters their warm bloods imbrew,
Whilst by the sacrificing Priest she stands,
And gripes their trembling entrails in her hands. Zezes histors 19

At length, the Captain of the Heard beguild
With a Cowes skin, by curious Art compild,
The longing Queen obtaines her full desire,
And in her infants birth bewrayes the Sire.
This Mynotaure, when he came to groath, was enclosed in
the Laborinth, which was made by the curious Arts-maister
Dedalus, whose Tale likewise we thus pursue:
When Dedalus the laborinth had built,
In which t'include the Queen Pasiphaes guilt,
And that the time was now expired full,
To enclose the Mynotaure, half man, half Bull: Dedalus and Icarus.

Kneeling he says, Just Mynos end my mones,
And let my Native soil intoombe my bones:
Or if dread sovereign I deserve no grace,
Look with a pittious eye on my sons face, Ovid 2. de art Amandi.

And grant me leave from whence we are exild,
Or pity me, if you d^ny my Child:
This and much more he speaks, but all in vain,
The King both Son and Father will detain,
Which he perceiving says: Now, now, tisfit,
To give the world cause to admire thy wit,
Both Land and Sea, are watched by day and night,
Nor Land nor Sea lie open to our flight:
Only the Air remains, then let us try
To cut a passage through the air and fly,
Ihoue be auspicious to my enterprise,
I covet not to mount above the skies:
But make this refuge, since I can prepare
No means to fly my Lord, but through the air,
Make me immortal, bring me to the brim
Of the black Stigian Water, Styx I Will swim:
Oh human, wit thou, can invent much ill?
Thou searchest strange Arts, who would think by skill.
A heavy man, like a light Bird should stray,
And through the empty Heavens find a fit way.
He places in just order all his Quils,
Whose bottoms with resolved wax he fills,
Then binds them with a line, and being fast tide,
He places them like Oars on either side,
The tender Lad the downy Feathers blew,
And what his Father meant, he nothing knew:
The wax he fastened with the strings he playde,
Not thinking for his shoulders they were made,
To whom his Father spoke (and then looked pale)
With these swift Ships, we to our Land must sail:
All passages does crewell Mynos stop,
Only the empty air he stils leaves open.
That way must we, the Land, and the rough deep
Does Mynos bar: the air he cannot keep,
But in thy way beware thou set no eye
On the sign Virgo, nor Boetes hye:
Look not the black Orion in the face
That shakes his Sword, but just with me keep pace.
Thy wings are now in fastening, follow me,
I will before thee fly, as thou shall see
Thy Father mount, or stoop, so I aread thee,
Take me thy Guarde, and safely I will lead thee:
If we should soar to near great Phoebus seat,
The melting Wax will not endure the heat,
Or if we fly to near the Humid Seas,
Our moystned wings we cannot shake with ease.
Fly between both, and with the gusts that rise,
Let thy light body sail amidst the skies,
And ever as his little son he charms,
He sits the feathers to his tender Arms:
And shows him how to move his body light,
As Birds first teach their little young ones flight:
By this he calls to Counsel all his wits,
And his own wings unto his shoulders fits,
Being about to rise, he fearful quakes,
and in this new way his faint body shakes:
First ere he took his flight, he kissed his son,
Whilst by his cheeks the brinish waters run:
There was a Hillocke not so towering tall
As lofty Mountains be, nor yet so small
To be with Valleys even, and yet a hill,
From this thus both attempt their vncoath skill:
The Father moves his wings, and with respect
His eyes upon his wandering son reflect:
They bear a spacious course, and the apt boy
Fearlesse of harm, in his new tract does joy,
and flies more boldly: Now upon them looks
The Fishermen, that angle in the brooks,
and with their eyes cast upward, frighted stand,
By this is Samos Isle on their left hand,
Upon the right Lebinthos they for sake,
Astipalen and the Fishy Lake,
Shady Pachime full of Woods and Groves,
When the rash youth too bold in ventring, roues;
Loses his guide, and takes his flight so hie,
That the soft wax against the Sun does fry,
and the Cords slip that kept the Feathers fast
So that his arms have power upon no blast:
He fearfully from the hye clouds looks down
Upon the lower heavens, whose curld waves frown
at his ambitious height, and from the skies
He sees black night and death before his eyes,
Still melts the wax, his naked arms he shakes,
and thinking to catch hold, no hold he takes:
But now the naked Lad down headlong falls,
And by the way, he Father, Father, calls:
Help, Father help, I die, and as he speaks,
A violent surge his course of language breaks.
The Unhappy Father, but no Father now,
Cries out aloud, Son Icarus where art thou?
Where art thou Icarus, where do thou fly?
Icarus where art? When lo he may espy
The feathers swim, aloud he does exclaim,
The earth his bones the Sea still bears his name.
But least we in^st too much on these impertinent tales, we will proceed in our
proposed History.

The end of the seventh CANTO.
Argumentum
THE twice sacked Troy with all abundance flows,
Her walls mlarg'd, her spacious bounds augme^ted,
Fortune on Priam all her favor strowes,
Her populous streets from all parts are frequented,
Proud of his sons, the King impatient grows,
And with all Greece for wrongs past, discontented:
Warlike Anthenot by Embassage seeks,
To have the Kings fair Sister from the Greeks
ARG. 2.
THe worth of Poets. Who first weapons found,
Troy and the Trojans, Theta makes her ground
CANTO. 8.
1
Fair Poesy, both ancient and Divine,
Tell me thy true Divinity and age,
Emmius often calls thee Sacred, thou did shine
In Moses days, a Prophet wise and Sage,
Who sang sweet Hymns composed in measured line,
To great Iehoua. Often David did assuage
His melancholy cares in many an Oade,
Tuned to the praises of the almighty God.
2
A sweeter verse then good Isaias wrote,
Or Solomon in his deuinest song,
For Number, Accent, Euphony or note
Were never set with pen, or ayr'd with tongue,
Greek Pindarus, whose meeters made men dote,
Nor Saphos vain so Musically strong,
Could in their fluent Verse, or sweet invention,
Better delight the ravished ears attention.
3
The rising and soft Cadens of a verse,
In Deutronomium lively is expressed,
He that shall David's Haebrew Psalms rehearse,
Shall find true number in his words professed,
Not Orpheus, Horrace line could sooner pierce
Th'inchanted brain: not Homer whom so me gessed
To be chief Poet, this approues it holy,
Not as some hold derived from Apish folly.
4
In verse Hexamiter did Moises praise
The heavens Creator (through the red sea flying,) S. Hi^roms.

Archilochus Iambickes first began raise,
Apollo meetred Verse, all Prose denying,
Daphne the son of Mercury assaies
The Elegeick verse (soon after dying,)
Thespis: Quintilian Tragedies deuisd,
Which Sophocles soon after enterprisd.
5
A Poem is the richest Monument,
And only lives when Marble toombes decay,
Showing Kings deeds, their merit, and descent,
Notstab'd by time, whom Sepulchers obey,
Thou proud Achilles with thy great ostent,
Where stands thy Monumentall grave this day:
Toome-makers die disgracst, then Homer trust,
By whom thy fame lives, now thy grave is dust.
6
By Poem Troyes name is preserved from fire,
Which else long since had perished with the town,
Who in these days would for her fame inquire?
Had not divine wits Chronicled her down,
Those flames that eat her buildings with like Ire,
Had burnt her Name, and swallowed her renown:
But Poesy apt all such things to save,
Redeems her glory from Obliuions grave.
7
Poets are Makers, had great Homer pleased
Penelop had been wanton, Hellen chaste,
The Spartan King the mutinous host appeasde,
And smooth Ulysses with the horn disgra'st,
Thersites had the Imperial Scepter ceasd,
And Agamemnon in his rank been plast:
Oh! Homer, it was in thee Troy to subdue,
Thy pen, not Greece; the Troyans overthrew.
8
Achilles, durst not look on Hector when
He guld his Silver arms in Greekish blood,
Homer that loved him more then other men,
Gave him such heart, that he against Hector stood,
It Was not Achilles sword, but Homers pen
That drew from Hectors breast a Crimson-flood:
Hector his Myrindons, and him subdude,
In such hye-blood faint hands were not imbrude.
9
It Was Poesy that made Achilles bold,
Stout Ajax, valiant, and Ulysses wise,
By Homers gift the great Alcide contrould
The host of Greeks: all such as highly prise
The sacred Muse, their Names are writ in gold,
Thersites was well featured, but denies
The Muse her honor, therefore to his shame,
The Muse has made him Stigmaticke and lame.
10
This made great Scipio Affricanus bring
Dead Ennius from the rude Calabrian Coast, Pompey gave Theoptanes a City.

placing his statue, that his praise did sing,
In Romes hye Capitol, who now can boast
Of such rich meede, worthy the greatest King?
So Pompey guerdon'd learning to his cost:
And gave a large Town rounded with a Wall,
And thought it for the Muse a gift to small.
11
Art thou a Tyrant? to thy service take,
Some Helliconian Scholar, whose fine quill
To after times thy reign, may gentle make,
And give them life, whom thou in rage did kill?
Art thou a Usurer? Will thou not forsake
A hundred for a hundred? Learn this skill:
To some one fluent Poet pension give,
And he shall make thy famous bounty live.
12
Had Thais favored Arts, the Arts had raisd her,
and made her Chaste as Fair: This Lucresse knew, Thais a Curtezan of Ath^nt.

Because she loved the Muse, the Muse has praisd her,
Lending the knife, with which her self she slew:
Who Lais can accuse? Though fame has blazed her
For wanton? who can say report is true? Lais a Curtezan of Corinth

Happly though Chaste, al Poets she eschewes,
And now lives only famous among the Stews.
13
Art thou a Coward? Exhibitions lend
To Scholars that shall make thee ventrous bold;
Art thou a Glutton? Make the Muse thy friend?
Or a loose Leacher? Give thy Poet Gold,
He Will clear thy Fame, and give thy scandal end,
He can redeem renown, to ruin sold,
Make Ryoters frugall, the dull blind to see,
The Drunkard temperate, and the Covetous free.
14
The Ambitious meek, the Lofty minded low,
The Inconstant stable, and the Rough, remiss;
Women that your defective humors know,
Are likewise by your bounty helped in this,
Some special grace unto the Muses show,
That have the power t'inthrone your names in bliss:
Had fair fac'st Hellen this opinion cherisht,
O're-whelmed Troy, had not for her sake perished.
15
They can make wantons Civil, the Fool wise,
The stooping Straight, the Tawny colored fair,
The merry, Modest, and the Loose, precise,
and change the color both offace and hair,
All your Mercuriall mixtures then dispyse,
For your Vermillion tinctures take no care:
What need you far for colored unctions seek,
When our black Ink can better paint thy cheek.
16
Some of this Artfull color now I want,
Which from the Muses I desire to borrow,
In Melancholy Priam to dispaint
The perfect Image and true face of Sorrow,
At sight of ruind Troy his spirits faint,
Yet after gathers strength, and on the morrow
Resolves himself with bootlesse cares to strive,
To interre the dead, and cheer those that survive.
17
In process, taking truce with all Vexation,
Priam intends a fayrer Troy to rear
Of larger bounds, so lays a firm foundation
So strong, that being mounted they need fear
Nor Phoebus wrath, nor Neptunes Inundation,
Nor any other bordering Neighbor near:
His Town repayrd, King Priam in small space,
Takes to his Wife a Princess, borne in Thrace.
18
Great Aegipseus Daughter, Hecuba
Proves Mother of five Sons, the first in Row Aegipseus King of Thrace.
Hecubaes Issue.

Hector, the boldest Knight in Asia,
Paris the fairest, expert in the bow,
Then Deiphebus, named by Phoebus ray,
Helemus taught all hidden Arts to know:
Bold Troylus youngest of his Mothers store,
Has Bastard-Brothers five and forty more.
19
Some think young Polidore from her descended,
And Ganimed that stands in Aebes place,
Her Eldest Girl Creusa, much commended
Matched with Eneas, of a Noble race,
Whose puisance next: Priam most extended
Then sweet Cassandra, one of regal grace,
A Prophetess: but Polixene surpast,
Fairest of all the world, and Hee^bs last.
20
But now since Arms, and Battles, Swords, and Spears,
With other warlike Engines we must use,
Before Troyes rich abundance touch our ears,
With some delay we must restrain our Muse,
To show what people the first Armor bears
And who they were first broake the general Truce:
In the first age, erae men keen weapons knew,
They fought with naked fists, but no man slew.
21
Some say, the Thratian Mars first Armor brought, Diodorus.

Others, that Pallas was of wars the ground, Tully.

Others, that Tubal-Cayne for weapons sought, Ihosephus.

And taught the way how to defend and wound,
Most think Lame Vulcan on the Styth first wrought Homer.

Helmets, Swords, Spears, the Lacedemons found:
The Haberion Midias, Messenius filed,
Iauelins and Darts Aetolus first compiled, A^tolus Son to Mars.

22
Yet were not Soldiers armed at every Piece, Herodotus.

Some think the Egyptians flourisht in this trade,
And Helmets and bright Salets brought to Greece,
Leg-harnesse by the Carians was first made, Polidor,

These Jason used in Conquest of the fleece,
Great Fuluius Flachus Iustings Spears assayde:
At Capua first, by old Tyrhenus framed, Plutarch.

For the brown Bill, the Thracian was first named.
23
Pyses the hunting Staff, the warlike Queen
Penthiselea, taught the Pollax-fight,
Crosse-bowes were first among the Cretans seen,
Quartyes and Bolts the Syrians bring to sight,
The euer-bold Phenetians furnished been Dares. The first that was seen to use
the snield.

With Brakes and Slings to Chronicle their might:
In lists appointed, in the Argiue fields,
Acrisius and bold Pretus fought with shields.
24
Epeus at Troyes seidge the Ram deuisde,
The Tortoyes City walls to undermine,
Artemon Clazemonius enterprisde
Bellerephon, to imitate the sign
Called Sagitarius, Footmanship dispisde, Peletronians a nation of Thessaly.

And backed the Iennet: after some Divine:
Bridles, Bits, Trappings, to adorn a Steed,
Served first the Peletronians warlike speed.
25
But of all Hellish Engines, he whose brain
By Deuilish practice first deuisd the Gun,
The world shall Universally complain
A general murder, by that, Almain done,
By which the strong men are by Weakelings slain,
By him has many a Mother lost her Son: Macheuil history Flore^tina.

This Hell-borne Art, sinceby the Devil must
Venice against the Genoes practice first.
26
Of Priam now, and of his royal seed, Priam:

Their fashions, and their features Dares writes,
The aged King of puissance in his deed,
And in his prime-age expert in all fights:
Tall, but well shaped, Mounted on his Steed,
In Horseman-ship excelling all his Knights:
Grisled his heir, grey-eyde, Beard full and long,
Soft voy'st, his limbs, though slender, rare and strong.
27
In enterprises dreadlesse: early rising,
Eating betimes, with Music highly pleased,
Not rash to execute, but with aduising,
Sound in his body, and no way diseasd,
Upright in sentence, flattery dispising,
Apt to be angry, and as soon appeasd:
Even to the last, in arms his body proving,
Amorous of Ladies, and Soldiers dearly loving.
28
Hector the eldest of King Priams race, Hector.

Past in his puissance all Knights of that age,
An able body, and a pleasant face,
Affable, and not much inclinde to rage,
Big-limb'd, but featured well, which added grace
To his proportion, young, but gravely sage:
His flesh tough-hard, but white, his blew veins ayery,
His quick eye fiery bright: his skin much heyry.
29
His head short curld: his beard an aburne brown,
His pleasant Language lisping, but not loud,
(Save in the wars) he was not seen to frown,
Save to his Gods and King, he never bowd,
In field a Lion, but a Lamb in town,
Strong without equal, but in Arms not proud,
Was never known to speak fellonious word,
Or but against Troyes foes to use a sword.
30
Aduentrous bold, but with discreet advice,
Patient of travel, with no labor tired,
In the Pannonian wars he triumphed thrice,
And more the Tent, then walled town desird,
Often has his pillow bin a Cave of Ice,
Often has his sword his foes Caske proudly fird
To warm him by, when he before app^ard
With Isicles low hanging at his beard.
31
Forth of Troyes gates near issued man so strong,
So double vertued, Chiualrous and mild,
Or better Usher through a Mattiall throng,
Among foes a Giant, to his friends a Child,
Dreaded and loved, and sooner bear^ing wrong,
Then known t'oppresse: he never grace exild
From Captives, whom in arms he overthrew,
He never fled the strong, or yiedling slew.
32
A Homers fluence, or a Virgils pen,
Behooues him that should give great Hector due,
Whom with this Title, Valian^est of Men,
I now forbear his Brothers to pursue: Parls.

Next Alexander sirnam'd Paris, when
His Mothers ominous dream among Shepherds threw
The infant Prince. In him you may discover
The true proportion of a perfect Lover.
33
Straight bodied, mid-statu'rd, wondrous fair,
A pleasant look, his eye both great and gray,
Round visag'd, soft, and Crispe at end his hair,
Smooth skind, well spoke, effeminate every way,
No Coward, eloquent, an Archer rare,
Swift, a good Hunts-man, and much given to play,
Cunning at Chesse, which as most voices run,
Was by King Priam first in Troy begun. Daris. Ches-play first devised in Troy.

34
Loving gay clothes, and go richly clad,
Costly in Jewels, and stones highly rated,
Quicke-witted, jesting, dallying, seldom glad,
Who above all things Melancholy hated:
At loose lascivious speeches seeming sad,
And by all Starre-coni^cture fairly fated,
A Courtly carriage, and a promising face,
A manly look mixed with a womanish grace.
35
Bold Deiphebus, and wise Helenus, Deiphebus.

Were scarce to be distinguished, both so like:
The last a Clarke, sawes hidden to discuss, Helenus.

The first not taught to pray so well as strike,
The one devout, the other Chiualrous,
One grub'd his pen, while the other tossed his Pike:
Though several byrths, yet twins they seemed rather
And both the true proportions of their Father.
36
The most redoubted Troylus youngst of five, Troylus.

Next after Hector was esteemd in field,
(Save this bold brother) the best Knight alive,
Most expert in the use of sword and shield: Cressida.

Amorous of Calchas daughter: Ladies strive
Which to his sweet embracements soon'st may yield:
Never was Knight in valor better proved,
Or Courtier amongst Ladies deerlyer loved.
37
Then in one word, his aprises to comprise,
He was another Hector, shape, look, gate,
Stature, proportion, fashion, hair, and eyes;
Martial encounter, or for Courtly state,
Aeneas a bold Knight, a States man wise,
Lover of peace, and foe to stern debate:
A Counselor and Soldier, who imparts, Aeneus.

Inequaliz'd proportion, Arms and Arts.
38
Large stature, and broad set, deuinely skild,
His hair by Nature brown, but grayed with years,
Clear eyed, sharp visag'd, but with color filled,
One of King Priams best esteemed Peers,
Sober in speech, and seen to laugh but seild,
Whom Paphian Venus by Anchises bears,
Preferring much the Counsels of the old,
And Beards of Silver, before Hairs of Gold.
39
Anthenor, second to Aeneas, black, Anthenor.

Long, and lean visag'd, whom the King affected
And much esteemed his Counsel, in the sack
And fall of Troy, by Priam much suspected,
Polydanus his son, in whom no lack Polydanus.

Of virtue was, or valor well directed:
Of Counsel with his Father in Troyes fall,
Resembling him, lean visag'd, swart, and tall.
40
Menon of all the Kings that Priam aided Menon.

With best assistance, and most valiant Knights,
Broad-brested, and big-limb'd, not soon dissuaded
From hostile oppositions, and stern sights,
By him was many a Grecian Knight disgraded,
Whom hope of Honor, more then gain incites:
Queen Hecuba, Religious, Grave, well staide, Hee^ba.

A Manly Woman, somewhat rudely made.
41
Andromache, well shapt, looking alost, A dromache.

Exceeding fair, her eye-ball broad and clear,
Her Alablaster skin, white, smooth, and soft,
A worthy Wife to such a worthy Peer,
As full of Grace as Beauty, praying often,
A visage Lovely, but withal severe:
Promising love, but with so Chaste an eye,
That what her beauty grants, her looks deny.
42
Creusa like her Mother bodied well, Creusa.

But nothing fair, her grace is manly rude;
Only the wise Aeneas happy fell
Into her favor, with good Thewes indude,
Her inward, more then outward gifts excel,
Unapt young amorous Courtiers to delude,
A gracious, affable, kind, modest Creature,
Loved for her Virtues, more then for her feature.
43
Cassandra, Hecubs second, chaste and wise,
A professed Virgin, and Deuinely red, Cassandra

In Deuinations, Sawes, and Prophesies,
She for her life abandons Hymen's bed;
Faire-hair'd, Meane-statur'd, Round-mouthd, steadfast eyes
Sometime her yellow Locks about her spread:
(Rapt with Deuinest fury) often she wears,
Like a rich cloak, wouen of her golden hairs.
44
But young Polixena among the rest,
Most Beautifully perfect, Rauishing sweet, Polyxena

Of all Terrestrial graces, lo the best,
In one exact and Complete creature meet,
Celestial colored veins, Swan-downy breast,
And from her Native golden crown to feet
Spotless, her brow the whitest, eye the clearest,
And her Rose colored Cheek of al Dies dearest.
45
One Ladies beauty lies most in her hair,
Another in her Check, this in her brow,
Her eye is quick, another colour's rare,
To which the Knights their deeds of Honor vow,
Foot, skin, or hand: and all esteemed fair,
The least of these best Judging wits allow:
And where but one of all these are extended,
For that one gift bright Ladies are commended.
29
On such quick feet as makes you Lady praisd,
Polixena does lightly touch the ground,
Such hands as make another name imblazd,
White, azure-vain'd within her Gloves are found;
A body on two Iuory collumnes raisd,
A breast so white, a Globe-like head so round:
a hair, so bright-hewed Breasts so softly sweld,
Save in this maid no Mortal has beheld.
47
She is all beauty, Nature showed her skill
To have this Maid made in all parts complete,
her Storehouse, the Creator first did fill,
The Prodigal Queen, does for the Lady cheat
her Surplusse, then the world lamenteth still
The Trojan Ladies Larges was so great:
That hye-borne women yet in many places,
Are for'st since her, to have hard-fauoured faces.
48
But least we dwell upon her shape too long,
From her unto the buildings we look down,
Leaving the Ladies fair, the Princes strong,
It follows, that we next suruiew the Town,
How Priam sought to quit Hesiones wrong,
His Scepter, State, and his Imperial Crown:
These by the assistance of th'all-guiding Fate,
And by the Muses help, we next relate.
49
The glorious Towers and Spyres of Tray look hye,
Six principal Percullist Gates admit The six gates of Troy.

The people in and out: first Dardany,
Fimbria the second (but scarce finished yet)
Hely the third: we Chetas next descry,
Troyen the fifth, with Marble Turrets fit:
The sixth and last, but of like state with these,
Called by Antenor, Antenorides.
50
Vn-numbred Palaces, houses of State,
With their guilt couers seem to mock the Sun,
Which toward heaven their hye tops eleuate,
Staples of Foreign Merchants now begun,
Free Traffickt-Marts, and Wares of every rate,
By which, much wealth may be acquird and wun:
Nothing is wanting in this New-built-Towne,
That may acquire Troy Riches or Renown.
51
Midst this young Cities heart, a River glydes, The River Symois.

Bleeding her Azure veins through every street;
Whose meeting streams a spacious Channel guids
To the maine Ocean, where the Troyan fleet
In all tempestuous sea-stormes safely rides,
The Merchant ferried for his pleasure, meets
His laden Lyters, Barks, and ships of trade,
Whom at their rich keys they with Cranes unlade.
52
Upon the highest hill the rest o're-peering
The Palace royal does the King erect,
On her wind-mouing vanes Troyes Scutchion wearing,
Whose shyning guilt upon the Town reflect,
The Marble posts, and Porphyr-Collumnes bearing,
Roofes of pure-gold from the best Mines select;
By good advise they Islium Towers inuest,
A Citadell to ouer-looke the rest.
53
The glorious Sun, from whose all-seeing eye,
Nothing on earth can be conceiled long,
In his Diurnall travels through the sky,
Saw never Palace built so fair and strong,
The square Pyramides appeared hye,
As if they had bin reared the Clouds among,
The Porches, Tarras, windows, Arches, Towers,
Resembling one of Ihoues Celestial Bowers.
54
More then the rest his great Hall men admire,
Built like th Olimpicke palace, where Ihoue feasts,
Paued with bright Stars, like those of Heavenly fire,
On which he treads, when he inuites his guests,
The roof hung round with Angels (a rich Quire)
With Diamond eyes, red Rubies in their breasts,
Holding like Grapes long branches in their fists,
Of Emeralds green, and purple Amethists.
55
At one end of the Hall stands Priams Throne,
To which by twelve degrees the King ascended,
His chair all Gold, and set with many a Stone,
By curled Lions, and grim Bears defended,
Who seemed to fawn on him that sat thereon,
The curious Grauer all his Art extended:
The savage Monsters that support his chair,
Even to the life, cut and proportiond are.
56
Next this, from twenty hie steps looking down
Toward the Skreene aloft inthroned stands
Ihoues Statue, on's head a glorious Crown,
An universe and Scepter grac'st both hands:
His length full fifteen foot, his color brown,
His front Maiesticke, like him that commands:
His state, as when with Gods he was couersing,
His face so dreadful, and his eye so piersing.
57
By his Stone-shining Alter, rooted grows
The rich Palladium, the two Thrones betwixt,
Whose golden root enameld Branches strowes
Through the vast Hall, the leaves with blossoms mixed:
Among which ripe Fruits their colored sides dispose,
As mellowed with the Sun, Deuinely fixed;
A wonder it was, this Arbor to behold,
The Fruit and blossoms Stones, the branches Gold.
58
Of selfsame Metal was his dining board,
Where with his Sons and Peers often times invested
He eat in state, and sometimes would afford
That stranger Peers were at his Table feasted;
In stead of plate they precious Lycours powered
Into bright hollowed Pearl, rarely digested,
Gold was thought base, and therefore for the nones,
They diu'd for Pearl, and pierst the rocks for stones.
59
With as great state as Trojan Priam could,
I have beheld our Soueraign, Strangers feast,
In Boules as precious, Cups, as dearly sold,
and hy-prizd Lyquors equal with the rest,
When from the Lands-graue and the Browns-wicke bold,
The Archduke and the Spaniard Legates pressed:
But chiefly when the royal British James,
at Greenwitch feasted the great King of Danes.
60
No King for wealth was to this King compared,
Fortune showrd all her bounties on his head,
No King had bold Sons that like Priams dared,
Or Dames with greater beauties garnished,
Kings and Kings sons were in their eyes ensnared,
Whom their imperious beauties captive led:
Prince Hector more his Fathers Crown to grace,
Adds by his sword, Pannonia, Phrigia, Thrace. Three kingdoms conquered by
Hector.

61
Full with all plenty, with abundance stored,
Seeing his walls so strong, his Town so fair,
Himself by foreign Potentates adored,
And his Exchequer rich without compare,
Fifty tall sons, the least to use a sword,
And most of them in Martial Turneyes rare:
His Counsel grave, his Lords of hie degree,
As provident, as full of Chiualry.
62
He therefore now bethinkes him of his shame,
Done by the Argiues in Alcides days,
Therefore against all Greece will war proclaim,
And to their opposition, forces raise,
He summons all his Lords, who forthwith came,
To whom assembled thus King Priam says:
Oh! which of all this fair and princely train,
Has not (by Greece) a friend or Kinsman slain.
63
Show me the man has not inricht their Treasure
With his own substance by his Father lost,
Whose wives and daughters have not serud their pleasure,
If they be rich, they Revel at our cost,
Their Barbarous Tyranies exceed all measure,
They spoiled our Navy on the salt Sea Coast;
Beat down our Walls, they pillaged all our goods,
And waded knee-deepe in our Fathers bloods.
64
Amongst vn-numbred of your near allies,
My royal Father treacherously they slew,
Were not your Fathers in the selfsame wise
Butchered and mangled by that murdrous erew?
I see my words confirmed in your wet eyes,
(Remembrance of these wrongs their moist tears drew)
Besides they slew my Sister in their spleen,
A free borne princess, Daughter to a Queen,
65
Behold my state, surueigh your private powers,
Is it for Priams honor this to bear?
Being your Sovereign, my disgrace is yours,
And that which troubles me, should touch you near;
We have deferred revenge to these last hours,
Till we had gathered Arms, strength, wealth, and fear:
And now since heaven supplies our general need,
I ask your Counsel: Is revenge decreed?
66
So deeply did the Kings words pierce their breasts,
That with a general voice, Revenge they cry,
Now every man the inuasiue Greek detests,
And thinks it long, tili they-can Greece defy,
Soon after this, the King his Nobles feasts,
Longing till some advantage they can spy
To make their war seem just, at length devise
This color to their Hostile enterprise.
67
That Pryam shall in courteous manner, send
To all the Grecian Kings, to ask again
His captive Sister, like a royal friend:
(Which if they grant,) in friend-ship to remain:
But if this Embassy their ears offend,
And they the fair Hesione detain;
To Menace war: Anthenor Nobly mand,
At Priams vrgence, takes this task in hand.
68
In Thessaly where Peleus that time reigned,
Anthenor after some few months a^iues,
And of Hesiones estate complained,
That her return might save ten thousand lives,
But if to bondage she were still constrained,
Her Brother that as yet by fair means strives,
Must in his Honor seek by arms to gain her,
Unto their costs, that proudly dare detain her.
69
Peleus enraged, commands Anthenor thence,
Nor will he grace the Trojan with reply,
That dare to him so proud a suit commence,
He therefore makes with speed from Thessaly,
Great Telamonis Ajax to incense,
Who keeps the Princess in base Slavery:
In Salaminaes Port he Anchor casts,
And thence unto Duke Ajax Palace hasts.
70
Mildly of him the Ambassador demands
Hesione, or if he keep her still,
With her to enter Hymen's Nuptial bands,
Not as a Slave to serve his lustful will:
When Tellamon this Message understands,
He was in thought, the Trojan Lord to kill:
So scornefully the Duke his Message took,
His face looked pale, his head with anger shook.
71
He tells him he is not allyde at all
With twice-won Troy, nor any league desires;
The beauteous Princess to his lot did fall,
Whom he will keep (and mauger all their yres,)
For scaling first Troyes well defended Wall,
She was his Trophies prize: He that aspires
To take her thence, or once demand her back,
Is but the means their Troy again to Sack.
72
And so commands him thence, who still proceeds
Unto Achaia, where the famous Twins
Castor and Pollux have aduanc'st their deeds,
And by their Valors were both crowned Kings;
Unto their Court in have Anthenor speeds,
And to their ears his Embassy begins:
But they with Telamons rude scorns reply,
And charge him straight out of their Confines hie.
73
With like contempt Duke Nestor sends him back,
So did the two Atrides; So the rest
Of all the Argiue Kings, command him pack
Out of their bounds, as an unwelcome guest,
Since Troy deservedly endured such wrack:
Anthenor answered thus, esteems it best,
Back to resaile, and to King Priam tell,
What in his bootlesse voyage him befell.
74
The King at this reproach inflamed with rage,
Assembles all his people, Sons, and Peers,
Intending by their aids new war to wage,
To which the youthful Gallants wanting years,
Freely assent, but those of riper age,
Out of their grauer wisdom, not pale fears,
Seek by their Counsels Priam to persuade,
To reign in peace, and not proud Greece invade.
75
Among the rest, great Hector, from whose tongue
Did never issue proud discourteous word,
Whom Greek nor Trojan can accuse of wrong,
Nor they within whose bloods he glazed his sword,
Rayseth himself above the populous throng,
And thus he says: Who rather should afford
Vengeance on Greece, then I your eldest son, Hectors Oration.

To whom these rough injurious wrongs are done.
76
But if we well consider what a foe,
And what great wrath upon our heads we pull,
Not Greece alone, but all that homage owe,
Asia and Affricke make their numbers full,
The odds is too unequal, therefore know,
I am of thought all wars to disanull.
Troy's but a City, and though rich and strong,
Yet against the world opposed, must needs take wrong.
77
Why will Rich Priam hazard his estate,
Being in peace? what need we covet war?
What can we more desire, then fortunate?
So Priam, Troy, and all our people are:
Why should we seek t'incurre the Argiue hate,
Of which remains so incurable a scarre?
Wisemen in their reuenges should forsee
What ends may fall, not what beginnings be.
78
My Grand-sire's dead, perhaps he did offend,
But howsoever he cannot now survive?
To seek his life we vainly should contend:
Methinkes in this against the Gods we strive,
What the Greeks marred, the Gods themselves amend,
Whence should we then our detriments derive?
Our Troy is since her second fall, much fairer,
Her people richer, and her buildings rarer.
79
Troy lost a King, that loss your Grace supply,
And though (your son) of this I proudly vant,
He is in you received with usury,
They pillaged us, and yet we nothing want,
Of all their wounds, we not one scarre can spy,
Unless Hesione our Princely Ant:
Whose bondage long since happening, we may guess,
The custom and continuance makes seem less.
80
But how soever near to me allyde,
I do not hold her freedom of that meed,
That for her sake Troy should in blood be did,
Priam or any of his issue bleed:
And for this cause do I my self divide
From their rash Counsel, that Revenge decreed:
Knowing all war is doubtful, and foreseeing
Of Troy, what it may be, not of Troyes being.
81
If any hot blood prouder then the rest,
Accuse my words, and think I speak through fear,
I wish that man the boldest Grecian guest
That ever with Alcides Anchored hear,
That I might print my valor on his Crest,
And on his armed Vaunt-brace prove my Spear:
This said, great Hector Congied to the King,
Then takes his place, when up does Paris spring.
82
And to the King his Idaes dream relates,
And how he judged three beauties for the ball;
How far he Venus above the rest instates,
The fairest Greek unto his lot must fall,
A fit revenge for those whom Priam hates:
For if the King will make him General,
He makes no doubt, from Greece a Queen to bring,
Shall equalize the Sister of the King.
83
Now all the peoples voice on his side flows,
In every ear his famous dream is rife,
When ranckt next Paris, Deiphebus grows,
Persuading still to give these discords life,
As one that by presumptions thus much knows,
His voyage can procure no further strife:
Then if the promising Fates assist his Brother,
To prove th'exchance of one Queen for another.
84
But Helenus with sacred spells indude, The prophecy of Helenus.

Seeks this prepared voyage to restrain,
He says, the Greeks shall with their hands imbrude
In Troyes blood royal, conquer once again,
Entreating Paris, he will not delude
Their reverent ears, with dreams and visions vain:
Assuring him, that of this Quest shall grow
The Cities universal overthrow.
85
When youthful Troylus thus: Who ever heard
A bookish Priest persuade to hostyle Arms,
Let such as are to Fates and Sawes indeard,
Crouch by the fires that smoking Alters warmes,
And cherish their faint sinnewes (much affeard)
Dreading their own, not Soldiers threatened harms:
He that is a Priest, amongst priests let him pray,
We Soldiers cry Arm: and a glorious day.
86
What lets the King my Father, but to grant
My Brother Paris a right royal fleet?
That in revenge of our surprised Aunt,
He Warlike prays among the Graecians meet?
Shall tymerous Clerks our Martial Spirits dant?
No royal Father: know revenge is sweet:
Which since the Fates by visions promise bear:
Not to obey their Hests, we Cowards were.
87
Troylus preuailes, and Hector is persuaded
To shun the imputation of base fear,
With which his courage should be wrong vpbrayded,
A tymerous thought came never Hector near,
Si^ce it is agreed that Greece must be invaded,
He Will guard his honor with his sword and Spear;
Or if the Gerekes will on the Trojans pray,
Through his bold body they shall first make way.
88
Without his fair applause it had not past,
So reverent was the opinion of his brain;
His words were Oracles, so sweetly gracst,
They general murmur in all Counsels gain,
His free consent they having w^on at last,
The King appoints them a well furnished train,
With two and twenty Ships well rig'd and manned,
In any part of Greece freely to Land.
89
Which when the Prophetess Cassandra hears,
Indu'de with divine wisdom, she exclaimes,
Her yellow Tramels she in fury tears,
And cries alowd: poor Troy shall burn in flames.
Oh had not changelesse Fate made deaf their ears
They had bin moved: The Unhappy King she blames:
The credulous Queen, rash Paris, and all Troy,
That give consent their City to destroy.
90
But as her Deuinations never failed,
So were they never credited for true,
Till Troy unawares with mischief was assailed,
And then too late their misbeliefe they rue,
They that now held her mad, ere long bewailed
Their slack distrust, when threatened Ils ensue:
But it was a Fate their Sawes were still neglected,
and till prooud true by process: false, suspected.
91
Apollo, in whose sacred gift remains
The true presage and ken of future things, Phoebus and Cassandra.

Dotes on Cassandraes beauty, and complains,
To her chaste ears he tunes his golden strings;
The crasty Girl that in her heart disdaines
The gold, as she had erst despised Kings,
Demands a boon, which Phoebus has decreed
To grant Cassandra, in sure hope to speed.
92
He swears by Styx, an oath that cannot change,
That he will grant what she shall next impose him,
She asks to know the skill of secrets strange,
And future Prophesies; withal she shows him
Her beauty where his eyes may freely range:
The amorous God of Fire securely throws him
In her fair lap, and on her Iuory breast,
Lays his bright head, so grants her her request.
93
But when she feels a divine spirit infused
Through all her parts, (this Phoebus did inspire,)
She fled his loose embraces, and refused
By any means to accomplish his desire:
He mad with anger to be thus abused,
Thus says: Thou think to mock the God of Fire:
Thy Sawes, though sooth, yet shall do no man good,
Not be believed, or else not understood.
94
This was the cause the King remained unmoved,
The Queen untouched with her lamenting cries,
And all those Princes that their safeties loved,
Though long for-warn'd, her Counsel yet despise,
Her Spells have credit, when th'euents are proved,
Till then, though true, they are esteemed lies:
But leave Cassandra to her ceaselesse care,
And Paris to his Trojan Fleet prepare.
95
Who with his Brother Deiphebus sends,
To have Aeneas to the Seas with speed,
Polydamus, Anthenor, and such friends,
As in this general voyage were agreed,
His Soldiers most Pannonians, he entends
Shall rather see his Aunt from Ajax freed,
Or some bright Grecian Queen, for her disgrace
Shall Captive live in fair Hesiones place.
96
Imbarckt, and passing diverse Seas, at last,
In Lacedemons Port they safely Land,
But what twixt Paris and bright Hellen past,
What favors he received from her fair hand,
How the Greek Spartan Queen the Trojan grac'st,
You in the sequel Book must understand,
Some small retyrement at this time we crave,
What you want here, another place shall have,
TOuching the Dignity of Poets, I refer you to Ouids 3. Book, De art
Amandi, omitting others, translating him thus: SEe, see, What alterations rude
time brings,
Poets of old, were the right hands of Kings,
Large were their gifts, supreme was their reward,
Their meeterd Lines with fear and reverence hard,
Honor, and state, and sacred Majesty,
Belonged to such as studied Poetry:
Ennius (by Scipio the great) was sought,
And from the Mountains in Calabria brought:
Dishonored now, the Iuy Garland lies,
The Ancient worship unto Poets dies,
Yet should we strive our own fames to awake,
Homer an everlasting work did make,
His Illiades called, else who had Homer known,
Had Danae in her Tower an old wife grown,
And never unto publish view resorted,
How had her beauty bin so far reported?
And in another place proceeds thus: We in our flowing numbers beauty praise,
And in our Poems your deserts can raise:
We first bestowed on Nemesis a name,
Cinthia by our admittance keeps her fame,
Lycoris never has bin known before,
By us she sounds in every foreign shore,
And many proffer me large gifts, to know
Who my Corinna is, whom I praise so:
In us there is a power shall never perrish,
Us the Pierides and Muses cherrish:
A Godhead reigns in us, and with the stars,
We have Traffic and acquaintance, holding wars
Which none save Barbarism, our Sacred spirit,
We from the bye Deuinest powers inherit.


POlydor was son to Priam and Hecuba, who was committed to Polynestor, to be
kept in the time of the Trojan wars, with a great sum of money.

The description of the Trojans be according to Dares the Trojan, who lived in
the wars of Troy, and writ their utter subversion.

The Peletronij were the Lapithes, who first found the use of Bridles, Bits,
and Snaffels, so called of Peletronium a Town in Thessaly.

Castor and Pollux were two twins, whom Jupiter begot of Laeda, Kings in
Achaya, Brothers to Helena.

The Fortunes of Paris, his casting out to be a Sheapherd after the ominous
dream of his Mother, with the vision of the three Goddesses in the mount of
Ida, are more at large expressed in his Epistle to Helena.

Cassandraes Prophesies true, and never credited, alude to the Prophet Tyresias
a Southsayer of Thebes. Who with striking two Adders ingendring, became
forthwith a Woman. Seven years after, he likewise finding two Serpents,
stroke them, and was immediately turned again into a man, and participated
both the affection of man and woman.

It so fell out, that Jupiter and Juno arguing, fell into great difference: She
holding obstinately Women less wanton then men: He affirming men less
Lascivious then Women: and who can better moderate this discention then
Tyresius, that had felt the desires of both, to him they appeal; He took
Jupiters part, and averd Women to be most Luxurious: At which Juno enraged,
struck him with blindness, which because Jupiter could not help (for one
Godde cannot undo what another has done) she gave him the gift of Prophecy:
to which, the spightfull Goddess added also this, that his Prophefies (though
true) yet they should never be believed.

Clazemonij were people of Ionia. Of that Country, Artemo^, was called
Clazemonius: It was the name of a Physician in Pliny, also a beautiful young
man much loved of al Women.

Mideus wat called Messenius of Mess, a Town in Peloponesus.

Of Acrisius we have spoake before, the Father of Danae' his Brother Praetus,
sought to dispossess him of his kingdom, and they are said to be the first
that used a shield in battle.

Of the Palladium, what it was, many writers differ: Palladia, are all such
Images as are made without hands, or such Pherecides.
as fell from heaven to Earth: such was the Palladiu^ of I roy, and light first
in the City Pessinus, a Mart-Towne in Phrygia, where Sibell had a Temple.
Others think it to be given Dio, Drodorus.
by Jupiter to Icus the Brother of Ganimed, whose censure we most allow. Though
others write this Palladium to be made by Asius a great Philosopher, and a
Mathematitian, of I^hanes Antioch^s.
whom the third part of the world was called Asia, being modeld with this
Virtue, that the City which inioyed it, should for the time be invincible.
The like things was attributed to the shafts of Hercules, given to Philocteres
by dying Hercules in the Mount Oeta, between Thessaly and Macedonia, when the
Delphian Oracles had signified to the Greeks, that Troy could never be
surprised without the shaftes of Hercules, they sought Philoctetes, and
demanding of him those spoils (which he was bound by oath to conceal)
being extremely urged, he pointed with his foot to the place where they
were buried, which the joyful Greeks inioying, they received by them
victory, and the Trojans the overthrow.

The end of the eight CANTO.
Argumentum
PAris departs from Troy, and Greece does enter
Whom Menelaus welcomes, having seen;
The King is called thence by a strange aduenter
And to his Troian-guest he trusts his Queen:
Paris fair Hellen Loves, and does present her
With a long suit, to heal his wound yet green:
First Paris writes, she answers; Then with joy
Greece they for sake, and both are shipped for Troy
ARG. 2.
BRight Hellen courted, Paris birth and Fate,
With his Loue-trickes, Iota shall relate.
CANTO. 9.
WHo can describe the purity of those,
Whose beauties are by Sacred Virtues guided,
Or who their ugly pictures that oppose
Their beauti^s against Chastity divided,
Proud Lucifer an Angel was, but chose
Vice: Virtue to eschew: and from heaven slided:
Women like him (in shape Angellicall)
are Angels whilst they stand, Devils when they fall.
2
Their gifts well vsd, have power t'inchant the wise,
To daunt the bold, and ruinate the strong,
Which well applyde, can make the ruined rise,
The Coward valiant, weak to taste no wrong,
They are all poison, when they wantonize,
All Sovereign, where there is Virtue mixed among:
Chaste, nothing better; wanton, nothing worse,
The grate-fulst Blessing, or the greatest Curse.
3
Had Spartan Hellen bin as chaste as fair,
her Virtue sooner might have raisd a Troy
Then her loose gestures: great without compare,
Had power so rich a City to destroy:
By this time all the Trojans Landed are,
and Paris of the Queen received with joy:
To whom th'inamored Prince in private sends
These lines, in which his duty he commends.
The Epistle of Paris to Hesten.
HEalth unto Laedaes daughter, Priains son
Sends in these lines, whose health cannot be won
But by your gift, in whose power it may lie,
To make me whole or sick; to live, or die:
Shall I then speaks? Or does my flame appear
Plain without Index? Oh, it is that Ifeare:
My Love without discovering smile takes place,
And more then I could wish shines in my face.
When I could rather in my thoughts desire
To hide the smoke, til time display the fire:
Time, that can make the fire of Love shine clear,
Untroubled with the misty smoke of fear:
But I dissemble it, for who I pray
Can fire conceal, that will it self betray?
yet if you look, I should affirm that plain
In words, which in my countenance Imaintaine:
I burn, I burn, my fault I have confessed,
My words bear witness how my looks transgrest.
Oh pardon me that have confessed my error,
Cast not upon my lines a look of terror,
But as your beautic is beyond compare,
Suite unto that your looks (oh you most fair)
That you my Letter have received, by this
The supposition glads me, and I wish
By hope encouraged, hope that makes me strong,
you will receive me in some sort ere long,
I ask no more then what the Queen of Beauty
Has promised me, for you are mine by duty,
By her I claim you, you for me were made,
And she it was my journey did persuade:
Nor Lady think your beauty vainly sought,
I by divine instinct was hither brought,
And to this enterprise, the heavenly powers,
Have given consent, the Gods proclaim me yours,
I aim at wonders, for I covet you,
yet pardon me, I ask but what is my due,
Venus her self my journey hither led,
And gives you freely to my promised bed:
Under her safe conduct the seas I past,
Till I arrived upon these Coasts at last:
Shipping my self from the Sygean shore,
Whence unto these Confines my course I bore:
She made the Surges gentle, the winds fair,
Nor marvel whence these calmes proceeded are,
Needs must she power upon the salt-Seas have,
That was sea-borne, created from a wave,
Still may she potent stand in her ability,
And as she made the seas with much facility
To be through-saild, so may she calm my heat,
And bear my thoughts to their desired seat:
My flames I found not Here, no, I protest,
I brought them with me closed in my breast,
My self transported then without Attorney,
Love was the Motive to my tedious journey;
Not blustering Winter when he triumphed most,
Nor any error drove me to this Coast,
Nor led by Fortune where the rough winds please,
Nor Marchant-like for gain crossed I the Seas:
Fullness of wealth in all my Fleet I see,
I am rich in all things save in wanting thee.
No spoil of petty Nations my Ship seeks,
Nor Land I as a spy among the Greeks,
What need we? See of all things we have store,
Compared with Troy (alas) your Greece is pore,
For thee I come, thy fame has thus far driven me,
Whom golden Venus has by promise given me,
I Wished thee ere I knew thee, long ago,
Before these eyes dwelt on this glorious show:
I saw thee in my thoughts, know beauteous Dame,
I first beheld you with the eyes of Fame,
Nor marvel Lady I was stroke so far,
Thus Darts or Arrows sent from ^owes of war
Wound a great distance off: so was I hit
With a deep smarting wound that ranckles yet,
For so it pleased the Fates, whom least you blame,
I Will tell a true Tale to confirm the same.
When in my Mothers womb full ripe I lay,
Ready the first hour to be hold the day,
And she at point to be delivered straight,
And to unlade her of her Royal freight,
My Byrth-houre was delaid, and that sad night
A fearful vision did the Queen affright,
In a sons stead to please the aged Sire,
She dreampt she had brought forth a Brand of fire,
Frighted she rises, and to Priam goes,
To the old King this ominous dream she shows:
He to the Priest, the Priest does this return,
That the Child borne shall stately Islium burn:
Better then he was ware the Prophet guest, Hecubaes dream.

For lo a kindled Brand flames in my breast,
To prevent Fate a Pesant I was held,
Till my fair shape all other Swains exeld,
And gave the doubtful world assurance good, To prevent the Oracle, Para was
cast out among the shepherds of Ida.

your Paris was derived from royal blood.
Amid the Idean Fields there is a place
Remote, full of hie Trees, which hide the face
Of the green mantled Earth, where in thick rows,
The Oak, the Elm, the Pine, the Pitch-tree grows:
Here never yet did browze the wanton Ewe,
Nor from this plot the slow Ox lick the dew:
The savage Goat that feeds among the Rocks
Has not grazed here, nor any of their Flocks,
Hence the Dardanian walls I might espy,
The lofty Towers of Islium reared by,
Hence I the Seas might from the firm Land see,
Which to behold, I leant me to a Tree:
Believe me, for I speak but what is true, The vision of Paris.

Down from the skies with feathered pynions flew
The Nephew to great Atlas, and does stand
With Golden Caducens in his hand,
(This as the Gods to me thought good to show,
I hold it good that you the same should know:
Three Goddesses behind young Hermes move
Great Juno, Pallas, and the Queen of Love;
Who as in pomp and Pride of gate they pass, Juno, Palles, and ^enus.

Scarce with their weight they bend the tops of grass:
Amazed I start, and endlong stands my hair,
When Mayus Son thus says, abandon fear
Thou Courteous Swain, that to these groves repairest,
And freely Judge which of these three is fairest:
And least I should this curious sentence shun,
He tells me by Iboues sentence all is done.
And to be Judge I no way can eschew,
This having said, up through the Air he flew:
I straight take Heart a grace, and grow more bold,
And there their beauties one by one behold.
Why am I made the Judge to give this dome?
Methinkes all three are Worthy to o're-come:
To iniure two such Beauties what tongue dare?
Or preserre one where they be all fair:
Now this seems fairest, now again that other,
Now would I speak, and now my thoughts I smother,
And yet at length the praise of one most sounded,
And from that one my present Love is grounded:
The Goddesses out of their earnest care
And pride of Beauty to be held most fair,
Seek with large Ariues, and gifts of wondrous price,
To their own thoughts my censure to entice:
Inno the Wife of Ihoue does first inchant me,
To Judge her fairest, she a Crown will grant me:
Pallas her Daughter, next does under take me,
Give her the price, and valiant she will make me:
I straight devise which can most pleasure bring,
To be a valiant Soldier or a King:
Last Venus smiling came with such a grace,
As if she swayed an Empire in her face,
Let not (said she) these gifts the Conquest be are,
Combats and Kingdoms are both fraught with fear.
I Will give thee what thou love best, (lovely Swain,)
The furest Saint that does on earth remain
Shall Be thine own, make thou the Conquest mine,
Fair Laedaes fairest daughter shall be thine.
This said, when with my se'se I had devised,
And her rich gift and beauty jointly prised:
Venus victor, ore the rest is plac'st,
Juno and Pallas leave the Mount disgrac'st,
Mean time my Fates a prosperous course had ron,
And by known signs King Priam called me Son:
The day of my restoring is kept holy
Among the Saints-dates, consecrated soly
To my remembrance, being a day of joy,
For ever in the Calenders of Troy.
As I wish you I have bin wished by others,
The fairest maids by me would have bin Mothers,
Of all my favors I bestowed not any,
you only may enjoy the Loves of many:
Nor by the Daughters of great Dukes and Kings
Have I alone bin sought, whose marriage Rings
I have turned back, but by a strain more hie,
By Nimphs and Phairies. such as never die.
No sooner were you promised as my due,
But I (al hated) to remember you:
Waking, I saw your Image, if I dreampt,
Your beauteous figure still appeard to tempt
And urge this voyage: Til your face excelling
These eyes beheld, my dreams were all of Hellen.
Imagine how your face should now incite me,
Being seen, that unseen did so much delight me:
If I was scorcht so far off from the Fire,
How am I burnt to Cinders thus much nyer:
Nor could I longer owe my self this treasure,
But through the Ocean I must search my pleasure,
The Phrygian Hatchets to the roots are put
Of the Idean Pines, (asunder cut)
The Wood-land Mountain yielded me large fees,
Being despoyl'd of all her tallest Trees,
From whence we have squared out vn-numbred beams,
That must be washed within the Marine streams:
The grounded Oaks are bowed, though stiff as steel,
And to the tough Ribs is the bending Keele
Wouen by Ship-wrights craft, then the Maine-mast,
Acrosse whose middle is the Sail yard plast.
Tackles and sails, and next you may discern,
Our painted Gods upon the hooked stearne:
The God that bears me on my happy way,
And is my guide, is Cupid: Now the day
In which the last stroke of the Hammer's heard,
Within our Navy, in the East appeard,
And I must now lanch forth, (so the Fates please)
To seek adventures in the Egean Seas.
My Father and my Mother move delay,
And by entreaties would enforce my stay:
They hang about my neck, and with their tears
Woo me defer my journey: but their fears
Can have no power to keep me from thy sight:
And now Cassandra full of sad affright,
With loose disheuel'd Tramels, madly skips,
Just in the way betwixt me and my Ships:
Oh, whether will thou headlong run she cries?
Theu bear fire with thee, whose smoke up flies
Unto the heavens (Oh Ihoue) thou little fear
What quenchlesse flames thou through the water bear:
Caffandra was too true a Prophetess,
Her quenchlesse flames she spoke of (I confess,)
My hot desires burn in my breast so fast,
That no Red Furnace hotter flames can cast.
I pass the City gates, my Bark I board, The entertainment of Paris.

The favorable winds calm gales afford,
And fill my sail^s, unto your Land I steare,
For whether else (his course) should Paris bear:
Your Husband entertaines me as his guest,
And all this happens by the Gods behest,
He shows me all his Pastures, parts, and Fields,
And every rare thing Lacedemon yields,
He holds himself much pleased with my being,
And nothing hides, that he esteems worth seeing.
I am on fire, till I behold your face,
Of all Achayas Kingdom, the sole grace,
All other Curious objects I defy,
Nothing but Hellen can content mine eye,
Whom when I saw, I stood transformd with wonder,
Senseless, as one struck dead by Ihoues sharp Thunder:
As I revive, my eyes Irowle and turn,
Whilst my flamed thoughts with hotter fancies burn,
Even so (as I remember,) looked Loves Queen,
When she was last in Phrygian Ida seen,
Unto which place by Fortune I was trained,
Where by my censure she the Conquest gained:
But had you made a fourth in that contention,
Of Venus beauty, there had bin no mention:
Hellen assuredly had borne from all
The prize of beauty, the bright Golden Ball.
Only of you may this your Kingdom boast,
by you it is renowned in every Coast:
Rumor has every where your beauty blazed,
In what remote Clyme is not Hellen praised?
From the bright Eastern Suns vprise, Inquire
Even to his downfall, where he slakes his fire,
There lives not any of your Sex that dare,
Contend with you that are proclaimd so fair;
Trust me, for truth I speak. Nay what is most true,
Too sparingly the world has spoke of you:
Fame that has undertook your name to blaze,
Played but the envious Husvvife in your praise:
More then report could promise, or fame blazon, H^en at nine years of age
ravished by Theseus.

Are these Divine perfections that I gaze on:
These were the same that made Duke Theseus lavish,
Who in thy prime and Nonage did thee ravish;
A vvorthie Rape for such a vvorthie Man,
Thrice happy Rauisher, to ceize thee than
When thou were stripped stark naked to the skin, A custom in Pelepones^, the
Prou^ in which (...) (...) stands.

(A sight, of force to make the Gods to sin:)
Such is your Countries guise at seasons when,
with naked Ladies they mix naked Men;
That he did steal thee from thy Friends, I praise him,
And for that deed, I to the Heavens will raise him:
That he returned thee back, by Ihoue I wonder,
Had I bin Theseus, he that should assonder
Have parted us, or snacht thee from my bed,
First from my shoulders should have pared my head:
So rich a purchase, such a glorious pray,
Should constantly have bin detai'nd for aye.
Could these my strong Arms possibly unclasp,
Whilst in their amorous Foulds they Hellen graspe,
Neither by free constraint, nor by free-giuing,
Could you depart that compass, and I living:
But if by rough enforce I must restore you,
Some fruits of Love, (which I so long have bore you,)
I first would reap, and some sweet favor gain,
That all my suite were not bestowd in vain;
Either with me you should abide and stay,
Or for your pass your maidenhead should pay.
Or say I spared you that, yet would I try
What other favor, I could else come by,
All that belongs to love, I would not miss,
You should not let me both to clip and kiss.
Give me your heart fair Queen, my heart you owe,
And what my resolution is, you know,
Til the last fire my breathless body take,
The fire within my breast can never slake,
Before large kingdoms I preferred your face,
And Iunoes love, and potent gifts disgrace.
To sold you in my amorous Arms I chusd,
And Pallas virtues scornefully refusd.
When they with Venus in the Hill of Idc,
Made me the Judge their beauties to decide,
Nor do I yet repent me, having took
Beauty: and strength and Sceptered rule for sooke:
Methinkes I chusd the best, (nor think it strange)
I still persist, and never mean to change;
Only that my employment be not vain,
Oh you more worth then any Empires gain,
Let me entreat, least you my birth should scorn
Or parentage: know I am royal borne.
By marrying me, you shall not wrong your State,
Nor be a wife to one degenerate.
Search the Records where we did first begin,
And you shall find the Pleyads of our Kin:
Nay Iho^e himself, all others to forbear,
That in our stock renowned Princes were:
My Father of all Asia reigns sole-King,
Whose boundless Coast, scarce any featheredwing
Can give a girdle too, a happier Land
A neighbor to the Ocean cannot stand:
There in a narrovv compass you may see
Cities and Towers, more then may numbered be,
The houses guilt, rich Temples that exell,
And you will say I near the great Gods dwell.
You shall behold hie Issiums lofty Towers,
And Troyes brave Walls built by Immortal powers,
But made by Phoebus the great God of Fire,
And by the touch of his melodious Liar:
If we have people to inhabit, when
The sad earth groans to bear such troops of men:
Judge Hellen, Likewise when you come to Land,
The Asian Women shall admiring stand,
Saluting thee with welcome, more and less
Inpreasing throngs and numbers, numberless:
More then our Courts can hold of you (most fair)
You to your self will say, alas, how bare
And poor Achaya is, when with great pleasure,
You see each house contain a Cities Treasure.
Mistake me not I Sparta do not scorn,
I hold the Land blessed where my Love was borne:
Though barren else, rich Sparta Hellen bore,
And therefore I that Province must adore;
Yet is your Land methinkes but lean and empty,
You worthy of a Clyme that flows with plenty
Full Troy, I prostrate it is yours by duty,
This petty-seat becomes not your rich beauty;
Attendance, Preparation, Curtsie, state,
Fit such a Heavenly form, on which should wait,
Cost, fresh variety, Delicious diet,
Pleasure, Contentment, and Luxurious ryet,
What Ornaments we use, what fashions faigne,
You may perceive by me and my proud train,
Thus we attire our men, but with more cost
Of Gold and Pearl, the rich Gowns are Imbost
Of our chief Ladies, guess by what you see,
you may be soon induc'st to credit me. Ganimed.

Be tractable fair Spartan, nor contemn
A Trojan borne, derived from Royal stemne:
He was a Trojan and allyde to Hector,
That waits upon Ihoues cup, and fills him Nector: Cephalus.

A Trojan did the fair Aurora wed,
And nightly slept within her Roseat bed:
The Goddess that ends night and enters day,
From our fair Trojan Coast stole him away, Anchises.

Anchises was a Trojan, whom Loves Queen,
(Making the Trees of Ida a thick Screene
Twixt Heaven and her) often lay with, view me well,
I am a Trojan too, in Troy I dwell:
Thy Husband Menelaus hither bring,
Compare our shapes, our years, and every thing
I make you Iudgesse, wrong me if you can,
you needs must say I am the properer man:
None of my line has turned the Sun to blood,
And robbed his Steeds of their Ambrosiall food:
My Father grew not from the Caucasse Rock,
Nor shall I graft you in a bloody Stock:
Priam nere wronged the guiltless soul, or further,
Made the Myrtoan Sea look red with murder. Myrtoan is a part of the sea
betwixt the Ioutum and Eg^um.

Nor thirsts my great Grand-sire in the Lake
Of Lethe, Chin-deepe, yet no thirst can slake:
Nor after ripened Apples vainly skips,
Who fly him still, and yet still touch his lips,
But what of this? If you be so derived,
You notwithstanding are no right deprived:
You grace your Stock, and being so divine,
Ihoue is of force compeld into your Live.
Oh mischief! Whilst I vainly speak of this,
Your Husband all unworthy of such bliss
Inioyes you this long night, enfolds your wast,
And where he list may boldly touch and taste,
So when you sat at Table, many a toy,
Passes between you my vexed soul t'annoy,
At such hie feasts I wish my enemy sit,
Where discontent attendes on every bit,
I never yet was plac'st at any Feast,
But often it irkt me that I was your Guest:
That which offends me most, thy rude Lord knows,
For still his arm about thy neck he throws,
Which I no sooner spy but I grow mad,
And hate the man whose courting makes me sad:
Shall I be plain? I am ready to sink down
When I behold him wrap you in his Gown,
While you sit smiling on his amorous knee,
His fingers press, where my hands itch to be:
But when he hugs you I am forc'st to frown,
The meat I Am eating will by no means down,
But sticks half way, amidst these discontents
I have observed you laugh at my laments,
And with a scornful, yet a wanton smile
Deride my sighs and groans, often to beguile
My passions, and to quench my fiery rage,
By quaffing healths I'haue thought my flame t'asswage,
But Bacchus full cups make my flame burn hyer,
Add wine to love, and you add fire to fire.
To shun the sight of many a wanton feat,
Betwixt your Lord and you I shift my seat,
And turn my head, but thinking of your grace,
Love skrewes my bead to ga^e back on your face.
What were I best to do? To see you play
Mads me, and I perforce must turn away,
And to forbear the place where you abide,
Would kill me dead should I but start aside:
As much as lies in me I strive to bury
The shape of Love, in mirths spite I seem merry:
But oh, the more I seek it to suppress,
The more my blabbing looks my love profess.
You know my Love which I in vain should hide,
Would God it did appear to none beside,
Oh Ihoue how often have I turned my cheek,
To hide th'apparant tears that passage seek,
From forth my etes, and to a corner stepped,
Least any man should ask wherefore Iwept:
How often have I told you pittious tales,
Of constant lovers, and how Love preuailes?
When such great heed to my discourse I took,
That every accent suited to your look.
In forged names my self I represented,
The Lover so perplexed and so tor^ented,
If you will know? Behold I am the same,
Paris was meant in that true Lovers name:
As often, that I might the more securely
Speak loose immodest words that sound impurely,
That they offencelesse might your sweet ears tutch,
I have lispt them out, like one had drunk too mutch:
Once I remember, your loose veil betrayed
Your naked skin, and a fair passage made
To my inamored eye, Oh skin much brighter
Then snow, or purest milk, in color whiter
Then your fair mother Laeda, when Ihoue grac'st her,
And in the shape of Feathered Swan imbrac'st her:
Whilst at this rauishing sight I stand amazed,
And without interruption freely gazed,
The wreathed handle of the Boule I graspt,
Fell from my hold, my strengthlesse hand vnclaspt,
A Goblet at that time I held by chanee,
And down it fell, for I was in a trance;
Kiss your fair daughter, and to her I skip,
And snatch your kisses from your sweet Child's lip.
Sometimes I throw my self along, and lie
Singing Loue-songs, and if you cast your eye
On my effeminate gesture, I still find
Some pretty covered signs to speak my mind,
And then my earnest suit bluntly inuades
Aethra and Clim^nca your two chief maids,
But they return me answers full of fear,
And to my motions lend no further ear.
Oh that you were the prize of some great strife,
And he that wins might claim you for his wife,
Hyppomanes with swift Atlanta ran,
And at one course the Goal and Lady wan,
Even she, by whom so many Suitors perished,
Was in the bosom of her new Love cherisht:
So Hercules for Deyaneira strove,
Brake Achelous horn, and gained his love,
Had I such liberty: such freedom granted,
My resolution never could be daunted,
Your self should find, and all the world should see,
Hellen (a prize alone) reserved for me.
There is not left me any means (most fair)
To Court you now, but by entreats and praire,
Unless (as it becoms me) you think meet,
That I should prostrate fall, and kiss your feet,
Oh, all the honor that our last age wins,
Then glory of the two Tyndarian Twins,
Worthy to be Ihoues Wife, in heaven to reign,
Were you not Ihoues own daughter, of his strain.
To the Sygean confines I will carry thee,
And in the Temple of great Pallas marry thee:
Or in this Island where I vent my mones,
I Will beg a Toombe for my exiled bones:
My wound is not a slight race with an arrow,
But it has pierst my heart, and burnt my marrow,
This Prophecy my Sister often has sounded,
That by an heavenly dart I should be wounded:
Oh then forbear (fair Hellen) to oppose you.
Against the Gods, they say I shall not lose you:
Yield you to their beheast, and you shall find,
The Gods to your petitions likewise kind.
A thousand things at once are in my brain,
Which that I may essentially complain,
And not in papers empty all my head,
Anon at night receive me to your bed.
Blush you at this, or Lady do you fear
To violate the Nuptial laws austearc?
Oh (simple Hellen) Foolish, I might say,
What profit reap you to be Chaste, I pray?
1st possible, that you a World to win,
Should keep that face, that beauty, without sin?
Rather you must your glorious face exchange
For one (less Fair) or else not seem so strange:
Beauty and Chastity at variance are,
It Is hard to find one Woman chaste and fair,
Venus will not have beauty over aw'de,
Hie Ihoue him self, stolen pleasures will applaude,
And by such theeuish pastimes we may gather,
How Ihoue against Wedlocks laws, became your father:
He and your mother Laeda both transgrest
When you were got, she bare a tender breast.
What glory can you gain Loves sweets to smother?
Or to be counted Chaster then your mother?
Profess strict chastity, when with great joy,
I lead you as my Bride-espousd, through Troy;
Then Ientreat you rain your pleasures in,
I wish thy Paris may be all thy sin.
If Citherea her firm Covenant keep,
Though I within your bosom nightly sleep,
We shall not much misdoo, but so offend,
That we by marriage may our guilt amend.
Your husband has himself this business aided,
And though (not with his tongue) he has per swaded
By all his deeds (as much) least he should stay
Our private meetings, he is far away:
Of purpose rid unto the farthest West,
That he might leave his wife unto his guest.
No fitter time he could have found to visit
The Chrisean royal Scepter, and to ceize it:
Oh, simple simple Husband: but he is gone,
And going, left you this to think upon.
Fair Wife (quoth he) I prithee in my place,
Regard the Trojan Prince, and do him grace:
Behold, a witness I against you stand,
You have been careless of his kind command.
Count from his first days journey, never since
Did you regard or grace the Trojan Prince;
What think you of your Husband? that he knows
The worth and value of the face he owes?
Who (but a Fool) such beauty would endanger,
Or trust it to the mercy of a Stranger.
Then (royal Queen) if neither may entreat,
My quenchlesse passion, nor Loves raging heat
Can win you, we are wooed both to this crime,
Even by the fit advantage of the time,
Either to Loves sweet sport we must agree,
Or show our selves to be worse fools then he.
He took you by the hand the hour he rode,
And knowing, I with you must make abode,
Brings you to me, What should I further say?
It was his mind to give you quite away.
What meant he else? Then lets be blithe and jolly,
And make the best use of your Husbands folly:
What should we do? Your husband is far gone,
And this cold night (poor soul) you lie alone:
I want a bedfellow, so do we eather,
What lets us then, but that we lie together.
You slumbring think on me, On you I dream,
Both our desires are fervent, and extreme:
Sweet, then appoint the night. Why do you stay?
Oh night, more clearer then the brightest day,
Then I dare freely speak, protest, and swear,
And of my vows the Gods shall record bear:
Then will I seal the contract, and the strife,
From that day forward, we are man and Wife:
Then questionless I shall so far per swade,
That you with me shall Troyes rich Coast invade,
And with your Phrygian guest at last agree,
Our potent Kingdom and rich Crown to see:
But if you (blushing) fear the vulger bruit,
That says, you follow me, to me make suite,
Fear it not Hellen; I Will so work with Fame,
I will (alone) be guilty of all blame.
Duke Theseus was my instance, and so were
Your brothers Lady, Can I come more near
To ensample my attempts by? Theseus haled
Hellen perforce: Your brothers they prevailed
With the Leucippian Sisters, now from these
I Will count my self the fourth (if Hellen please.)
Our Trojan Navy rides upon the Coast,
Rig'd, armed, and Manned, and I can proudly boast,
The banks are high, Why do you longer stay?
The winds and Oars are ready to make way,
You shall be like a high Maiesticke Queen,
Led through the Dardan City, and be seen
By millions, who your State having commended,
Will (wondering) swear, some Goddess is descended.
Where ere you walk the Priests shall Incence burn,
No way you shall your eye or body turn,
But sacrificed beasts the ground shall beat,
And bright religious fires the Welkin heat,
My father, mother, brother, sisters: all
Islium and Troy in pomp maiesticall,
Shall with rich gifts present you (but alas)
Not the least part (so far they do surpass)
Can my Epistle speak, you may behold
More then my words or writings can unfold.
Nor fear the bruit of war, or threatening Steel,
When we are fled, to dog us at the heel:
Or that all Graecia will their powers unite,
Of many ravished, can you one recite,
Whom war re-purchast? These be idle fears,
Rough blustering Boreas fair Orithea bears
Unto the Land of Thrace, yet Thrace still free,
And Athens raisd no rude Hostility:
In winged Pegasus did Jason sail,
And from great Colchos he Medea stale:
Yet Thessaly you see can show no scar
Of former wounds in the Thessalian war.
He that first ravished you: In such a Fleet
As ours is, Ariadne brought from Creet:
Yet Mynos and Duke Theseus were agreed,
About that quarrel, not a breast did bleed:
Less is the danger (trust me) then the fear
That in these vain and idle doubts appear.
But say rude war should be proclaimde at length,
Know, I am valiant and have sinowie strength:
The weapons that I use are apt to kill,
Asia besides, more spacious fields can fill
With armed men then Greece, amongst us are
More perfect Soldiers, more beasts apt for war:
Nor can thy husband Menelaus be
Of any high spirit and Magnanimity,
Or so well proved in Arms: for Hellen I
Being but a Lad, have made my enemies fly,
Re-gaind the prey from out the hands of Thieves,
Who had dispoild our Herds, and stolen our Beeues,
By such adventures I my name obtained,
(Being but a Lad) the conquest I have gained
Of young men in their prime, who much could do,
Deiphebus, Ilioneas to,
I have overcome in many sharp contentions,
Nor think these are my vain and forged inventions,
Or that I only hand to hand can fight,
My arrows when I please shall touch the white.
I am expert in the Quarrey and the Bovv,
You cannot boast your hartlesse husband so:
Had you the power in all things to supply me,
And should you nothing in the world deny me^,
To give me such a Hector to my brother
You could not: The earth bears not such another:
By him alone all Asia is well mand,
He like an enemy against Greece shall stand
Opposd to your best fortunes, wherefore strive you?
You do not know his valor that must wiue you,
Or what hid vvorth is in me, but at length
You will confess when you have proved my strength:
Thus either war shall still our steps pursue,
Or Greece shall fall in Troyes all-conquering view,
Nor would I fear for such a royal Wife,
To set the Universal world at strife:
To gain rich Prizes, men will venture far,
The hope of purchase makes us bold in war:
If all the world about you should contend,
Your name would be eternizd without end,
Only be bold, and fearelesse may we sail
Into my Country, with a prosperous gale,
If the Gods grant me my expected day,
I to the full shall all these Covenants pay.
THese two Epistles being so pertinent to our History, I thought necessary to
translate, as well for their elegancy as for their alliance, opening the whole
project of the Love betwixt Paris and Hellen, the preparation to his journey,
his entertainment in Sparta, as also Hecubaes dream, Paris his casting out
among Shepherds, his Vision, and the whole prosecution of his intended Rape.

Laeda was wife to Tindarus King of Laconia. The Poets write, that Jupiter
accompanying her in form of a Swanne, she brought forth two eggs, of the one
came Pollux and Helena, of the other came Castor and Clitemnestra, after wife
to Agamemnon.

The Pleyades from whom Paris deriues his progeny, are the seven stars, once
daughters to Lycurgus the famous Lawgiver of Athens.

Hermione was daughter to Menalaus and Helena, betrothed to Orestes, but
married to Pyrrhus, for which cause Orestes slew Pyrrhus at the Altar, and
after enjoyed his love Hermione.

To prosecute the Tale of Ariadnes transformation after she had saved the life
of ungrateful Theseus, who by her advise and providence slew the Mynotaur,
Theseus in his return home for sooke her, and left her upon a desolate Island.

It so fell out,
Mad Ariadne stayde that Isle about,
Left desolate upon that harren plain
Where the brook Dia poures into the Maine,
Who waking from her rest, her veil unbound,
Her barefoot treading on the unknown ground,
Her golden hair disheue'ld, loud she raues,
Calling on Theseus to the deaf-ned waves,
On Theseus, cruel Theseus, whom she seeks,
Whilst shewers of tears make furrows in her cheeks.
She calls and weeps, and weeps and calls at once,
Which might have moved to ruth the senseless stones,
Yet both alike became her, they both gracst her,
The whilst she strives to call him, or cry faster.
Then beats she her soft breast, and makes it groan,
And then she cries, What, is false Theseus gone?
What shall I do? she cries, What shall I do?
And with that noate, she runs the Forests throoe,
When suddenly her ear might understand,
Cimbals and Tymbrels touched with a loud hand,
To which the Forests, Woods, and Caves resound,
And now amazde she senseless falls to ground.
Behold the Nymphs come with their scattered hair,
Falling behind, which they like garments ware,
And the light Satyrs, an unruly crew,
Nearer and nearer to the Virgin grew.
Next old Sylenus on his lasie Ass, Sylenus the Priest of Bacchus.

Nods with his drunken pate, about to pass,
Where the poor Lady all in tears lies drowned,
Scarce sits the Drunkard but he falls to ground,
Scarce holds the Bridle fast, but staggering stoopes,
Following those giddy bachinalian troops,
Who dance the wild Lauolto on the grass,
Whilst with a staff he lays upon his Ass.
At length, when the young Satyrs least suspect,
He tumbling, falls quite from his Asses neck.
But up they heave him, whilst each Satyr cries,
Rise good old Father, good old Father rise.
Now coms the god himself, next after him
His Vine-like Chariot, drawn with Tygres grim,
Color, and voice, and Theseus, she does lack,
Thrice would she fly, and thrice fear plucked her back,
She trembles like a stalk the wind does shake,
Or a weak reed that grows beside the Lake,
To whom the God spoke: Lady, take good cheer,
See one more faithful then false Theseus here:
Thou shall be wife to Bacchus, for a gift
Take the high heavens, and to the Spheres be lift,
Where thou shall shine a star to guide by night,
The wandering Seaman in his course aright:
This said, least his grim Tigers should affray
The trembling Maid, the God his Coach does stay,
And leaping from his Chariot with his heels
Imprints the sand, and then the Nymph he feels,
And hugging her, in vain she may resist,
He bears her thence (Gods can do what they list)
Some Hymen sing, some Io, Io cry,
So Bacchus with the maid all night does lie.
Therefore when wine in plentious cups does flow,
And thou the night unto thy Love do owe,
Pray to the God of grapes that in thy bed,
The quaffing healths do not offend thy head.
Agreeable to this, is that in the first book, de Art. aman. for from Paris he
deriues these Loue-tricks in wine.

Lo, I can teach thee, though thy tongue be mute,
How with thy speaking eye to move thy suit:
Good language may be made in looks and winkes,
Be first that takes the cup wherein she drinks,
And note the very place her lip did tutch,
Drink just at that, let thy regard be such:
Or when she carues, what part of all the meat
She with her fingers touch, that carue and eat:
Carouse not, but with soft and moderate sups,
Have a regard and measure, in thy cups:
Let both thy feet and thoughts their office know,
Chiefly beware of brauling, which may grow
By too much wine. From fighting most abstain,
In such a quarrel was Eurilion slain:
Where Swaggering leads the way, Mischief coms after,
Iunkets and Wine were made for mirth and laughter:
Though to be drunk indeed, may hurt thy brain,
Yet now and then, I hold it good to feign:
Instruct thy lisping tongue sometimes to trip
That if misplacst, a word transgress thy lip
It may be iudgd that quaffing was the cause, etc.
The end of the nynth CANTO.
Argumentum
HEllen re-wrytes, the Trojans suit preuails,
And of the appointed Rape they both agree,
Proud of so fair a purchase, Paris sails
To Troy, from whence the Graecians seek to free
The ravished Spartan: Menalaus bewailes
The absence of his Queen, longing to see
Revenge on Troy, to which the Graecians meet,
Castor and Pollux perish with the Fleet.
ARG. 2.
KAppa records her Rape, describes and brings
To Aulis Gulf the powerful Grecian kings.
CANTO. 10. Hellen to Paris.
NO sooner came mine eye unto the sight
Of thy rude Lines, but I must needs re-wright:
Dare thou (Oh shameless) in such heinous wise,
The Laws of Hospitality despise? And being a stranger,
from thy Countries reach,
Solicit a chaste wife to Wedlocks breach?
Was it for this, our free Tenarian Port,
Received thee and thy train, in friendly sort?
And when great Neptune nothing could appease,
Gave thee safe harbor from the stormy Seas?
Was it for this, our Kingdoms arms spread vvide,
To entertain thee from the waters side?
Yet thou of foreign soil remote from hence,
A stranger, coming we scarce know from whence,
Is perjured wrong the recompense of right?
Is all our friendship guerdond with despite?
I doubt me then, whither in our Court does tarry,
A friendly guest, or a fierce adversary:
Nor blame me, for if justly you consider,
And these presumptions well compare together,
So simple my complaint will not appear,
But you your self must needs excuse my fear.
Well, hold me simple, much it matters not,
Whilst I preserve my chaste name far from spot,
For when I seem touched with bashful shame,
It shows how highly I regard my Fame:
When I seem sad, my countnance is not fained,
And when I lower, my look is unconstrained.
But say my brovv be cloudy, my name's clear,
And reverently you shall of Hellen here:
No man from me adulterate spoils can win,
For to this hour I have sported without sin,
Which makes me in my heart the more to wonder,
What hope you have in time to bring me under,
Or from mine eye what comfort thou can gather
To pity thee, and not despise thee rather:
Because once Theseus hurried me from hence,
And did to me a kind of violence,
Follows it therefore, I am of such prize,
That ravished once, I should he ravished twice:
Was it my fault, because I strived in vain,
And vvanted strength his fury, to restrain?
He flattered and spoke fair, I strugled still,
And what he got, was much against my will:
Of all his toil, he reapt no wished fruit,
For with my wrangling I withstood his suit,
At length, I was restored, untouched and clear,
In all my Rape, I sufferd naught (save fear)
A few untoward kisses, he (God wot)
Dry, without rhellish, by much striving got,
And them with much adoo, and to his cost,
Of further favors, he could never boast:
I doubt your purpose aims at greater blisses,
And hardly would alone be pleased with kisses,
Thou have some further aim, and seekst to do
What (Ihoue defend) I should consent unto:
He bare not thy bad mind, but did restore me,
Unblemished, to the place from whence he bore me:
The youth was bashful, and thy boldness lackt,
And it is well known, repented his bold fact:
Theseus repented, so should Paris do,
Succeed in Love, and in repentance to;
Nor am I angry: Who can angry be
With him that loves her? If your heart agree
With your kind words, your suite I could applaude
So I were sure your lines were void of fraud.
I cast not these strange doubts or this dispense
Like one that were bereft all confidence:
Nor that I with my self am in disgrace,
Or do not know the beauty of my face,
But because too much trust has damaged such
As have believed men in their loves to much,
And now the general tongue of woman says,
Man's words are full of Treason, void of faith.
Let others sin, and hours in pleasure wast,
It Is rare to find the sober Matron chaste:
Why, say it be that sin preuailes with fair ones,
May not my name be rank't among the rare ones?
Because my mother Laeda was beguilde,
Must I stray too, that am her eldest child?
I must confess, my mother made a rape,
But Ihoue beguild her in a borrowed shape,
When she (poor soul) nor dreampt of god nor man,
He troad her like a milke-white feathered Swan:
She was deceived by error, If I yield
To your unjust request, nothing can shield
Me from reproach, I cannot plead concealing,
It Was in her, error, it is in me plain dealing:
She happily erred, He that her honor spilt,
Had in himself full power to salve the guilt;
Her error happyed me to (I confess)
If to be Ihoues child, be a happiness.
To omit high Ihoue, of whom I standin awe,
As the great Grandsire to our Father in Law,
To pass the kin I claim from Tantalus,
From Pelopes, and from Noble Tyndarus.
Laeda by Ihoue in shape of Swan beguild,
Her self so chaungde and by him made with ch^ld
Proves Ihoue my Father: then you ydely strive
Your name from Gods and Princes to derive.
What need you of old Priam make relation?
Laomedon, or your great Phrygian Nation?
Say, all be true: What then? He, of whom most
To be of your alliance you so boast,
Ihoue (five degrees at least) from you removed,
To be the first from me, is plainly proved;
And though (as I believe well) Troy may stand
Powerful by Sea, and full of strength by Land,
And no Dominion to your State superior,
I hold our Clyme nothing to Troy inferior:
Say, you in riches pass us, or in number
Of people, whom you boast your streets to cumber,
Yet yours a Barbarous Nation is, I tell you,
And in that kind, do we of Greece excel you.
Your rich Epistle does such gifts present,
As might the Goddesses themselves content
And woo them to your pleasures, but if I
Should pass the bonds of shame, and tread awry
If ever you should put me to my shifts,
Your self should move me more then all your gifts:
Or if I ever shall transgress by stealth,
It shall be for your sake, not for your wealth;
But as your gifts I scorn not, so such seem
Most precious, where the giver we esteem.
More then your presence, it shall Hellen please
That you for her have past the stormy Seas,
That she has causde your toil, that you respect her,
And more then all your Troyan Dames affect her.
But ye'are a Wag in troth, the notes and signs
You make at Table, in the meats and Wines,
I have observed, when I least seemde to mind them,
For at the first my curious eye did find them.
Sometimes (you wanton) your fixed eye aduaunces
His brightness against mine, darting sweet glaunces,
Outgazing me with such a steadfast look,
That my dazd eyes their splendour baue for sooke,
And then you sigh, and by and by you stretch
Your amorous arm outright, the bowl to reatch
That next me stands, making excuse to sip
Just in the self-same place that kissed my lip.
How often have I obserud your finger make
Tricks and conceited signs, which straight I take?
How often does your brow your smooth thoughts cloak
When (to my seeming) it has almost spoke,
And still I fearde my Husband would have spide ye,
In troth you are to blame, and I must chyde ye:
You are too manifest a Lover (Tush,)
At such known signs I could not choose but blush,
And to my self I often was forced to say,
This man at nothing shames. Is this (I pray)
ought save the truth? Often times upon the board
Where Hellen was engraven, you the word
Amo have vnder-writ, in new spilt wine
(Good sooth) at first I could not skan the line,
Nor understand your meaning: Now, (oh spite)
My self am now taught, so to Read and write.
Should I offend, as Sin to me is strange,
These blandishments have power chaste thoughts to change
Or if I could be moved to step astray
These would provoke me to lascivious play:
Besides, I must confess, you have a Face,
So admirably rare, so full of grace,
That it has power to woo and to make ceasure,
Of the most bright chaste beauties to your pleasure.
yet had I rather stainelesse keep my Fame,
Then to a stranger hazard my good name:
Make me your instance, and forbear the fare,
Of that which most does please you, make most spare.
The greatest virtues of which wise men boast,
Is to abstain from that which pleases most.
How many gallant Youths (think you) desire,
That which you covet? Skorcht with the selfsame fire?
Are all the World fools? Only Paris wise?
Or is there none save you have judging eyes?
No^ no, you view no more then others see,
But you are playner and more bold with me,
You are more earnest to pursue your game,
Iyeeld you not more knowledge, but less shame
I would to God that you had sayld from Troy,
When my Virginity and bed to enjoy
A thousand gallant princely Suitors came:
Had I beheld young Paris, I proclaim,
Of all those thousand I had made you chief,
And Spartan Menalaus to his grief
Should to my censure have subscribde and yielded,
But now (alas) your hopes are weakly builded
You covet goods possessed; pleasures fore-tasted,
Tarde you come, that should before have hasted,
What you desire, another claymes as due.
As I could wish to have been espousde to you,
So let me tell you, since it is my fate,
I hold me happy in this present state,
Then cease fair Prince, an idle suite to move
Seek not to harm her whom you seem to love:
In my contented state let me be guided,
As both my stars and fortunes have provided,
Nor in so vain a quest your spirits toil,
To seek at my hands an unworthy spoil.
But see how soon poor Women are deluded,
Venus her self this covenant has concluded,
For in the Idaean Valleys you espy
Three Goddesses, stripped naked to your eye,
And when the first had promised you a Crown,
The second Fortitude and wars renown,
The third bespake you thus: Crown, nor Wars pride
Will I bequeath, but Hellen to thy Bride,
I scarce believe those high immortal Creatures,
Would to your eye expose their naked features,
Or say the first part of your Tale be pure,
And meet with truth: The second's false I Am sure,
In which poor I was thought the greatest meede,
In such a hie cause by the Gods decreed.
I have not of my beauty such opinion
T'imagine it preferred before Dominton,
Or fortitude: nor can your words persu^de me
The greatest gift of al, the Goddess made me.
It is enough to me, men praise my face,
But from the Gods, I merit no such grace,
Nor does the praise you charge me with offend me,
If Venus do not enuiously commend me.
But lo I grant you, and imagine true,
Your free report, claiming your praise as due,
Who would in pleasing things call Fame a liar,
But give that credit, which we most desire.
That we have moved these doubts be not you grieved,
The greatest wonders are the least believed,
Know then I first am pleased that Venus ought me
Such undeserved grace: Next, that you thought me
The greatest meede: Nor Scepter, nor Wars Fame,
Did you prefer before poor Hellens name.
(Hard-hart it is time thou should at last come down)
Therefore I am your valor, I your Crown,
Your kindness conquers me do what I can,
I were hard-harted, not to love this man;
Obdurate I was never, and yet coy,
To favor him whom I can never enjoy.
What profits it the barren sands to plow
And in the furrows our affections sow,
In the sweet theft of Venus I am rude,
And know not how my Husband to delude;
Now I these Loue-lines write, my pen I vow
Is a new office taught, not known till now,
Happy are they that in this Trade have skill,
(Alas I am a Fool) and shall be still,
And having till this hour not slept astray,
Fear in these sports least I should mis my way
The fear (no doubt) is greater then the blame
I stand confounded and amazed with shame.
And with the very thought of what you seek,
Think every eye fixed on my guilty cheek,
Nor are these suppositions merely vain,
The murmuring people whisperingly complain,
And my maid Aethra has by listening slily,
Brought me such news, as touched mine honor hily:
Wherefore (dear Lord) dissemble, or desist,
Being ouer-eyde, we cannot as we list,
Fashion our sports, our Loves pure harvest gather:
But why should you desist? dissemble rather:
Sport, (but in secret) sport where none may see,
The greater, but not greatest liberty
Is limited to our Lascivious play,
That Menalaus is far hence away,
My Husband about great affairs is pousted,
Leaving his royal guest securely hoasted,
His business was important and material,
Being employed about a Crown Imperial:
And as he now is mounted on his Steed,
Ready on his long journey to proceed,
Even as he questions to depart or stay,
Sweet heart (quoth I) oh be not long away,
With that he reached me a sweet parting kiss,
(How loath he was to leave me, guess by this.)
Farewell fair Wife (says he) bend all thy cares
To my domesticke business, home affairs,
But as the thing that I affection best,
Sweet Wife, look well unto my Trojan guest.
It was no sooner out, but with much pain,
My itching spleen from laughter Irestraine,
Which striving to keep in and bridle still,
At length Iwrung forth these few words (I will.)
He Is on his journey to the Isle of Creet,
But think not we may therefore safely meet,
He is so absent, that as present I
Am still within his reach: His Ear, his Eye
And though abroad, his power at home commands
For know you not Kings have long reaching hads?
The fame for beauty you besides have given me,
Into a great exigent has driven me:
The more your commendation filled his care,
The more just cause my husband has to fear:
Nor marvel you the King has left me so,
Into remoate and foreign Climes to go,
Much confidence he dares repose in me,
My carriage, hauiour, and my modesty,
My beauty he mistrusts, my heart relies in
my face he fears, my Chaste life he affies in.
To take time now when time is, you persuade me,
And with his apt fit absence you invade me:
I would, but fear, nor is my mind well set,
my Will would further, what my fear does let.
I have no husband here, and you no wife,
I love your shape, you mine, dear as your life.
The nights seem long to such as sleep alone,
Our letters meet to enterchange our moan:
You judge me beauteous, I esteem you fair,
Under oue Roof we Lovers lodged are,
And (let me die) but every thing consider,
Each thing persuades us we should lie together,
Nothing we see molests us, naught we hear,
And yet my forward will is slackt through fear:
I would to God that what you ill persuade,
You could as well compel, So I were made
Vn-willing willing, pleasingly abusde,
So my simplicity might be excusde:
Injurious force is oft-times wondrous pleasing,
To such as suffer ease in their diseasing,
If what I will, you against my will should do,
I with such force could be well pleased too.
But whilst our love is young and in the bud,
Suffer his Infant vigor be withstood,
A flame new kindled is as easily quenched,
And sudden sparkles in little drops are drencht:
A Trauellours Love is like himself, unstaid,
And wanders where he walks, It is not laid
On any firmer ground, for when we alone
Think him to us, the wind blows fair, he is gone:
Witness Hypsipile, alike betraide, Ariadnt.

Witness with her, the bright Mynoyan maid:
Nay then your self, as you your self have spoken
To fair Oenone have your promise broken,
Since I beheld your face first, my desire
Has been, of Troyan Paris to inquire:
I know you now in every true respect,
I Will grant you thus much then, say you affect
Me (whom you term your own.) I Will grow thus far
Do not the Phagian mariners prepare
Their sails and Oars, and now whilst we recite
Exchange of words about the wished night:
Say that even now you were prepared to clime
my long wished bed, just at the appointed time
The wind should alter and blow fair for Troy,
You must break off, in midst of all your joy
And leave me in the infancy of pleasure,
Amid my riches, I shall lose my treasure.
You will for sake the sweets my bed affoords,
T'exchange for Cabins, Hatches, and pitched boords,
Then what a fickle Courtship you commence,
When, with the first vvind, all your Love blows hence.
But shall I follow you when you are gone,
And be the graund-child to Laomedon?
And Islium see, whose beauty you proclaim?
I do not so despise the bruit of fame,
That she to whom I am in debt such thanks,
Should fill the Earth with such adulterate pranks:
What will Achaia? What will Sparta say?
What will your Troy report and Asia?
What may old Priam or his reverent Queen?
What may your Sisters having Hellen seen,
Or your Dardanian brothers deem of me?
Will they not blame my loose ^nchastity:
Nay, how can you your self faithful deem me,
And not amongst the loosest dames esteem me
No stranger shall your Asian Ports com near
But he shall fill your guilty soul with fear.
How often (angry at some small offense)
Will you thus say; Adultresse, get thee hence,
Forgetting you your self have been the chief
In my transgression, though not in my grief.
Consider what it is forgetful Lover,
To be sins Author, and sins sharp reprouer,
But ere the least of all these Illes betide me,
I wish the earth may in her bosom hide me.
But I shall all your Phrygian wealth possess,
And more then your Epistle can express;
Gifts, wouen gold, Imbrodery, rich attire,
Purple and Plate, or what I can desire?
Yet give me leave, think you all this extends
To counter-vaile the loss of my chief friends?
Whose friendship, or whose aid shall I employ,
To succor me when I am wronged in Troy?
Or whether can I, having thus misdone,
Unto my Father or my Brothers run,
As much as you to me, false Jason swore
Unto Medea, yet from Aesons door
He after did exile her: Now poor heart,
Where is thy Father that should take thy part?
Old Aeres or Calciope? thou tookest
No aid from them, who thou before forsookest.
Or say thou did (alas they cannot bear
Thy sad complaints) yet I no such thing fear,
No more Medea did, good hopes engage
Themselves so far, they fail in their presage:
You see the ships that in the Main are tossed,
And many times by Tempests wrackt and lost,
Had at their launching from the Havens mouth,
A smooth sea, and a calm gale from the South.
Besides, the brand your mother dreampt she bare
The night before your birth, breeds me fresh care,
It Propheside, ere many years expire,
Inflamed Troy must burn with Greekish fire,
As Venus favors you, because she gained
A double prize by you; yet the disdained
And vanquished Goddesses, disgracst so late,
May bear you hard, I therefore fear their hate:
Nor make no question, but if I consort you,
And for a Rauisher our Greece report you:
War will be waged with Troy, and you shall rue,
The sword (alas) your conquest shall pursue:
When Hypodamia at her bridale feast,
Was rudely ravished by her Centaur guest,
Because the Saluages the Bride durst ceaze,
War grew betwixt them and the Lapythes:
Or think you Menelaus has no spleen?
Or that he has not power to avenge his teene?
Or that old Tyndarus this wrong can smother?
Or the two famous Twins each lo'ud of other.
So where your valor and rare deeds you boast, Castor and Poll.

And warlike spirits in which you triumph most,
By which you have attaind among Soldiers grace,
None will believe you that but sees your face,
Your feature and fair shape, is fitter far
For amorous Courtships, then remorselesse war:
Let rough-hevv'd Soldiers warlike dangers prove,
It Is pity Paris should do ought save love.
Hector (whom you so praise) for you may fight,
I Will find you war, to skirmish every night,
Which shall become you better: Were I wise
And bold withal, I might obtain the prize,
In such sweet single Combats, hand to hand,
Against which no woman that is wise will stand:
my Champion I Will encounter breast to breast,
Though I were sure to fall, and be o'repreast.
In that you private conference entreat me,
I apprehend you, and you cannot cheat me,
I know the meaning durst I yield thereto,
Of what you would confer; What you would do,
You are too forward, you too far would vvade,
But yet (God knows) your haruests in the blade.
My tired pen shall here his labor end,
A guilty sense in theeuish lines I send,
Speak next when your occasion best persuades,
By Clymenea and Aethra my two maids.
1
THese enter-changes of their Amors past,
And Menelaus absent, they compound,
That in some place an ambush shall be placed,
With which the Queen shall be incompast round,
And willingly surpised, seeming aghast,
and at their arms, to weep, to shrieke, to sound:
But all in vain, the Troyan seems to fear her,
and force perforce, unto his Fleet to bear her.
2
She in her frightfull agony, seems dum,
Yet when she was past help, for help she cride,
She calls for rescue, that had rescue come,
Even at the sight of Spartan arms had did:
She seems affrighted at the Trojan drum,
and at their stearne allarmes terrifide:
She calls on Father, Husband, Brother, Friend,
Naming them most, who could her least defend.
3
This uproar made the bold Pannomians guard
The passage to their ships, still Hellen cries
Upon the Acaians, from her rescue barred,
The rumor of her Rape through Sparta flies,
Whilst Paris with his Soldiers keeps strict ward,
Launching at length with his desired prize:
Her two Twin-brother-Kings, that nothing doubt,
At the same season soiournd thereabout.
4
And hearing of their Sisters Rape, make have,
The Rauisher with fury to pursue,
They disimbogue, hoping to gain at last
Sight of the Tro^ Nauye, which now grew
near to the Hellespont, having quite past
Th'Aegean Sea, the Winds against them blew,
The Surges swell, and with the rough Winds meet,
Conspiring both the ruin of the Fleet.
5
Ships, Sails, and men, are swallowed in th'Abisse,
The brothers to two Stars the Gods translate, Castor and Poll^ translated
into the two Poles, the North and South, Pauson.

One of the Poles by Castor named is,
The the other Pollux, to record their fate,
Where now they shine in their Celestial bliss,
But so far distant in their blessed estate,
As neither has the power to see his brother,
For when we raise the one, we loose the other.
6
By this time with his Trojan Rape arriues
At Tenedos, the amorous Trojan Lad,
Which Priam understanding, nobly strives
To welcome her (at her arrival glad)
The Queen attended with the Noble Wives
Of all the Trojan Princes, richly clad,
Issues from Troy, with thousands following after,
To entertain bright Ladaes ravished daughter.
7
Behold where (on an aumbling Palfrey mounted
White as her mothers feathers) she appears,
Now one of Priams daughters counted,
For with that style, young Paris Hellen cheeres,
At meeting, the old King himself dismounted,
and with soft kisses dryes her feigned tears,
Old Hecuba next Priam cheeres her moan,
and after her, her daughters one by one.
8
Hector and Troylus with the Lords of Troy,
Kiss her by turns, and with kind arms embrace her,
The people with applauses crown their joy,
Whilst Priam before the multitude to grace her,
Betrothes the Spartan to his amorous boy,
And in's return on his right hand does place her,
Aeneas and Anthenor highly praisde,
Kneel to the King, and by his hand are raisde.
9
The long divorced Peers now enterchange
Their free embracements, whom with kisses sweet
Their wives, to whom such favors were grown strange,
with their long absence wirh like language meet,
The Troyans eyes on Hellen freely range,
With praise and wonder they her welcome greet,
Her beauty even so deep in Hector struck,
He now repines that he against her spoke.
10
The ground is strewed with sweet and various flowers,
In every place is Music heard to sound,
From Tenedos in less then two short hours
They enter Troy, whose Walls are peopled round,
She wonders at their buildings and hye Towers,
The like to which in Sparta are not found,
Walls, wealth, and people, Palace, all appearing
Richer to the eye, then their report in hearing.
11
She treads not but on Arras, Casts her eyes
But on rich hangings, beautyes, rooffes of Gold,
Jewels, State, Garments: Now she does despise
The poverty of Sparta, as things old,
The novelties of Troy she gins to prise,
But most delights in her sweet arms to infold
Inamoured Paris, who as much excels
her husband; as Troy Sparta, in ought else.
12
The morrow coms, by Priam she is led
To Pallas Temple, and espoused there
To Paris; and at night conueyde to bed
By Hecuba, her bright Attendants were
Andromache, Crevsa, (and instead
Of hand-maydes) Polyxene and Cressyde, dear
To Troylus; None save Ladies of estate,
Are suffered on the Spartan Queen to wait.
13
Eight entyre days and nights, the hye feast lasts,
And Troy's all mirth, whylst Sparta is all woe,
With swiftest speed a winged Curror hasts
As far as Creet, Queen Hellens Rape to show,
Menelaus his sad hours in anguish wastes,
By this the Grecian Kings his sorrows know:
And of themselves assemble, offering free,
Their hostyle aid, and in Troyes fall agree.
14
To bring so huge a Navy on the Seas,
Behooues us know their names that first deuisde
These noble vessayles: whether for their ease,
Whether Ambitious, they the Land despisde,
Whether the Creatan Minos did first please Strabo. Diodo.

The sutges God: or Neptune enterprise
The foaming billows, being by Saturnes motion,
Made Admiral of all the brinish Ocean.
15
Whether Ericthris in the red Sea sailed Pliny

And first made Boats, which others would impute
To the Meones, such as never sailed
In th'Hellespont, or whether the pursuit Palydor

Of Danaus in the Egyptian Sea prevailed,
An honor which to him most attribute:
Or whether Navigators first had place,
In Atlas kingdom, or in Samo-Thrace. Polichron.

16
This I aver, his Arc first Noah made
Fore th'vniuersall Deluge, since his days
Jason the Greek, who Colchos sought to invade,
Composde the Galley, which next him assayes
Sesostris King of Egypt, In this Trade
Eytheus flourisht, whom our Anthors praise
For Marine skill, his Barge did first divide
The Surges with two Oars on either side.
17
First, with three course of Oars Amocles rowed,
The Carthagens with four, as many write, Amocl^s of Corinth. Nesichthon of
Salamis.

With five Nesichthon: These were first bestowed
By the bold Romans in the great Sea Fight
At the first battle Punicke: He that owed
The sixe-Oard barge to do Zenagaras right
Must yield it him (in Siracusa dwelling
For ship-wrights Craft, all other much excelling.
18
Hyppias the Troyan the broad Lyter framed,
The Cyrenens the Hoy, which some more fine,
The Gallioon call: with Barks the Cyprians tamed
The rude sea-Rouers, Cockboates (some divine)
The ^lyrians built: the Keele and Craer were named
By the Phenetians first: the Brigandine
The Rhodians reared: the Canoas now in trade,
In India by the Germans were first made.
19
The Copians found the Rudder, the broad Oar
The sly Plateans by their Art composed;
Young Icarus the sail not known before,
Which some affirm, King Aeolus disclosed,
With Masts and Sayle-yards Dedalus did store
The Cretans: but the stern Typhis disposed:
The stem Pyseus: Anacharsis wrought
The Tackle, Anchors first the Tyrhens sought.
20
Athens first ferried men, whether we must draw
Th'Graecian fleet, the great'st that has bin seen,
Such store the amazed Neptune never saw,
No not when France and England met between A sea-battaile fought betwixt
Phillip of France and Ed. the 3. in the year 1340. when there were slay^
French 30000, ships taken 200.

Callice and us, where after many a flaw;
Phillip gave place to the third Edwards spleen,
Before, the black Prince, by wars prosperous chance,
Quater'd our Lions with the Flowers of France.
21
Nor when the stout Venetian Galleys frame
Their expedition against the Turks Armade,
Nor when Sea-wars Malta or Rhodes proclaim,
Whose ponderous hulkes the Oceans back nie swayde,
Nor when th'^uincible huge Navy came
In the year Eighty eight, England t'inuade:
Were there so many Vessailes well provided,
As by the Argiue Pylots are now guided.
22
Great Agamemnon they Grand-Duke create Agamemnon

Of all their powerful host, who in the aid
Of Menelaus, as one of highest estate,
With full an hundred ships at Athens staide,
All stuffed with Armed Knights sworn to the Fate
Of threatened Troy, whom they with scorns vpbraid,
With forty ships fair rig'd and well supplide Menelaus

In Athens road, does Menelaus now ride.
23
For Athens was their Randeuous, and there
King Archelaus and Prothenor stay, Arch^laus.

With fifty Ships that of Boetia were,
With fifty Ships from Orconomies bay: Prothenor. Helmius. Ascalaphus.

Helmius and Duke Ascalaphus appear,
The Kings Epistrophus and Sedius, way
Their Anchors next, and to the Spartan King, Epistropus.

Thirty tall ships rig'd from Phociden bring. Sedius.

24
King Telamon launcht fifty Souldierd well Telamon.

From Salamine, and in his princely train Theuter. Thebus.

Duke Theuter, Polyxeme, and Thebes fell,
With Duke Amphimachus: from Pylon came Amphimachus

With three-ag'd Nestor fifty ships t'expell Nestor

The Trojans from the Hellesponticke Maine;
Thoas with fifty ships the harbor sought, Thoas

whether K. Doxunois likewise fifty brought. Doxunois

25
King Telamon Chileus three times ten Telam. Chyleus

And six good Ships rig'd, in the Spartans Quest, Amphimachus

Amphimachus and Polibetes, men Polybetes.

Of high rcsolue, accompany the rest
With thirty sail, King Idumeus then, Idumeus.

And Cretan Mereon their loves expressed, Mereon.

They fourscore and two Frigots brought in place,
And thirty two Ulysses weighed from Thrace. Ulysses

26
Twelve Ships from Phrygia Duke Tynelus brings, Tynelus Prothocathus

And from Phtlaca fifty two arrive,
at the great charge of two imperious Kings Prothesilaus

Prothocathus: The Prince to that did wiue
Laodomeia fair, whose praise Fame sings.
Prothesilaus: Collesis seeks to drive Collosis.

With four and twenty Craers th'opposed fleets
Whom King Machaon by appointment meets. Machaon

27
Machaons Son Pollydris thirty three, Pollydris Achilles. Thelaphus Eruphilus

Achilles two and twenty has in store,
King Thelaphus as many, these agree
By their joint Arms to win the Trojan shore,
Eruphilus has likewise vowed to free
The ravished Queen with two and fifty more:
Anthipus and Amphimachus are seen, Anthipus

From Rustican with Hulkes and Hoyes thirteen. Amphimachus

27
King Polybetes that from Rythee came, Polybetes

Bring sixty two, and in his friendly aid,
His Brother the Duke Lopius moved with fame Lopius

Of these great wars, seeks Phrygia to i^ade: Diomedes

King Diomed of Arges threats the same,
Fourscore and two tall Vessailes he displaide:
Eurialus and Thelanus in sight,
Of all the host, beneath his Ensigns sight. Eurialus Thelanus.

29
Thirteen K. Fureus, Polyphebus nine, Fureus Polyphebus

Prothoylus fifty two, as many led
The King Carpenor of the Bresseian line, Carpenor Theorius

Theorius four and twenty colors spread,
In four and twenty ships, all these in fine
In the Athenian part meet and make head:
Twelve hundred twenty Ships make The Ocean tremble,
In whom full sixty nine bold Kings assemble.
38
But ere we further enter or proceed
In these Heroike wars, we hold it fit,
Before the Graecians or the Trojans bleed,
To memorize their shapes; ere we admit
The Argiue Peers (all in one thought agreed)
To be revenged on Troy, and ransacke it: Hellen

Hellen the first, as Pearelesse through all Lands,
As Venus picture that in Coos stands.
31
She was nor dwarfe-like statur'd, nor too tall,
Nor foggy fat, nor yet Consumptiue lean,
Her Wast not gross, nor yet too slender-small,
Her saire proportion, was smooth, quaint, and clean:
Her habit shadowed no extreme at all,
She was all shaped by the Golden mean;
So rare, that never eye dwelt on her Check,
But lost it self, and had his light to seek.
32
What should I with harsh Language slubber over
Exact perfection? Shall my ragged quill
In seeking Natures cunning to explore,
Iniure the work in which she shows such skill?
To Express such Graces as the Gods adore
In Hellen, would a spacious Volume fill:
And asko (should I her beauties al recite,)
A world of Paper, and an Age to write.
33
And all my Subject should be Hellen, she
That in the Universe can find no peer:
Hellen the scope of all my Verse should be,
Yet to her worth my praise not once comes near;
Therefore, since more them Hellen call on me
To speak their Valors, and insert them here:
I leave her with this Title: Hellen, fairest
Of all the World, and for Perfection rarest.
34
Bold Agamemnon Duke of all the Host,
Invoakes me next his features to set down,
Tall statur'd, ably limbed, adored most
Of all the Argiues with the imperial Crown:
White-bodied, straight, tres-puissant without boast,
Hardy, well-spoke, Ambitious of Renown.
Menelaus, of mean stature, his voice loud,
Brown-hair'd, well set, Valiant in arms, not proud.
35
Achilles, he whose Myrmidons defended
The host of Greeks with a strong brazen Mure,
From Thetis Goddess of the Sea descended,
Pourefull, expensiue, on his Covenant sure,
Bright-hair'd, his face and feature much commended,
His eye much fiery, his Complexion pure:
Broad shouldered, and big-arm'd, large brested, strong
His match in Atmes, lived not the Greeks among.
36
King Tantalus, broad, fat, and hye withal,
His head Crispe-blacke, his Beard-thicke, but not long,
Affable, Courteous, and despising bral,
Delighting much in Music, and in Song:
Al^ as broad as Tantall, and as tall,
But in his deeds of Arms more active strong:
He that alone by the Greeks awful rector,
Was chosen worthy to encounter Hector.
37
Ajax Oeleus was of smaller size,
Of milder temper, Courteous, Black his hair,
His Color fresh, himself of fair Emptize,
And a great part among the Princes bare;
Vlesses King of Ithaca most wise,
A right Mercurialist, in discourse rare,
An Orator, whom Judging ears applaud,
Yet Oily toong'd, full of deceit and fraud.
38
King Diomed, of Gyant-like aspect,
The largest Greek that menac'st Troy with steel:
A Prince, whom all the Princes must respect,
His ponderous blows make many Trojans reele,
Equally apt to fight, or to direct,
Dreadlesse of Fortune, or her turning wheel:
Comely, and decked with all the gifts of Nature,
His heart having Correspondence with his stature.
39
The three-ag'd living Nestor, Pytous King,
Slenderly-tall, his Visage Sagely grave
And promising Counsel, he whose Muse did sing
Of King Prothesilaus, to him gave
The wreath, for quick and Active combatting,
Yet all his Art his body cannot save:
His look effeminate, his Courage bold,
His strength by might, but not by fear controld.
40
Strout Neptolynus, in his Countenance grim,
Blacke-hait'd, broad-ey'd, his hairy win-browes meet,
Armed at all points, deep Rivers he would swim,
Though heavy bodied, active were his feet,
They that most curiously decipher him,
Report his Language stammering and unsweet:
Palumides, faire-shapt, but sickly tender,
His Color cheerful, but his stature slender.
41
Nereus Ipasse, the fair Greek Homer loved,
Penelaus, Leitus, Eurialus,
Clouius Arcecilaus, Nobly proved,
Ialmen of Boetia, Ascalaphus;
Bold Idomen, (a Fury) being moved,
The Phocean Scedius, and Amphimachus,
Prothous, Ieonteus, Polybetes,
Guneus, Aemilius, and great Philoctetes Philoctetes companion to Hercules.

42
Who brought the Arrows dipped in Hydraes blood,
To Troyes sad siege, there was the brave Prothenor,
By whom Podarces and King Merion stood
Tlepolemus, Cteatus, and Alphenor,
Phidippes, Anthipus a soldier good,
With stout Alceus soon, K. Agapenor,
Talpheus, Phetides, King Polyxemon,
Muestheus, Stenetus, Thoas, son to Andremon.
43
Rough Polidarius, fat, and scornful proud,
False of his promise, and yet warlike bold,
Mathaon of mean stature, yet aloude
For valiant to, and among the best inrold,
More princes did the Greek pauilions shroud,
Whose shapes we leave, to have their merits told:
Now come we to Crescida, Calchas daughter,
So fair, that many warlike Princes sought her.
44
She was a worthy and a beauteous Dame,
Whom Troylus loved, and Diomedes sought,
To gain her Grace, they wan immortal Fame,
And still their glorious spoils to Cresseid brought,
For her the mighty Persian Sophy came,
To gain her Love, he against the Troyans fought:
Filling the number of the Grecian host,
Who wait but waftage to the Dardan Coast.
45
They call a Counsel, and dispatch away
Achilles and Patroclus to the Isle
Called Delos, which our Cosmographers say,
Stands midst the Ciclades: Here of long while
The God Apolio, unto such as pray,
Gives answer (by his Oracle:) His smile
Cheares such as kneel, his frown strikes them with terror
Such was the Panims Faith, the Pagans Error.
46
To this fair Clyme (which some Ortigia call,)
The Sun and Moon were in their Nonage seen,
Latona brought them forth: Here first of all
Phoebus (the days God) and his Sister Queen
Cynthia, that guids the night, both rise and fall:
Here stands the Temple, and the gilded Skreene,
On which Apolloes Statue dwells for aye,
pronouncing Oracles to such as pray.
47
Here did Achilles and Patroclus find
The Trojan Calchas, reverent Thystranes son,
Sent by King Priam to know Phoebus mind,
And what shall in these future wars be done:
The Oracles has by his priests assignd,
That after ten years Troy shall be o're-run:
Which Calchas hearing, with Achilles makes
His speedy peace, and so his Troy forsakes.
48
Achilles proud of such a glorious pray,
With these glad tidings to the Fleet returns,
Who with all prosperous speed their Anchors way,
And whilst Troyes King revolted, Calchas mournes,
Whose grave advice was to his Realm chief stay,
No longer the Argiue Duke his speed adiournes:
But launcheth his Fleet royal: They set sales,
And the calm Eurus yields them gentle Gales.
49
Diana (that was ever friend to Troy,)
Neptune entreats, that may command his waves,
The great Armade of Gracia to destroy
And swallow them within his Briny graves,
She takes it ill, the Greeks depart with joy
From Aulis Gulf, yet none her license craves
Or offers at her Altars, the due rights
Of Sacrifice, amongst those Kings and Knights.
50
Amidst the wrathful Tempest Calchas prays
To Neptune and the Moon, their Fleet to spare,
Who not with words to be appeased, will raise
His tumbling waves, and toss them in the air,
Unless great Agamemnon Altars raise
To angry Cynthia, and perform his Prayer,
And on her bleeding Shrine, at Dians feet,
Kill Iphegenia to preserve the Fleet.
51
Loath is the General his Child's blood to spill
Yet holds it better that one Lady dye,
(Although his Daughter) then the Seas to fill
With Ships, bold Knights, and Kings advanced hye:
Calchas the Priest the Innocent Maid does kill,
To Appease Dianaes wrathful Deity:
The Sacrifice performed, the wind blows fair,
The Seas are calmed, the Sun has cleared the Air.
52
And now the wind plays with those swelling sails
Which they but late in fury rent and tore,
Calm Zephyr cheares their Fleet with gentle Gales,
Which made but late the violent Surges rore,
(This can the Gods) but ere proud Greece preuailes,
Or Land their powers upon the Phrygian shore:
Or that Scamander field in blood be did,
We from our task our self a while divide.
Aethra and Clymenen, were Hellens Chamber-maids and imployd in all her most
private business.

Some affirm that Paris only met Menelaus upon the sea, and haled him as he
was in his voyage toward Creet, and by that means understanding his absence,
thought it a fit opportunity for him to steal away his Queen. And that he
ravished her out of the Temple dedicate to Cy^herea, where Paris and she as
strangers one to another, sacrificed together, but in this I^mitate Ovid as my
approved Author. That Menelaus was at home when Paris Landed in the Isle
Cythere, and gave him friendly entertainment, though some seem to disprove,
yet Ovid in diverse of his works affirms it. WHen Menelaus from his house is
gone,
Poor Hellen is afraid to lie alone; De Art Amandi 2.

And to alay these fears (lod'g in her breast)
In her warm bosom she receives her guest:
What madness was this? Menelaus, say
Thou art abroad, whilst in thy house does stay
Under the self same roof, thy Guest, and Love?
Madman unto the Hawke thou trusts the Dove:
And who, but such a Gull, would give to keep
Unto the Mountaine-Wolfe full folds of Sheep.
Hellen is blameless, so is Paris too,
And did what thou, or I my self would do.
The fault is thine, I tell thee to thy face,
By limiting these Lovers, Time and Place.
From thee the seeds of all thy wrongs are grown,
Whose Counsels have they followed, but thine own?
(Alack) what should they do? Abroad thou art,
At home thou leauest thy Ghest, to play thy part:
To lie alone, the (poor Queen) is afraid,
In the next room an Amorous stranger staid,
Her Arms are open to embrace him, he falls in,
And Paris I acquit thee of the sin.
And in another place somewhat resembling this: Orestes liked, but not loved
dearly
Hermione, til he had lost her clearly:
Sad Menelaus, why do thou lament Deremedio Amoris 2.

Thy late mishap? I prithee be content:
Thou knew the amorous Hellen fair and sweet,
And yet without her did thou sail to Creet,
And thou wast blithe and merry all the way,
But when thou saw she was the Trojans p^ay,
Then wast thou mad for her, and for thy life,
Thou can not now one minute want thy wife.
So slout Achilles, when his lovely Bride
Briseis, was disposed to great Atride,
Nor was he vainly moved: Atrides too
Offered no more then he of force must do:
I should have done as much, to set her free,
Yet I (heaven knovves) am not so Wise as he.


Hipsipile the Daughter to Thoas King of Lemnos, who^ when all the women of that
Island had slain their Husbands and Kinsmen, she only referu'd her Father
alive, for which they after exiled her.

By the Mynoxan Maid, is understood Ariadne forsaken by Theseus.

The Meones are those, who are now called Trojans. First Dardanians of King
Dardanus.

Coos an Isle in the Sea Icarium, not far from Rhodes, now called Langor. The
chiefest City is likewise called Coos, where as some think, Apelles left his
admirable vnfinisht Picture of Venus, so rarely begun, that not the most
exquisite Art-maister (he dying before it was finished) durst enterprise to
perfect it. Homer. Virgill.


The assembly of the Greeks was in the Haven of Athens, or Aulis Gulf, a
port-Towne in the Country of Boetia.

The names of the Grecian Princes, though they seem somewhat strange, yet are
all remembered by Homer and others, that writ the History of Troy, which (though
no question) diverse Translations and sever all Languages have somewhat
corrupted, yet they all meet in one Truth, that such men as are here
remembered, were at this renowned siedge.

Legos where the Temple of Apollo stands: in the Nauel of the world.

It is likewise called Ortigia, of the Birds Ottiges. in English Quails, because
those Birds (to us common) were first seen in that Island.

Many differ about the Sacrifice which Agamemnon slew Metamor. 12.
to appease the wrath of offended Diana: some think it to have been a Heart:
but Ovid avers is to be the daughter of Iphegenia. Theacritus in dioscuris
Apollon, lib, 1


Of Castor and Pollux there are many things extant, of their birth we have
spoke before. They were the Sons of Jupiter, not of Tyndaris, They went
with Jason to the Conquest of the golden Fleece, where Pollux slew hand to
hand Amicus the Gyant-sonne of Neptune, who had before dared all the
Argonantes to a single Combat, and after the Colchian voyage, when Theseus had
ravished Helena, they warred upon Athens, and having recovered her, spared all
the vanquished Athenians, and in their return these Brothers Zezes hist, 46
ravished the two Daughters of Leucippus and Arsinoe. They were called Phebe and
Falaira: Of Phebe Pollux begot Asineus: Of Falaira, Castor begot Amagon, whose
former Husbands pursuing the rauishers, fought against them a bloody battle
near to the foot of the mountain Taigetes, and when they had hid themselves
within the body of an ore-growne Oak, they were espide by Linceus, of all
mortal men the best Stasinus in rebus Ciprijs.
sighted, which an ancient poet thus describes.

-- Quo tempore Linceus,
Taygeti velox ascendit Culmina montis,
Lustrauitque oculis quicquid tenet insula magni,
Tantalidae Pelopis: praeacuto lumine vidit,
Hos ambos intra ventrosae robora quercus,
Pollucem fortem and domitorem Castora equorum.
Of their deaths we have already discoursed, they were after drowning,
translated into Stars, to whom the Nauigators of old did ordinary Sacrifice.

The end of the tenth CANTO.
Argumentum
THe Graecians Land, Prothesilaus falls
By Hectors sword, King Diomed is sent
With wise Ulysses to debate their brals,
And fetch the Spartan to her Husbands Tent:
Hellen denide: the Greeks begirt Troy walls,
But are by Hector raisd incontinent:
Troylus and Diomed in Arms contend
For Cressida, so the first battles end.
ARG. 2.
Our English Worthies, Fame and her rich Crown,
With Troyes confedred Kings, Lambda sets down
CANTO. 11.
OH can we foreign Worthies Memorize,
And our own Native Champions quite forget,
Whose fame swift Clangor has through pierst the skies,
To whom due Honor still remains in debt:
How many true victorious Peers arise
From this fair Garden, midst the Ocean set:
How many an English Knight has borne his head
As hie as those, whom Troy or Greece has bread?
2
Achilles, Ajax, Diomed, or those
Whom Homer has extold with Golden praise,
Have not done greater spoil upon their foes,
Then some that have suruiu'd even in our days,
And had I spirit but like the least of those
That writ the Grecian Acts, my pen should raise
Our British Champious, and their acts proclaim,
Above the Greeks in the high Tower of Fame.
3
What could Achilles more then British Bren, Bren.

That after many dangerous battles wun,
Fotrag'd France, Denmark, Germany, and then
Sacked Rome, and high Pernassus ouer-run,
And by the aid of his bold Englishmen,
Laid siege unto the Temple of the Sun:
Or what bold Grecian dare against Nennius stand, Nennius.

That fought with twice-foyl'd Caesar hand to hand.
4
Renowned Arthur famous in his age, Arthur.

In his round Table, and his thirteen Crowns,
Hie Romes Impetious Senate felt his rage,
and paid him homage in their purple Gowns,
His Came'lot Knights their hardiments engage,
Through all the world to purchase their renownes:
Of Noble Edgar, my dull Muse next sings, Edgar

Rowed on the Thames by eight commanded Kings.
5
Bold Edmond (Sir-nam'd Ironside) him succeeds, Edmond Ironside.

a brauer Spirit breathed not vital air,
The Bastard Williams Son, Duke Roberts deeds
ask the next place, for his attempts were rare, Robert of No, mandy surnamed
Cort-bise.

By Cort-hose many a Tyrant Panim bleeds,
By whom the Christians re-invested are:
and whilst hye Syons Towers triumphant stand,
He chosen Monarch over the holy Land.
6
Richard the first that Cordelyon hight, Richard Cordelyon. Edward long
shankes. Edward 3. Black prince invested don Pedro in Spain. John a (...)

and Edward Sirnam'd Long-shankes, without Peer,
Was never Dardan Prince or Argiue Knight,
That in their ages more admired were:
Edward the third that Conquered France by fight,
and Edward the Black Prince to England dear,
He forrag'd France, for Pedro wan all Spain,
Which after John a-Gaunt subdude again.
7
Henry the fifth, then whom the world near bread
A worthier Prince. Bedford and Talbot bold, Bedford. Talbot.

Who in their foreign Regency so sped,
That puissant France was by their powers controld,
Edward the fourth (though wantonly misled) Edward 4. Richard 3.

Wan ten set battles: The third Richard sold
His name to scandal, else his warlike merit,
Might with the rest, a Worthies name inherit.
8
The valiant Earl of Surrey often staid Earl Surrey

The Northern Enemies from filching hear: Charles Brandon.

In the eight Henry's days Charles Brandon made
England renowned, by his victorious Spear,
And those whose Woorths these late times have displaid
Howard, Gray, Norris, Sidney, Essex, Veare:
These, had they lived in aged Priams days,
Had dimmed the Greeks, and matched the Trojans praise.
9
Now to our hostile preparations, we
Must arm our Pen, the Greeks are under sail,
There is a place from Earth, Sea, Heaven, stands free,
And equally removed from them all:
In the worlds Navel, fixed where Concaues be,
And hollow-sounding Vaults through Crannies small:
Where the reports and rumors of all sounds,
Give shrill Reuerberat Echoes and rebounds.
10
Here Fame her Palace builds by wondrous skill, Fame.

Seating her self in her most lofty Tower,
Yet is her house erected on a hill,
A thousand Loope-holes are within her Bower,
A thousand doors and windows open still,
Transparant every late and early hour,
Full of Big-bellyed Vaults, and the walls such,
Of sounding Brass that rings with every tutch.
11
Whose empty womb continual murmur yields,
And iterates again each word it hears,
Within this place no toonglesse silence builds,
No solitary dumnesse spares the ears:
A whistling wind flies round about the fields,
Which shakes the trembling branches, but forbeares
All violent gusts: about this hollowed ground,
There are perpetual calmes, no Tempests found.
12
And though no silence, yet no clamors rise,
Only a whispering murmur like the Seas
Heard a far off, or when the troubled skies,
(With remote Thunder moved) soft showers appease,
The Courts are thronged with multitudes of spies,
Light giddy people tatling what they please:
Who (in and out) through every chamber pass,
Whispering sometimes what is, and what near was.
13
Infinite Currors, Purseuants, and Posts,
Ambassadors, and such as hurry news,
Heralds (such men as Traffic between Hosts)
Walk too and fro, and no man Tales eschewes,
One speaks of Wars, of Combats, and rude boasts,
Another serious talk of Peace pursues:
All as they are disposed, this man is telling
Of buying Land, that other speaks of selling.
14
Some talks of this man's Honors, that man's shames,
Others of Storms, and many a boisterous flaw,
Some men of their success and chance in games,
One what he heard, another what he saw,
Some men of Knights adventurers, some of Dames,
Others how long their suits have hung in Law:
Toies with things serious pass, grave things with bables
Lies mixed with truths, and truths discourst with Fables.
15
Numberless rumors through the Palace fly,
In every nooke they make their free intrusion,
here bashful truth does face the bold faced lie,
To fend and prove begets a mere confusion,
Whilst some th'attentiue ear with news supply,
Others report Stale things, and in conclusion,
Adds of his own, which bandied without ceasing,
From every several tongue receives increasing
16
Here you may see a dwarfe-like rumor grow,
Even in an instant to a Giants size,
Whether the Nature of the winds that blow,
Retains the power to make the tumors rise
Or whether Fame all tidings apt to know,
Gives to her train such Bombast Liueries:
Their growth is strange, whom I compare aright,
Unto the Mush-roome, statur'd in a night.
17
Here dwells credulity, rash error, fear,
Doubt, volubility, and quick belief,
There is no voice has power to pierce the ear,
But fame of brutes and rumors, Queen and chief,
Shrieks through the world: From hence the Trojans hear
The Atrides rage, King Menelaus grief:
Their expedition, and their Naual power,
Ready the threatened Enemy to deuower.
18
Their Frontier Towns that border next the waves
Are fortified, three distant leagues from Troy Tenedos subverted.

Stands Tenedos, whom with imperious braues
The Argine Flect assault, race, and destroy:
The wrathful Greek not one poor Phrygian saues,
But to their ruins all their powers employ:
This done, by general Counsel it is decreed,
Two Kings to Priam shail on Message speed.
19
Into the Hall where th'aged King then sat,
Attended with his Captains, Sons, and Peers,
And such confedered Kings as to the Fate
Of threatened Troy, brought Horsemen, Bows and Spears,
On this hie business to deliberate,
And rid their hearts from all inuasiue fears:
In, throngs Ulysses and bold Diomed,
Two Princes armed at all points save the head.
20
Here sat the King Pandrastus King Pandore, Pandrastus. Panodrus. Galior.

And the King Galior, that to Priams aid,
Brought each of them a thousand Knights and more,
Four Kings that from Tholosson waftage made,
Carras, Amasius, Nestor dreaded sore, Carras. Amasius. Nestor. Amphimac.

And stowt Amphimachus: these Kings displaid
Their warlike Ensigns, in all dreadful fights,
Bringing along five thousand valiant Knights
21
Next these seven Kings, K. Glaucus took his place, Glaucus

Three thousand bold Squires he from Lycia brought, Sarpedon.

His Son Sarpedon of the Trojan race,
In all King Priams battles bravely fought,
Next whom Eusemus sat, distant a space, Eusemus.

Who with three thousand Knights Troyes honor sought,
Lyconians all, Lyconias Realm he guided,
Since into several parted Crowns divided.
22
Two puissant Kings to make the Jury full,
Came from Larissa, these had in their train Mystor.

Knights sist^ene hundred; Mystor, whose tough scul
The Argiue Princes bruised: Capidus slain Capidus.

In battle too, about the Spartan Trull,
Never to see her Native Clyme again:
On a rich bench sast by King Priams State,
These twelve bold Kings upon the right hand sat.
23
Upon the left, from Thahory that came,
King Remus, who besides three thousand men, Remus.

Brought four great Dukes, seven Earls of Noble fame
All clad in Azure arms, well noted then;
The King of Trachy, whom some Pylex name, Pylex.

Was plac'st next him, this royal Monarch, when
He entered Troy, had in his Princely train,
Eleven hundred valiant Knights, all after slain.
24
With him Duke Achumus the Trojans aided, Achamas.

By whom Pessemus the Pannonian King Tessemus.

Was seated, him great Hector had persuaded
Unto these wars three thousand Knights to bring,
All expert Archers, with whom Stupex traded, Stupex. Fortunus Samnus Ausernumus

A valiant Duke, and in his youthful spring:
Next him sat three Boetian Dukes Fortunus,
Duke Samnus, and the bold Duke Ausernumus:
25
These led twelve hundred Knights, next whom took Boetes.

Two Brother-Kings, the bold Boetes first, Epistemus.
place,
The other Epistemus, of one race,
Both Princes, in the Realm of Burtia nursed,
They brought a thousand Knights the Greeks to chase,
Men of great spirit, and such as all things durst:
Next them was set a Giant (dreaded sore) ^hilemus.

Philemus, of the Realm of Paphlagore.
26
The Ethiopian Perseus Rauen-blacke, Perseus. Thiction.

And the King Thiclion of the selfsame hue,
With Symagon, in whom there was no lack Symagou.

Of heart or skill his foe-men to pursue:
These Kingly Moors that Priam come to back
Next to the lofty Giant sit in view,
Three thousand sunburnt knights, that bravely fought
From Aethiopia they to Phrygia brought.
27
This State was full: and lower one degree,
Another longer Bench runs cross the Hall,
Where mixed with Priams valiant sons, you see
More of these leagued Kings in order fall:
First of the rank was Hector, next him, be Hector.

Two potent Kings, Thelemus hye and tall, Thelemus.

And young Archilochus a valiant Boy: Archilocus

These with a thousand good Knights strengthen Troy.
28
Paris next them, and by his amorous side,
Two Princes reigning in Argrestes Land, Two Kings from Argrest

They brought twelve hundred Knights to see them tried,
Next these was Troylus plac'st on the left hand, Tro^lus. Deiphebus.

And Deiphebus full of warlike pride
Mixed amongst these, a King of great command:
Epistropus, that beyond Scythia came, Epistropus.

Twixt Greece and Troy his valor to proclaim.
29
He brought a thousand Knights, and a strange Beast
Half horse, half Man, two perfect shapes divided,
A Sagittary called (not dreaded least) Sagittarius.

An expert Archer, his strong shafts were guided
With wondrous aim and cunning, which increast
His dread among the Greeks (at first derided:)
Next, great Epistropus rankt by their years,
Sat Priams Bastard-sonnes, next them his Peers.
30
Next them a Prince in Jewels rich, and Gold,
That many Knights brought from Meander flood,
The barbarous Meones Duke Nastes told, Nastes.

By whom, upon a costly foot-pace stood
Tentumidas, by some (sirnam'd the Bold,) Tentumidas.

Now aged in his prime, a Soldier good:
By him Prince Pindarus aduanct his head, Pandarus. Hyrtacides.

Next him Hyrtacides in Sestos bread.
31
Adrastus, Amphius, Merops, Princes three, Adrestus. Amphius. Merops.

Are ranked then, by whom Ennonius sits,
And Chronius, under whom the Mysians be,
Pylemen the next empty place well fits, Ennonius. Chronius. Pylemen Pyrechmes.
Euphemes.

Prince over the Paphlagonian Chiualry:
Pyrechmes next, whose fiery Horses bits
The Paeons manage. Good Euphemes then
Whom the Cicintans led, all expert men.
32
Ascanius and Dius, who does guide Ascanius. Dius.

The Halizonians next in order fall,
Then Pyrous who his Thracian Soldiers tried, Pyrous. Mnemon. Pyleus.
Hypothous.

And warlike Mnemon boldest of them all:
Pyleus and Hypothous them beside,
These the Pelasgians unto battle call:
Warlike Aeneas of the Noblest race,
Next whom, the Lords and Barons take chief place.
33
Anthenor, with Polydamus his son,
The glistering Ladies keep another State
Above them all: Priams hye throne begun
To lift it self where he in glory sat,
Benches of Dukes and Earls from all sides run,
Apparel'd in rich Robes of greatest rate:
Thus was the King prepared, when the two Greeks,
Press forward to his throne with blushlesse Cheeks
34
At their approach the Lords amazed rise,
And at their bold intrusion musing stand, Ulysses and Diomeds Embassle.

Upon these two, the Kings fix all their eyes,
Prepared for some strange Novel, when his hand
Ulysses wafts for silence, and applies
His speech to Priam thus: He whose command
Ravished from Sparta, great Atrides wife,
Forfeits to Greece, his Country, Crown, and Life.
35
If thou be he whom all these Lords adore,
I summon thee in Agamemnons name,
Back to her Lord, Queen Hellen to restore,
With full amends done to the ravished Dame,
And to present thy lustful son before
The bench of Argiue Kings, to abide such shame
That he in after times to our successors,
Be made a terror to the like Transgressors.
36
Else shall the enraged Princes spoil thy Towns,
Thy Matrons in their husbands arms defloure,
Slaughter thy Sons and bury their renownes,
And with thy peoples blood the channels scour,
Of these confederate Kings ceaze all the Crowns,
When death that swallows them must thee devour:
Say, will thou to prevent this and much more,
Punnish thy son, and Hellen back restore?
37
To this the incensed King replies again,
Th'vnable Greeks (alas) are much too weak,
Wanting the power thy proud vants to maintain,
Or to make good what thou do rashly speak:
They ravished our fair Sister, whom in vain
We re-demanded, her despights to wreake:
Our Son the amorous Paris crossed the deep,
To fetch thence Hellen whom the Boy shall keep.
38
Have they not slain our Father, spoyld our City,
Pillaged our people, wives nor Matrons spared,
Eucn Babes and Infants mangled without pity,
And in their barbarous rigor all things dared,
Then in fair Hellens rape what wrong commit I,
Since not the least of these Greece has repaired:
Since whilst our Sister leads a Strumpets life,
Hellen is grac'st to be young Paris wife.
39
You shall repent: King Diomed replies,
This insolence which we will punish dearly,
By us the General of the Greeks defies:
Priam and Troy whom we will chastise severely,
Unto whose ruins seauenty Princes rise,
Whose forces shall begirt you late and early:
These words promised, the Trojans so disdain them,
That many drew their Faulchions to have slain them.
40
But ever. Honored Hector qualified
The sudden uproar, and appeased the brall,
Their passage by the multitude denide,
Hector makes free, and Vshers them through all,
Yet many proud braues past on either side
Twixt the strange Kings and them in the Palace Hall:
At their departure casting up his eye,
King Diomed by chance does Cresseid spy,
41
As she with Hecuba and Hectors wife,
Creusa and Pollixena was plac'st,
Him thought he never saw in all his life
A Lady better formed, or Sweet-lyer grac'st,
His mutinous thoughts are in themselves at strife,
To see a face so fair, an eye so cha'st:
Beauty so full of charm, with which enchanted,
He craves her name by whom he seems so danted.
42
When up starts netled Troylus; and thus says,
Her name is beauteous Cressid whom you seek,
And Troylus Mistress? to whose heavenly praise
My soul has bin devoted many a Week,
And if thou aym'st my graces thence to raise,
I challenge thee the combat valiant Greek,
He would accept it, but he needs must part,
His body goes, he leaves behind his heart.
43
The dantlesse Trojans now prepare for war,
Whilst to th'incamped host the Legate Kings
Relate King Priams answer, and how far
He stands from peace, the Grand-Duke now begins
Like a good Captain to foresee what bar
May lie twixt him and safety: with swift wings
Achilles is dispatched to cross the Scas,
With Telephus the son of Hercules.
44
Because the Messean Land where Theutram reigned Theutr^m.

Was fettile, they from thence demand supply
Of Victual for the host, but he disdaind
T'assist them, therefore him the Greeks defy:
The Kings hye blood Achilles Faulchion stained,
Theutram (alas) by him is forest to dye,
And Telephus crowned King, from whose rich Coast,
With store, and Victual he relieues the host.
45
Twelve Moons were past since first the Greeks took land,
When Duke Palamides at th'host ariues,
Whose absence murmured long, yet the command
Of the whole Army, with the Princes lives,
Are made his charge, none seeming to withstand
his principality: this Duke deriues
His birth from Naulus, and is made the head
Of the stout Greeks, in Agamemnons stead.
46
But in desaster hour, Ulysses friend,
To Agamemnon by his crafty fraud,
Both to his life and his command gave end:
He that but late the Argiue Princes awed,
And foyld the common foe, cannot defend
his own dear life, but whilst the host applaud
Atrides honor, in unhappy season,
Is forcst to perrish for suspected Treason.
47
Tenedos sacked, the Greeks insult upon it, The first battle.

And from that place made level with the plain,
The Fleet disanchors, whose proud Nauall front,
Prothesilaus proudly does maintain,
Hoysing the first Sails in the Hellespont,
A hundred Ships whose Flags and Pendants stain
The Air with various Colors, he commands,
And twice repulst, upon the Beach he Lands.
48
His ships tough ribs upon the sands he brake,
And many Greeks, some drowned, some landing, fall,
As well the boldest that the Ship forsake,
As those that keep aboard must perish all,
Only the bold King makes the Trojans quake:
Who whilst his maimed train for rescue call,
Makes good the place, till with an hundred more,
Archelaus and Prothenor man's the shore.
49
Now grows the battle hot, for the rude rout
Of the disordered Trojans madly flock
To impeach their Landing, who with courage stout
Leap on the shore, and there abide the shocke
Of the proud Foe, who murder all about,
And with rude taunts their proud Invasion mock:
But Askalus and Agabus draw near,
Two Kings, whose landed soldiers change their cheer.
50
Yet at the length into the Sea driven back,
Till Nestor seconds them with fresh supply,
and now th'astonisht Trojans suffer wrack,
Yet still make good the shores with fresh supply;
again repulst, the Greeks made good the lack
Of more armed men; Ulysses Ships pressed ny,
Whose dreaded Ensigns on the Margent spread,
Conquer the Beach, the whilst the Trojans fled.
51
King Philomenes envious of his Fame,
A pointed Spear brake on Ulysses face,
and stounded him: but when the bold King came
T'himselfe again, he quitted that disgrace:
So much did wrath his Noble thoughts inflame,
he wounded him in such a speeding place,
That had not Ihoue kept back his Weapons force,
The late victorious, had dropped down a Corse.
52
Whilst these two Kings contend, the Greeks retire,
And back into the blood-stained Sea are driven,
When Thoas with his fleet does Land desire,
Now Agamemnons Ships are all to riuen
Upon the Strond, his men half blood, half mire,
Tugge for the shore, whilst many die vnshriuen;
Next Menelaus has vnmand his Ship,
And from his Bark does stormy Ajax skip.
53
At whose approach near to the brinish brinke,
The Amazed Trojans yield him Landing free,
Beneath his ponderous Arm the strongest shrink,
Before his sword the affrighted people flee,
Their souls below the waves of Lethe drink,
Whose deeds of valor when King Perses see:
He with a band of Moors their violence stayde,
Making th'astonisht Greeks expect more aid.
54
When the great Duke Palumides discends
Upon the Continent, and in his train
A thousand Armed Knights, his Noble Friends,
Whose swords the Beach with blood of Trojans slain:
Palumides against Symagon extends
His pointed Iauelin, Symagon lies slain:
A valiant Moore, to Perses near alide,
Though strong, he by the son of Naulus did.
55
Now against the beaten Trojans rose loud cries,
Which puissant Hector hearing, from the Town,
Issues from forth the gates, and soon applies
His fortitude, where War seemed most to frown;
His armor Siluer-white, his shields devise
A Lion Gules the field, Or after known
And dreaded among the Greeks, where ere he marches
The Flowers and grass with blood of Greeks he parches
56
Prothesilaus him encounters first,
and at his Steely Beauer aims his Spear,
The King his Staff upon his Visor burst,
But from the Worthy Hector past not clear:
All that encounter him must taste the worst,
The steel-head Lance from off his steed does bear:
The dreadlesse King, who rose by great endeavor,
But Hector cleft his head quite through his Beauer. Prothesilaus slain.

57
So passes on strowing his way with Corses,
That in a while his smoking blade was feared,
Whom ere he meets he to the ground inforces,
His valor has the drooping Trojans cheared,
He without riders leaves five hundred horses,
Whose broken limbs lie on the earth besmeared:
Death Marshals him the way where ere he traces,
Pauing the Margent of the Sea with faces.
58
His courser Galathee the Noblest Steed,
That ever Knight bestrid, in the morning white,
In every bare place seems from far to bleed,
His valiant ryder shunned no dangerous fight:
He Is flak't all ore, and where no wounds indeed
Were hewed, great gashes grisly to the sight
Appear upon him, Galathee still stood
Sound, and yet stained all ore with Gracian blood.
59
Nor wonder if his white Steed were so painted,
When his sharp sword so many Rivers shed,
This day a thousand Knights beneath him fainted,
And on the verdure by his hand lie dead,
With this mortality the air is tainted,
The spacious plains with wounded Greeks are spread:
Charon the sweat wipes from his ghastly face,
And never wrought so hard in so short space.
60
Hels Judges and the Gods of Darkness wonder,
What Is now to do on earth, that such a throng
Of Ghosts whose threads the fatal Sisters sunder,
Press in such multitudes for sentence: long
The Princes of the Vaults and regions under,
Were not so troubled to judge right and wrong:
For never in one day it has befell,
So great a Sessions has bin seen in Hell.
61
Th'inuincible Dardanian Hero tired
With purple Massacre, toward night withdrew,
Horse, Arms, and Plumes the brightest morn admired
For whiteness, at his issue, purple grew,
And he returns Vermilion all: attired
In Crimson, scarce the royal Priam knew
Great Hector from the Torras where he stood,
Seeing his onset white, Retrait all blood.
62
Soon was the Noble Trojan mist in field,
For with his Myrmidons proudly attended
Achilles Lands, and that renowned shield
God Vulcan made, in which his art extended,
He vaunteth: yet the daunted Trojans yield,
Th'vnconquered shores Hector so late defended
Lie open to inuaders, whole Greece Lands,
For against the great Achilles no man stands.
63
Even to the City walls the Trojans fly,
Whom the maine host with hostile showtes pursude,
And had not Noble Troylus heard the cry,
Paris and Deiphebus where they viewed
So great effusion from a Turret hy,
They'had won the Town, the streets had bin imbrude
With Native blood, but they in have descend,
Relieve the oppressed, the City gates defend.
64
And yssuing with three thousand Knights, compel
Achilles to retrait, and when his face
Looked back from Troy ward, there was none so fell
Upon the Graectan party, but gave place:
This day Prince Diomed was seen t'excell
In Arms: him Troylus met in equal race:
They spur their Steeds that ran both swift and true,
Incountring, both their Staves to splinters flew.
65
Their Lances broake, they try their burnisht blades,
A thousand fiery stars at every rushing
Fly from their helmes, with fury each inuades
His opposite, their mutual Armors frushing,
The big-limb'd Diomed himself persuades,
Young Troylus cannot match his strength, and blushing
A beardlesse Lad should hold him so long play,
Doubles his blows and thinks to end the fray.
66
The Noble youth whom Cresseids love prouokes
To all atchieuements, beyond mortal power,
(Though young,) his lofty spirit his rival yoakes,
Who thought his infant Virtues to devour,
He doubles and re-doubles warlike strokes,
The battle lasts the best part of an hour:
But whilst upon their helmes each champion thunders
Night that deuides the host their fury sunders.
67
This Eeuen the Greeks incampe, early the Morrow, The second days battle.

They shine in armor with the rising Sun,
The Trojan Princes from their Ladies borrow
Rich favors, and withal to horseback run,
A kind of fear begot twixt joy and sorrow,
Lives in their eyes, til the dread fight be done:
To see their Champions proudly armed they joy,
Grieve to behold so huge an host fore Troy.
68
Now are both Battles pitched, Menon appears
First from the Argiue host: from Troy forth stands
Hector, who in his burnisht Beauer wears
Andromachs Glove, and now all Troy commands:
These two begin the battle with their Spears,
They broke, they toss their bright steel in their hands:
Hector soon hurles King Menon from his horse,
So passes on to prove his warlike force.
69
The two hoasts join, ruffling confusion flies
Through all Scamander field, the dying groans
Are mixed with th'applausiue Conquerors cries
Trojans and Greeks conquer and fall at ones,
Renowned Hector this day wins the pryse,
he sunders Males and Armors, flesh and bones:
His al-deuiding sword was made by charm,
No steel so wrought but shrunk beneath his arm.
70
Thus like a raging storm he rusheth still,
Over his Plume a Clowd of terror hung,
And where he rides he does on all sides kill,
His bloud-staind Faulchion spares nor old nor yung,
Tired with his horse, his Chariot Mount he will,
Now up he takes a Bow deuinely strung,
And shooting midst the Host, not one steele-head
Iat'd from his Bow but stroke a Grecian dead.
71
Him the King Menon and king Glaucion then,
Huge Thesus and Archilochus defy,
They in their squadron lead three thousand men,
But Hector in his Chariot still sits hie,
Until his Brasse-shod wheels are purpled, when
Their Naues are drowned in blood of men that die:
Charioted Hector these four Kings assail,
But his smart Steeds spring through their armed pale.
72
Menon that was too forward boue the rest,
Pursues great Hector in his lofty Carre,
A dart the Trojan quiuer'd through his breast,
King Menon bids his last farewell to war, King Menon slain.

With multitudes the Prince is ouer-prest,
And yet he kills the Greeks near and from far:
Near, with his fatal sword he cleaues their hearts,
And a far off, with his keen shafts and Darts.
73
Unto this rescue Prince Securabor,
One of King Priams Bastard sons soon came,
And Noble Margareton thirsting for
Honor, and among the Greeks to get a name,
All Priams issue cowardice abhor,
Duke Menesteus envious of their fame,
Against them comes, now clamors fill the sky,
Whilst about Hectors Chariot thousands lie.
74
Unto this hostile tumor from Troy-ward,
Three Kings with Noble Troylus the fourth man
Make their incursions: King Sampitus fared
Like a fierce Lion, King Maclaon wan
With anger, and the King that all things dared
Alcanus: against whom Menesteus ran
And bore him Nobly, yet alas too weak,
Till Thesus came the Trojan ranks to break.
75
Troylus Menesteus singles, but his Horse
Stumbled, and he enforcst on foot to fight:
Five hundred Greeks beguirt him, and enforce
The youthful Trojan (now debard from flight)
To be their prisoner; Many a liuelesse corse
Troylus first made, before compeld t'alight:
When Hector heard but word of his disgrace,
He slew on all sides till he wan the place.
76
But first Alccenus had addressed his Spear,
Against the Duke that led Prince Troylus bound,
The Steel point took him twixt his cheek and eat,
And made the Athenian Duke a dangerous wound,
Sampilus seconds him (a Steed was near)
On which they mounted Troylus from the ground:
Menesteus mad that he has lost his prise,
Pierst through the throng, and called for more supplies.
77
King Menelaus and Prothenor knowing
The Athenians voice, press that way with their powers,
But find Hyripsus and King Hapon strowing
The earth with Greeks, at which the Spartan lowers:
These four their forces join, many yet growing,
Their swords supplant: death through the Champion scowers
At whom th'Olimpian Gods amazed stand,
To see him with such quickness move his hand.
78
Anthenors son Polydamus makes on,
King Rhemus backs him with three thousand more,
Their Speare-length (through the press he had not gone)
But Celidus him from his Courser bore,
A fairer Prince then Celidus lived none,
By Venus gift he Beauties Livery wore:
Polydamus re-mounted, soon addressed,
A second course, and pierst him through the breast.
79
Which Menelaus seeing, soon assayles
Rhemus, and lays him stounded in the field,
And but that stowt Polydamas preuailes,
He Had borne him to his Tent upon his shield,
Still was not Hector Idle, Hills and Dales
His Chariot skoures, to him the mightiest yield:
For like a raging Torrent after Rain,
Where ere he comes confusion fills the plain.
80
Now was he by the men that Ajax led
Troopt in: the Salamines Thunder about him
Like Ciclopes, as if his Noble head
Were Vulcans Anuile (yet the boldest doubt him)
And seeing store of Carcass bout him spread,
Wish in their hearts to fight elsewhere without him:
For like a baited Lion at a stake,
he cuts them off, and makes the boldest qnake.
81
King Theuter somewhat rougher then the rest,
as worthy Hector kept these Dogs at bay,
Finding the Prince with two much task oppressed,
against him with his Courser makes swife way,
The brazen-headed staff glides by his breast,
and against his rib he feels the Iauelin stay:
King Theuter thou have done a Noble deed,
Thou art the first that made great Hector bleed.
82
Well was it for thee that thou staidst not long,
Those that grow next him for thy act must fall,
Like a mad Bull he fares the Greeks among,
and whom he hits, beneath his Chariot sprall,
The Prince, the common man, the weak, the strong,
The Bold, the Coward, taste confusion all:
The Sun looks pale, heaven red, the green earth blushed
To see their bones beneath his Chariot crushed.
83
Whose valor Thesus seeing, nobly spoke: Thesus.

Great Hector, I admire thee, though my Foe:
Thou art too bold, why do thou undertake,
Things beyond man, to seek thine overthrow?
I see thee breathless, wherefore do thou make
So little of thy worth, to perish so?
Fond man retire thee, and recover breath,
And being thy self, pursue the works of death.
84
Prince Hector his debility now finding,
Thanks royal Thesus, and begins to pawse,
And bout the field with his swift coursers winding,
Unto a place remote himself withdrawes,
Mean time King Menelaus the battle minding,
Wan in the dangerous conflict much applawse:
Here Celidonius valiant Moles slew:
Moles that his descent from Oreb drew.
85
By Mandon, King Cedonius lost an eye,
A Grecian Admiral, Sadellus kills,
And Aix Telamonius does defy
Prince Margareton, King Menestheus, spils
The Galls red blood, Prothenor low does lie
By Samuels Spear, renowned Hector fills
The field with wonder, he his Carre forsakes,
And Milk white Galathee again he takes.
86
At his first entrance he espies his friend
Polydamas by thirty soldiers led,
Amongst whom spurring, they themselves defend,
But scarce one man has power to guard his head,
Unto their days great Hectors sword gave end,
And freedom to Polydamas, nigh dead:
With shame and wrath, next to the battle came
King Thoas to redeem the Argiues Fame.
87
With him the King Philotas who adrest
Themselves against two of Priams Bastard Sons,
Young Cassilanus puts his Spear in rest,
And with great fury against Thoas ronnes,
He brake his staff, but Thoas sped the best,
As to their bold encounter Hector comes,
He sees his young halfe-brother he held dear,
Through-pierst (alas) by Thoas fatal Spear.
88
Hye-stomackt Hector with this object mad,
hurries through the thick prease, and there had slain
Whole thousands, for the death of that young Lad,
But his red wrath King Nestor did restrain,
For with six thousand Knights in armor clad,
he fortifies the late forsaken plain:
Against whom marched Philon, of the part of Troy,
Their battles join, each other they destroy.
89
Polydamus and Hector taking part
With Philon, aged-Nestor grows too weak,
For Cassilanus death the Greeks must smart,
They through their flanks, wings, ranks, and squadrons break
When Ajax Telamon spide what huge wreake,
The Trojan Worthy made: his men take heart,
And with King Menelaus them dispose,
To rescue Nestor, and assault their Foes.
90
Against them Aeneas with the host arriues,
And ioynes with Hector: on the Argiue side
Philoatas with three thousand soldiers strives,
all proved Greeks, whose valors had bin tried:
Aeneas and great Ajax gage their lives
To equal conflict, whom their troops divide:
Philoatas on great Hector thinks to prove him,
(In vain) he from his saddle cannot move him.
91
But him the Worthy stounded with a blow,
A flatling blow that on his Beauer glancst,
Ulysses and Humerus next in row,
With twice five thousands Knights on Hector chancst,
But Paris happened with as many more
On Hectors part, where numbers lie intrancst:
Paris a keen shaft from his Quiner drew,
Whose fatal point the King of Cipresse slew.
92
This Ciprian, Kinsman to Ulysses was,
In whose revenge the Ithacan defies
Prince Paris, who in Arch'ry did surpass,
These two in field against each other rise,
And with their mutual blood they stain the grass,
But parted by the tumult, they devise
On further massacre, near to this place,
Troylus, Ulysses meets, and wounds his face.
93
Nor escaped the Trojan wound-free, in this stower
Was Galathee beneath Prince Hector slain,
And he on foot, the Greeks with all their power
Begirt him, and assault the Prince amain;
But he whose fame above the Clouds must lower,
From all their battering strokes still guards his brain:
Till Dynadorus Priams Bastard son,
Against well-mounted Polixemus ron.
94
A strong Barb'd horse the Noble Greek bestrid,
a Worthier Master now the steed must have,
The Bastard youth against Polixemus rid,
Unhorsed him, and his Steed to Hector gave,
Who mounted, far more deeds of Honor did,
Leaving the Greeks most Coarses to ingraue:
a troop of Archers Deiphebus brings,
Who expel the Greeks with arrows, darts, and slings
95
At the first shocke the Prince King Theuter hit,
and car^'d a deep wound on his armed face,
The well steeled point his sword-proofe Beauer split,
and now th'assaulted Greeks are all in chase,
Some save themselves by swiftness, some by wit,
Young Quinteline of Priams Bastard race,
and King Moderus have surpised by force,
Thesus, and spoiled him both of arms and horse.
96
Whom when the Dardan-Worthy saw surpriz, d
He calls to mind the cur'sie to him done,
By whom nigh breathless, he was well advised,
The future eminence of war to shun,
King Thesus whom his Victors much despised,
Hector releast, and by the glorious Sun,
Swears not to leave him, till he see him sent,
With safe conduct unto his warlike Tent.
97
Here Thoas, by whom Cafsilan^ fell,
Is by great Hector beaten from his Steed,
Who razing of his Helm, to send to hell
A soul he so much hated, was soon freed
By Menesteus: who makes on, Pell-Mell
With a huge host, and rescues with all speed
Th'astonisht King: not long the day he tried,
Till Paris with an arrow pierst his side.
98
Humerus glaunst a Iauelin through the sight
Of Hectors Beauer, that it racst the skin,
The Enraged Prince on proud Humerus light
And with one stroke he cleft him to the chin,
Proceeding on, he still pursues the fight,
The Grecians loose, and now the Trojans win,
They beat them to their Tents, where some inquire
For pillage, whilst the rest the Navy fite.
99
In this pursuit Hector and Ajax meet,
Who (after interchange of hostile blows)
Part on eeuen terms, and with kind language greet,
For the two kinsmen now each other knows:
Ajax entreats the Prince to spare their Fleet,
And save theyrtents, whose flame to heauen-ward grows
Which courteous Hector swears to undertake,
For Ajax and his Aunt Hesiones sake.
100
Oh Il-stard Hector! Thou have ouerseene
A Victory, thou can not reach to more?
Had thou to him inexorable been
Thou had saved Troy, and freed the Dardan Shore:
Duke Ajax prayet has wrought Troyes fatal teene
And has the power (lost Grecia) to restore:
Oh, had thou taken the advantage of this day,
all Greece had perished, that now lives for aye.
101
But there is a Fate in all things: Hector blows
His wel-knowne horn, his Soldiers all retreat:
The Greeks to quench their Fleet themselves dispose,
and re-instaure their tents, whose spoil was great:
The next day from the camp to Priam goes
A Herald, to surcease all hostile heat:
Demanding truce till they the dead have grounded,
And both of Camp and City cured the wounded.
102
It Is granted, from the Town with Coffins com
Pale widows, winpled in their mourning weeds,
To fetch their husbands coarses cold and nom,
To whom they offer solemn Funeral deeds,
The Children fetch their Sires, and Fathers some
Their slaughtred sons, which general mourning breeds:
The Greeks likewise their fellow-mates desire,
And yield their bodies to the hallowed fire.
103
But whilst these odoriferous piles they rear,
And sacrifiz'd their friends in holy flames,
And in perfumed Boxes, prized dear,
Coffin their precious ashes, least their names
Should die in Lethe: Novel broils appear,
And Ate through the Camp discord proclames:
But now to truce our spirits we have intention,
Before twixt them we move a new dissension.
TO omit all our English worthies, whose names we have only memoriz'd, not
having room to insert their deeds in so little a compass as we have
prescribed to our History, we rather covet to touch matter more foreign, and
less familiar to some, with whom our Book must necessarily Traficke.

In the description of Fame, we have rather imitated Ovid then Virgill, his
Fama malum quo non etc.

In the description of King Priams state, we must needs imagine it great,
where so many foreign Kings assembled in his aid, in whose names we have
conferred Dares, the Trojan Dictes, the Greek Homer, Virgill, and others, who
though in some particular things (not momentarily they differ) yet they
generally concur in this, that such Princes with such populous and almost
invincible assistance succored Troy.

Telephus joined in commission with Achilles, to sail to the land of Mess, was
son to Hercules, whom Theutam (having before in the battle received his
deaths wound) voluntarily adopted his successor, for the great love that he
for many benefits formerly received) had borne to his father Hercules.

The passages of Love betwixt Troylus and Cressida, the reverent Poet Chaucer
has sufficiently discourst, to whom I wholly refer you, having past it over
with little circumstance.

The description of the first battles service, disordred and confused, we
must excuse, with this necessity, that being to remember so many, and to
employ them all, we could not do it with a directer method, then to set down
things done without order disorderly, and actions happening by accident
accidentally, and confused things, confusedly.

King Prothesilaus was the first King that perished before Troy, for though it
were foretold by Oracle, that he that first set foot a shore, should perish by
the sword of Hector, yet he fearelesse of death, first landed, and in his too
much valor made the fair Laodomeia a desolate widow.

Ate, Goddess of revenge or strife, she is called by Homer one of Ihoues
daughters, Lesio. Homerus Iliad. 7.

Presba dios thugater ate H pantas a-atai,

Ate prisca Iouis proles quae leserit omnes.

Mortales --

The Tale of Cephalus and Procris, because I have omitted in my former Cantons,
especially in that which seems to inueigh against Jealousy, I think not
altogether unnecessary to insert in this Skolia, knowing that which was ill
forgot, cannot be amiss remembered at any seasonable opportunity, Here
therefore (though out of his rank) I intend to admit him.

BEneath Hymettus hill well clothed with flowers,
A holy Well her soft springs gently powers, The Tale of Cephalns and Procris.

Where stands a Cops, in which the Wood-Nymphs shroue,
(No wood) It rather seems a slender Grove,
The humble shrubs and bushes hide the grass,
Here Laurel, Rosemary, hear Myrtle was,
Here grew thick Box, and Tam'rix, that excels,
And made a mere confusion of sweet smells:
The Triffoly, the Pine, and on this Heath
Stands many a plant that feels cool Zephirs breath.
Here the young Cephalus tired in the chase,
Vsd his repose and rest alone to embrace,
And where he sat, these words he would repeat,
Come Air, sweet Air come, cool my heat^:
Come gentle Air, I never will for sake thee,
I Will hug thee thus, and in my bosom take thee.
Some double dutious Tel-tale hapt to hear this,
And to his Jealous wife does straightway bear this.
Which Proctis hearing, and with all the Name
Of Air, (sweet Air) which he did often proclaim,
She stands confounded, and amazd with grief,
By giving this fond tale too sound belief.
And looks as do the Trees by winter nipt,
Whom Frost and cold, of fruit and leaves has stripped,
She bends like Corueile, when too rank it grows,
Or when the ripe fruits clog the Quinch-tree bows:
But when she comes to her self, she tears
Her Garments, and her eyes, her cheeks, and hears,
And then she starts, and to her feet applies her,
Then to the Woods (storke Wood) in rage she hies her.
Approaching somewhat near, her servants they
By her appointment in a Valley stay,
Whilst she alone with creeping paces steals
To take the Strumpet whom her Lord conceales.
What mean thou Procris in these Groves to hide thee?
What rage of love does to this madness guide thee?
Thou hopst the Arye he calls in all her bravery,
Will straight approach, and thou shall see their knavery,
and now again it Irkes her to be there.
For such a killing sight her heart will tear,
No truce can with her troubled thoughts dispense,
She would not now he there, nor yet be thence:
Behold the place, her jealous mind fortels,
Here do they use to meet, and no where else:
The Grass is laid, and see their true impression,
Even here they lay: I, here was their transgression.
A bodies print she saw, it was his seat,
Which makes her faint heart against her ribs to beat,
Phoebus the lofty Eastern Hill had scald,
And all moist vapors from the earth exhald:
Now in his noone-tide point he shines bright,
It was the middle hour twixt noone and night:
Behold young Cephalus draws to the place,
And with the Fountain water sprinkes his face,
Procris is hid, upon the grass he lies,
And come sweet Zephir, Come sweet Air he cries.
She sees her error now from where he stood,
Her mind returns to her, and her fresh blood,
Among the Shrubs and Briars she moves and rustles,
And the injurious boughs away she ^stles,
Intending, as he lay there to repose him,
Nimbly to run, and in her arms enclose him:
He quickly casts his eye upon the bush,
Thinking therein some savage Beast did rush,
His bow he bends, and a keen shaft he draws,
Unhappy man, what do thou? Stay and pause,
It is no brute beast thou would reaue of life;
(Oh man unhappy) thou have slain thy wife:
Oh Heaven she cries, Oh help me I am slain,
Still does thy Arrow in my wound remain:
Yet though by timelesse Fate, my bones here lie,
It glads me most, that I, no Cuck-queane dye:
Her breath (thus in the Arms she most affected,)
She breaths into the Air (before suspected)
The whilst he lifts her body from the ground,
And with his tears does wash her b^eeding wound.
The end of the eleventh CANTO.
Argumentum
A Chilles transformation: Palimed
Accusd of Treason and condemnd to die:
After long battle, honor Hector led
The boldest Argiue Champion to defy:
The Graecians storm to be so challenged,
Hector and Ajax the fierce Combat try:
A Truce, a Banquet: at this pompous feast,
Queen Hellen is invited a chief guest.
ARG. 2.
Deiademeias Love, Ulysses Spleen,
Two Princely husbands claim the Spartan Queen
CANTO. 12.
1
Far beit, I so much on Hector doat,
To rob the adverse part of any right,
I am not to the Trojans so deuoate,
(Though thence derived) that the least Argiue Knight
Should me accuse, or any passage coat,
Guilty of flattering love, or partial spite:
Lo to both parts we newtrall hate profess,
But equal love, as we can euenly guess.
2
I cannot flatter with smooth Virgils pe^
Or give Augustus more then he should have,
(With Ovid) bestow Dieties on men,
And where he hates or loves, condemn or save:
Blind Homer, how shall I excuse thee then;
That all the glory to Achilles gave,
For wit and strength, to whom have thou don wrong,
Ulysses was as wise, Ajax as strong.
3
If Hector with Achilles thou comparest,
Or rather would prefer the valiant Greek
As he whose valor and esteem was rarest,
Needs must I cast a blush upon thy cheek:
Because great Hector was thy foe, thou sparest
To speak of him, (his praise must be to seek)
And all thy skeads Achilles Fame display,
Whom Hestor has vn-horst twice in one day.
4
I must confess Achilles highly blessed,
To have a Homer in his Country borne,
Had Troy bred Homer, or had Greece possessed
Renowned Hector, no Prince should have worn
A wreath equal with his, Fame should inuest
The Trojan highest, maugre Enuies scorn:
Show me the cause else, why to his disgrace,
Hector's the worthy? he has lost the place?
5
Or how can this through Gracia be digested,
A Trojans Fame should with such Luster shine,
The general bench of Judgments has invested
The Trojan Hector one amongst the nine,
Though Homer for Achilles has protested,
Made his Fame Tower-lesse, and his birth Divine:
Yet has the world the Trojan so respected,
Achilles is put by, Hector elected.
6
And reason too, for what Achilles wan,
Was by the valor of his armed train,
When Hector fought, he buckled man to man,
And by his proper hand lie thousands slain,
But how Achilles Fame at first began,
And who first brought him to Scamander plain,
My Muse sings next, Ihoue-borne my brain inspire,
Whilst I the Fate of Thetis son inquire.
7
Old Peleus issue by the Seas fair Queen, Lycomedes K. of Scyros.

Thetis in Lycomedes Court abides
Clad like a Gitle (for such his youth was seen)
His warlike hand a Womanish distaffe guides, Achilles and Deiademeia.

A female shape obscures his Martial spleen,
In stead of Cushes a long Kirtle hides
His warlike limbs, those arms among Virgins played,
That were indeed for Vulcans armor made.
8
The careful Mother that pre-science had
By Oracle, her sonne'fore Troy should fall,
Seeks to prevent his Fate, and sends the Lad
Unto the King of Sciros (being but small)
He passes for a Girl, so was he clad,
Such was his shape, gate, gesture, look, and all:
And through the Court a general voice does run,
Of Thetis daughter, not of Thetis son.
9
The King appoints him Bedfellow to be
With fair Deiademeia his sole-Child,
So well the youthful pair in bed agree,
That when Achilles laughed, the Lady smild,
And when he honored, she would bend her knee,
With him she tasted joy, or mirch exild:
His amorous gestures were to her a Law,
To keep her actions and her looks in awe.
10
Achilles grows, so does the Lady too,
And as their years increase, so their affection,
Custom and long continuance taught them do
Pleasures to youth unknown (without direction)
Without suspicion, he may freely woo,
The opportunous night friends her complexion:
When in her Arms the Prince does rudely rush
Night Curtens her and none can see her blush.
11
So long they use this dalliance, the young Less
Feels her breasts swell, and her lanke belly grow,
(No marvel) by the Prince with child she was,
Of him that wrought Troyes fatal overthrow;
Great Neptolemus who did surpass Neptolemus called Pyrrl^.

In Martial prowess, and laid Islium low:
Whilst these things are in process, it is decreed
By Oracle, Troyes wars shall ill succeed.
12
For when th'inuasiue Greeks demand the event
That in these expeditions shall betide,
Answer is them returned, incontinent
Without Achilles, Troy shall swell with pride,
And therefore was Ulysses forthwith sent
With Diomed, to find the Prince, denide
By Thetis, unto whom was then revealed
Her sons short date, (the cause she him concealed.)
13
The crafty Greek the Mothers guile suspecting,
To Lycomedes Court posts in disguise,
His weeds of state and Princely robes rejecting,
He Pedler-like attempts the enterprise,
He bears along bright glasses, fair reflecting
Cawles, Laces, Tyres, to please young Ladies eyes:
Besides these women's toys, he bears along
A bright sword, and a Bow surpassing strong.
14
In the Court-hall he opens his fair pack,
And twenty several Ladies come to buy,
The Peddler needs not ask them what they lack,
Not one, but with some trifle gluts her eye,
Achilles (hanging at the Pedlers back,)
Spies a fair Bow, and by his Hamper lie
A rich carved sword, the strong Steele-bow he drew,
And shook the sword, by which the Prince he knew.
15
Then closing with Aeacides, persuades
The valiant youth to suite him to his kind,
His loose effeminate habit he vpbraids,
Tells him what honors are to him assind,
with what disgrace he lives among wanton Maids,
And what renown attends a valiant mind:
Which in his noble thoughts takes such Impression,
The Prince repents his former loose transgression.
16
He tears his feminine Vales, rends off his tyres,
His golden Cawle and Fillet throws aside,
and for his head, a Steele-wrought Caske desires,
That hand that did so late a spindle guide,
To brandish a bright luster'd sword aspires,
a sword that must in Hectors blood be did:
His smooth Rebata from his neck he falls,
and to the Greek, for a stiff Gorget calls.
17
From his large Limbs th'Imbrodered Roabes he shakes,
and leapes out of his Garments with proud scorn,
In stead of which, he a rich Vaunt-brace takes,
Which buckling on, grows proud to see it worn,
The wanton Guirles first wonder what he makes,
With sword and arms (his Garments having torn:)
But when he frowned, the Ladies grow affrayde
Of him so armed, with whom but late they playde.
18
But now Ulysses, Diomed, and he,
Leave (without leave,) both Sciros and the King,
( Deiademeia most bewailde of thee)
Whoseyssue in thy Womb thou feelst to spring.
They pierce through Greece, whom when the Princes see,
To their arrive, they Oades and Cantons sing:
Praising their Gods, that have Achilles found,
Whose hand must lay Troy leauell with the ground.
19
This Thetis hearing, that her royal son
had left his secure habit of a Woman,
and by Ulysses to the wars was won,
She for his safety does her wits still sommon,
To Lemnian Vulcan she does post-hastronne,
Whose art in forging arms she knew not common:
at her be-heast, he for her Son did yield,
a Speere-proofe-armour, and a Globe-like Shield.
20
What can a Mothers care against Fare prevail?
Not Vulcans Armor can defend his life,
When th'vnauoyded destinies assail
against the Sisters bootlesse we make strife,
Mortal prevention then of force must fail,
In vain then have thou labored ( Peleus wife)
To guirt his body in a steely wall,
Since thy Achilles must by Paris fall.
21
No sooner was he borne, but the fair Queen
Plunged him into the Sea, all save the heel,
By which she held him fast, that which was seen
Beueath the waves, was wound-free against Steel,
Had she but drowned her hand, the Prince had been
Sword-proofe even there, her niceness would not feel
The coldness of the waves, therefore that part
Was left unarmed, for Paris poisoned Dart.
22
Who therefore would against the Fates contend,
By whom our elementall parts are swayde,
Since every thing that's borne must have his end,
and Nature still decays what she has made,
It Is Heaven, not Earth, that can our lives defend,
The high powers must in all things be obayd:
But leave the fayre-foot Thet is, and proceed
To what the Camp has against Troy decreed.
23
By this great discords monges the Gracians fall,
Twixt Duke Palamides, and Mecenes King,
But no man knows the birth of this great brall,
Or from what Fountain these dissentions spring,
Achilles thinks his warlike meed too small,
He will not fight: not Diomedes bring
His Men to battle, while their Sovereign head,
Is Nawlus son, the general Palamed.
24
Whom some affirm, the amorous Paris slew,
In even Encounter of opposed hate,
But others say, against him Ulysses drew
Such points of Treason, as concerned his fate,
About Palamides strange rumors flew,
Twixt whom and great Atrides fell debate
About the Sovereign sway, enuies fire nursed
Long in their bosoms, into flashes burst,
25
The King of Ithaca married but newly
Unto the chastest Queen that has been crowned, Ulysses and Palamides.

When all the Grectan Kings appointed duly,
To make their meeting, and assemble round,
Gave out he was turned Frantique, but not truly;
Which craft of his, the Son of Nawlus found:
For coming where Ulysses Plowd the Sand,
and steered the crooked Rafter with his hand.
26
Palumides just in the Mad-mans way,
Laid young Telemachus his first borne Son,
Which made the Greek his yoaked teeme to stay,
and where his Issuelay, the place to shon,
Palumides dilcouers his delay,
Finds that his Lunacy by craft was don:
That whilst the Gracians were with Troy at strife,
He might at home sleep with his constant wife.
27
In ill time did the Son of Nawlus this,
The vengfull King roused from so fair a Bride,
who by this means now quite abandoned is,
Does in his bosom spleen and rankor hide,
and for the loss of every amorous kiss,
Threatens a wide wound in the Princes side:
Oh treacherous Greek! to want thy wife in Bed,
Mustat Troyes siedge cost the great Generals head.
28
Arnea was Sole-Daughter to the King
Icarius and fair peribea his wife, Peribea daughter to Nais.

who feels a young Babe in her Womb to spring,
The Father when he knew The Infant had life,
after conception: doubting some strange thing, Oracle. Femine^ Peribea d^s
Peribeap^dorem fort ^ere.

To Delphos hyes, where answers then were ryfe;
When th'Oracle thus spoke, the princely Dame
Shall child one full of Honor, full of Shame.
29
A beauteous Maid the troubled Mother bears,
The Father misinterprets Phoebus mind,
And to avoid her shame his future fears
Commits her to the rage of Seas and Wind,
The Birds that bred of Meleagers tears, Heredotus lib. de perse and Andromeda.

Called Meleagrides (by Nature kind:)
With their broad wings about the Cock-boat houer,
And from all storms the beauteous Infant cover.
30
And having nourisht her for a certain space,
Into the selfsame Port her Bark they drive,
Where the sad King without paternall grace,
First launcht it forth, and finding her alive
Circled with Birds of Meleagers race,
Their melting hearts against their furies strive: Penelopes Greece sig. A brood
of Indian hens.

They take the young Arnea from the Sea,
And call her of those Birds Penelope.
31
In beauty, stature, and in wit she grows,
But when her Father finds her apt to marry,
Fearing the Oracle, whom still he knows
Sooth in his words, persuades the dame to tarry,
A safer course to keep her chaste, he chose,
(Virginiti's a heavy load to carry:)
And to devise to have her nobly sped,
At a high rate he sets her Maidenhead.
32
When all the Grecian Princes sought her grace,
And lay their Crowns and Scepters at her feet,
Icarius leads them to a Martial race,
where the young Kings in hot encounter meet,
Above them all, Ulysses won chief place,
The shamefast Queen must her new Husband greet:
The bashful modesty of this chaste Dame,
The earefull Father did misconster: shame.
33
For woman-hood this Lady had no Peer, (...) in Chrisilla.

witness her many Suitors in the time
Her Husband absent was, some twice ten year,
who though much wooed (and in her youthful prime)
Yet in their force or fair means could appear,
Not the least taynt of any amorous crime:
Though many Suitors through her doors intruded,
They by her Bow and Web were all deluded.
33
Whether Ulysses breast does malice shrowde,
And being at full groath, now out it must;
Whether his love to Agamemnon vowde,
Bred in the Nawlian Prince some great distrust;
Or whether great Palamides grew proud,
And in the Balance of his awe unjust:
But the great Duke unto the Bar he brings,
And there arraignes him by a Bench of Kings.
34
Unto this royal Sessions men are brought,
That swear Palamides would Greece betray,
And that King Priam had by Factors wrought,
To make the Argiue Camp the Troyans pray,
The Generals private Tent is forthwith sought,
Where Bags of Troyan Coin conceiled lay:
This evidence condems the Prince (betrayed)
For there that Gold before Ulysses laid.
35
And Agamemnon is again restord,
With whose election the late Truce expires,
The maimd are cured, the victors are adored,
The bodies slain, receive the funeral fires, The third battle.

The Obits on both sides are full deplord,
And either party the fair field desires:
The great Atrides Martials his fair host,
Who shine in Steel by the Sygean Coast.
36
Upon the adverse party, Hector leads
His m^n to battle, flanct with sleeves and wings,
His nimble Horsemen forage round the Meads,
The maine well-fen'st with Skirts of Shafts and Slings,
In forehead of the battle Hector treads,
This day the General over thirty Kings:
The charge is given, armed knights meet breast to breast
Striking bright stars out of each others Crest.
37
The doughty Greeks after their long tru'st ease,
Are full of breath and vigor, they fight well,
The Troyans that but late drove to the seas
The scattred Camp, think likewise to excel,
Even Ballan'st is the field, as the Scales please
who Victors be, who vanquished none can tell?
On both sides some are conquered, some subdue,
And as the day increast, the conflict grew.
38
Broad breasted Diomed against Paris rides,
and lifts him from his Saddle with his Spear,
The Prince, the Buttockes of his Horse bestrydes,
And hardly can the Troyan keep him there,
Whilst Diomed his quick remove derides
Unshaken, from the Prince he passes clear:
Spurring from troop to troop, making intrusion,
Where the hot fight was grown to most confusion.
39
Now in his Chariot stands Achilles hy,
And with his Spear before him, squadrons strowes,
Great Hectors puissance he longs to try,
Or some that's able to withstand his blows,
And whilst whole troops before his Chariot fly,
The raynes upon his steedes white neck he throws:
Calling for Hector: Hector, fore him stood,
His Chariot-steedes caparison'd in blood.
40
To whom Aeacides, what ere thou be
That thus confronst me like the God of war?
Know it is Achilles must thy life set free,
And tumble thee from thy triumphant Carre:
This said, a pointed Iauelin he lets flee,
Which Hector at his loose perceived to jar,
And took upon his Targe: the Dart he cast,
Pierst nine Steel folds, and in the tenth stuck fast.
41
Helme-graced Hector started at this blow,
And aemulous of great Achilles Fame,
Charged in his hand another dart to throw,
But first he says: Inquir'st thou Hectors name?
Behold him here, see thy eternal foe,
Hector thou seek'st, and lo I am the same:
His active arm his language does pursue,
For with his latest word his Iauelen flew.
42
Well was it his Orbicular Targe was strong,
Which Vulcan by divine composure made,
Else had it stretched the warlike Greek along,
It hit against the Bosse, and there it stayde,
But with the force it brake the mighty thong
In which his massy shield about him plaide:
The affrighted Palfreyes with so great a stroke
Startle aside, and the proud Curb revoke.
43
Now when Achilles rousde himself, and saw
Illustrate Hector in his Chariot stand,
Himself so basely, his hot Steedes withdraw,
As if he meant to charge some other band,
Thinks in himself it is too great a flaw
To his clear mettald fame, and with his hand
Wastes to Imperious Hector from a-far,
To Abide a second deadly shocke of war.
44
Th'vndaunted Hero, who already wonders,
The brauing Greek so quickly should retire,
And what strange fate their Brasse-bard chariots sunders,
Since both so ardently the fight desire,
Expects Achilles, who against him thunders,
Whilst from the Flints his armed wheels beat fire:
Now the two Chariot-driuers prove their might,
The Prince with Prince, Horses with Horses fight.
45
This six-fold Combat has not lasted long,
When Archeptolemnus that guides the raines Archeptolemnus Hectors Charioter.
Antomedon Achilles Charioter.

Of Hectors Coach-Steedes, thinking them more strong
Then those whom rough Antomedon constraines,
Lashes his fiery Palphreyes, hot and young,
Expert Antomedon his skill disdaines:
Yerkes his proud horse, whose fiersenesse he dares trust
Till their white foaming mouths snowed all the dust.
46
The two stern Champions mounted in their Carres,
Confront each other with their armed Staves,
Whose points on eithers Vaunt-brace print deep scarres,
Sometimes they flourish them, with idle braues
Dart them sometimes (like Knights well seen inwarr,)
But when they join, they Combat with their Glaues:
Sometimes they grapple, sometimes they retire,
And at their meeting make their Helmes all fire.
47
The grim Aeacides mad in his mind,
The warlike Troyan should against him stand,
Inradg'd, his teeth against his teeth does grind,
And beats his Arm'd-breast with his Gauntlet hand,
About him through the field does Hector wind,
His fayre-maynde Coursers have so well been manned:
That to retreat, or to assault the foe,
He at his will can check, or make them go.
48
Antomedon has taught his Steeds like skill,
For traversing, he likewise takes the field,
His Iades are countermaunded by his will,
For with the Curb they both rebel and yield,
Their Milky foame upon their breasts they spill,
Being parted thus: great Hector vaunts his Shield:
Achilles his: again their Coursers meet,
And from the Earth beat Thunder with their feet.
49
In this rude Iustle is Achilles bruised,
His high plumde Helm close to his Scull is batterd
And he within his Chariot sits diffusde,
His Sword, his shield, his Darts about him scatterd,
Antomedon retraites, to have excusde
His second shocke: and over the plains he clatterd:
his barbed teeme over thousand Coarses flies,
In whose Red-blood, his Chariot Naues he Dies.
50
Great Hector scorns pursuit, nor takes he breath,
But falls upon the next Greek that he finds,
And prints on him the bloody stamp of death,
The long imprisoned soul his Sword vnbinds,
Mean time Achilles roused, abroad surveith
For Hector, th'obiect of all Noble minds:
But when he found himself from Hector straid,
The Prince does base Antomedon vpbraid.
51
Who falling prostrate, sooths Achilles thus,
Let not on me your deadly hate be grounded,
Not I from him, but Archeptolemus
Made way from me, for sure great Hectors wounded?
With you retired the son of Priamus
On equal points: our rich-main'd Steeds have bounded:
Over these plains great Hector wel-nie dead,
By great Achilles, is to Troy-ward sped.
52
This calmes the wrathful Greek who else had sought
His opposite amidst the slaughtering troops,
Disioynd from him the enraged elsewhere fought,
And where he reares his hand that Squadron stoopes,
His armed Chariot, midst their Phalany wrought
Horrid effusion, Troyes proud faction droopes
Beneath Achilles arm, nor can it yield,
(Save Hector) one to stand him in the field.
53
The Archduke Agamemnon with his spear
Encountered King Pandolus, till both bled
King Thelamon pressed to Sarpedon near,
And with his blade he raught him on the head,
By their rude force they both unhorsed were,
Against Eurialus King Thesus sped,
Neither escape wound-free; Carras bare him well,
Against Scenetus, till from their Steeds both fell.
54
King Philomenes made An^henor fly,
King Rhemus with the King Philotas ran,
Before Ulysses does Arastus lie,
Ajax this day has slaughterd many a man,
King Priams Bastard sons themselves apply
In many a skirmish since the charge began:
Young Deiphebus and Aeneas stand
Against Hupon, and the three-ag'd Nestors band.
55
Troylus and Diomed fiercely assail,
And bravely beat each other from their steeds,
Both resku'd by the prease, else without fail
There had bin fixed the period of their deeds,
Re-mounted Diomed breaks through the pale
Of his armed foes, and to his horse proceeds:
So Troylus hewes his passage through the rings
Of harnest foes, and to his Steed he springs.
56
Paris and Menelaus once more meet,
And bring unto the battle fresh supplies,
With thundering strokes upon their Helmes they greet,
Bretes the Admiral Hector defies:
Bretes that did command their blacke-stem'd Fleet,
Against him does Priamides arise,
And with such violent rage upon him sped,
That with one blow he cleft his Helme-deckt head.
57
The Admiral thus dead, Hector desires
The goodly Steed, from whom the Greek was feld,
Which (as for deeds of honor he inquires)
The King Archilochus by chance beheld,
Who seeing Bretes dead, the wound admires,
His face looked pale, his heart with anger sweld:
And with his sword he couets to make bleed
The Trojan Prince, who still pursues the Steed.
58
Who storming to be troubled in the chase,
Against the King Archilochus returns,
Enraged Mars is figured in his face,
And in his looks the eye of Gorgons burns,
The Greeks blunt sword can scarce his Helmet race,
So weak a foe (inflamed Hector) scorns:
Upon his Crest his Faulchion he lets fall,
And cleaues the Greek, helm, body, arms and all.
59
The emulous son of Thetis, crossed by chance
The black goar'd field, and came to view this blow,
And mad in mind, against him charged his Lance,
In hope the towering Prince to overthrow,
Him Thoas seconds, and does proudly'aduance
His reeking sword, late crimsoned in the foe,
Both with remorflesse blows; the Prince offend,
And his bruisd Shield about his arm they bend.
60
Had not his helmet been of metal pure,
With Axes they had hewed it from his head,
But he that made it was an Arts-man sure,
Else had his brains bin on his harness spread,
Nor had he long bin able to endure
Such tedious battry, had not Fortune led
Paris, Aeneas, Troylus and the rest,
To rescue valiant Hector, thus oppressed.
61
At their approach the Achive bands retire,
Whom to their Pallisadoes they pursue,
By this, in heaven ten thousand Lamps of fire
Shine through the air, and now both Hoasts withdrew,
The re-assembled Greeks Hector admire,
And among themselves into sad counsel grew:
Since not by force of Arms, by what sly train,
The neuer-daunted Worthy may be slain.
62
More honored Hector, in his royal brain
Reuolues on milder thoughts, how blood to save:
It pitties him to see so many slain,
And come to such a general timelesse grave:
Then, that no more red blood may Symois stain,
And change the color of her silver wave,
He by a general challenge will devise,
For thousands safeties, one to Sacrifice.
63
Against all Greece he will flyng his hostile gage,
And to a single Fight their Princes dare,
That two bold Champions may the combat wage,
And in their mutual Fury, thousands spare,
Mean time, black night, from th'vniuersall Stage
Of Earth, is cha'st and driven: Now all prepare
For the early Field, and with Apollo rise,
To shine in Armor by his rhadiant eyes.
64
The Princes to the place where Hector lay
Throng in their Arms, and his command attend,
After they had took and given the time of day,
with him they to the aged King descend,
Before whom Hector briefly does display
his purpost challenge, which they all commend,
For well his Father and his Brothers know,
Hector has power t'incounter any foe.
65
The Sun, up the steep Eastern hills clymes fast,
Th'embattaild Greeks upon the plains appear,
To them the faire-rankt Trojans march in have,
Within the reach of Hectors armed spear:
Both Hoasts attend the charge: when vnagast
The Prince first wafts, that all the Campemay may hear,
Then leaning on his Iauelin, makes this boast,
Even in the face of their assembled host.
66
You curled Greeks, that have unpeopled quite Hectors challenge.

Threescore vast Kingdoms of their ablest men,
To throng our fields with numbers infinite,
All hopeless of their safe return again:
Among these sixty Kings that shine so bright
In burnisht Steel, upon this sanguine Fen:
Can you select one boulder then the rest,
T'encounter armed Hector, Creast to Creast?
67
Or if your Princes be too weak a number,
Can all those threescore Climats yield one hand,
Amidst this world that coms our Realm to cumber,
That dares between these hoasts against Hector stand?
Or do you all fear deaths eternal slumber?
As well your Kings. as those of common band,
That with a brave, breathed in so many ears,
No soul (more valiant then the rest) appears.
68
If any of these Princes prove so free
His prodigal life against ours to engage,
Know by exposing his, whole thousands be
Saved from the spoil of wars infernal rage:
Oh, let me then that thrifty Champion see,
That will spare Grecian blood, with him ^wage wage
Equal contention: with my lives expense,
I will maintain the Trojans eminence.
69
A Prince shall meet that Prince: as near allide
To thundering Ihoue as he that's best degreed,
If in his warlike Chariot he will ride,
I in my Chariot will con^tont his speed,
March me these four white Coursers Greece has tried,
These fair Andromache does mornely feed:
With her white hand with bread of purest wheat,
And waters them with Wine still when they eat.
70
Xanthus, Podargus, Lampus, Aethon dear, Hectors steeds

To Hector, you my armed Coach shall draw,
And in this fierce exposure shall appear,
Before the best Steeds that the Sun ere saw,
But all Greece cannot match your swift Carrere,
Not Diomedes Steeds that fed on r^w
And mangled limbs, that in their Mangers bleed,
Can equal you in courage or in speed.
71
Therefore I Will cease that odds, and once again
Leaving the Kings to common men I turn,
Among such clusters growing on this plain,
In no warm breast does so much valor burn,
But shall so many shewers of blood still rain
On Symois bank: so many widows mourn
For their slain Lords, so many Children cry
For their poor Fathers that here slaughtred die.
72
If not for Love of honor, in despair
Methinkes some one our puissance should accost,
For no^ two souls that here assembled are,
Shall escape the ^y of our Trojan host,
Death and devouring ruin shall not spare
One, of your infinites, you are ingrost
All on destructions File, then let some Greek
(Despairing life,) a death with honor seek.
73
Yields our besieged Town a Nobler spirit
Then sixty assembled Kingdoms can produce?
That none dares enterpose his hostile merit,
But all put off this combat with excuse,
Among such infinites will none inherit
A name with us? Fears Greece our hand shall sluice
Their Universal blood? That fear can slave
So many Legions with one Hectors brave?
74
I beg it of you Greeks, let some forth stand
To try what puissancelyes in Hectors sword,
If I be foiled by his all-daring hand,
The Spartan Hellen shall be soon restord,
And all the spoils brought from the fertile Land
Of Cythara, made good, and he adored
With these ennobled arms, the sword and crest
Of Hector, Honors more then all the rest.
75
If I subdue your Champion: Greece in peace
Shall ease our burdened earth of this huge weight,
Hostility between our hoasts shall cease,
You with your men and arms your ships shall freight,
And from our bloud-stain'd soil free this large prease,
So shall illustrate Hector reach his height:
When th'Vniuersall world has understood,
Hector gagged his, to save his Cities blood.
76
Oh, let it not in after times be said,
Twice thirty kingdoms could not one man find,
Prince, Knight, or Swain, durst equally invade,
A Trojan Prince in Arms, and height of mind,
Nor let succeeding time the Greeks vpbraide,
To hear such lofty spirits so soon declinde:
Behold, here stand I to abide the rage
Of his armed hand, that dares but touch our gage.
77
These words thus breathed, a general showt is given
Through all the Tr^n army, which aspires
And strikes against the Marble floores of heaven,
Where fixed are ten thousand sparkling fires,
The heart of whole Greece is asunder riuen,
Rude tumult springes out of their strange desires:
A confusde murmur flies along the shore,
Which to the Tr^yans ears, the calm winds boar.
78
The ^ager Soldiers mutiny: Some say,
Oh would the Kings and Dukes were not in place,
Our Darts through Hectors Curace should make way,
But common-men must not the Peers disgrace,
The rage-burnt Kings their furies cannot stay,
They fix their fyr'd eyes in each others face:
Yet none presums the Gaunlet up to take,
When thus the younger of the Atrides spoke.
79
Is it my lot all Grecia to excuse?
Greece, that far from these powers has congregated?
Shall Pesant cowardice the Camp abuse,
Whilst Menelaus lives a King instated?
It shall not: what these Princes all refuse,
I will take up, the cause shall be debated
Twixt me and Hector, for the general host,
(And reason) since the cause concerns me most.
80
With that he ceasde the gage, when his great Brother
Blaming his rashness, makes him let it fall,
And now the warlike Kings eying each other,
The Spartans words moved fury in them all,
Their shame and rage they can no longer smother,
About the Gauntlet they begin new brall:
Toward the ground nine royal Princes be^d,
And for great Hectors gage at once contend.
81
The Archduke first: then great Andremons Son,
Thoas, King Diomed, King Idomen,
Ajax the strong, surnamed Telamon,
Ajax Oleus: Eriphilus, and then
The warlike Ithacyan, that always won
The praise for eloquence, boue other men:
Ulysses: King Meriones, all these
Stoop to the earth, and would the gauntlet cease.
82
To Appease their wrath, thus Nestor does devise
Three several Lots into some Helm to throw,
And that bold Prince whose hand extracts the prize
Between the Armies to assault the foe,
The Lots are made, and all with ardent eyes,
Into the Generals Caske iniect them so:
Achilles was not there, till word was sent
Whose the Lot was (that day he kept his Tent.)
83
The soldiers that had proved great Hectors might,
Pray to the Gods the Combats chance may fall
To Ajax Telamon, that he may fight
With Hector, for the Greeks in general,
If not on warlike Ajax, it may light
On warlike Diomed, broad set, and tall:
Or if not these, yet to appease his rage,
Great Agamemnon may the battle wage.
84
The Heralds from the generals Helmet drew
The first Inscription, which being known, was laid
At Ajax foot, the Prince the Paper knew,
Glad of his Lot (as all the soldiers praid)
The Kings retired, only stern Ajax grew
Near to Dardanian Hector, naught dismayed;
Armed at all points, he struts upon the plain,
Like angry Mars, after an army slain.
85
His shape was huge, his presence full of fear,
An angry Tempest sat upon his brow,
A Sanguine Plume does from his Helm appear,
Which double arms his back, and seems to bow
Beneath his Bases: armed with such a Spear
His right hand was, that none can disallow:
Athwart his breast a purple Bawdricke fell,
Bearing a sword, which many had sent to hell.
86
The scabberd Crimson Velvet, richly embost
And chap't with Gold: upon the hilt was grau'd
The battle of the Centaures who were lost
In that fierce war, and whom the conflict saved,
This swotd was aged Telamons and cost
A Cities prize, the bright Blade had bin lau'd
In many bosoms, many Princes bloods,
The handle was stuck round with Golden stoods.
87
The Pummell wayde a Talent, rarely wrought The combat twixt Archelous and
Hercules.

With Artfull Modules, on that curious round,
Grim Achelous with Alcides fought,
And there in all his Proteus shapes was found,
Thither the prize fair Deyaneyr was brought
And placst aloft; beneath her, those that sound
Unto the dreadful charge, with Clarious shrill,
Sit with swollen cheeks their lofty pipes to fill.
88
Such Art th'inchacer showed, to mock the eye,
That some would think their Reeds did Music yield:
There sat the King her Father Throned on hye,
With him his Peers, and round about the field
Th'vnruly multitude still pressing nigh
The bounded lists, to see their Champions weild
Their dreadful Arms, and who the prise can win,
One with a Club armed, and a Lions skin.
89
The other with his God-hood and his power,
To change himself to shapes of strange disguise,
Sometimes he seems a Dragon, to devour
His rival Prince, who does his Art despise,
For on his head his Club falls like a Tower,
Next like a fire into his face he flies:
Ali which the Noble Champion cannot tame,
For with a Club he straight beats out the Flame.
90
Then like a grim mad-Bull the halfe-God raues,
And with his horns Alcides thinks to gore,
But he contemning such inchaunted braues
Flies to his head, and with his rude hands tore
One horn quite off (at this the Workman grieves)
The conquered Bull in falling seems to rore:
Four Nimphs descend from a fair sacred hill,
And this rich horn with Flowers and fruits they fill.
91
Which of the horn of plenty still bears name,
This and much more the hye-pris'd Pummell bears
A finer tempered blade, or of more fame Cornucopia.

By his proud side no Princely soldier wears:
With this armed Ajax to the combat came,
And singly to the Dardan Prince appears:
On his left arm a ponderous Targe he bare,
Quilted with seven Oxe-hides all Tan'd with hair.
92
Tycheus was the Currier drost those hides,
Best of his trade that dwelt on Hyla then,
Accootred thus, strong Atax with huge strides
Stalks in the field before the best of m^n,
And fixing his bold foot, boldly h'abides
Con^onting him: the Argiue army when
They saw the Salamine Prince bear him so proud,
Their souls reioyc'st, their hearts his lot allowd.
93
Priamides that never was affraide,
Of ought (save fear) his Combattant thus greets,
Oh thou whose presence to my soul is made
More pleasing then the most delicious sweets!
Let me partake his name, who vndismaide
In such fair equipage great Hector greets:
For since mine eye first knew Apollos light,
I never saw a more accomplished Knight.
94
Nor one whose presence better pleased mine eye,
(Although my foe) I Will give thee all thy dew,
If courage suite, by shape I can ^spy
No blemish in thee; either let me view
Thy open Helm, or else thy name discry,
When stormy Ajax up his Beauer drew,
And thus reply'de: The Helmet I had on,
Obscured the face of Ajax Telamon.
95
And Coozin Hector, know I am the least
Of many that our spacious camp contains,
Who to thy fury dare oppose their Crest,
And on even language charge thee on these plains,
We come to fight, not brall, then do thy best,
The strongest hate that in thy bosom reigns
Power on my Shield, destruction be my share,
If with my Sword or Spear, I Hector spare.
96
Gramercies Cooze, the Troyan Hero spoke,
Thou love me best, to lay it soundly on,
These noble thoughts thy mixed birth did take
From us of Troy, and not from Telamon:
Our Dardan blood thou in thy arm do shake,
But when thou fear: thy Mothers heat is gone:
And only that remains to chill thy heart
Which Troy disclaymes, and yields Greece as her part.
97
And would to Ihoue I knew where that blood ran,
Unto those Veins I would direct my Spear,
And those in which our Kindred first began,
My hate should spare, as blood to Hector dear:
Come Noble Ajax, bear thee like a man,
And one of Hectors Kinsmen, scorning fear:
(Fear) is a word in Troy not understood,
A banished exile from all Priams blood.
98
More, I could wish that I might prove my rage
On some, whose vein no Troyan moisture guides,
Thetis armed Son, whose heat we must assuage,
Tetydes, or the Elder of the Atrides,
Save these lives, none can equal conflict wage
With Hector: but behold, our fury rides
On Horrors wings, our blood is up and hye,
Then guard thee Cooze, my Iauelin now must fly.
99
His words and spear together cleave the air, The Combat betwixt Ajax and
Achilles.

The Golden-headed-staffe as lightning flew,
And like the swiftest Curror makes repair
Whether it was sent, and does his message true,
Ajax huge shield has interposed the bare,
Which Hectors agitagious still pursue:
Through six tough hydes, it pier'st without respect,
But the sharp point upon the seventh was checked.
100
Ajax then shakes his Iauelin, forth it flies,
And through the Plates of Hectors Target pierces,
The toughest Metal that the Anuile tryes,
Must at his force relent: a thousand hierces
His rage has filled, and now the Prince applies
His Universal power, f^ry dispierces
Through all his veins, which to one force united,
No wonder, Hector was so well requited.
101
The Combat is begun, which to descry,
To their full virtues does surpass my skill,
Their blows so swift are, they deceive the eye,
The least of thousands are of power to kill,
At aduantagious places they soon spy,
Both seas and shores with their loud strokes sound shrill:
Were never heard such blows, so sound, so thick,
Or seen such Wards, so cunning, and so quick.
102
Such that save Hector and blunt Ajax, none
On Earth could equal, then much less exceed
These two Heroicke spirits, spent and gone,
To rival them, no age the like can breed;
Nor marvel though these two excelled alone,
They being both derived from God-like seed:
In whom The Imperial Dietyes contended,
In two such men, to have two Hoasts defended.
103
Infinite Charges pass from either side,
From either part their nimble Iauelins sing,
Both fix their bold feet, and such storms abide
As with their force tempestuous fury bring,
Even till their Noble bloods the Verdure Did,
with Ecchoing rage, their vaulted Helmets ring:
Whose deafning Clangor from the field rebowne,
Through the best Arches of Troyes Marble Town.
104
Their spears being shiuered in the empty air,
The Truncheons swelling from their hands they take,
with interchange of heat, they madly fare,
Till the tough Oak even to their Gauntlets brake,
And now their hands vnseruiceably bare,
For their bright Swords, their cracked staves they forsake,
Behold their wrestling Steeles contend on hye,
And ^ug for honor in the empty sky.
105
With lightning such as Ihoues Incensements breed,
Swifter then thought, or sight, their furies meet;
Both seeming doubly armed with such quick speed,
Their bright swords guard them round, from head to feet,
Their trusty Armours stand them much in steed,
For with such wounding strokes their Caskes they greet,
So full of horror, that both armies wonder,
how Earth-bred men, should make such Iouiall thunder.
106
The invincible Dardanian with one stroke,
Raught Ajax Beauer, and vnplum'd his head,
The Steely Claspe (deuinely wrought) it broake,
Which in the Salmin Duke stern fury bred,
Who striving now the Dardan Prince to yoke,
His spleen and powerful Sword together sped,
The point to Hectors breasted Armor flew,
And from his Bulk Vermillion drops it drew.
107
The Trojan grows inflamed, the Argiue proud
To see his bright Skeyne in such blood Imbrude,
Th'Inuaders showte, and lift their cries aloud,
To see their Champion with such power indude,
For this (great Hector) in his Soul has vowde
Sudden revenge, he grows more fierce and rude:
His Sword plyde Ajax Helm, yet shining bright,
As Cyclops hammers on their Anuiles light.
108
So well it was tempered, and his strength so hy,
That his tough mettal'd Blade in pieces flew,
At selfsame instant Ajax began apply
His trusty steel, and close to Hector grew,
But as he thus pronoun'st (now Hector die)
And heaues his arm aloft to make it true,
his Sword upon his Caske fell as he spoke,
And with the force close by the handle brake.
109
The Champions both disarmed save their shields,
First Hector with his eye does round inquire,
And finds a scattered Rock left in the fields,
Never till then removed, now all on fire,
To avenge his wonnd, what no man else could weild,
(His mind boue Mortal puisance gins t'aspyre:)
His puisant arm aduanceth at the last,
And the huge Mass he toward Ajax cast.
110
He takes it on his shield, but with the power
Of his comparelesse strength, the seven tough Hides
were all to crushed and bruisd, he thinks some Tower
Of arched stone from his high structure slides
Him to intombe alive, and to devour,
Down drops his Targe to earth, and he abides
Asto^sht for a space, at length his eye
Glan'st on a young tall Oak that grew fast by.
111
Whose sinnowy strings with shaking to and fro,
He soon vnloos'd, and by the Earth up tears,
And wauing boue his Helmet, with one blow
seeks to give end to all the Dardans fears,
should it fall steady, he should lie full low,
The threatening Oak still in the air appears:
Menacing veng^ance, but before it light,
Here breath my Muse, and cheer thy traueld sprite.
Achilles his concealment ofhis sex in the Court of Lycomedes: De Art Aman^.
1.
Ovid thus writes.

NOw from another World does sail with joy,
A welcome Daughter to the King of Troy,
The whilst the Graecians are already come, Achilles and D^a.

(moved with that general wrong against ^slium:)
Achilles in a Smock, his Sex does smother,
and lays the blame upon his careful mother,
What make thou great Achilles, teazing Woo^,
When Pallas in a Helm should claspe thy Scull?
What does these fingers with fine threads of Gold?
Which were more fit a Warlike Shield to hold.
Why should that right hand, Rock or Tow contain,
By which the Tro^n Hector must be slain?
Cast off thy loose vailes, and thy Armor take,
And in thy hand the Spear of Pelias shake.
Thus Lady-like he with a Lady lay,
Till what he was, her belly must bewray,
Yet was she forced (so should we all believe)
Not to be forced so, now her heart would grieve:
When he should rise from her, still would she cry,
(For he had armed him, and his Rooke laid by)
And with a soft voice speak: Achilles stay,
It is too soon to rise, lie down I pray,
And then the man that forced her, she would kiss,
What force (Deiademeia) call you this?
Antomedon was Achilles Charioter, and Squire to Pyrhus, Ovid de Art Amandi
lib. 1.
whose skill Ovid remembers.

By art of Sail and Oar, Seas are divided,
By art the Chariot runs, by art Love's guided,
By art are Bridles rained in, or let slip,
Typhis by art did steare the Hemonian ship:
And Times succeeding, shall call me alon,
Loves expert Typhis and Antomedon.
The reason why Achilles kept his Tent, and was not in the Homer.
field when Hector breathed his challenge, is not fully resolved: some think he
was discontent about a difference betwixt the General Agamemnon and him, who
kept away perforce Briseis, a beauteous Lady, claimed by Achilles as his Prise,
which we rather follow in our History, then to lay his absence on his Love to
Polixena, whom he had not yet seen, and the promise which for her sake he
made to Hecuba, to keep himself and his M^midons from the battle.

Achelous was son to Oceanus and Tellus (viz:) the sea and the Earth whence
all Rivers are derived, who being Strabo lib. 10.
vanquished by Hercules, hid himself in the River, called of himself Achelous,
a famous stoud in Greece, dividing Aetolia from Acatnauia. This Achelous was
before called Plutarch lib. d^ fluminibus.
Thoas, and rises from the Mount Pindus, but Plutarch calls it Thestius, of
Thestius the son of Mars and Pisidices who had three daughters. Calirhoe,
Castalia and Dirce, of whom the famous Greek Poet Akeloou thugater diska, etc.
Eurip. in Bachis

Oh Acheloi filia, venerande Virgo dierce:
The Floods of Achelous were so famous that all the waters used in the divine
sacrifices were by the Oracle called Aquae Heredot^ in Eutripe.
Acheloae.

The Poets feign him to transhape himself in a Bull, because Hellanicus.
Riuersplow the earth as Oxen make Furrows, or because Bulls draw near to the
brinkes of rivers when they bellow for fresh pasture: else because waters
breaking violently through any fall, make a confused noise, like the roarings
of many Bulls together: He was ^ald a Dragon by his many indented windings and
turnings.

Hercules being leagued with King Oeneus, undertook Strabe 10.
to suppress this raging river, whose many inundations had much damaged his
Kiingdome, who extenuating his maine stream, by enforcing it into many
riualets, by that means made the country more fertile, therefore it was
moraliz'd that Hercules breaking off his horn received in the same all fruits
of plenty.

To this Cornucopia or horn of abundance, Jupiter gave Xanthus in rebut
Etolicis.
this property, that whosoever held it, and wished, should receive according to
their desire. The rarieties of the most choice fruits and wines of all kinds,
how delicious soever to taste the Pallat.

This virtue was first proved by Amatthea daughter to Hemonius King of Aetolia,
though some take Amatthea to Her^genes lib de Phrygia.
be the Goat that nursed Jupiter with her milk, when Rhea had given him to be
brought up to Adrastea and Isde.

The end of the twelfth CANTO.
Argumentum
A Chilles dotes on beauteous Polixaine,
And at her fair request refraines the field,
The Truce expierd, both Hoasts prepare again
For battle, with proud hearts, in valor steeled:
The Greeks are beat back, many killed and taine,
Patroclus don's Achilles Arms and shield:
Him Hector, for Achilles took and slew,
Whose Armor gone, his Mother seeks him new.
ARG. 2.
TRuce after Combat, Hecuba is won
By Paris means, to league with Thetis son.
CANTO. 13.
1
AWake soft Muse from sleep, and after rest
Show thy self quick and active in thy way,
Thy laboring flight and travel long oppressed
Is comforted, no longer then delay,
But with thy swiftest wings fly in the Quest
Of thy prefyxed goal: The happy day
In which this Kingdom did her wide arms spread,
To embrace king James, our Sovereign Lord and head.
2
And you (great Lord) to whom I Dedicate
A second work, the issue of my brain,
Accept this Twin to that you saw of late,
Sib to the first, and of the selfsame strain,
That only crave the shelters of your state,
To keep it from all storms of Ha^le and Rain,
Who neither dread the rage of winds or Thunder,
whilst your fair roof they may be shadowed under.
3
Your favor and protection deckes my phrase,
and is to me like Ariadnes clew,
To guide me through the Laborinthean Maze,
(...) which my brain's entangled: It Is by you,
That every vulger eye has leave to gaze,
and on this Pro^ct takes free enter view,
Which, but to express a due debt (yet unpaid)
Had still remained imperfect and unmade.
4
Proceed we then, and where we left repair:
About his head (the Tree) rough Ajax flings,
Like to a threatening Meteor in the air,
Which where it lights exitiall ruin brings,
Such seems th'vngrounded Oak, leauelesse and bare,
Who shakes ore Hectors Crest her rooted strings,
And with such rude impetuous fury fell,
To Have dingd him through the Center down to hell.
5
But Hector with his broad shield waits the fall,
Which shiuers all the plates of his strong Targe:
The Graectans too much fury, strikes withal,
The plant from his own hands, in his rough charge,
Unarmed once more they grapple, to make thrall
Each others strength their arms sinnowy and large,
About their sides with mutual strength they cling,
and wrestling strive, which can each other fling.
6
When lo, the Kings on bothsides much admiting
Their never equald valor, loath to lose
Such Champions, in whose charging or retyring
Their spring of victory, declines or Flows,
(Their Conquests droop toward earth, or rise aspiring)
The general of each host his Warder throws
Between the Combattants, who still contend.
By slight of strength to give the difference end.
7
Two Guards from either Army step between
Their heated furies, till their blood retired,
For with fresh breath they both abate their spleen,
And cease that Combat thousands late admyr'd,
Instead of blows their friendly Arms are seen
T'infold each other (with new loves inspyr'd)
Ajax his Belt pluckes from athwart his breast, An entercha^ge of gifts betwixt
Hector and Ajax.

And gives to Hector (of all Knights the best.)
8
Who takes a good sword flesht on many a foe,
And enter-chang'd with Ajax (but oh Fate)
Two ominous Tokens these good Knights bestow,
Which to themselves proved most unfortunate,
To Hectors heels must Ajax Baldricke grow,
And three times drag him by each Trojan gate:
Whose sight whole Troy with clamorous shricks shall fill,
With Hectors sword, Ajax, must Ajax kill.
9
These passages of friendship given and took,
Behold a Herald from the Town appears,
Who greets the proud Greeks with a friendly look
From Priam, (reverent both in state and years:)
Them, whom but late the Trojans could not brook,
Troy now inuites, and for a space forbeares A Truce.

All hostile hate, between both hoasts proclaiming
A day of Iubile for feast and gaming.
10
The Faith of Hector as best hostage given,
Th'inuasiue Kings in peace the City enter,
Whom Priam feasts, with all that under heaven
Can be found rare, or bred above the Center,
The Dames and Damsels all pale fear bereauen,
Amongst the dreadful Greeks dare freely venture,
And they that late did fright them above measure,
Have liberty to sport and Court their pleasure.
11
Vnpeered Hector (who had never seen
Achilles, (but on Horseback armed) before,
Eyes him with pleasure, and forgets all spleen, Dictes.

And Thetis son that (but in blood and gore)
Stained and besmeared, had never Hector seen,
Freely surueighs his shape: his robes he wore:
His brawny Limbs, broad bulk, his face, and stature,
Nor can he but applaud the pride of nature.
12
To whom Achilles thus? Hector, I see
A presence I could Love, but his Fame hate,
It Is thy renown alone does blemish me,
And makes me in these wars unfortunate,
I never yet dropped blood, but drained by thee,
For which, my teene is grown inueterate:
Nor could I relish pleasure, but still trusting
To end thy days, by sword-fight, or by iusting.
13
To him the Hero mildly thus replies:
Aeacides pursues a double wrong,
That comes from Greece our City to surprise,
And race our walls that we have builded strong,
Your Loves we hold dear, but your hates despise,
(As opposites that dare not front us long:
If more thou would: To arms: refer the rest,
Sit, (for thou art welcome) freely taste our feast.
14
Priam and Agamemnon take chief place,
The rest are rankt unto their states or fames, The Greeks feasted by Priam.

Troylus and Diomed, sit face to face,
and gin to brall, for Diomedes blames
Troylus, and Troylus him, to his disgrace
The iarres appeased, for see the fairest Dames
Of the best bloods of Troy, richly attired,
Bring in the Queen, whose state the Greeks admired
15
Hellen, Troyes Firebrand sat at this hye feast,
Nor did she blush to see her husband there,
Him, Paris thinks a bold unwelcome guest,
and that to Hellen he was plac'st too near,
Alone he tastes no dainties, among the rest,
Her very sight has cloyd him without cheer;
On Hecuba fair Pollixene attended,
Whose beauty great Achilles most commended.
16
Now the revolted Cal^has free time found
Against Trojan, lovely Cresseid to persuade,
With Arguments and words so firm and sound,
The Trojan now no more may Court the Maid,
King Diomed must henceforth be the ground
Of all her passionate Love, she can be staid
In Troy no longer (though she wished it rather)
She Is but a Child, and must obey her Father.
17
Whilst all the Kingly Leaders had loud chat
Of Chiualty, hye Bloods, and deeds of war,
(And as their humors led, of this or that)
Of many a bleeding wound and grisly skarre,
Whilst some spoke much, and some sat mute thereat, Achilles love to Polixena.

Achilles eye fixed on a brighter star
Then any shines, fixed among the heavenly fires,
The rarest Pollixene alone admires.
18
He neither can dilate of Noble deeds,
Nor enter-change discourse of slaughtered Kings,
What comes of peace, or what of war proceeds;
What profit rest, what hurt invasion brings;
His new dissolved heart within him bleeds,
And from his Rocky breast a Fountain springs
Of passion, only by her sight engendered,
In place of which, old hate is quite surrendered.
19
It now repents him he has lift a blade
Against the Sire, that such a child has bred,
Or to the place that fostered that sweetmaide,
His bloody Myrmidons to battle led;
Or that his dreadful hand did once invade
Her Brother (for whose Love he is well-nye dead)
To gain whose beauty, he could find in heart,
Greece to renounce, and take the Trojans part.
20
Queen Hecuba observes Achilles passion
Thinking to make it useful to her good,
That the most strong of all the Argiue Nation,
Shall for her daughters sake spare Trojan blood:
By this, the feast and Royal preparation
Breaks up, the Kings that on their honors stood,
With bounteous thanks take leave, bent on the morrow,
This Truce-full joy to mix with hostile sorrow.
21
The selfsame night by Hecubaes advice,
Unto Achilles Tent fair Paris sends,
Offering his Sisters love (held at hye price)
Mixed with the aged Queens most kind commends,
With courteous words the bold Greek they entice
To leave the siege, which Thetis son intends
Her nuptial bed being promised, with much joy,
Answer's returned, he will war no more against Troy.
22
Now while he rests him in his Idle Tent,
And to his amorous Harp Loue-Ditties sings, A battle lasting 30 days

Both Armies sundry Stratagems invent,
Great Hector to the field his puissance brings,
Upon the plain appears incontinent
A gallant host led by th'incamped Kings:
Wars Music sounds, Mars trots upon his Steed
Ore thousand mangled sides, that freshly bleed.
23
Sometime the Trojan Leaders with their powers,
Even to their Pallisadoes beat the Foe,
Whence being repulst, the camp the Champion scowers
And fore Troyes gates their purple Lances grow,
Whom th'yssue from the City soon deuoures,
Again the Greek sustaines great overthrow:
Again relieved, the Trojan powers they face,
Whom to their Tents again the Dardans chase.
24
Full thirty days together Fortune strives
To make their Conquest doubtful, in which time
Unnumbered Knights on both parts lost their lives,
Some in their waine of years, some in their prime,
Some slain outright, some captived put in Gyues,
Some loose their Fame, and some to honors clime:
Amongst whom Hector in the first rank stands,
For deeds of name wrought by his warlike hands.
25
Though farre-fear'd Ajax did hye works of Fame,
And blacke-hair'd Agamemnon boldly fought;
Though strong-limb'd Diomed his worth proclaim
By Martial Acts midst fields of slaughter wrought,
Though Nestor oft-times to the battle came,
And (to his strength and age) for honor sought:
Though Menelaus often in field was seen,
Ulysses too, more full of guile, then spleen.
26
Though these and more among themselves contended,
With aemulation to atchieue most praise,
Yet when great Hector to the field descended,
Backed by his Brothers, their swift current stays,
Above them all his glorious worth extended,
The Greeks grow warre-tyr'd after thirty days:
And beaten to their Trenches much decayed, Achilles his abstinence from
battle.

They jointly flock t'implore Achilles aid.
27
Who with his Myrmidons from field abstaines,
In hope to gain the fairest Dame alive,
Still through the fields remorselesse slaughter raines,
The Greeks beyond their Parapets they drive,
Still they entreat, he still their words disdaines,
Within the Camps skirts he may hear them strive:
Yet (all this notwithstanding) he seems loath
To Arm himself against a sacred oath.
28
But when he saw the wounded soldiers run,
Their bleeding heads amongst the Tents to hide,
Heard, by their swords so many slaughters done,
Beheld some mangled, that before him did,
Found how the foe their Camp had well nigh won,
Perceived the fire burn bright on every side,
Himself surcharged with Flames, in his tent sweating
And all the princes by his bed entreating.
29
He then relents, and at their fair request,
He Will keep his oath, and yet afford them aid,
For now the man whom he esteemed best,
He whom alone his bosom friend he made,
Patroclus don's his arms, his shield, his Crest,
And to his thigh girts his victorious blade:
And with three hundred Myrmidons attended,
He yssues where the Camp was least defended.
30
At his appearance when those arms were seen
So well, among the Trojans known and feared,
They make him way, Patroclus had not been
Long in the place, but all the Greeks were cheared:
They that before stood like a harvest screene,
Gave back apace, for not a man appeared,
Patroclus still aduanc'st Achilles shicld,
And with his Myrmidons maintains the field:
31
Now horrid Massacre pursues apace
Th'astonisht Trojans Paris, wounders most
To see Achilles armed, makes good the place,
And with such rage assault the Trojan host,
That not a man dares their Pauillions face,
Or against the Myrmidons his valor boast:
He calls him troth-lesse, perjured, false, forsworn,
And as he speaks (withal) is backward borne.
32
The cry grows great, which Hector ouer-hearing,
He calls upon his men to cease base flight,
And spying one above the rest appearing,
Dreadful in shape, and all imbrude in fight,
His quakefull hand and sword, so often rearing,
He takes him for the warlike Pelean Knight
Achilles, of the Graecians great'st in pride,
Whom he had often before in battle tried.
33
He chooses from his Page an Oaken spear.
Hewed from the heart of Ihoues relentlesse tree,
And couching it, spurs with a full Carriere
Against Patroclus: his proud Steed was free,
And like a shot star does his Ryder bear,
At every plunge the ground near kissed his knee:
His constant aim, that never er'd at need,
Tops the proud Greek from off his Noble steed.
34
And now Achilles armor strowes the field, Patroclus slain

Patroclus lies upon the Verdure spread,
Here lay his sword, and there his trusty shield,
The Myrmidons (as had their Lord bin dead,
And never more victorious Arms should weild)
Al in disordred ranks retired and fled:
Achilles arms ceizd, who durst longer stay?
This was the cause the Dardan wan the day.
35
When dead by Hector was Menetius son,
And that his wounded body strowed the plain,
(Quoth Hector) Now Achilles arms are won,
These are mine own, and these will I maintain:
He strips the fair Patroclus (new foredone,)
And thought at first Achilles he had slain:
But when he saw one not of God-like kind,
The Arms he takes, the body leaves behind.
36
Achilles frantic with so great disgrace,
Loss both of friend, and of his glorious arms,
Torments himself with fury for a space,
Threatening to Princely Hector hostile harms,
Yet when he thinks to have his life in chase,
And rowse the Worthy with his wars alarmes:
He now records his friends disgrace in field,
To combat him, he has nor arms, nor Shield.
37
The bright-foot Amphetrite his fair Mother, Thetis otherwise called
Amphetrite.

Knowing the grief her son conceiues at heart,
Her true Maternall pity cannot smother,
But with her care she seeks to cure his smart,
Instead of these, she will provide him other
Made by Divine composure, not Man's art,
And thus resolved, to Lemnos she does hie,
Where Vulcan works in heavenly Ferrarie.
38
She found him with his face all smoog'd and black,
And laboring at his Forge quite hid in smoke,
The stifling fume kept the fair Goddess back,
About she was her soft steps to revoke,
But whilst the C^ps on their Anuiles thwacke,
She spies fair Charis, and to her she spoke:
That the Lame Mettall-God might understand,
Thetis his friend, the Seas-Queene was at hand.
39
Charis the hand-maide, grace whose Office still Charis.

Is to strew Venus lovely bed with Flowers,
And to them both Caelestiall Nectar fill,
As unto Ihoue-himselfe fair Hebe powers,
Prays the bright Goddess but to stay until
The swetty Smith his face and visage skowers;
And whilst she tells the God of her repair,
To ease her self in a rich golden Chair.
40
Charis departs, she mounts the Inamel'd seat, Homer Iliad

The back of solid Gold richly ingrau'd,
Cut and inchac'st, it showed his skill was great,
and in the Metal too, no cost was saved,
So though the frame was large, his art was neat,
The four supporters round about were stau'd
With pillars of white silver, molded so,
That by the work, the worke-man you may know.
41
Mean time fair Charis to the Smith relates,
How faire-foote Amphetrite stays without,
at this report lame Vulcan thanks the Fates,
Who had so well his business brought about,
The Queen whose favor he so highly rates,
Should take the pain to find his Concaue out:
Of whom, he (falling through the Plannets seven,)
More favor found, then all the rest in heaven.
42
With that his apron from his breast he takes,
His airy Bellows have surceast to blow,
He sleckes his Coals, his smoaky Forge forsakes,
Spunges his hands and face, then gins to throw
A rich Roabe ore his shoulders, and so makes
On to the Queen, whose mind he longs to know:
When after many a limping Curtsie made,
Thus Amphetrite does the Smith persuade.
43
If ever I was held worthy the name
Of the seas-Queene, unfortunate alone, Apollodorus.

For of the seed of Gods derived I came,
Yet (married to a Mortal,) find you none
Thetis except: yet is it to me no shame;
Behold my Divine beauty, I was one
Even Ihoue himself loved, whom, cause I denide,
In spite he gave me to a Mortals Bride.
44
Yet am I not esteemed amongst them least,
For when my hye espousals were first made Staphilus in lib de Thessalia.

In the Mount Pelion, all the Gods increast
My glory with their presence; for none stayed
Or kept away from th'Hymenean feast,
Saving the Gods discord, the Spheres played Dailochus. Pherecides.

Music to us; my Peleus me contented
To grace, whom all the Gods rich gifts presented.
45
Ihoue gave us Graces on our bed to wait,
Apollo, Ingots of the purest Gold, Zezes histo 45.

Pluto, a smarag'd to be worn in state,
Juno, a lem worth, more then can be told,
Neptune two Steeds, above all Mortal rate,
Xanthus and Ballia, whom you may behold
Still draw my Coach, a rich Knife rarely wrought,
Among other presents you God Vulcan brought.
46
But what of these digressions, If my hap
Has ever bin to do you any grace,
When falling from hye Heaven, in my soft lap
I gently caught you, See: behold the place
On which your head fell, which to fold and wrap
In smoothest silks, my robes I did unlace:
For this, and much more kindness by me done,
Requite all, with an Armor for my son.
47
Enough (quoth Vulcan fetch Pyragmon straight)
A parcel of the best and purest Steel,
And you Berountes let it find the weight Pyragmon, Berountes, and S^pes, the
three Ciclops that attend on Vulcan.

Of your huge Hammers, and their ponders feel,
The Ciclops fetched a Plate six Cubes in haight,
So Massy, that the burden made him reele;
Sceropes stained with smoke, the Bellows blew,
And all at once themselves to work withdrew.
48
They forged a Helmet with rich Flowers inchac'st Achilles armor

So curiously, that Art it much exceeded,
Borders of sundry works about were plac'st,
The precise sight of the best eye they needed,
That could discern the closures, they were grac'st
With God-like skill (from God-hood it proceeded)
For beauty, it was glorious to the sight,
For proof, no Steel could on this Helmet bite.
49
The Gorget, Vaunt-brace, Backe-peece, breast, and all,
Came from the selfsame substance, and like skill,
The Cushes that beneath the girdle fall,
Impenetrable were, and Steele-proofe still,
And though the thickenesse did appear but small,
The Plates they with such strength of Metal fill:
It has the force and puissance to withstand
The sharpest Spears hurled from the strongest hand.
50
Above them all, his shield the rest surpast,
Massy, and only for his Arm to wear Achilles shield

For whom it was made, upon the same was ra'st
The great world Tripartyte: heaven and each Sphere,
Thence all the hye Circumference was pla'st
Stars, Moon, and Sun, the signs that rule the year,
The Ram, the Bull, and the Twin-brothers sign,
The Crab, the Lion, and the Maid Divine.
51
The Skale, the Scorpion, and the Centaure fell,
Stern Capricorn, and he that water powers,
The Fishes: all these were ingraued well,
There Phoebus stood, about him days and hours,
With the four Seasons: First the Spring began swell
With sweetest Buddes: Summer that seldom lowers
Stood next in rank, well clad in freshest green,
Autumn next her, in ragged Roabes was seen.
52
There stood old Winter in hye Furs attyred,
On whom the flakes of Snow like Feathers hong,
He shyuering looks, as if he warmth desired,
With chattering teeth, hands Palsied, quaking tongue
Below the Earth, with Dales and Hills admired,
Fields full of Grain, and Meads with Grass new sprung:
Here Cities rarely built, there Hamlets stand,
Here fallow-fields, besides them, New-tild Land.
53
Between the middle Earth, Seas ebb and flow,
Whose Billows in their caruing seem to move,
Here the Leuiathan huge waves does throw
From out his Nostrils to the skies above,
The Dolphins, of a thousand coullours show,
Here Whales their heads above the waters prove:
And sailing ships contrived by cunning rare,
On which strange Fish, with wonder seem to stare.
54
A thousand sundry Objects made by Art,
This huge Orbicular Shield in compass holds,
What Heaven or Earth, or Seas to us Impart,
His Globe-like compass to the eye unfolds,
When Vulcan taking the fair Queen apart,
(who with much wonder his strange work beholds:)
Presents it her, made perfect for her Son,
In whose rich arms, Troy seems already won.
55
At Vulcans Cave she yoakes her Chariot-steeds,
which over the Oceans rugged back make way,
And as she freely on the Seas proceeds,
About her Coach the Quicke-ear'd Dolphins play
At her Sons Tent (famed for his warlike deeds,
She lights, and to the Couch on which he lay:)
Tossed those rich arms, which when Achilles viewed,
The halfe-dead spirit within his breast renewed.
56
He leaps from of his Pallet, to embrace
The beauteous Queen, and soon entreats her aid,
To arm his shoulders, and his head to grace,
With that inchaced Helm God Vulcan made,
Who now completely furnished, longs for place
Where thus be-seene, he Hector may invade:
He cannot sleep for gazing on his Shield,
In hope t'aduance it in the Morrowes field.
57
Thetis departs, when the early Cock gave sign,
With his loud notes Aurora to dispose,
Who leaves the Bedridden Tython sunk in Wine,
From whom the Gold hair'd Goddess blushing rose,
To harness Phoebus Coach-steeds, who in fine
About his face, his Beams bright ghstring throws:
To dry the Mornings tears, who weepeth still,
To see th'vnkind Sun climb th'Easterne hill.
58
He had not left the forelorne Goddess long, A Battle.

But from Olimpus top he may espy,
Plaine-Crested Hector, his armed Troops among,
Chearing them up the proud Greeks to defy:
Next him marched Noble Troylus, Memnon strong,
Antenor and Aeneas mounted hye:
Young Deiphebus and Polydamas,
Paris, whose aim in Arch'ry does surpass.
59
Sarpedon, King Epistropus: beside
Many more Kings that sundry battles led
Against these soon the Curld Inuaders ride,
The grim Atrides first aduan'st his head,
Achilles next, past with vainglorious pride
For his rich armor, Nestor next him sped
Menon, whose arms were set with many a stone,
And (he that Hector stood) bold Telamon.
60
The Ithacan, with Lacedemons King,
The widdowed Spartan: ground of all this broyle,
These to the field their several battles bring,
With thousand followers, bent on death and spoil,
Their barbed Steeds the earth behind them fling,
Harness and quartered limbs block the smooth soil:
Amongst the rest, Achilles loftiest stood,
and his new armor double-Guilds in blood.
61
With Memnon, ^onne to Tython and the Morn, Apollodorus lib. 3.

Who came from Egypt in King Priams aid,
Aeacides encounters, change of scorn
Between them past, bold Memnon naught dismaide,
With that strong hand that had the Scepter borne
Of Persiaes kingdom, and did once invade
Susa, as far as where Choaspes flows,
Upon his Helm thunders two persant blows.
62
They stound him in his saddle, make him kiss Hesiodus in Theogonia.

His Steeds curled Crest, ere he can Mount his head,
Achilles who esteems no other bliss,
But to behold his foes before him spread,
(Wak't from his sudden trance) espyes by this,
A Grecian Squadron bout King Memnon dead,
And his bright sword still to wring ore his Crest,
Threatening in his third fall, Eternal rest.
63
The proud Greek sends a blush out of his face,
as red as that in which his proof was lau'de,
he now records his strength, his god-like race,
and his rich armor with such artingrau'de,
He knows it ill becomes his Name or Place,
By any Mortal puissance to be brau'de;
He doubles strength on strength, and stroke on stroke,
Even till he mists himself in his own smoke.
64
Auroraes Darling proves to weak a Foe Simonides Poeta

For him, on whose tough Shield no Steel can bite,
His conquered Sword and Arms the field must strew,
Achilles is too strong an opposite,
His Red-cheek't Mother ouercharg'd with woe, K. Memnon slain by Achilles.

Laments her Son untimely slain in fight:
In grief of whom, a Dusky Roabe she wears,
And fills the whole world with her dew-drop tears.
65
The death of Memnon even to Hector flies,
That Tragic news cost many a Princes life,
Incenst, he seems all safety to despise,
And where he spurs, he makes red slaughter rife,
For every drop of blood, a bold Greek dies:
Him Troylus seconds in his purpled strife:
And (if as for a wager) they contend,
Whose Sword most pale Souls can to Orcus send.
66
They break a Ring of Harness, making way
Into the Battayles Center, where they see
a Noble Knight maintain a gallant fray,
Against many Trojan Knights (in valor free)
Yet of them all, this Champion gets the day,
The strongest cannot make him cringe his knee:
Polydamus against him bravely sped,
Yet still his gazed at Shield, safeguards his head.
67
Against which Paris many arrows spends,
But all in vain, they shiuer against his Targe,
and whom he best can reach his force extends
as far as life, the prisoned Soul t'enlarge,
Young Deiphebus to that place descends,
and with his Speate in reast, does against him charge:
But the Dardanian fayles in his intent,
And from the Noble Knight is bleeding sent.
68
Victorious Hector at such deeds amazed,
But more at the rich Armor that he ware,
Mannadge and shape in heart he highly praysd,
and in his honors longes to have a share,
Hupon Larissaes King, that long had gazed
Upon his valor, sees him fight so fair:
A pointed Staff against his breast he proved,
But from his Steed the bold Greek was not moved.
69
Unhappy Hupon could not stay the force King Hupon slain.

Of his keen Sword, but soon before him falls, King Philos slain.

King Philos, next against him spurd his Horse,
And (turn thee valiant Greek) aloud he calls,
But he was likewise slain without remorse,
It seemed he was invr'd to such hot brals:
Hector no longer can his rage forbear,
But against the unknown Knight aims a stiff Spear.
70
Who when he Hector from a far espyde,
As if he had but sported with the rest,
and that was he against whom he should be tryde,
He thrild a Iauelin at the Dardans breast,
It Was terror to behold these Champions ride,
and skorch the Plumes that grew in eithers Crest,
With fire that from their Steel in sparkles flew,
No sooner dead, but still they forced new.
71
There Is for Patroclus death, the proud Greek says
There Is for my arms, which thou did basely win,
and as he speaks upon his shoulders lays,
at every dint his bruisde arms pincht his skin,
Hector now knows his Champion by his phrase,
and by his stroke (he thinks his arms too thin:)
Such puissant blows, whose weight he scarce can like,
None but Achilles hand has power to strike.
72
A well known Knight, in unknown arms he sees,
against whose force he gathers all his might,
His hye-stretcht arm contendes to make him leese
All fore-past Fame, and hazard dreadful fight,
But now the multitude like Swarms of Bees
Between them flock, who far from all affright:
Vex in their heated bloods to be so parted,
So with their Steedes among other ranks they started.
73
Three puissant Kings beneath Prince Hector fell,
Archilochus, a Soldier of hye Fame, Three Kings slain by Hector.

Prothenor, who in battles did excel,
And with the Atrides to the field then came:
King Archelaus too, a Champion fell,
Who among the Greeks had won a glorious Name:
And whilst half tyerd, he from the throng withdrew, The Sagittary slain by
Diomed.

King Diomed the Sagittary slew.
74
Thoas took Prisoner, to the Town was sent,
Whom Paris with his arrows had surprisde,
Antenor likewise to Ulysses Tent
Was Captive led (whom he before depisde)
Epistropus, his hostile fury bent
Against Polyxenes, in rich arms disguisde; King Polixenes slain.

They part, when Polixenes full of pride,
Crost-Hectors course, and by his valor did.
75
Once more the dauntlesse Trojans have the best,
The night comes on, both Hoasts themselves withdraw,
The Cities Captains take them to their rest,
But the Argiue Kings (that naught but ruin saw
Impendent still, whilst Hectors able breast
Bucklerd large Troy from each tempestuous flaw)
At Agamemnons Tenta Counsel call,
To find some train, by which the Prince may fall.
76
Achilles oft-times Mated, vows in heart
With his black Mirmid^ns to guirt him round,
And never from a second field depart,
Till Hectors length be measured on the ground,
Th'assembled Kings, whose bleeding wounds yet smart,
Vow by all means his puissance to confound:
For well they know whilst Noble Hector stands,
In vain against Troy they rear their armed hands.
77
Night passes on, and the gray Morn appears,
The Greeks a six-months Truce of Troy demand,
In which the Camp bloud-staynd Scamander cleares
Of Bodies slain by wars infernal hand,
A Herald to the Camp King Thoas bears,
Receiving back Antenor, Nobly manned,
The Truce expires, both parties now provide
To have their Arms tight, and their Weapons tried.
78
Andromache this night dreampt a strange dream, Andromaches dream.

That if her Husband tryde the field that day,
His slaughter should be made the general Theme
Of Troyes laments, she feign would have him stay,
She wooes him, as he loves the populous Realm,
Her Life, his Honors, safety, or decay:
The aid of Troy, their Universal good,
To save all these in keeping still his blood.
79
This ( Hector censures) spoake from Womanish fear,
He arms himself in have and calls to Horse,
Takes in his hand a bright Brasse-headed Spear,
Longing for some on whom to prove his force,
Andromache spends many a ruthful tear,
His thoughts were fixed, they bred no soft remorse:
He arms for field, she to the Kings proceeds,
and tells his thus: If Hector fight, he bleedes.
80
Her dream and fear she to the King relates,
and prays him to entreat her Husband fair,
Or if soft speech his purpose naught abates
To use his power: This said, she does repair
Where Hecuba and Hellen kept their states,
and where the rest of Priams Daughters are:
To whose requests she knows he will soonest yield,
Still urging them to keep him from the field.
81
The Greeks Imbattayld are, and from the Town,
The Trojans Issue the Midway to meet,
When from the lofty Palace hastening down
Andromache, prostrate at Hectors feet
Throws her fair self: and by King Priams Crown,
His Mothers love, her own imbracements sweet:
his Brothers, Sisters, and his little Son, Astianax Hectors Son.

Con-iures his stay, till one days fight be done.
82
Hector bids one: she mingles words with tears,
and once more casts her self to stop his way,
(That he shall back) she begs, she wooes, she swears,
and shun the battle for that ominous day,
her horrid dream has filled her heart with fears,
And hill she hanges on him, to have him stay:
She weeps, entreats, clinges, begs, and Coniures still,
(In vain) he is armed, and to the battle will.
83
King Priam by Antenors mouth desires
To unarm him straight, and to the Court return,
For should his life fail: Troyes fair Sons and Sires,
Matrons and Damsels, for his death should mourn,
The Prince enraged, his Eye-bals sparkle fires,
With inward rage his troubled Entrails burn:
He knows from whence these Coniurations spring,
And that his Wives dream has incenst the King.
84
Yet will he forward: when the aged Queen
This hearing: with the Spartan makes swift speed,
They ring his Horse: Entreat him cease his spleen,
And for one day to act no warlike deed,
The more they pray, the more they rouse his teene,
a purpose irremoueably decreede:
He Will put in action though they kneel and pray,
and compass in his Steed to have him stay.
85
This Priam understanding, he descends,
And in his face a graceful reverence brings,
He stays his Courser by the Raines, and ends
The difference thus: Oh! Thou the awe of Kings,
Death to thy Foes, supporture to thy Friends,
From whose strong arm our general safty springs:
Refrain this day, tempt not the Gods decree,
Who by thy Wife this night forwarneth thee.
86
The discontented Prince at length is won,
Yet will he not unarm him for them all,
But to express the duty of a Son,
With Priam and the rest he mountes the wall,
To see both Armies to the Skirmish roone,
Where some stand hye, and some by slaughter fall:
King Diomed and Troylus from a far,
Wafts to each other, as a figne of war.
87
They meet like Bullets, by two Soldiers changed,
Their way as swift, their charge as full of Terror,
Their Steedes keep even, they neither tript nor ranged,
Both Man and Horse are free from any Error,
No art of War was from these Knights estranged
In Troylus, might be seen a Soldiers Mirror,
In Diomed, the pattern of such skill,
as they desire that would their Foe-men kill.
88
The fayre-browde Sky shrinkes up her Azure face,
Least their sharp splinterd Staves should race her brow,
Both covet honor in this warlike race,
and in their hearts they eythers ruin vow,
But Menelaus happily came in place,
With him three hundred Knights that well knew how
To manage battle, these between them grew,
and they to further ranks perforce withdrew.
89
Miseres (King of Phrigia) met by chance
The Spartan King, and shook him in his Seat,
Against Duke Ajax, Paris charged a Lance, Ajax Telemon

and him, the Sal'mine did but ill entreat,
At the first blow he stounds him in a trance,
Then midst the Trojan ranks does ^oyle and sweat:
Striving behind, on both sides, and before,
Even till his arms with blood were vermeil'd over.
90
Prince Margareton, unto Hector dear
Knowing the slaughter Noble Ajax made,
against his Vaunt-brace bravely proves his Spear,
and to their vanquished Phalanx brings fresh aid,
Ajax is for'st his fury to forbear,
The Trojans powers on all sides him invade,
Till Agamemnon comes with fresh supply,
at whose approach, th'astonish Trojans fly.
91
Yet Noble Margareton keeps his stand,
Nor can the strongest arm of Greece remove him,
He feels the strength of Agamemnons hand,
Grim Ajax sword with a towers weight does prove him,
Yet shrinkes not, till the place was Nobly manned
By Paris and Polydamus that love him:
These hearing Margareton much distressed,
Rescue the Prince, who bravely guards his Crest.
92
It joys the King and Ladies, that on hy
Stand on the Torras to behold the field,
To see the Prince so full of Chiualry,
And with such power to vle his Sword and Shield,
Achilles (in a place where thousands lie
Besmeard in blood, as if he meant to build
a wall of Limbs and Quarters) bravely fought,
And bout himself a siedge of bodies wrought.
93
Where issuing after much effuse of blood
To calm himself, remotely from the throng
(Retyerd alike) young Margareton stood
Striving for breath, he had not rested long,
Butspyes Achilles with a purple flood
Powerd o'rehis arms, a Iauelin light and strong
The valiant Trojan Prince against him bent,
Whom the proud Greek receives incontinent.
94
From broken Spears they come to two-edged Steel,
Oh! How stont Hector yernd to be in place,
His very Soul does all the puissance feel
Of him that has his Brothers life in chase,
No stroke that makes Prince Margareton reele,
But (as he thinks) it tingles on his face:
And from the wall in Armor he had lept,
Had not the King and Queen perforce him kept.
95
By this the youthful Priameian tyerd
With odds of might, he wauers too and fro,
Doubtful which way to fall, the Greek admierd
To find so young a gallant plunge him so,
and therefore with hisanclent rankor fierd,
He doubles and redoubles blow and blow:
Till he (whose dear life was to Hector sweet) Prince Margareton flaine.

Sinkes from his Horse beneath his ruthlesse feet.
96
Who with his barb'd Steed tramples over his Coarse,
Whose Iron hoof the Princes armor raceth,
This Hector seeing, breaks from all their force,
He cla ps his Beauer down, his Helm fast laceth,
With ^mble quickness vaults upon his horse,
(And yssuing) where he rides, the enemy cheareth:
For Margaretons death, he vows that day,
Achilles with a thousand more shall pay.
97
Two Noble Dukes he charge, and both slew, D. Coriphus and Duke Bastidius
slain.

Duke Cortphus, Bastidius big and tall,
And forth like lightning among their squadrons flew,
Where such as cannot fly before him fall,
Leocides an Armor fresh and new,
(He was amongst the Greeks chief Admiral)
Would prove against Hector, but in his swift race, Leocides slain.

The Trojans Spear brake on the Gr^ns face.
98
A splinter struck the Greek into the brain,
And down he sinkes, Achilles full of ire,
Spying so many bold Pelasgians slain,
Pricks on with Polyceus: both desire
To prove themselves with Hector on the plain,
The bold assaylants need not far^e inquire
For the stern Prince: In that part of the host,
They Are sure to find him where the cry grows most.
99
Both Menace him, against both he stands prepared,
Duke Policeus to Achilles dear, Policeus slain

(Whose Sister he was promised, had war spared
His destined life) drew to the Trojans near,
At the first stroke his Beauer'd face he bared,
But with the next his sparpled brains appear,
Achilles mads at this, and swears on hye,
For Polyceus death, Hector shall dye.
100
His threatened vengeance Hector did soon quail,
For through his thigh he quiuers a sharp Dart, Achilles wounded.

Achilles feels his bleeding sinnowes fail,
And with all speed does to his Tent depart,
Where having bound his wound up, wan and pale,
With fury, and the rancor of his heart;
Three hundred Myrmidons that all things dared,
he leads to field his person to saue-gard.
101
Swearing them all theyrioynt-rage to bestow
On Hector, and on him stern vengeance power,
And saving him t'intend no Dardan Foe,
That Heaven with him may on his Conquests lower,
They listen where the clamors loudest grow,
And there spy Hector, wald in like a Tower
With heaps os men, that bout him bleeding lay,
For not a li^ng Greek durst necre him stay.
102
Now tyrd with slaughter, he was leaned upon
The Pomell of his bright victorious Blade,
and for his strength and breath was almost gone,
His Armor he had slackt, it loosely playde
about his shoulders (for he dreaded none:)
Him now the bloody Myrmidons invade:
In threefold rings about him they were guided,
To take the Noble Hero^ vnproulded.
103
Oh! Where is Paris with his Archers bow?
Where Is youthful Deiphebus now at need?
Where Is the inuinced Troylus, to bestow
His puissant strokes before Prince Hector bleed?
Where is Aeneas to repulse the foe?
You Troyes confedred Kings, where do you speed?
Bring rescue now, or in his Mountain fall
Bencath destruction, he will crush you all.
104
All these are absent, naught save death and ruin
Compass the Prince, a tripple ring of blades
Inguirts him round, who still their ranks renewing,
Threaten to send him to the infernal shades,
With bloody appetites his fall pursuing,
Achilles as they shrink, on hye persuades
With promises: and some with threats, he swears
To pay the base shame of their dastard fears.
105
A hundred Myrmidons before him lie
Drownde in their own bloods, by his strong arm shed,
The rest renew the charge with fresh fupply,
and thunder on his shoulders, arms, and head,
Achilles strongly ar^'d and horst, spurs by
To see the hunger of his Bloodhounds fed:
Was never Mortal, without might of Gods,
That stood so long against such powerful ods.
106
They hew his armor peece-meale from his back,
Yet still the valiant Prince ma^taines the fray,
Though but halfe-harnest, yet he holds them tacke,
And still the bloody Slaves upon him lay,
Armor and breath at once the Prince does lack,
Stored with naught else save wounds (alack the day:)
Yet like a steadfast rock the worthy stood,
From whom ran twenty several springs of blood.
107
This, when the fresh-breath'd Greek beheld, and saw
So much effuse of blood about him run,
He chargd his warlike Myrmidons withdraw,
And crying out alowd: Now Troy is won,
(With shameful odds against all Knight-hoods law)
Against naked Hector, well-arm'd Thetis son
Aims a stiff Iauelin, and against him rides, The death of H^.

The ruthlesse staff through picrst his Royal sides.
108
With him King Priam and whole Asiaes glory,
Queen Hecuba with all her daughters fair
Sink into Lethe, even the Gods are sorry
To see the man they made without compare,
So basely fall, to make Achilles story
Reproachful to all ears that would not spare
So great a Worthy, but with odds strike under,
Him that atchi^ud things beyond strength and wonder
109
Hector thus fallen, the Trojans (whose whole power
Lay in the arm of Hector) fly the field,
And now th'incourag'd Greeks Scamander scower,
(The head subdude, the body needs must yield,)
Behold the Prince that awed within this hour,
Millions of Greeks lies dead upon his shield,
He gone, whose Atlas Arm vpheld their states,
Amazed Troy rams-vp her sieged Gates.
110
At sight of which Achilles sweld with rage,
From Hectors breast, the Belt Ajax him gave
Snatcheth in have, and his sad spleen t'asswage,
Fetters his Legs, and like a conquered slave,
Void of all honor, ruth, or Counsel sage,
at his Horse-heeles he drags him like a slave:
Having Troyes wall first three-times circled round,
hurdling the Dardan Hero^ on the ground.
111
To think so brave a Peer should basely bleed,
A Prince t'insult upon a slaughtered Foe,
and ga^nst a worthy act so base a deed,
Makes my soft eye with Springs of Sorrow flow,
Nor can I further at this time proc^ede,
The Greeks black practice does offend me so,
Hear therefore I desist my Tragic verse,
To mourn in silence over Prince Hectors hearse.
Aeacides, a name we sometimes give to Achilles, is a deriuatiue of Aeacus, and
is as much as to say, the Grand child of Aeacus, sometime we call him Pelias
Issue (viz:) the Son of Peleas, the Son of Aeacus.

Patroclus a Noble Greek, son to Menetius and Stheuele, he was brought up
under Chiron the Centaure with Achilles, who ever after entirely loved him.

Chiron likewise, whom we have before in some places mentioned, is thought to
be Son of Saturn. Ovid. Metamerpho. 6.


Vt Saturnus Equo geminum Chirona creauit. Apollonius lib. 1 Arg^.
His Mother was called Philyra: Ad mare descendit montis de part suprema
Chiron Philerides.


Saturn deflowring the fair Philiris, Daughter to the old Oceanus, and
fearing leaft his ^ife Rhea (otherwise called Sibilla) Appolo lib. 2.
should discover his wantonness, transhapes him self into a Horse, and then
beg at in the Islands Philerides, Chiton the Centaure, from the Navel vpwardes
having the perfect semblance of Man, the rest downwards the shape of an Horse.
Suidas.


Others have thought him to be the Son of Ixion, and Brother to the race of
the Centaurs. He taught Aesculapius Physic, Hercules Astronomy, and Apollo to
play on the Lute or Harp. Of Thetis, otherwise called Amph (...) it is thus
reported, that she was the most beautiful of all the Goddesses, and when
Apollo, Neptune, and Iu^ter, contended about her Homer.
which should ^ioy her bed (being all frustrate) Jupiter enraged, doomed her to
be a mortals Bride, because she had so peremptorily despised their God hoods.
The Goddess much agrieu'd to be so abiectly bestowed, despised Pelcus, who
extremely doted on her beauty, and still when he would have comprest her, she
metamorphised her self, sometimes to a flame of Fire, sometimes to a Lion, then
a serpent, so dreadful, that he was still detered from his purpose, till after
by the advice of Chiron the Centaure, (neglecting all terror) she held her
Isacius.
fast so long, till having run through all her Protean shapes, he wearted her
in her transformation, till she returned into her own shape of the most
beautiful Goddess, of whom he begat Achilles.

Tython for his beauty beloved of Aurora the morning, is said to be the son of
Laomedon, and Brother to Priam, though by diverse mothers, he gat Pr^am of
Leucippe, and Tython of S^ma, or else of Rhoea the daughter of Scamander:
Aurora begd of the Fates for her Husband Tython Imortality, which being
imediately granted her, she had for got with his length of life, to beg withal
that he should never wax old and decrepit, wherefore he is said to be ever bed
rid, till the Gods pitying his feebleness, turned him after into a
Grasshopper. Horatius lib. 2 Carminum.
Longa Tithonum minuit sen^ctus.
su^a a chief City in Persia, where the great Sophies keep their Courts, it
is seated near the famous river Choaspes, and was builded by Tython.

Pclasgians are an ancient people of Greece dwelling in Peloponesus in the
edge of Macedonia, of whom the general Graecians sometimes have usurped that
name.

The end of the thirteenth CANTO.
Argumentum
TRoylus, Achilles wounds, and is betrayed
By his fell Myrmidons, which being spredd,
The bloody Greek still loves the beauteous Maid
Pollixena, and for her love is lead
To Pallas Church, whom Paris does invade,
And with an Arrow in the heel strikes dead:
Penthisilea with her valiant Maids,
Assists sad Troy, Greece lofty Pyrthus ayds.
ARG. 2.
IN this last fight, fall by the Argiue spleen,
Paris, Amphimachus, and Scithiaes Queen.
CANTO. 14.
1
TO whom, Andromache may I compare
Thy Funeral tears ore Hectors body shed,
If among late Widows none survive so rare
To equal thee, lets search among the dead,
The Carian Queen that was as chaste as fair,
Bright Artimesia a wonder bred:
Galathian Camna did likewise constant prove, Artimesia Camna.

And ^al'd her in firm Conjugal Love.
2
What Fathers grief could equal Priams tears?
Who lost a son, no age, no world could match,
Whose arm vpheld his glory many years,
Whose vigilant eye did on his safety watch,
Englands third Edward in thy face appears
Like grief, when timelesse death did soon dispatch Edward the 3.

Thy brave sons life, Edward Sirnam'd the black,
By whom Spain flag'd, and France sustained wrack.
3
No^ Margaret, when at Teuxbury her son Q. Margaret wife to Henry the 6.

Was stabbed to death by Tyrant Glosters hand,
Felt from her riueld cheeks more Pearl drops run,
Then Hecuba, when she did understand
The thread of Hectors life already sponne,
Whose glories stretched through Heaven, air, sea, and land
Though he of semblant hope to England were
With him, whom Asia did account most dear.
4
Nor could the Countess Mary sorrow more,
To hear her Brother (the brave Sidney wounded,) Laid Mary Countess of
Penbrooke, and Sister to Sir Phillip Sidney.

Whose death the seventeen Belgian states deplore,
Whose Fame for Arts and arms the whole world sounded,
Then did Cassandra, who her garments tore,
Creusa who with extreme grief confounded,
With whom Polyxena bare a sad strain,
To hear a third part of the earth complain.
5
Nor when the hopeful youth Prince Arthur did, Prince Arthur elder brother to
Prince Henry, after Henry the 8.

Leaving his Brother both his life and Crown,
Could the prince Henry less his sorrows hide,
Then Hectors Brothers who still guard the Town,
The universal City doffes her pride,
The King himself puts on a Mourners gown:
The Queen and Ladies with their leagued Kings,
Bury with him their best and costliest things.
6
So when from Rome great Tully was exild,
Full twenty thousand Citizens the best, M. F. Cicero.

In garments Tragic, and in countenance wild,
For twelve sad Moons their loves to him professed,
But Troy even from the Bedridden to the Child,
From Crutch unto the Cradle, have expressed
A general grief in their lamenting cries,
Looks, gestures, habits, mournful hearts and eyes.
7
Now when the Fountain of their tears grew dry,
And Men and Ma^ons him bewayld their fill,
With one Ioynt-voyce for just revenge they cry
On him, that did the Prince by Treason kill;
They lay their sad and Funeral Garments by,
The souldiets long to prove their Martial skill,
And try their strengths upon Scamander plain,
Thinking themselves too long Inmut'd in vain.
8
It Is Questionable whether greater woe
In Troy, then glee within the Camp abounded,
They hold themselves free from that late dread foe,
Who with his Steed had often their trenches rounded,
And never but to the Argiues overthrow
appeared in field, or to the battle sounded
With shrill applause, they proud Aehilles Crown,
And with Brauadoes oft-times front the Town.
9
Thus when re-spirited Greece had Dominear'd
and brau'd the fieged Trojans at their gates,
Old Priam for his age now little feared,
With Troylus and the rest, of wars debates,
For Hectors slaughter (to them all indeer'd)
They vow revenge on those hye Potentates
That were spectators of the ruthlesse deed,
When Hectors coarse thrice round the walls did bleed
10
And yssuing with their power, the aged King
Puts acts in execution, much above The battle.

His age or strength, he youthfully does spring
Upon his Steed, and for his Hectors love,
Amongst the throng of Greeks dares any thing, The valor of King Pria^

Himself against Diomed he longs to prone,
and scapes untouched, then against Ulysses rides,
and still his age does equipage their prides.
11
Forthwith against Agamemn^ he contends,
and on his Beauer raught him many a blow,
Who like a soldier his renown defends,
amazd that weak age should assacult him so,
The King his puissance further yet extends,
Against the Spartan King (an equal foe)
Whom with his spear he did so ill inrreat,
Fair Hellens husband sits beside his seat.
12
From them he further to the throng proceeds,
And deals about great Larges of grim wounds,
Admired alone for his renowned deeds,
Some with his sword upon the Caske he stounds,
This day old Nestor by his Iauelin bleeds
With many more, and still the field he rounds:
Against old Priam not a Greek dare stay,
Who soly claims the honor of that day.
13
Yet the mean time the King was in this broyle,
Bold Deiphebus kept the rest in fee
With bloods and death, whilst Paris made great spoil
Of such as in their valor seemed most free,
Aeneas strongly mounted, gave the foil
Unto the Athenian Duke, whose warlike knee
Bended to him, yet in an upright heart,
Achilles in his rescue claims a part.
14
The King Epistropus amongst them fought,
So did Sarpedon against th'incamped Kings,
The stout Pelasgian strength they dreaded naught,
Now among their renged squadrons Treylus flings,
And on their foiled troops much effusion wrought,
In him the life and spirit of Hector springs;
Twice he Achilles met, and twice him feld,
Who all the other Kings of Greece exeld.
15
A hundred thousand Trojans were that day
Led to the field to avenge Prince Hectors life,
Double their number on Scamander stay,
To entertain them in their aemulous strife,
Duke Ajax Telamon then kept in play
Troylus, whilst murder through the field grew rife,
The stern Polydamas did Nobly fight,
And was the death of many a gallant Knight.
16
But Troyl^s that succeeds Hector in force,
In courage, and in all good Thewes beside,
Whom ere he met that day did braue^ unhorse,
Till his white Armor was with Crimson did,
For Hectors sake his sword vsd no remorse,
His warre-steel'd spirits to slaughter he applyde:
No man that saw him his bright weapons weild,
But swear another Hector was in field.
17
This day is Troyes, and now repose they borrow
From the still night, to give the wounded cure,
And such of note as did, t'intombe with sorrow,
They that (...), themselves with arms assure,
And so prepare for battle on the morrow,
Some to be siedge, the rest the siedge t'indure:
Or if they can, to their eternal praise,
The foreign Legions from their Trenches raise.
18
Six Moons gave nightly rest to th'Hostile pains,
Ofiust so many days, for full so long
Troy without respight the proud Camp constraines,
Howerly to prove whose puissance is most strong,
Blood-drops by Plannets on Scamander ^nes,
Horrid destruction flies the Greeks among;
Troylus still held the Noblest Arms professor,
And Hectors equal, though his late successor.
19
T'omit a thousand Combats and Contentions,
Hostile Encounters, Oppositions brave,
Such as exceed all human apprehensions,
Where some win living honor, some a grave,
With Stratagems and sundry rare inventions,
The Town to fortefie, the Camp to save:
And contrary, to stretch all human reach,
The Host t'indamage, and the Town t'impeach,
20
In all which, Troylus wondrous Fame achieved,
His sword and Armor were best known and feared,
Above the rest the Argiue Dukes he gricued,
By his sole valor were the Trojans cheared,
In acting wonders scarce to be bele^ud,
The life of Hector in his blood appeared:
Priam and Troy now think themselves secure,
So long as Troylus among them may endure.
21
Achilles by his valor mated often,
And (as he thinks) much blemished in renown,
To see another valor soar aloft,
But his own bruitfull fame still sinking down,
His downy bed to him appears vnsoft,
He takes no pleasure in his regal Crown:
The best delights to him are harsh and sower,
Since in one arm rests a whole Cities power.
22
The Greeks think Hector in this youth alive,
To stop whose honors torrent they devise,
For since by force of arms in vain they strive
To catch at that which soars above the skies,
They to the depth of all their Counsels diue,
How they by cunning may the Prince surprise:
Being well assured that whilst his honors grow,
In vain they seek Troyes fatal overthrow.
23
The son of The^is feels his arms yet sore,
By the rude strokes that from his fury came,
His armor here and there be sprinkt with gore
Of his own wounds, that he is well-nye lame
With often iustles: and can no more
Endure the virtue of his strength or Fame:
For since his brest's in many places seard,
He Will fly unto the rescue of his guard.
24
Since neither the broad-brested Diomed
Can in the course his rude encounter stay,
Since last when Telamon against him sped,
He was perforc'st to give his fury way,
Since all those (...) Agamem^ led,
Though Martial'd in their best and proud'st array,
Could not repel his swift and violent speed,
he by his guard his ruin has Decreed.
25
The selfsame charge that he against Hector vsd,
Against Troylus he his Myrmidons persuades,
Behold where he with Hectors spirit infusd, Troylus.

The warlike Thous in even course inuades,
Him, whom his strength of arms might have excusd,
The Treian sends unto th'Elisian shades:
The Athenian Duke against him spurs his horse,
But quite through-piercst, the Greek drops down a corse.
26
Four Princes in as many coarses tasted
Like Fate, yet still the Dardan Prince sits hye,
No coarse, no towering blow he vainly wasted,
(In his great heart an host he dares defy)
King Diomed once more against him hasted,
And longed with him a warlike course to try:
But horse and man were in the race ore-throwne,
(Normaruell) now the princes strength was grown.
27
The elder of the Atrides next him grew,
And tryes the vigor of his arm and Spear,
Him likewise Troylus bravely overthrew,
And forth (vnshooke himself) he past on clear,
Now well-nigh breathless he himself withdrew,
Whom then the spleenefull Pelean watched ncare:
And as he lights to rest him on the ground,
Him the black Myrmidons incompasse round.
28
With merciless keen glaues they siege the youth,
Whom all at once with fury they assail,
In them is neither Honored grace not ruth,
Nor is one Trojan near the Prince to bale
Achilles, with the rest his blood pursuith,
(Thousands against one man must needs prevail)
Who seeing nothing else save death appearing,
Even against all odds, contemnes despair, or fearing.
29
But through their squadrons hewes a bloody trackt,
And lops the foremost that before him stands,
Had Deiphebus now his Brother backed,
Or had the place bin by Sarpedon mand,
Or had Epistropus (whom he now lackt)
Upon his party, tear'd his conquering hand,
Had their brigat Faulchions-brandisht by his side,
The Myrmidons had fayl'd, Troylus not did.
30
But he is alone rouud guirt with death and ruin,
And still maintains the battle, though in vain,
On every side a bloody passage he wing,
To work himself out through a dismal Lane
Of Myrmidons: Achilles still pursuing,
Who keeps the hindmost of his rough-hair'd train:
Yet had Prince Troylus marked him where he stood,
And almost wrought to him through death and blood
31
But ods prevailed, he sinkes down the midway, The death of Troylus.

Even in his fall his sword against him darting,
That did both Hectors and his life betray,
Boasting a Noble spirit in his departing
By Troylus death the Greeks obtain the day,
The Myrmidons their many wounds yet smarting,
Cure in their Lords Tent: whom the Greeks aplaud,
For Troylus death (against honor) wrought by fraud.
32
Now the dejected Trojans dare no more
Enter the field, the Greeks approach the gates
And dare them to grim war, who still deplore
Hector and Troylus in their Tragic fates,
Queen Hecuba yet keeps revenge in store.
Of which at length with Paris she dabates,
Vowing to catch his life in some fly train,
That by like fraud her two bold sons had slain.
33
She clas to mind the great Athilles pride,
Withal, the love he to her Daughter bears,
A thing in zeal she can no longer hide,
Since in Polyxena like love appears,
Troyes weak deiection she makes known besides,
Disabled by a siege of many years:
Therefore entreats him to accept her love,
And in a general truce the Argiues move.
34
The lofty Greek proud, by so great a Queen
To be sued to, when he records withal
How much he is feared, he gins to slake his spleen,
And the Maids beauty to remembrance call,
What can he more? Since he has dreaded been,
And seen his ablest Foes before him fall:
But yield to beauties soft inchaunting charm,
Knowing weak Troy dares not conspire his harm.
35
The day draws on, a peace has bin debated,
To which Achilles the proud Greeks persuades;
Some think it needful, others, hyer rated
Their honors, and this Concord much vpbraides,
Alone Achilles longs to be instated
In her fair grace (the beautifulst of Maids)
And with the son of Nestor makes repair,
Where Priam with his sons and Daughters are. Archilochus the son of Nestor.

36
Truce is proclaimed, the Damsel richly clad,
And by the Trojan Ladies proudly attended,
Whom none that saw, but admiration had,
As at a Goddess from hye heaven descended,
The innocenr Maid was still in countenance sad,
For loss of those that Tray but late defended:
Yet guiltless in her soul of any spleen
Dreampt against the Prince, by Paris or the Queen.
37
Unarmed Achilles to the Temple goes,
Whom Nestors son attends to Pallas shrine,
and all the way with Gold and Iew^ls strowes,
Prising them Earthy, but his Bride Divine,
and nothing of their Treacherous act he knows,
When Paris from a place where he had line
With armed Knights yssues, and a keen shaft drew,
Which in the heel the proud Achilles slow,
38
Who when he sees himself and friend betrayed,
and wounded to the Death, whilst he could stand,
Brandisht his sword, and among them slaughters made,
But now he wants his Myrmidons at hand,
and his strong armor Paris to invade, The death of Achilles and Archilochus.

Alack, the Temple was too strongly manned:
his strength that cannot bandy against them ali,
at length must sink, and his hye courage fall.
39
There lies the great Achilles in his gore,
and by his side the Son of Nestor slain,
Amongst the Trotans to be feared no more,
His body to the Greeks is sent again,
Whom they for Hectors change, and long deplore
his death (by Treason wrought:) upon the plain
For him a Monumentall Toombe they rear,
and for his death a joint revenge they swear.
40
The siedge still lasts, upon the part of Troy
Penthisilia with a thousand Maids, penthis^

Vows all their Amazenian strength to employ,
and for the death of Hector, Greece vpbraides,
Whilst in the Camp with much applausiue joy, Neopto^mus

Grim Pyrrh^ is received, Pyrrh^ that trades
In gore and slaughter, with revenge pursuing,
Even to the death, Troy, for his Fathers t^ine.
41
No longer the he will delay, but straight
Dare them to battle by the Morrowes Sun,
The Scythian Damsels long to show their height,
and imitate their deeds before-time dunne,
They know they enterprise a work of weight,
and long for Signal, now to battle run:
The (...) Greeks that were of Pyrrhus train,
Whom the Amazonians soon repulse again.
42
Penthisilea, was not that fair Queen A tale of a chaste Queen amongst the
Amazons.

Of Amazons, of whom we now entreat,
That made a Law, what Man so'ere had been
Within her Court, to make a byding Seat
above three days, he might not there be seen,
Though his power mighty, and his State were great:
For if within her Court he longer dwelt,
The penal Law was, he should sure be gelt.
43
So much she feared the supposed trains,
With which soft Women-kind us men accuse,
That our society she quite disdaynes,
Nor shall our fellowship her Ladies use,
To this decree she their applause constraines,
Because false men their weaker Sex abuse:
From which her words, nor warning can restrain the^,
She chusd this way, the only means to tame them.
44
This stri^kt decree kept many from her Coast,
That else had flockt as Suitors to the place,
Their Angel beauties which men covet most,
Must from the eyes of man receive no grace,
Many too bold their dearest Jewel lost,
And were made Eunuchs within three days space:
Else they were thought unfit for the Queens diet,
Who held that the first way to keep them quiet.
45
Some that could well have ventured their best blood,
Were loath to hazard what they needs must pay,
The Queen so much upon this Edict stood,
That she had driven her Suitors quite away,
And still (to be at rest) she held it good,
Vowing t'obserue it to her dying day:
Having this proved, those men that came most bold,
Their forf^it pay, none more submisse and cold.
46
So that in process few approacht their shore,
But such as had no means to hue elsewhere,
Whom their own Countries did esteem no more,
But pay their fine, they may be welcome here,
And have good place, and Lands, and livings store,
Nothing the Court has, can be held too dear:
Amongst the rest that held a Sovereign place,
Their lived a Baron of a Noble race.
47
He that was from his Nat^e Country fled,
For some offense that questioned his life,
and as a refuge to secure his head,
He shund the deadly Axe to taste the Knife,
But time out-weares disgrace, his course he led
Among the Damsels, free from femenine strife:
Doubtless the Woman that is suspicious most,
Would be resolved to see what he had lost.
48
The Noble Eunuch left a Son behind
In his own Country, who being grown to years,
Grew fairly featurd, of a generous mind,
and in his face much excellence appears,
He vows the world to travel, till he find
His banished Father, whose estate he fears:
At length by search, he is made to understand,
Of his late soiourne in the Scithians Land.
49
Thither he will, for so his vow decrees,
But when he knows an Edict too severe,
He Is loath to pay unto the Land such Fees,
Which he hopes better to bestow elsewhere,
In this distraction, lo from far he sees
A nimble Fayry, tripping like a Dear:
and as holies strowde on the grassie plain,
With sw^st speed she makes to him amain.
50
And greetes him thus: (Fair Youth) boldly proceed,
I promise thee good Fortune on thy way,
Among the Scithian Dames thou shall not bleed,
Only observe and keep still what I say,
My counsel now may stand thee much in steed,
and save thee that, thou would be loath to pay:
Receive this Handkercheife, this Purse, this Ring,
The least of them a present for a King.
52
These virtues they retain: when thou should eat,
Upon the Board this curious Napkin spread,
It straight shall fill with all delicious meat,
Foul, Fish, and Fruits, shall to the place be led,
With all delicious Cates, costly, and neat,
Which likewise shall depart when thou have fed:
This Ring has hath^ stone, whose virtue, know
Is to discern a true Friend, from a Foe.
52
In this thou may perceive both late and early,
Who flatters thee, and who intends thee well,
Who hates thee deadly, or who loves thee dearly:
The virtue of this Jewel does excel,
Out of this Purse if I may judge severely,
and in few words the worth exactly tell:
Value it rightly, it exceedes the rest,
and of the three, is rated for the best,
53
So often as thou shall in it thrust thy hand,
So often thy Palm shall be repleat with Gold,
Spend where thou will, travel by Sea or Land,
The riches of that Purse cannot be told,
Use well these gifts, their virtues understand,
Thank my deuinest Mistress and be bold:
Add but thy will to her auspicious aid,
She Will sure thee that which others late have paid.
54
Encouraged thus, he pierces their cold Clime,
Where many hot Spirits had been calmed of late,
And enters the great Court at such a time,
When he beheld his Father sit in State,
They that ^uriew the Youth now in his prime,
Not knowing his decree, blame his hard Fate:
And wish he might a safer Country choose,
Not come thus far, his deer'st things to loose.
55
For not a Ladies eye dwells on his face,
Or with judicial note viewes his perfection,
But thinks him worthy of their dearest grace,
They praise his look, gate, stature, and complexion,
And Judge him Issued of a Noble race,
A person worthy of a Queens election:
Not one among them that his beauty saw,
But now at length too cruel think their Law.
56
After some interchange of kindest greeting
Betwixt the Father and the stranger Son,
Such as is usual to a sudden meeting,
With ecstasies that Kindred cannot shon,
To omit their height of joy, as a thing fleeting,
For greatest joys are oft-times loohest don:
The Fath^ of his Sons ability,
Asks, If (...) brookt his (...) loss with facility.
57
For well he knows, he cannot anchor theare,
Or soiourne on that rude and (...) barous Cost,
But his free harborage must cost him d^ate,
(Censuring his Son) by what himself had lost,
she gentie Youth, whose thoughts are free from fear,
Says he is come securely there to host:
and spite the Queen and Ladies (with oaths deep)
Swears to his Father (what he has) to keep.
58
By this the Amazonian P^ hears
Of a young stranger in her Court arrived,
She sends to know his Nation, Name, and years,
But being told his Father there suruiu'd,
A reuerentman, one of her chiefest Peers,
She will not as the custom have him gyu'd:
But takes his Fathers promise, oath, and hand,
To have his Son made Freeman of her Land.
59
Three days the limits him, but they expierd
As others carst, he must the Razortry,
all things determined, the fair Queen desierd
The Stranger to a banquet instantly,
Who at his first appearance much admierd
Her state, her port, proportion, face, and eye:
Nor had he (since his Cradle) seen a Creature
So rich in beauty, or so rare in feature.
60
Down sat the Queen and Damsels at the board,
But the young Stranger stands by, discontent,
They pray him sit: He answers not a word,
Three times to him the Queen of Scithia sent,
But still the Youth would no reply afford,
The rest not minding what his silencement:
Leave him unto his humor, and apply
Themselves to feed and eat deliciously.
61
But when he saw the Ladies freely eat,
and feed upon the rude Cates of the Land,
At a withdrawing board he takes his seat,
and spreads his curious Napkin with his hand,
Straight you might see a thousand sorts of meat,
Of strangest kinds upon the Table stand:
What Earth, or Air, or Sea, within them breeds,
On these the Youth, with looks di^dainefull feeds.
62
The Queen amazed to see such change of cheer,
Whose beauty and variety surpast,
Longing to know the news, could not forbear,
But rose with all her Damsels at the last,
To know from whence he was supplyde, and wheare,
With Cates so rich in show, so sweet in taste:
The like in Scithia she had never seen,
The least of them a service for a Queen.
63
For now she has in scorn her own provision
And calls her choysest banquet, homely fare,
Her dainty Cates she has in proud derision,
Since she beheld the Strangers food so rare,
The Youth, who hopes by this t'escape incision,
Tells her (if so she please) he can prepare
A richer feast (yet not her Treasure wrong)
With any dish, for which her grace may long.
64
She grows the more Inquisitiue, and straight
Swears, if he will her royal Cater be,
She Will in her Kingdom raise him to the height
Of all high state, and chief Nobility:
For well she knows, it is a work of weight
To furnish her with such variety:
Since her cold Climat, with ten Kingdoms more,
Cannot supply her board with half that store.
65
When up the Stranger ryseth, and thus says:
Madam, for your sake was I hither guided,
Whom I will freely serve at all assayes,
For you this diet have I here provided.
Sit then, and as you like, my bounty praise,
These no illusions are to be derided,
But meats essential, made for your repast,
Sit down and welcome, and wher't please you taste.
66
The more she eats, the more she longs to know
Whence this strange bounty of the heavens proceeds,
They prove as sweet in taste, as fair in show,
The more she wonders, still the more she feeds,
The more she eats, the more her wonders grow,
She vows her Land shall Chronicle his deeds:
And make him Lord of all his present wishes,
Excepting Love, and what belongs to kisses.
67
The stranger then his Napkins virtue tells,
What wonders it affoords when it is spread,
Without all charms or Negr^ticke spells,
Or inuocations made unto the dead,
Only in native Virtue it excels
(A secret power by inspiration bred)
This he will bestow with all their Virtues store,
To save his forfet but for three days more.
68
The Ambitious Queen loath her Decrees should slack,
More loath to loose a Jewel of such prize,
That can afford her all things she does lack,
To make a feast as with the Dieties,
Vows for three days he shall sustain no wrack,
But then her law of force must tyranize:
Mean time her Court is for the stranger free,
Upon these firm conditions they agree.
69
Glad was the Queen, more glad the amorous stranger,
For neither at their bargain was agrieued,
She for her gift, he to escape such danger,
Having his Manhood for three days reprieu'd,
In her fair Park he longs to be a ranger,
Where fed such store of Dear (scarcely belieu'd)
Till he by tried experience had beheld,
How many beauties in the Court excelled.
70
Now trusting to the virtue of his Ring,
He longes to prove; who hate, who mean him good,
Who only to his ear smooth flatteries bring,
Who with the Queen upon his party stood,
For flattery is like an oily Spring,
Whose smooth soft waters waxing to a flood:
Entyce fond men, his Silver streams to crown,
But he that proves to swim, perforce must drown.
71
Among the rest, one Beldam near in place,
Unto the lustlesse Amazon, he knows
Persuades the Queen to his especial grace,
and stands in plea b^weene him and his Foes,
With her he grows acquainted in small space,
And in her lap a liberal Treasure throws:
He gives h^ Gold in every place he finds her,
And by large bounty to his Love he binds her.
72
The time wears on, his three-dayes Lease expires,
In which he ^s the things, to which he is borne,
His own Fee simple, yet the Queen requires
To have the forfeit since, the day's outworne,
But still his precious gifts the Youth inspires
With cheerful hope, he shall not live forlorn:
But trusts by promise of the fayry Dame,
A Man to part thence, as a Man he came.
73
The day fore The Execution, he was viewing
His precious Ring, the like was never seen,
Finding the time so near, he sits still ^ewing
His rashness, for he fears the Knife is keen,
Each man he thinks a Barbar him pursuing
To have him Enunch't; when in comes the Queen
And spies this glorious Ring upon his Finger,
(The Beldam, to this troubled youth did bring'er.)
74
Of this she falls in Question, much admiring
The Splendour, and besides she longs to know
What vertue't has, with ^gency desiring
If it be rare in worth, as rich in show,
The Youth into his former hopes retyring,
Recounts to her what Sovereign Virtues grow
From this bright Love, a means ordaind by Fate,
Only by which she may secure her State.
74
In this her Friends she may discern and try,
On whom she may rely her certain trust,
Who in her charge their utmost wills apply,
Who in her Seat of Judgment prove most just:
Next, she by this all Traitors may descry,
Such as against her virtues arm their lust:
Such as intend their Sovereign to depose,
Briefly, it points her Friends out from her Foes.
76
No marvel if the Queen were much in love
With such a Jewel, and for it would pay
What he would ask, as that which much behooues
To keep her doubtful Kingdom from decay,
To buy it at the dearest rate she proves,
He only craves but respight for one day:
That she but one day more his Youth would spare,
Ear he came bound unto the Barbers Chair.
77
The match is made, his gifts are known abroad,
and from all parts they come this man to see,
The multitude esteem him as a God,
That to their Sovereign Queen has been so free,
A starely S^eede he mo^s and thereon road
About the Court, wherethrongs of people be:
and from his Purse, of Gold whole handfuls flings,
A bounty that is seldom seen in Kings.
78
A thousand times his arm abroad he stretched,
as often the figured plates of coyn'd-Gold fly
about their ears, still to his Purse he reached,
And still to his applause the peoply cry,
The more they showte, the greater store he fetched
From his divine vnending Treasury:
The news of this unto the Queens soon came,
Wondering whose praise her people thus proclaim.
79
In comes th'admired Stranger and alighting,
The Queen him meets, and takes him by the hand
To lead him up: he by the way reciting
The Project she much longs to understand,
The Scithian Queen in his discourse, delighting
Upon the virtue of this Purse long scand:
Thinking if this third Prize she might enjoy,
She by her wealth might all the Earth destroy.
80
But Treasure cannot gain it, for it is Treasure
Even of it self, in vain she offers Gold
above all wealth, the Youth esteems his pleasure,
One thing will do it, that in her ear he told,
The covetous Queene's, perplexed above measure,
To buy the price that will be cheaply sold:
Only to bed with her, he does desire,
But till two Pears be roasted in the fite.
81
Oh! Gold, what can not thou? Long she does pause,
How great's the Wealth, how easy it is to buy
She knows, besides she is above her Laws,
And what she will, no Subject dares deny,
Why should she loose this Jewel? What Is the cause
She to her own Land should prove Enemy?
Whose weal, since she may compass with such ease,
Why should she not her-selfe somewhat displease?
82
The time's but little that the Youth does ask,
Besides, she will cause her Maid her charge to have,
If she compare her wages with her task,
She knows her time will not be spent in wast,
The friendly night will put a blushlesse Mask
Upon her brow, then how can she be trast?
The fire is made, the Pears plast, both agreed,
To Bed they go, good Fortune be their speed.
83
The trusted Hag, he knows to be his friend,
and one whom he had bribed long before,
It pleased her well, that his desires have end,
To have had him Eunuch't, would have griu'd her sore,
In bed mean time the loving pair contend,
To prove the game she never tried before,
And still she calls to make a quicker fire,
And prethy sweet Nurse let the Pears be nyer.
84
They shall (quoth she,) yet let them roast at ^easure,
The way-ward Queen yet thinks the time too long,
And that she pays too sweetly for his Treasure,
(For yield she must) the stranger proves too strong)
Yet still she calls (not yet?) It Is out of measure,
Nor yet, nor yet, she sings no other song,
Alack the Beldams slacknesse quite betrays her,
(The only means to keep him from the Razer.)
85
The youth prevailed, the Queene's somewhat appeasd,
And for there is no help the utmost tries,
Since her the stranger has by wager ceasd,
Before the watchword given she must not rise,
The Beldam thinks at last the Queen to have pleased,
Oh Madam they are roasted now (she cries:)
Are they indeed? Let them roast on (quoth she,)
And prethy Nurse put in two more for me.
86
I know not what effect this wager took,
But the next day she canceld her strict Law,
She that men hated: Eunuchs cannot brook,
Command was given that all such should withdraw,
And not presume within her Court to look,
That could be found touched with the smallest flaw,
And this Decree among the Scithians grew,
Till the sad day that they their husbands slew.
87
For when their flying men were quite disgracst,
And sailed in battle, they disdained their yoke,
And scorning all subjection, proudly facst
Their foes themselves with many a boisterous stroke,
From Scithiaes bounds all men they clean displacst,
And strongly armed, through many Regions broke:
Thus reigned successively many a bold Dame
In Scithia, whence Penthisilea came.
88
Their Pollaxes, whose use the Greeks near knew,
Thunder upon their losty Caskes and fell them,
The Greeks st^ll guarde the field, although some few
Perished at first, and striving to excel them,
Being but Women, they some Damsels slew,
And with the odds of number they repel them,
But when the Queen into the battle flings,
Where ear she comes, she bloody Conquest bringes.
89
King philomines Combats by her side,
With many a bold Knight brought from Paphlagone,
Against whom the King Cassilius fierce can ride,
Srriuing that day to have his valor known,
Between them was a fair and even course tryde,
Amphimacus to Priam dear alone
Since Troylus death, thrust in amongst the Greeks,
Forcing their flight with many clamorous shrikes.
90
Him Ajax Telamon encounters then,
And stays the fury of his barbed Steed,
Acting that day, deeds, more then commen men,
Such as through both the Armies wonder breed,
Whom Noble Deiphebus meets again,
The youthful Prince, whose valor does exceed,
The fearful slaughter of his puissance stays,
Whose discipline his Focs could not but praise.
91
And had not wrathful pyrrhus now led on
His Fathers Myrmidons, and quite forsook
His vntryde Knights, the day had sure been gone,
But where they marched, the Earth beneath them shook,
And to withstand their vigor, they found none,
Till Paris with his Archers that way took:
and now began a fierce and Mortal fray,
In Emulation who should fly, who stay.
92
Paris preuailes, his forces gain the best,
And Lycomedes Grandchild must retire,
Behold, where against the Trojans Ajax Crest
Seems above all his Soldiers to aspyre,
His huge seauen-folded Targe still guards his breast,
For Paris through the field he does inquire:
Whom as the Sal'mine fighting, spies from far,
He hears a Steele-shaft from his Crosbow jar.
93
It aims at him, and where his Armor parted
Between the Arm and Shoulder, there it fell,
Ajax observed the man by whom he smarted,
And pressing forward, vows to quite him well,
Through the mid-throng the nearest way he thwarted,
No opposition can his rage expel:
Till he had past through Groves of growing Spears,
To come where thousand Shafts sung by his ears.
94
Yet past them all, even till he came where fought
The amorous Trojan, and to him he makes
His guard of Archers, the Greek dradded naught,
But over his Helm his reeking Glaue he shakes,
Which in his fall assured ruin brought The death of Paris.

Upon the Earth, the dying Trojan quakes:
And in his death leaves all terrestrial joy,
Fair Hellen, Priam, Heeuba, and Troy.
95
Oh! Had the Raptor in his Cradle did,
Millions of lives had in his death been saved,
and Asiaes glory, that late sweld in pride,
Had not with siedge and death so long been brau'd,
Over his dead Coarse the warlike Greek does stride,
and works his way through harness richly ingrau'd:
Whose curious works he blemished where he stood,
Blurring their Fingers with wide wounds and blood.
96
The Dardans fly at Brute of Paris fall,
The Greeks with dreadful march their flight pursue,
Even to the very skirts of Troyes fair wall,
But between death and them the Scithians grew,
Squadrons of Greeks before the Damsels fall,
Now the re-spirited Trojans fight ren^w:
Twice fore the Scithian Queen did Pyrrhus stand,
Yet twice by her repulsed, hand to hand.
97
Night parts the battle upon equal odds,
In Paris death, the Trojans have the wurst,
Hellen and Troy bequeath him to the Gods,
His death less mourned, then has his life bin cursed,
The morning comes, the Greeks make their abode
Before the gates, through which the Scithians burst:
And scorning to be Coopt, each with her shield
Bravely aduanst, make roomth into the field.
98
Them Deiphebus follow^s with his train,
The Sole-remainder of King Priams race,
By whom at first a valiant Greek was slain,
That in the Camp inioyde a Sovereign place,
Amphimachus next him spurs on the pla^ne,
With Philomines who ranks on apace:
Aeneas and Antenor, these contend,
With all their powers to give the long siedge end.
99
In vain: for lo, upon the adverse part,
Guirt with his Fathers Myrmidons appears,
Stern Pyrrhus, whose late bleeding wounds yet smart,
Next him Pelides, with a band of Spears,
Then marched Tysander with a Lions heart,
Ulysses, Steuelus, and (proud in years:)
Nestor: the two Atrides well attended,
The two Achiaces next the field as^nded.
100
These with the other Princes proudly fare,
Disordred ruin, ruffles on each side,
Thousands of either party slaughterd are
In this encounter, Deiphebus did,
And b^aue Amphimachus, forward to dare, The death of Deiphebus and
Amphiemachus.

And able to perform (a Soldier tried)
And now on Priams party only stand,
The Scithian Damsels to protect his Land.
101
Troy droopes, and (...) aspyres full fourteen days,
Penthisilea has vph^ld her fame,
Both Camp and C^ty surf^it with her praise,
and her renown deservedly proclayme,
The best of Greece her hardiment assayes,
Yet shrink beneath the fury of the Dame:
None can escape her vigor unrewarded,
Troy by this stern Virago's soly guarded.
102
But destiny swayes all things: Troy was founded
To endure a third wrack, and must fate obey,
Therefore even those that with most might abounded,
Cannot reprieue her to a longer day,
The S^ythian Dames (by many Princes wounded)
Were with the Queen at length to Greece a pray,
Her too much hardiness her self inmur'd,
Admidst her foes, in Armor well assured.
103
And when her Lance was ^plinter'd to her hand,
Her warlike Pollax hewed to pieces small,
Her self round guirt with many an armed band,
Even in her height of Fame she needs must fall,
The warlike Wench amongst the Greeks does stand
Vnbackt by Troy, left of her Damsels all,
The battery of a thousand swords she bides,
Till her iron plates are hewed off from her sides.
104
Thus br^athlesse, and vnha^est, (fresh in breath
And strong in armor,) Pyrrhus her inuades,
At these advantages he knows it is eath
To cope with her quite scuered from her Maids,
His bale^ull thoughts are spurred with rage and death,
Close to her ^ide in blood of Greeks he wades:
(Blood sluc'st by her) and naked thus assayles her,
Whilst a whole Camp of foes from safety railes her.
105
After much war th'Amazonian falls,
Whom Pyrrhus lops to pieces with his Glaue, The death of P^nthisilea.

And ^ing p^-meale hewed her, loud he calls
To have her limbs kept from an honored grave,
But to be strow'd about the sieged walls:
She dead, the Trojans seek themselves to save
By open flight, her Virgins fighting dye,
Scorning the life, to gain which, they must fly.
106
Now Troy's at her last cast, her succors fail,
Her soldiers are cut off by ruthlesse war,
Her Seaports hemd in with a thousand sail,
In her land fiedge two hundred thousand are,
They close their Iron gates their lives to bail,
And strengthen them with many an iron bar:
After that day, they dare no weapons weild,
Or front the proud Greeks in the open field.
107
Aeneas and Anten^r now conspire,
(As some suppose) the City to betray, Dares.

And with the Greeks they doom it to the fire,
But whilst the rich Palladium's seen to stay,
In Pallas Temple, they in vain desire
King Priams ruin or the Lands decay:
Therefore the slye Ulysses buys for Gold,
The Jewel that does Troy in safety hold.
108
Oh cursed Priest, that can thy self profess, The Palladi^ bought by
Ulysses of the Priest of Pallas for a great sum of money.

Severe in habit, but in heart profane,
Would of thy name and Order, there were less,
That will not stick to sell their friends for gain,
Who (but that knows thy Treason,) once would guess
Such treacherous thoughts should taint a Church-mans brain,
But many to the Gods devoted soly,
In hearts are godless, though in garments holy.
109
Whether by purchase, or by stealth, (Heaven knows,)
But the Palladium now the Greeks enjoy,
And by a general voice the Camp arose
From their long ^ege, their ships again t'inioy,
The Greeks unto the sea themselves dispose,
And make a show to bid farewell to Troy:
But of this Stratagem, what next befell,
This Canto will not give us room to tell.
ARtimesia Queen of Caria, and wife to King Mansolus, she is famous for her
Chastity and the love to her husband, after whose death she made so royalla
Sepulcher for him, that it was held of the Wonders of the world, and of that,
all stately buildinges have since then been called Mansolea.

Camna a beauteous maid borne in Galatia, the wife of Plutarchus libde
virtutibus Mulierum.
one Sinatus, she was religiously devoted to the cha^ Goddess Diana, whom her
Country held in great reverence, whom when Synorix had often solicited with
love, but could not prevail, he treacherously slew her husband Sinatus, and
after enforced her to his Marriage Bed, to whom by the urgent instigation of
her friends, and the promotion expected by the greatness of Synotix, she
seemed willingly to yield, (he persuading her, that for his love to her, he
wrought the death of her beloved Sinatus.) When before the Altar of the
Goddess they were to be espoused, she drank to Synorix (as the custom was) a
Bowl of Wine, in which when he had pledged her, she told him with a joyful
countenance, that in that draught they had both caroused their deaths, being
extremely ouer-ioyed, that before the chaste goddess Diana, and in the face of
so great a people, she had justified her own Innocence, and revenged the
murder of her husband, which incontinently appeared, for the potion being
commixt with poison, they both expired before the Alter.

When Achilles was slain in the Temple by Paris, it is remembered Antimachus.
of him that the Graecians could not purchase his body of the Trojans till (to
ransom him) they waighed them down ass much Gold as poysed the body of
Hector. It Is said that for his death all the Muses and Nymphs wept exceedingly
Rursus redempto pro altero cadauere Lycophron in Alexandra.

P^r pondus Auris splendidi parto^j ferent.
The Isle Boristhenes was called Achilleides of Achilles that Ibicus.
was there buried, besides it is Poetised of him that in the Elisian field,
after his death, he espoused Medea. Herodotus in Euterpe.


Paris that slew Achilles, and was after slain by Ajax, was sent into Greece
with two and twenty sail, whence he brought the fair Hellen. His
Shipmaister, or he that built Diognetes in rebus.
his ships, was called Phereclus. Some think he pierst Greece first by the
Commandment of Venus, and having (...) Smernais Harmonida^
Hellen, carried her into Egypt, where he first lay with her. Others are
opinioned, that he bedded with her in Athens, and (...), Duris (...). (...).
had by her these four Sons, Dunichus, Carithus, Aganus, and Ideus. Others
think, he first lay with her in Cranae, one of the Sp^rad Islands, which when
Paris had done almost Alexandar in (...) (...).
by violense, and after many tears sbed for the leaving of her Husband, it is
said, that of her tears grew the Herb Helenium, which if women drink in
wine, it prouokes mirth and Venery.

Of Helena it is thus recorded, Menelaus being dead, after their return to
Greece, for her former luxuriousnes, she was expulsed from Lacedemon by her
Sons, Nicostratus and Megapenthe. She fled to her Cozen Polixo, the Wife of
Tlepolemus, who governed Rhodes, where she soiourned for a space, but Polixo
after remembering, that her Husband was by reason of the Adultery of Hellen,
stain in the wars of Troy, (...) in (...) (...).
she came upon Hellen suddenly, as she was bathing her self amongst her
Maids, and hurriyng her unto a tree, upon the same she strangled her.

Others report, that Hellen waxing old, and seeing her beauty wrinkled, and
quite faded, in grief thereof hanged her self, as a just reward of her former
incontinence.

Some think the Palladium to be bought by Ulysses of the priest of Pallas.
Others, that it was stole by Ulysses and Diomed, others that it was
Merchandized by Aeneas and Antenor, In which sale, the famous City of Troy was
betrayed to (...) lib. 3.
the Greeks. These opinions are uncertain, but when Ilus was to build the
Palace of Islion, following a party-couloured Ox, he prayed to the Gods, that
some auspicious sign might satisfy him from the Heavens, that his buildinges
were pleasing to the dietyes: then to him descended the Palladium, an Image of
three Cubits height, which seemed to have motion, and to walk of it self; in
the right hand holding a Spear, in the left hand a Distaffe, or Rock and a
Spindle, and where he further proceeded to the Oracle to know the virtue of
this Palladium, it was them answered him, that as long as that was kept free,
inviolate, and vnprophaned, so long TIOY should be in peace and security, which
accordingly happened. For till Ulysses had either bought or stolen away the
Palladium, the Greeks had never any apportunity or means to use any vielence
upon the City.

The end of the 14. Canto.
Argumentum
ON th'Hellesponticke Sands Ep^us reares
A brazen horse: the Graecians hoise up sail
And feigning to depart: Synon with tears
Tells to the invaded King an ominous tale,
The Fleetereturnes by night: After ten years
Troy is surprisde, and the proud Greeks prevail,
The City a burnt, and after tragic broils,
The Greeks return, laden with Asiaes spoils.
ARG. 2.
LAocon and Polites, Hectors Ghost.
K. Priams death, Troyes Fate, Crevsa lost.
CANTO. 15.
1
TReason, whose horrid Front I must unmask,
And pluck the Vizor from thy Fiend-like face,
To paint thee out in colors is my task.
And by thy cloven foot thy steps to trace,
In which (I still Di^ine assistance ask)
Hell gave thee Birth, and thou (...) thy race
From the grand Prince of darkness, in whose Cell
Thou first tookst life, and (...) return to dwell.
2
T^y thou wast strong, and thy defense was good,
But Treason through thy strength made bloody way,
Had thou not harbored Traitors, thou had stood,
And to thy age annexed the longest day,
But Treason that most thirsts for Princes blood,
And of the highest kingdoms seeks decay,
Enters thy Court, and couets to destroy
With thy proud buildings (even the name of Troy.)
3
Thy envy stretched to our Chaste Maiden-Queene, Q Elizabeth.

Whose Virtues, even her foes could not but praise,
Yet against her graces did thou Arm thy (...),
Thinking by Parries hand to end her days, Doctor Parry.

But God and Truth (whose Patron she was seen,)
Against their Cannons did hye Bulwarks raise,
Such Bullet-proofe, that neither private Train
Could reach her, ^or the open arm of Spain,
4
What Parry mist, fourteen fierce Traitors more Babington and his (...)

Stirred up by Rome, took Sacramental vows,
That God that kept her (...) th'invasiue foe,
Against these bloody Butchers knit their brows;
Heaven gave them all a fatal overthrow,
(For heaven no such (...) act allows:)
But to all them a black end has appointed,
Whose bold hand dares to touch the Lords anointed.
5
If such Aeneas and Antenor were, Percy and Catesby with their Con^ederates.

That would for Coin their King and Country sell,
Like plots with them our late Arch-traitors bear,
To whom for aye they may be ranked well, Guido Vaux.

And thou ( Gui (...)) that never yet foundst peer
(For a damned purpose) bred in Earth or hell:
He whom all pens with most reproaches taint
Simon, (with thee compat'd) is found a Saint.
6
He told a forged tale to a foreign King,
With hope his King and Countries fame to raise;
But thou, from strangers did thy complots bring,
He a strange Country, not his own betraies,
The poisons from the head of Treasons spring,
False Guide sucked, which fed him many days:
Treasons, Milkt, tasted, seems to quench the thurst,
But once took down, it (...) men till they burst.
7
That fate which he and his confederates had,
May all receive that bear their Treacherous mind,
Their purpose cuill, and their ends were bad,
A Fate to all men of their rank affignd,
And that great King whose safety has made glad
The hearts of three great Kingdoms, (...) confind:
Long may he reign, still guarded by those powers,
Whose hands Crown Virtue, and her foes devowers
8
That the same state that was in hazard then,
May in this peaceful Kingdom long endure,
The King to guide his Peers: Peetes, Common men:
Whose summoned Parliaments may plant secure
Britains fair Peer, for many a worthy pen
To Chronicle: These acts black and impure,
We cannot justly on Aeneas lay,
In whose reproach we must our Censures stay.
9
Since some, whose hy works to the world are dear,
Whose gravity we reverence and admire Virgils Eneids.

His Fame, unto posterity would clear,
And in his Innocent applause desire,
It Were pity he that two New-Troyes did rear,
As famous as that one consumde by fire:
( Rome and our London) for the double gain
Of one lost Troy, should wear a Traitors stain,
10
The bruised Greeks (...) with rough storms of War,
By Pallas art, (...) a Timber-steede, The horse of Troy.

Whose Backs Tree, (...), of such huge vastness are,
That they in all (...) (...) wonder breed,
The Mountain structure may be seen from far,
Which finished, they amongst them have agreed:
To stuff his hollow (...) with great store
Of Harnest men (so (...) it on the shore.)
11
This done, their new-calkt Navy they wind thence,
As if they to My^ne would back repair,
Beneath a promontory not far thence,
They Anchor East, where they concealed are,
Now Troy secure and dreadlesse of offense,
Loses her self from her Diurnall care:
Wide stand the Ports, the people issue free,
Th'vnsouldierd fields and Deserts, plain to see.
12
Where Hector did (...) invade,
Where Nestor pitched, where Troylus wan the day,
Where grim Achilles log'd, where Ajax made
His hot incursions, hewing out his way,
Where Agamemnon with his forces played,
Where with his (...) Ulysses lay:
Where such men fought, and such their valors tried,
Where some men conquered, others bravely did.
13
Some wonder at Myneruaes stately piece,
Saying it were good to place it in her fawn,
Since the Pelasgians are returned to Greece,
Their brazen horse may through their walls be drawn,
Other more staide know they are come to Fleece
And pillage them, this leaving as a pawn
Of some strange Treason, whose suspected guile,
Seems to frown inward, though it outward smile.
14
Thus is the multitude in parts divided,
Some wonder at the Module being so rare,
Others, whose brains are with more i^dgement guided,
would rip his womb, which some desire to spare,
Ardent Laocoon thinking to have decided
This general doubt (as one that all things dare)
Is seen from top of a high Tower discending,
A threatening spear against the Machi^e bending.
15
Crying from far, you foolish men of Troy,
Oh, can you trust the presents of a foe?
Who came from Greece these high walls to destroy,
And ten whole years have wrought your overthrow,
What can you in the Danauish Treasons joy?
Amongst you all, does none Ulysses know?
Either this swelling womb is big with child
Of armed Greeks: or against your walls compild.
16
These brazen hoofes are made to (...) your mure,
The trusty pale that has so long defended
Your sons and wives, where they have lived secure,
Maugre the ruin by the foe intended,
Against your trusty Guards no wrong endure,
Whose Bulwarkt strength you have so often commended:
This said, against the brazen Steed he flung
A steele-head spear which through his entrails rung
17
The trembling Mole from forth his Cauernes gave
A horrid groan, a noise of armor iar'd
Through his transfixed breast, (if ought could save
Ill-fated Troy) this had their ruin bard,
And they had ripped the bowels of that grave,
From which the sad confused sound was heard:
Behold the Dardan shepherds with loud cries,
Before the King bring bound a Greekish prise.
18
Dispersed Troy assembles, and attend
Some uncouth Novel, manacled now stands,
The surprisd Greek, his eyes to heaven extend,
To heaven he likewise would exalt his hands,
Whilst showers of tears down by his cheeks descend,
And thus he says: Have I (...) the bands
Of armed Greeks, to (...) here in Troy?
And whom my foes have spared, must foes destroy.
19
Relenting Priam is soon moved to ruth,
His misery and tears woo him to passion:
He thinks such looks, such tears should harbor truth,
And pitties him, disguisd in wretched fashion,
With comfortable words he cheares the youth,
Asks him of whence he is, and of what Nation:
When to the passionate king he thus replide,
Priam commands, and I will nothing hide.
20
Who has not heard of the Duke Palimed,
By the Pelasgian Princes doomed to dye,
Whom false Ulysses to the scaffold led,
Him above all the rest most loved I,
He was my Kinsman (but alas he is dead)
With that, swift watery drops drill from his eye:
Him when I guiltless saw, condemned of Treason,
I mourned my Kinsmans death, (as I had reason)
21
Not could I keep my tongue (unhappy man)
But private whispering have I breathed against those,
That sought his death, to threat them I began,
Who to my friend had bin opposed foes,
Fox-like Ulysses first, observed me than,
Whom Calchas seconds (why should I disclose
My miserable state) unhappy wretch?
Since their revenge as far as Troy does stretch.
22
I had but did there, and I hear am dying,
(Grief stops his speech, he can no further speak)
Still what he wants in words, with tears supplying,
Till they with interruptions silence break,
When after farre-fecht sighs himself applying
To further process, (he proceeds:) the wreake
They threatened then, since now I must not fly, Synons Tale

(Witness you Trojans, Synon cannot lie.
23
Often would the warre-tyr'd Greeks have left this Town,
But still the Morrow tempests them restrain,
Threatening their Navy in the Abisme to drown,
And they attempt their wished return in vain,
But most the angry Neptune seems to frown,
When old Epeus had upon this plain,
Builded this Monumentall Steed, of late
To the Deuinest Pallas Consecrate.
24
Euriphilus is straight to Delos sent',
To know the Oracles advice herein,
He thus returns: A Virgins blood is spent
To appease the tempests when these wars begin,
And in their end the Gods have like intent,
That you with sacrifice shall purge your sin:
In your pursuit they human blood desire,
and you with blood must purchaso your retire.
25
This when the vulgar knew, not one but fears,
Whose dreaded life offended Phabus craves,
Oh! Hence proceeds the force of all my tears,
All prophecy his ruin, that depraues
The Oyle-tong'd Greek: Ulysses Calchas cheares,
To point him out that must appease the Waves:
Ten days he scilence kept, as loath to name,
His destined life, whom Phabus seems to claim.
26
Scarce with Ulysses clamors is he won
To sentence any: till with vrgence great,
He doomes me to the flames, the people ron
To see him that must taste the Alters heat,
all glad that this denounced doom is don,
That I th offended God-hood must entreat:
And that my bloody slaughter answers all,
Which each one feared, upon himself might fall.
27
The day was com, my brows with wreaths were crowned,
and I made ready for the sacred fire,
My hands behind (as you behold them) bound,
The Priest in his Pontifical attire,
Ready to strike, and I incompast round
With fire and death, (yet Mortals life desire)
The truth I Will tell, alas sin cannot lie;
I lcapt from of the Altar, thence I fly.
28
Pursude in vain, fear gave my body wings,
In a deep saggy covert, I obseure me,
Until the night had with her aerie stringes
Drawn her black veil over Heavens face, to assure me,
Hoping to hide me, till the Argiue Kings
Had sayld from thence, but thinking to seeure me:
Poor wretch, I from the Gracians fled a way,
and now (alas) (...) made the (...) pray.
29
Whom neither Heaven, nor Earth, nor Greece, nor Tr^y,
nor air, nor Sea, will take to their protection,
But all conspire poor S^non to destroy,
Then air, Come lend me part of thy infection,
Heaven, Earth, and Sea, all your (...) powers employ,
and like confederates (...) in my deiection:
and then he beats his breast, weeps, sighs, and groans,
Whose grief King Pri^m and all Troy bemones.
30
The good old Pri^m bids his hands unbind,
and cheares him thus: Of Greece thou art no more,
Thou shall be ours, thy Country has resigned
Thy life to us, which freely we restore,
Then say; What means this Monster we here find
Upon our Beach? Whom should this guist adore?
Or what Religion's int? Whence is he bred?
Or for what cause does he our Confines tred?
31
When with his new loosd hands to heaven vpreard,
Thus Synon: Witness you eternal Fires,
Thou (...) (...), which but late I feared,
and all you powers to whom our zeal aspytes,
That I hate Greece, and Troy that has me cheard
I am ingra'st too, Tr^y has my desires:
I am a Child of Troy, Greece I desye,
Witness you Gods, that Synon cannot lie.
32
The false pel^gians in great Pallas (...)
Her: Diomed (...) (...) offended,
By stealing from her charge with guile unjust,
Herrare Palladium for which she extended
Revenge against Greece: they to appease her, must
By some Oblation see their guile amended:
That her commensed (...) may be withdrawn
From them, whose violence spard not her ^wne.
33
And now to make the (...) borne Pallas smile,
Whose anger made the Tempests against them war,
Chalchas (...) the high Equinall pile,
That his huge (...) might all entrance bar,
Through your percullist Gates (such was his guile)
For should you on this Horse print the least (...)
Of an offensive hand (being for her made)
You by your (...) have your lives betrayed.
34
If you deny it entrance through your walls,
Or this unweildy frame in ought despise,
Well guarded Troy by Pallas anger falls,
The Greeks return, and long-liu'd (...) dies:
But if this Steed for whom the (...) calls
Pierce through your (...) mure, or if it rise
And mount above your walls, to Pallas shrine,
Troy still shall stand, and Greece the wrack is thine?
35
Priam and his consederate Kings shall then
To Sparta, and Meceane the Greeks pursue,
Deuast their losty spyring Citti^s, when
The clamorous Land shall their destruction rue,
Loosing by Troy whole infinites of men,
Witness you Gods, poor Synons words are true,
Such looks, such tears, such protestations chief,
Wins in all Troy remorse: the King belief.
36
What many a well-rig'd bark, and armed Keele,
What not the bloody ^edge of ten whole year,
To make Troy taste inconstant Fortunes wheel,
Ulysses wisdom, nor Achilles Spear,
What not King Diomeds through piercing Steel?
All this did periurd (...) with a tear;
B^old (whilst all the rowt on Synon gaze)
a dread portent that does all Troy amaze.
37
Along the troubled Billows toward the shore,
Two Blacke-scal'd Serpents on their bellyes glide,
at whose approach the foaming Surges rore,
These ^ery Serpents to the Beach applyde,
and in Laocons blood who that time wore
The Priest-hoods roabes, their arming Scales they did:
Their winding trains, they with loud hissinges roll
About his breast, till they enlarged his Soul.
38
The Monster-multitude before dismayed
At the recourse of these infernal Snakes,
Think bold Laocon to be justly paid,
Because he yet his harmefull Iauelin shakes,
Some Cables fetch, some with their Leauers stayed
The Pondrous Engine which deep ^urrowes rakes
Along the Earth: others the Walls hurl down
To give the Horse free passage to the Town.
39
Wide stand the yron-bard gates, whilst all the rout
Buckle to work, the fatal Muchine climes,
Th^thronged Bulwarks (big with Soldiers stout)
Ready to be delivered: hallowed rimes,
The Virgins sing, and nimbly dance about,
Myneruas Steed, the wonder of these times:
Thinking themselves boue others highly blessed,
That can be more officious then the rest.
40
Four times the Brazen Horse entering, stuck fast
Anenst the ruinde guirdle of the Town,
Four times was armor heard (yet vnagast)
The fatal Beast with sacred wreathes they Crown,
(Sunk in blind ignorance) and now at last,
Before Mineruaes shrine, they place it down:
In Himnes and Feasts the ominous day they spend.
Offering to her that must their lives defend.
41
Mean time heaven turns. night from the Ocean falls,
Inuoluing with black darkness, earth, and air,
And call the Gracian craft about the walls,
The scattred Trojans slumber, far from care,
and now his Pilots (great Atrides calls,)
Who back to Tenedos with speed repair:
The Universal Phalanx lands in have,
And through the silence of the Moon are past.
42
Now startles Synon, and a flaming-brand,
He wafts from top of one of (...) Towers,
Which like a Beacon in the night must stand
To guide the Greeks, and their nocturnall powers,
Then with a Key graspt in his fatal hand,
Feareless, he through the palped darkness scowres
To the big bellied Stallion, turns the spring,
and through the door the Harnest Grecians fling.
43
First, blacke-hayrd Pyrrhus fixes in the ground,
His Oaken Spear, and from the loft he slydes,
Ulysses next, yet halting of his wound,
and then the younger of the two Atrides:
Tysandar from the structure next does bound
Thoas and Athanas, two warlike guides:
With Stheuelus down by a Cable fall,
and bruisde with leaping, on the Pauement sprall.
44
Pelidus follows these, and then the man
That in his brain first cast this fatal mould,
Epeus th'enginer, whom Synon than
Did in his black and penurd arm^s in fould
Their sweatty brows, they with the darkness fan,
Each chearing up his Mate with courage bold:
Strip their bright Swords, by whose quick glimering light,
They find their way in the dark star-lesse night.
45
The City sunk in Wine and Mirth they'nuade,
Slaughter the Watch that on the ground lie spread,
Then through the broken Walls (but late decade)
The Generals Army is by Synon led,
And Agamemnons colors are displayde,
Now tumults and confusions first are bred:
Havoc begins, loud showtes and clamors rise,
Lifting their Tragic uproar through the skies.
46
Heavens lamps were half burntout, it was past midnight
When to Aeneas in his bed appeared
Sad Hector, (...) and wan, full of affright,
His hair clotterd with blood, his ruffled Beard Hectors ghost

Disordred, all those deep carved wounds in sight,
Which in defense of Tr^y and his indeard:
Were graude upon his flesh, behind him fall,
Those thongs, that dragged him round about Troyes wall.
47
Oh, how much from that great King-killer changed,
Hye spirited Hector, when being proudly decked
In great Achilles spoils, he freely ranged
Through guards of Steel, whilst from his Helm reflect
Trophies of Greece: Oh me! How much estranged,
From him that did all Asiaes pride protect,
Even to their Fleet the Achiue Kings pursue,
And among their ships round Bals of Wildfire flew.
48
When to the sleeping Prince approaching nigh,
He with a sigh from his decpe intrailes fetched,
Thus says. (Thou Goddess son, Aeneas fly)
And from these burnings, that by this are stretched
Quite over your glorious buildings, climbing hye,
Deliver thee: the Arm of war has retcht
Even to the Crest of Troy, and with one blow,
Given it a sad and certain ou^throw.
49
Greece has your walls, the Universal roof
Of Troy is sunk and fallen, her bearers fayld,
Destruction that has houered long aloose,
Has ceaz'd her towers, and her spires auayld,
Could might have kept her, by the manly proof
Of this right hand, the Prisoner had bin bayld:
But Troy (alas) is sentenc'st, and must dye,
Then from her funeral Flames ( Aeneas fly.)
50
To thee her Gods and Relics she commends
Thee, that must her posterity r^uiue,
For though her glory here in seeming end,
Yet dying Troy in thee is kept alive,
Now cleaues the earth, and the sad Ghost discends,
Aeneas with dull sleep begins to strive:
And waking, hears a noise of clattering War,
And many (...) Clamors, (...) and far.
51
When mounting on a Turret, he might spy
The City all on Flame, and by the light,
A thousand several Conflicts: sparkles fly
As far as to the Sea, the waves shine bright,
And now at length he sees, Synon can lie,
His Treasons manifest, still this black night
Clamors of men, and Trumpets, clangors grow,
Whilst with warm recking blood the channels flow.
52
Aeneas arms in have, graspes in his hand
A two-edged Semiter to guard his life,
Knows not to whom to run, or where to stand,
In every (...) is danger, rage, and strife,
Yet longes for skirmish: and on some proud band
To prove his strength, now whilst the tumults rife:
For since th'Achiue fires such splendour give,
To dye in arms, seems sweeter then to live.
53
Behold, where from the foreign slaughter flying Panthus Otriades.

Panthus Otriades, Priest of the Sun?
Scoures through the streets: Aeneas him espying,
Calls to him thus. Whether does Panthus run?
What mean these flames, these groans of people dying?
This frightfull iarte of battles new begun?
When Panthus thus: Aeneas lets away,
Of Troy and us, this is the latest day.
54
Troy was, and (...) was, but they are past,
Great Ihoue has from the earths bosom swept us all,
The Insulting Greeks have conquered us at last,
And foreign Steel now menases our wall,
The Brazen Horse that midst our Meure sticks fast,
Has powrd an army forth: whole thousands fall
And drop down from his sides, whilst Synon stands
Warming amidst the flames his treacherous hands.
55
The Gates are ceasd, the broken walls made good
With bright Death-pointed Steel, Irruption's bard,
Behold my passage was Knee-deepe in blood,
Crossing the street from great Atrides guard,
Such as escape this purple falling flood,
Fire or the Sword consumes, our choice is hard:
Ruin beguirts us, and what most we fear
We cannot fly, death rages every where.
56
Now hurries strong Eneas, madly faring,
Through flames, through swords, whether Erinnis calls,
Eg'd on by rage and fury, no man sparing,
On every side are fires, wounds, Clamors, brals,
To him armed Ripheus ioynes (and wonders daring)
Iphilus, Hypanis, and Dimas, falls
In the same tanke: youthful Chorebus tried,
Does likewise glister by Aeneas side.
57
Chorebus, who for fair Cassandracs Love,
Came from Megdomia to the Dardan broils,
These seeking, flying death, all dangers prove,
And task their valors to all desperate toils,
To places of most slaughter they remove,
Even where the Greeks commit most horrid spoils:
Armed with this Saw; This only Captives cheares,
When safety flies, all-resting death appears.
58
Thus seek they certain death amidst the heart
Of Flame-guilt Troy, whilst the black fatal night
Flies hood-winkt twixt the poles, her iron Cart
Rusty with darkness, oh what Mortal wight
Can half the terror of that hour impart,
Such howles, sighs, groans, wounds, slaughters and afright:
In every street, Liues-blood, death, murder, fear,
The reeking Faulchion, and the fatal Spear.
59
With Armed Androgeos they encounter first, Androgeos.

Androgeos who mistakes them for his mates,
And cheares them thus, we have already burst,
and made irruption through the batterd Gates,
Now let your Swords that for their liue-blouds thurst,
Glut them with purple healths, behold their Fates:
But when from them he looks some fire apply,
With armed hands upon his traynes they fly.
60
And put them all to massacre: the whiles
Chorebus says. Some comforts in despair,
Fortune upon our first endeavors smiles,
The Foes are vanquished, and we victors are,
Then come; Make use of their Pelasgian guiles,
Put on their arms, and to their Guards repair:
Their proper arms shall against themselves contend,
Where virtue fayles, use fraud, (to God and friend.)
61
With that he dons Androgeos shining Caske,
Which like a Bearded Commet glisters far,
The rest in foreign Helmes their faces mask,
And mingled with the Greeks, began new war,
Still Fortune smiles on their Nocturnall task,
Where Greeks with Greekish arms confounded are:
And among their frighted guards, great uproar grows,
Since from their Friends, they cannot ken their Foes.
62
A thousand fall to Hell, a thousand fly,
Some to the Navy, others to the shore,
and many Pale-fast Greeks affray de to dye
Run to the Horse where they were lodged before,
and in his dark conceited Entrayles lie,
See fair Cassandra from the Temple door,
Dragged by black Myrmidons: her Son espyes
Frightfull Chorebus, and that way he flies.
63
They after him, adismall conflict now
Grows in the entrance of the Temple, when
Their friends mistaking their disguised brow,
Route from the battle, meets by strength of men
Huge stones, and Webs of Lead stounding below
Their Greece-arm'd Friends, whose craft's deceived again:
(By Ignorance) they call their friends on hye,
and by their tongues the gr^cians them descry.
64
For now rough Ajax revels in the place,
The two Atrides with their armed Bands,
And sly Ulysses too: yet in the face
Of all their guards the bold Chorebus stands, The death of Chorobus.

Till number over swayes might: Migdoniaes race
Is now extinct by force of thousand hands:
Then Ripheus falls, then is bold Dimas breast
Through-pierst: so one by one decliue the rest.
65
Alone scapes bold Eneas by a cry
Raisde at King Priams Palace, whether hying
More Mutiny and broils he may espy,
More Tragic sight of wretched Trojans dying,
The massacre seems dreadful in his eye,
Before the assaulted Gates are thousands lying:
The havoc did so v^olent appear,
as had their bin no place of death but there.
66
The untamed Mars upon his Altars groans,
Hye crowned in blood: some Greeks tho Palace scale,
The Laders cleave unto the lettying Stones,
Whose Marble Collumns bend, and seem to fail
Beneath the weight of fire and Steel at ones,
and still the Banicadoed Gates the' assail:
Where able armed Pyrrhus stands before,
Th'inflamed Porch (his armor slack't in gore)
67
The enclosed Princes broyle, doubly pend in
With flames and steel, inclosde on enery side
With eminent death, yet no irruption win
Though they di^olue, the hye roof beautified
With Gold and figures (which to touch were sin)
The Geometricke ridge of Silver tried:
Fires over their heads, and drils down by the walls,
Which scalds the Princes as it melting falls.
68
Stern Pyrrhus sweats, and with Antomedon
His fathers Charioter assaults the place,
Scarce able to endure the arms they hau^ on,
So ouer-heat with Flames, in whose bright face
They stand with naked swords to gaze upon
Those shrinking Monuments the fires embrace:
at length with beams shocking by strength of hand,
They shake the walls, unable to withstand.
69
Which tumbling in, like a Bay-window shows,
Whose gaping mouth seems vast, (oh) now appears,
The gorgeous Courts, whose floor each Lady strowes
With her torn garments, hair, and pearly tears,
Still, still, their shrickes and feminine clanger grows,
as the Breach waxes, so increase their fears;
Their cries pierce heaven, slake Fire, and soften stones,
Yet move not Pyrrhus and his Myrmidons.
70
For neither Priams Guard, the door of Brass,
Nor trusty Marble can withstand the Foe,
But through them all by force of arms they pass
The heavy Gates, they from the henges throw,
Shiuering their plated leaves like pains of Glass:
Which with the fury of their burnings glow:
and breaking in, the spacious Courts they fill
With bloody Soldiers, who on all sides kill.
71
King Priam, when he saw his Town invaded,
His Troy sitting in fire, not to be freed,
and all those Gods that long had Islium aided,
Shrunk from his help, and in his fall agreede,
That his far shining beams at last were faded,
and the Universal heart of Troy must bleed:
The larum Bells of death on all sides ringing,
His shrieking wife and Daughter bout him clinging.
72
Expecting help from him in whom remaind
No help at all, he first dissolues in tears,
But casting up his eye to have complaind
His grief to Heaven, his Sword and Helm appears,
Hung by the Walls, with rust and Canker staynd,
Now burdens to his arm, in former years
Easy as Silks, his grief conuerts to rage,
He dons those arms, forgetful of his age.
73
To whom the sad Queen with wet eyes thus says:
What means my woeful Lord in his weak hand
To toss this burdenous Steel? There is no praise
For men to fight, when the high Gods withstand,
Lived puissant Hector in these Fatal days,
Yet could not his strong Limbs protect thy Land:
Much less these Saplesse branches, poor and bare,
Then let the reverent Priam keep his Chair.
74
Here at these holy Altars let us cling,
The Gods, if they be pleased, our lives may guard,
If not, we all will perish with the King,
and die at once, there shall not one be spard:
Behold, where broken through th'all-slaughtring ring
Of Pyrrhus Myrmidons, Slaves rough and hard:
The young Polytes well-ny breathless rons,
Polytes, one of Priams best-lou'd Sons.
75
Through many an Entry and blind-turning path,
The burning Pyrrhus has the Lad pursude,
Longing upon the Youth to vent his wrath,
now both at once before the King intrude,
The slaughterd-thoughted Greek, all bale and scath
In the Child's blood his satall Blade imbrude
Which plucking from his wounds: in the same place
Sparkled the Sons blood in the Fathers face.
76
To whom the armed King thus: You Gods above,
Whose divine eyes all deeds of horror see,
as you are ^ust, and acts of pitry love,
Behold how this rude man h^th dealt by me,
What God (worthy Heavens Palace) can approve
So black a deed as this, that is done by thee?
Before the Fathers eye the Child to kill, The death of Polytes.

and in his face his Innocent blood to spill.
77
Thou art a Bastard, not Achilles Son,
Of some she Wolf, or Hyrcan Tygresse bred,
not (to be shrin'd in Heaven) would he have don
So horrible a deed, so full of dred,
The shame and scandal thou this night have won,
More then Achilles honors shall be spread:
Thy Father honored, liude and did in fame,
Dishonored thou, shall perish in thy shame.
78
With that the Ia^elin in his hand he threw,
Th'vnprofitable strength of his weak arm,
Though it had art to guide the Weapon true,
It wanted power to do black Pyrrhus harm,
Against the long skirt of his Targe it flew,
But the round Bosse, as if composd by charm,
Shook off the idle steel, which on the bar
That took the blow, scarce left the smallest scarre.
79
Inflamed Pyrrhus thus to him replies:
Priam, thy soul shall straight descend to hell,
Even to the place where great Achilles lies,
And my sad deeds unto my Father Father,
With that (all wrath) in Prisms face he flies)
The prostrate King at Ihoues hye Altar fell:
With such hot rage he did the King pursue,
That though he mist, the whiske him overthrew.
80
When being groueled in Polites gore,
Grim Pyrrhus with his left hand takes the king,
By his white locks (never prophand before,
His reverent head against the ground to ding,
His proud right hand a smoking Curtlax wore, The death of Priam.

Which to perpetual rest must Priam bring:
With which against the good old King he tilts,
Till his heart blood flowed much above the hilts.
81
This was old Prisms Fate, his fatal end,
And ending glory, he that As^ swayed,
Whose spreading Fame did through the earth extend,
Lived till he saw both him and his betrayed,
Even till he had no subject, Son, or friend,
And saw Troyes spyres even with the groundsils laid,
Who now before loves golden face lies dead,
A namelesse coarse, a Trunk without a head.
82
All this, when good Aeneas saw from far
The ends of Troy and Priam: burnt, and slain,
And no abatement yet of heat, or war,
To his own Palace he returns again,
Where gathered on a heap together are,
His wife Creausa showring tears amain:
His servants: old Anchises, and his son
Askanius, these about Aeneas run.
83
After some short discourse of their affairs,
Aeneas on his back Anchises takes,
For young Askanius he his left hand spares,
In his right hand his guardant sword he shakes,
Creusa follows close, with tears and Prayers,
So through the fire and foe Aeneas makes:
He with his son and Sire, the right way choose,
But in the darkness they Creusa loose.
84
Whom missing, they Creusa call alowd, Creusaes death

Creusa, for whose safety they will return,
But sorne black Fate does her in darkness shroud,
Either Troyes Funeral fires the Lady burn,
Else is she stifled in the Hostile crowd,
For her, the Father, son, and husband mourn:
And seeking her amidst the wrathful flames, Helenus.

They encounter Helenus; who thus exclaimes.
85
Keep on Aeneas to the Se^n shore,
The heavens on Troy and us have vengeance powered,
Only thy ruind fortunes they restore,
They smile on thee, that have on Priam lowred,
The fair Creausa thou shall see no more,
Her, the none-sparing slaughter has deuowred:
But in her stead, the Gods to thee shall give
A wife, in whom deceased Troy shall live.
86
Follow yon star, whether his Bearded beams
Directs thy Navigations: on the fand
Thousands attend thy conduct through the streams,
Whom ruin spares, for thee and thy command,
Observe yon blazing Meteor, whose bright gleames
Points thee unto a rich and fertile Land:
Where, after many strange adventures past,
Storme-driu'n Aeneas shall arrive at last.
87
They to a spacious Climate thee restore, Italy

A Province which the Gods and fates hold best,
The Meditteren Sea beats on the shore,
With the Scicilian waters, South and East,
The Adriaticke Billows Northward rore,
With the hye Alps incompast on the West:
These Countries it contains, Latium Liguria,
The Climates of Campania and Hetruria.
88
With Fertile I stria and Calabria,
Full peopled Craunia and Apentium,
Aemilia, else called Rhomandtola;
With Gallia, Cisalpina, and Pycenum,
Iapidia, Vmbria, and Venetia,
Flauinia, Apulia, Sumnium:
All these are Italy, with great Lucania,
Which shall in times to come be called Rhomania.
89
Farewell and thrive, but leave us to our Fates:
This said, the Divine Helenus retires,
And shuts himself within those fatal gates,
Where none commands but foes and raging fires,
Aeneas hasts to meet his promised Mates,
And on the Coast their fellow-ship desires,
Who through the street hewes out a bloody tracke,
With old Anchises hanging at his back.
90
Still ^stium burns, nor are the ruthlesse Flames
Yet quenched, Ihoues sparpled Alters lick the blood
Of slaughtred Priam, the bright vestall Dames
Are pulled from Pallas Statue where they stood,
About their golden locks (with loud exclaimes)
Rough soldiers wind their arms, and through a flood
Of gore and tears, in which the pauement flows,
Drag them along, that faint beneath their blows.
91
The young Astianax from that hye Tower, The death of Astianax.

On which his Fathers valor often he saw,
Is tumbled headlong on the rough-pau'd flower,
His all to bruised limbs lie broke and raw,
To woeful Hecuba, in thrust a power
Of blood-staind Greeks, without regard or awe,
and from her aged arms, snatched by rude force
Polixena, whose beauty begs remorse.
92
She Is hurried to Achilles tomb, where stands
Stern Neptolemus, from top to toc
Satued in blood and slaughter, in both hands
Wauing a keen glaue, Crimsond in the foe,
To bind with Cords her soft arms he commands,
That more red lives may on his Faulchion flow: The death of Polyxeua.

There the bright Maid that bands did ill become,
He piece-meale howes upon Achilles tomb.
93
Thus is King Priam and Queen Hecubs race,
Extinct in dust, young Palidore alone,
The youngest Lad is with the king of Thrace
Left in great charge, with Gold and many a Stone Polymnestor K. of Thrace.

Beyond all rate, but Polymnestor base,
Hearing the pride of Troy was spent and gone,
False to the world, and to his friend untrue, The death of Polidore.

To gaino that wealth, the lovely Infant slew.
94
Whose death when Hecuba revenged had,
By tearing out the perjured Tyrants eyes,
First she records the beauty of the Lad,
Then all the glories she beneath the skies
Possessed before, which makes her Franticke-mad,
On her sloine husband, daughters, sons, she crics:
Troy she bewaild, and fatal Greece she cursed, The death of Hecuba

Till her great heart (with griese surcharged) burst.
95
Ten years, ten months, twelve days this siege endured,
In which of Greece before the Town were slame, The number of Greckes and
Trojans slain at the siedge.

Fourescoute hundred and six thousand, all inured
To steely war: Of Trojans that maintain
The honor of their City, well assured,
(Besides the number that were prisoners taken)
Six hundred fifty, and six thousand tried,
Omitting those that in the last night did.
96
Chiualrous Hector void of fraud or slight,
Eighteen great Kings slew by his proper hands,
No aduantagious odds he vsd in fight,
Therefore his fame spreds far, through foreign lands,
Three Kings to do the amorous Paris right
Fell by his Bow, next rankt Achilles stands:
Who (besides Troylus and great Hector) slew
Seven puissant Kings at Troy (if Fame speak true)
97
Four Kings beside the Sagitary fell
By Diomed, two by Aeneas lost
Their precious lives, though many more fought well,
Their warlike deeds are not so farte ingrost,
Black Pyrrhus acts above the rest excel,
Who thinking among them to be praised most:
Three Royal lives his Tragic wrath obayd, Ironia.

An aged King, a Woman, and a Maid.
98
Not how two worthy Greeks in words contended,
Who should the rich Vulcanian armor have, Ovid metam^.

Now how from Ajax, who had Greece defended,
Th'impartiall Judges to Ulysses gave,
To prove that Counsel above strength extended,
And had more power the Argine Camp to save:
In griese of which great loss, Ajax grew mad,
Slain by the sword that he from Hector had, The death of Ajax.

99
Nor of Ulysses travels twice ten years,
Nor of his love with Circe the fair Queen,
Who by her spells transformed him and his Pecres,
And kept him thence, where he desird to have been,
With fair Penelope, Famed among the spheres
In living chaste: though Princes full of spleen
Possessed her kingdom, and her palace ceaz'd,
Whom (wanting power) she by delays appeasd.
100
Nor how he after twenty winters came, Telegonus son to Ulysses and Circe,
otherwise called Calipso.

And in disguise his constant Lady proved,
How he by arms releast the beauteous Dame,
And all her suitors from his Land removed, Ulysses slain by his Bastard son
Telegonus.

Nor how Telegonus won with the Fame
Of him whom most the witch Calipso loved
From his fair Mother Circe himself vvith-drevv,
And vnavvares his Royal Father slew.
101
Nor how King Naulus laid Trains on the Seas,
To a^enge him on the Gracians for his son
Palamides, whose death did much displease
The aged Prince, since it was by treason done,
Nor how such wandering Greeks as he could ceaze,
Who on his shores their ship-wrackt vessels run,
Naul^s destroyed, and unto ruin brought,
Since they his sons dear life esteemed naught.
102
Nor how King Agamemnon home returning,
Was by his fair wife Clitemnestra slain, The death of Ag^memnon

How false Egistus in the Queens love burning,
Plotted with her to shorten the Kings reign,
Nor bow Horestes for his Father mourning
Grew mad, and slew Egistus that had lain The death of Cletemenestra

With his fair Mother, who^ when he had caught her,
Vnchild-like he did with his own hands slaughter.
103
Nor how black Pyrrhus Hellens daughter stal^
The fair Her mione, she that before
Was to Horestes troth'd, and should Sance fail,
Have bin espousd to him, who at the door
Of Delphos Templeflew him without blae, The death of Pytrhus.

Staining Apoltos shrine with Pyrrhus gore:
Not how that face for which the whole world wrangled The death of Hellen.

To see it changed with age, her self she strangled.
104
Nor how the Greeks after their bloody toils,
Antenor left to inhabit raced Troy,
And after the end of their sad Tragic broils,
All Asiaes wealth within their flect enjoy,
Robbing the Town of all her richest spoils,
Whose hye Clowd-peircing spyres the flames destroy,
nor how Aeneas does his forces gather,
And ships with his young son, and aged Father.
105
Rigging to soa these two and twenty sail,
That fetched the fire brand that all Troy inflamd,
The selfsame ships in which the Trojan stale
The Spartan Queen, against whom all Greece exclaimd,
Nor of Queen Didoes love and Tragic bate,
Nor of Aeneas travels nobly famed:
Nor how Andromache was Captain led,
Left to the hot lust of the Conquerors bed.
106
With whom Cassandra was inforst to go
With Helenus that kend deuinest things,
And al these sad proceedings did fore-show,
and propheside to Troyes confedered Kings,
Nor of King Di^meds sad overthrow,
Of Albions Isle first known, my Muse next sings,
Her Chariot now I can no further drive,
Britain from conquered Troy, we next derive.
Dolopes are a people of Thessaly, in the borders of Phthiolis, out of which
province Ulysses made choice of his Guard.

Pallas whose name we have often used, some take to be the Pausa. in Atticis
Heredotus in Melpom. Apollonius lib. 4. Arg. nanc.
Daughter of Neptune and Tritonis, and lived in the time of Giges. Others hold
her to be sprung of Ihoues brain, as we have before remembered. -- Palluda
quandam Cum patris e capite exilijt Clarissi^a patuam
lauerunt Tritonis aquae.
The like many others affirm, as also that when she leapt out of slefichorus
Lucia^s.
Ihoues brain, at the said time it rained a shewer of Gold on the Earth. Of
her birth many writers differ, some affirm her Strabo. lib. 14.
to be the Daughter of ^riton: others to berather the Daughter of ^upiter and
Thetis: Others of Craunus, differing from Apollodor^s. Athenodor^ ^izantius.
zozes Cic. de nature deorum
their opinions, therefore I hold with Cicero, who auers, that there were more
of the names. One of the Mother of Apollo, a second borne by Nyle. and adored
of the Egyptians, a third of the brain of ^upiter, a fourth of Jupi^er and
Ceriphe, the Daughter of Oceanus, whom the Arcadians call Cerin, and the
Inuentor of the Chariot. A fifth that was supposed to kill her Father, to
perserue her virginity.

Pallas and Minet^a were one, she was also by some called Callimachus in Himn.
Homer. Simonides Coeus 2. geneal. Isacius. Hor^ I. carnium
T^iloma. Ihouis filia gloriosa Tritonia.

Both Greece and Troy highly honered her, she is said to invent Arms, and to
have aided her Father J^piter in the destruction of, the Tytanoyes, which the
poets call Gigomantichia. Of whom it is thus remembered.

Palluda bellorum studijs Cautanus amicam e Ihoue progenitam magno quae
destruit vrbes. Stesicherus.


And of another thus: Sed prius illa fugis fum^tia soluit equorum Calli^.

Colla lauans alti fluctibus Oceani.
And so much of Pallas or Minctua, to whom the Trojans dedicated their chief
Temple.

Migdonia is a part of Phrigia, next Troas by the River Rhindacus, of this
Country Prince Chorebus, that loved Cassandra, was called Mygdonides.

The Scaean sbore: Scaea is a gate of Troy, opening to the West, where Laomedon
was buried, of that Gate the Sea and shore adjacent, bear the name of Scaea.

The Names of the 18. Kings slain by Hector, are thus, though somewhat
corruptly by an^ient Writers remembered: K. Archilochus, K. Protesilaus, K.
Patroclus, K. Menon, Dares. Dictes.
K. Protenor, K. Archimenes, K. Polemon, K. Epistropus, K. Ecedius, K. Doxius,
K. Polixenus, K. Phibus, K. Anthiphus, K. Cenutus, K. Polibetus, K. Humerus, K.
Fumus, K. Exampitus Achilles slew 7. Kings, K. Cupemus, King Yponeus, K.
Plebeius, K. Austerus, K. Cymonius, K. Memnon, K. Neoptolemus, besides Hector,
Troylus, and Margareton, with other of Priams Bastard Sons.

Some likewise, contrary to the assertion of Ovid and others, affirm that
Paris slew the Emp. Palumides, Ajax and Achilles. Aeneas slew K. Amphimachus,
and K. Mereus, the fair Greek whom Homer so much loved. ^yrrhus the son of
Achilles, slew K. Priam, an aged man, Queen Penthisilea, awarlike woman,
Polytes a young Lad, and Polyxena a beauteous Maid. K. Diomed slew the
Sagittary, K. Antipus, K. Escorius, K. Obstin^us, and K. Protenor. Many others
were slain in the disordred battles, but how, or by whom, it is not
particularly registered. Of Ulysses love to Circe Ovid in diverse places touches
it, part whereof I h^e thus English. ( Calipso as they on the sea bank stood,
2. De Art Amand.
Casting her eyes upon the Neighbor flood,
Desires the acts and bloody deeds to bear,
Done by th'Odrisean Captains sword and spear,
When holding twixt his fingers a white wand, Ulysses and Circo

What she requests he draws upon the sand,
Here Is Troy (quoth he) (for here the Town is meant)
Think Simois that, Imagine this my Tent,
Here Scithian Rhesus Tents are pitched hie,
This way his Horsemen slain, returned I.
Here Dolon did, when on the sudden ^oe,
A climbing Wave the shewers does overthrow,
And as the drops upon his work does fall,
It washed away his Tents, his Troy, and all:
To whom the Goddesses dares Ulysses trust
These senseless violent waves that are so cursed,
And darestthou with these waters be annoyd,
By whom such great Names are so soon destroyed?
How could her magic potions Circe please, De^ remedio Amoris lib. 1.

When ^ise Ulysses Ships float on the Seas,
All exorcisms the loving Witch does try,
To stay the Greeks, whilst he away does fly.
All Spells and Charms the loving Witch assaide,
That such hot flames might not her thoughs invade,
But spite the cunning Hag, and charm her best,
Ulysses flies, Love scorns to be suppr^st:
She that Men's shapes could from themselves estrange,
Had not the power her own desires to change.
It Is said, that when Ulysses would away
With such like words she did entreat his stay:
What I hoped erst, I do not now entreat,
That you with me would make a lasting seat
And be my Husband, yet if I my race
Call but to mind, I might de serve that place.
Despising me, a worthy Wife you shun,
A Goddess, and the Daughter of the Sun,
All that I beg, my humorous Love to feed,
Is only this: you would not make such speed.
Stay but a while, it is an east task,
What less thing can you grant? What less I ask?
Behold, the deep Sea rages: Neptune fear,
Stay till a Calm, and then begin to steare,
Why should thy fly? Thy fore sheate, and thy Mizen,
Why swell they with the Wind? No Troy is risen,
For thee again to sack, hear are no brals,
No man thy Mates, and thee to battle calls:
Here true Love raines, here peace is firmly grounded,
In which my self, and only I am wounded,
My heart is thine, and shall be thine for ay,
And all my Land is in thy Kingly sway:
She speaks, he lancheth, and the self same wind, Mm 2

That fills his sails, blows thence the words and mind.
Of Circe, otherwise called Calisso, he begot Telegons, who Zczeshistor. 16.
Chil. 5. Hesiodusin Theog. Homerus libr. odiss. Dionisius Milctus.
afterward unawares slew his Father Ulysses. She was the Daughter of the Sun
and Perses. Others have imagined her the Daughter of Hecate, or of Aeeta:
others to be the Daughter of Asteripes and Hiperion, as Orpheus in Argonantis.
Aeetae affinis coniunctaque sanguine, solis
filia quam proprio dixerunt nomine Circen
Astropey, patuus Hiperiony est auus, illa, etc.
She had by Ulysses these sons, Agrius and Latinus: Telegons Hesiodus in Theog
onea. Lycophron.
and Auson, of whom Ausonia (alias Italia) bears the Name, with Casiphon, with
Marsius, of whom the Marsiaus took Name, and Rhomanus: Her Toomb was in one of
the Pharmacusan Islands, not far from Salamine.

Diomedes, the manner of whose death we have not touched Strabo lib. 9. Tymaus
siculus
in our History, was killed by Danaus, whose Country he had before freed, and
in the same slain a huge Dragon, who threw his body with all the statues that
were reared to his honor (Ingratefully) into the sea where they perished.

Of Clitemnestraes Adultery Ovid says: De art Amandi. 2. De remedio Amoris. I.
Whilst Agamemnon liud with one contented,
His Wife liude chaste, and neither it repented.
His secret blows her heart did so provoke,
VVanting the Sword, she with the Scabberd stroke:
She hears of Criseis, and the many Iarres
About Lyrnesis, to increase the wars,
And therefore mere revenge the Lady Charms,
To take Thiestes in her amorous Arms.
And in another place; Why could not his blind lusts Aegistus bridle?
will you needs know, the Adulterer was still Idle,
When others labored Islion to annoy,
And lay strong siedge about the walls of Troy,
Abroad he war'd not; nor at home he law'd,
His thoughts no nauall office could applaud:
what he could do he did, (for so it proved)
Least he should nothing do, he therefore loved,
So is this love begot, so is he bred,
So cherisht, so at length be gathers head,


The end of the 15. Canto.
Argumentum
Having the sight of our wished harbor gaind,
The years from Brute to Christ: what famous Kings
Gouernd in Britan, and how long they raignd,
From Christ to Norman William, and what things
Of specill note were in their da^es containd,
In a brief Chronicle, our Muse next sings:
Much matter in few words: swift runs our Glass,
We many Ages in one instant pass.
ARG. 2.
A Genealogy exactly found,
From the first man, to Norman William crowned.
CANTO. 16.
1
ADam got Seth: Seth, Enos: Enos, Cayne,
Cayne, got Melaliel: Iareth next begone,
From Iareth Enoch, that to Heaven was taken,
He got Methusalem, whose line does ron
To Lamech: of him Noah, and from Noah came
Ihapheth: then Cichem, who was Iapheths Son:
Cichem got Cipre: Cipre, Creete, and so
Creete, Saturn: from whose branch great Ihoue does grow.
2
Dardanus is immediate Heir from Ihoue, Dardanus Son to Jupiter and Electra.

And by Candame, got Erichthonius,
Erichthon Tros: Tros Ilion: next him strove
Laomedon, and he got Priamus,
And when the Greeks from Troy Aeneas drove,
He by Creusa had Askanius:
Who after ( Carthaginean Dido past)
Up through the River Tiber ^ayles at last.
3
At Hostiaes Port (the place the Gods behight)
Aeneas Lands: Euander him receives
The Latins King, whose Daughter at first sight
Aeneas loves, and for her sake, bercaues
The Tuskayne King of life in single fight, Turnus King of Tuskaine

Turnus being dead, the fair Lauinia leaves
Her virgin vows, by whom the Trojan Prince
Siluius begot: and Siluius, Brutus since.
4
Brutes Mother in her painful throws deceast,
(H^) his glancing Shaft his Father slew,
For which with melancholy griefs infest
From Italy, the Prince himself withdrew,
Ten thousand voluntary men vnprest,
Consort him, strange adventures to pursue:
Whom Corineus with many Trojans more
Mcetcs, and assists, new Countries to explore.
5
Brute ( Grecian Pandras who denide him way,
And through his spacious Kingdom passage free)
O're-comes in battle, but denies to stay
Till he more Coasts and various Clymats see,
Fair Innogen, a Virgin fresh as May, Innogen Daughter to Pandras.

He marries, and with Pandras does agree,
For her rich Dower to have a royal fleet,
Well furnished for his Train: with all things meet.
6
He past Alcides Pillars, even to Guall,
Landing in Guien, Guffor the proud King
Denies prince Brute to hunt, but ( Mauger all)
He chac't his Dear, and made his Buckes to spring,
Thence, Albion he discries, like a white wall
Washed with the sea, and longs his fleet to bring
To a safe Harbor, where he might suruay,
The long sought Isle where he his boues must lay.
7
When Ayoth judged Israel, in the year Hugh Genesis and Harding.

Threescore and twelve, of his command and state,
Aegiptian Dana^ daughters lauded here
After long search, who for they had of late,
Their nine and forty husbands by th'austere
Iniunction of their Sire, brought to sad Fate: Albion of Albania the eldest
Sister.

Were in a Mastlesse ship to exile thrown,
And landinging here, called this Isle Albion.
8
Some say of these Viragoes spirits begot
Giants, that were of huge and monstrous size, The year of the world above the
line./ The year before ^hri: under the line.

Who when they grew to stature, spared not
Asfinity, for Son with Mother lies,
Brother with Sister: so the learned Scot
Marian, does in his Chronicles comprize:
And of these lustful Ladies, in small while,
Twelve thousand Giants peopled this large I Will.
9
PRince Brute with Corineus does Albion enter, Brute.

At Totnes, thirty monstrous Giants kills,
And after much and dangerous aduenter, 2855./1108.

Builds London (called new Troy:) his Throne he fills
Twenty four years, then pays his last debenter
To Nature; Britain he to Locrine wills:
Scotland to Albanact, Wales, Camber swayes, 2878./1085.

Israel was judged by Samuel in their days.
2
Locrine reigned twenty years, his wife him slew, Locrine.

Because he Sabrine loved, and her forsook, 2889./1074.

Mother and Child bold Guendolina threw
Into the Seuerne streams, who there name took
From Sabrine. In his days young David grew, 2889./1704.

And with a Sling the great Goliath struck:
At Locrines death, stern Guendoline begun, Guendoline.

Her husband she succeeds; and her, her Son.
3
Madan ruled forty years, and in his days Madan.

Was beauteous Absalom by Ioab slain, 2916./1047.

Memprisius twenty years the Scepter swayes, Me^prisius.

Procuring first his Brother Manlius bane 2954./1009.

Whom Madan loved, and had intent to raise:
In Lust and riot he consumed his reign,
For which just heavens their righteous vengeance powered,
Memprisius hunting was by Wolves devoured.
4
Him his son Ebranke in the Throne succeeds, Ebranke.

Who gouernes threescore happy Summers through, 2972./991.

Famous for many charitable deeds,
He builded York, Dunbar, and Edenborowe, Brute Green

Next him Brute Greene-shield don'd The Imperial weeds,
After twelve happy years his subjects sorrow 3033./930.

For his untimely Fate, and in his reign,
B'Elias prayer the Priests of Ball were slain. 3034./929.

5
L'Eill, Brutes son, raignd five and twenty years Leill. 3046/917.

And Carleil built, then did his seat resign
To young Lud Hurdibras, loved of his Peers, Lud Hurdibras.

Who gouernd Britains Scepter twenty nine,
He Winchester and Canterbury reares,
With Shafts-bury, then seeks a Throne divine: 3071/892.

Whose Obits were in Britain long bemoned, 3097/896

The propher Zachary in his days was stoned.
6
BLadud, Luds son raignd next, and Bath erected, Bladud.

A Sorcerer, and did attempt to fly,
And having twenty year the Realm protected,
He brake his neck down from a Steeple hie, 3109./854.

Amos and Amazia were directed
In those days by the spirit of Prophecy. Leir.

Leir next him, in whose time (as Books say) 3123/840.

Jonas three days in the Whales belly lay.
7
Leir built Leicester, forty years was Crowned,
Famous in his three Daughters and their Love,
The youngest most suspected, faithful found,
And they that promised most, least thankful prove,
Kindest Cordeilla that did most abound Cordeilla.

In filial zeal next Leir sits above: 1358./805.

Morgan and Cunedadgius two false Peers, Morgan. Cunedadgius

Depose their Aunt after five unhappy years.
8
They jointly reign, till Cunedadgius slew
His Brother Morgan in Glamorgan-sheere, 3162./801.

(From whom the Title of that Country grew)
And after gouernd three and thirty year,
Now Naum preached: Riuallo does pursue Riuallo.

The Kingdom next, a Prince that had no peer:
In his days Propheside, Esaias, Micheas, 3196./767.

The Prophets Adad, Amos, and Oseas.
9
Forty six years he gouernd: In his reign
Rome was first built, wise Sibell gave forth Sawes,
King Ezechy by God healed of hispaine,
Had fifteen years life promised: for some cause
The Sun full ten Degrees, turned back again:
Thales Milesius to the Greeks gave Laws:
In Britain it raind blood, Riuallo wained, Gurgustius.

And eight and thirty years Gurgustius reigned. 3242./721.

10
Now Joel taughts, his Iliads Homer wrate, 3252/711.

And Glaucus Chius Sodering first invented,
Sicillius next Gurgustius takes the state, Sisillus.

Forty nine years he gouernes well contented, 3279./084.

Amon in Judah raind: Zaleucus sat
Judge on his sons eye: Jeremy lamented
For the sad Tragedy of King Josias, 3299/668.

Now flourish Olda, Baruch, Sophonius.
11
Now Phalleris in Agrigentine swayde, 3311./652.

And thrust Perilles in his brazen Bull,
To taste the torment he for others made,
Iago next Sisillius makes up full Iago.

Twenty five years, then in his Tomb was laid,
Nabuchadnezar sought to disanull 3327./636

The Hebrew Laws. susannaes fame increased,
By th'Elders wronged, by Daniels doom released.
12
Fifty four years Kinimachus was known 3351./612.

After ^ago in the British Chair, Kinimachus

Arion with his Harp was o're-Boord thrown,
Whom through the Seas the pittious Dolphin bare:
Bell was called God, and fore him ^rumpets blown,
And the three Children in the robes they ware 3369./594.

Cast in the fiery Furnace, now I guess,
Liud Solon: Sapho the sweet Po^tesse.
13
Annaximander the Horoscope first made, Gorbodug.

Aesope in Birds and Beasts, first figured men:
Next King Kinimachus, Gorbodug swayde 3404/559.

The British Scepter: In the Lions den
Daniell was cast. Now Cyrus did invade 3417./546.

Cressus of Lydia, it was the season when
Zacharias, Aggeus, Malack Propheside, 3430./533.

And the chaste Lucresse by her own hand did.
14
Next Gorbodug, Ferrex and Porrex reigned, Forrex

After five years, bold Porrex Ferrex slew.
For which their Mother Porrex much disdained, Porrex

And in his blood did her black hands imbrew, 3467./496.

After their death sedition was maintained
Full one and fifty years, whilst no man knew
Th'imediate heir, and whilst these wars were norisht 3475./488

Darius, Xerxes, and Queen Hestor flourisht.
15
The Athenian Sophocles, a Tragic Poet,
Plato, Cratinus, Aristarchus, were 3513./450,

All Commicke Writers, as their works best show it:
Empedocles of Athens, did acquiere
Musickes full ground, and made the world to know it,
Parmenides made Lodgicke first appear:
Which in Mount Cancasus he first devised, 3522./441,

Esdras the Scribe the Scriptures now comprised.
16
MVlmutius Dunwallo, son and heir
To Cloten Duke of Corweyle's next instated, Mulmutius.

He did the four broad Highways first repair,
First Crowned: Paul's Church first built and consecrated,
And after forty years from Britains Chair
To a new Throne in hea^ he was translated, 3550./413.

Now Socrates the Athenian hea^ charms,
Demosthenes, famous for Arts and Arms.
17
BEline and Bren the British Crown divide, Beline. Bren.

Being by their Mother (after wars) attoned,
Whilst Bren in foreign Arms his valor tried,
Beline built Belinsgate: all Denmark groned
Beneath his yoke, Bren (to the Galls alide,) 3563./400.

Sacked Rome, burnt Delphos, and was after stoned,
With Hayle and Thunder-stroke, much blood was spilt,
In Italy ten stately Towns he built.
18
Twenty six years hetwixt them they supply 3568./395.

The Crown and Sceptet: Dionisius raignd
In Sicily, Dam^n and Pythias try
Their mutual friendship. Xenoph^n maintained
His school in Athens, Plat^ prized higher
His Accademy reared: Now was ordained 3586./377.

For King Mansolus, by the Carian Qneene,
A stately Tomb rankt among the wonders nine.
19
GVrguintus, Belins son, nin^teene years made Gurguintus.

The Britains homagers, by even Tradition, 3588/375.

Aristotle lived, whose Fame shall never fade,
Son to Nichomachus, a great Physician, 3595./368.

Now Macedonian Phillip began t'inuade
His neighbour-Kings in many an expedition, 3604/359.

The Noble Marcus Curtius for Romes sake,
Armed at all points, leapt in the Curtian Lake.
20
GVintheline six and twenty years made good Guintheline.

His right in Britain, Mercia his fair wife 3607/356.

De^isde the Mercian Laws: by Tibur flood
The clouds raind stones: after Darius strife, 3628./311.

Which ended in eff^sion of much blood, Cecilius. Kimar.

By poison Alexander lost his life:
Next Guintheline, seven years Cecilius reigned,
Next him three years Kimar the state maintained. 3633./330.

21
Nine years Elanius reigned, Morindus eight, Elanius. Morindus.

Devoured of a Sea Monster: In their days
Onias son of Taddus, reached the height 3,652./311.

Of the Priests Office: Gorbomannus swayes Gorbomanus 3660.

Eleauen full years, a Prince assisting right, 3660./303.

( Simon Onyas son), the Habrewes raise Archigall.

To the Priesthood, next just Gorboman,
Fierce Archigall to Tyranize began. 3671./292.

22
After five years deposed, his second Brother
Succeeded in the style of Elidure, Elidure

A virtuous Prince, there sat not such another
In Britains Chair, in life severe and pure;
Five years himself did Archigallo smother, 3676./287

And his deposing patiently endure:
At length by Elidurus met and known, Archigallo.

To Archigallo. he resignes his Throne. 3681./282.

23
Ten years the twice-Crown'd Archigallo now,
Gouernes the State in Honor, and then dying,
To Elidure again the Brittans bow, Elidure.

After two years his Brothers him defying,
Keep him in bonds: the Britain Peers allow, 3691./272.

Their double rule, nine years their Conquesttrying: Vigenius. Peridure.

Vigenius and Peridure are past, 3693./270.

And Elidure the third time Crowned at last, Elidure.

24
Reigning four years. In this forepassed state
Lived Epyre pyrrh^s, and Lisimachus, 3702./261.

The High Priest Eleasar chus'd oflate,
Receives th'Egiptian league: Now breath Seleucus
And Ptolomy; now by the Roman Senate
Silver was coined first, Theos-Antiochus 3684./279.

In Syria reigned, blood sprang out of a Well,
And from the Clouds Milk in abundance fell.
23
MAnasses lived high Priest among the Jews, 3705./258.

Ten years ruld Gorboman, Morgan (...), Gorboman. Morgan. Emerianus.

Emerianus next to him, pursues
The Diadem: a Tyrant full of spleen,
After seven years deposd: Inall insues, 3736./227.

A temperate Prince, who twenty years was seen
In Britains Throne: Amilchar Carthage swaide,
Illyrian Teuca ^id proud Rome invade. 3756./207.

26
RImo raignd sixteen years, bold Hanniball Rimo.

And Scipio fought, Wise Cato lived in Rome:
Next Rimo King Geruntius they install, Geruntius

Him after twenty years his Lords intoome,
The losty Spaniards from Romes Empire fall,
And after stand to Fuluius Flaccus doom: 3771/192

Ten years Catellus reigned: the Jews were foyld, Catellus

And by Antiochus Gods Temple spoyld. 3790./173.

27
The Mother and her seven sons Martird were, 3795./168.

The worthy Judas Machabeus fought Coill.

Gods battles, Coill reigned twenty year, 3800./263.

Great Carthage was destroyed, and Corinth brought
To fall by fire: The Doctrines first apeare 3820/140.

The Pharisei and Sadducei taught:
Five years just Porrex, drunken Cherimus Porrex. Cherimus Fulgen. Eldred
Androgeus Dedantius Detonnus

One, Fulgen two, one Eldred, one Androgeus.
28
Dendantius five years, two Detonnus held
The sovereignty, then lest this life for new,
Nature a Monstrous birth in Rome compeld,
Having four hands, four feet: Corn grew
In Bonony on Trees, whose taste excelled, 3843./120.

The Parthian Arsaces, Demetrius slew. 3835./128.

Great Scipio Affricanus ends his life,
By salse Sempronia his disloyal wife. 3848./115.

29
Young Vrianus three, King Eliud five, Vrianus Eliud. M^rianus Bladunus Capenas
Ouinius Sisilus. Bladgabred.

Two Meria^ns, and Bladunus twain,
Capen^s three, Ouinius does next strive,
And his imperial state two years maintain,
Two Silius, Bledgabredus ^id survive
Full twenty years in his auspitious reign
Hircan^s gouernd in the Highpriests sted,
Marius ^mpht over Iugurth, Captiueled. 3857/109

30
Archemachus raignd two, Eldotus four, 3869./94

Two Rodianus, three Redargius, Archemac. Eldotus. Rodianus Redargius Samillus
Penesillus Pirrhus Caporus Diuellus He^.

Samillius two: the Britains next adore,
King penesellus three, two princely pirrhus,
And after him Caporus two, no more,
Now grew the watres twixt Scilla and Marius:
Diuellus four, Helyas, Ely named,
Gouernd ten months, when death his body claimed. 3893./70.

31
Lvd, Helyes son, his happy rule began,
Named Troynouant, Luds-towne, Ludgate erected, Lud

Eleau^n years reigned, then to Cassibelan 3894./69

Left his two infant sons to be protected, ^belan

Who till the Princes grew to state of man,
By all the British Peers was King elected:
Reigned nineteen years, in his days twice repeld 3911/52

The Roman Casar, the bold Britains queld. Caesar.

32
Nennius wan Casars sword, and had it brought
To be hanged ore his hearse: Pompey the great
With Julius Casar in Pharsalia fought, 3916/47

Julius vsu^pes in Romes Imperial seat,
Was stabbed with Bodkins, he that never fought,
But conq^'d, in all Martial acts complete:
Now flourisht Cicero with praise Divine,
Hermius and seditious Cateline. 3919/44

33
And not the least grace to Triumphant Rome,
The rare Comadian Roseius, Next in row
Of British Kings, must young Tenancius come, 3921/42

Twenty three years he raignd, and then did owe Tenancius

No more to nature, then th'adopted son
Of Casar, great Augustus: now does grow
Romes Monarchy: Mark Anthony through pride 3934/29

Rebeld, by Aspes great Cleopatra did.
34
Virgil and Horace flourisht: In these days
Jesus Sabetes son was consecrated
High Priest: King Herod Iewries Scepter swayes,
A general peace is through the world debated,
The Britains next, King Cimbelinus raise, 3944./19

And five and thirty years he is instated: Cimbeline.

And now the Savior of the world was borne,
The Eternal King Crowned with a wreath of Thorn. The year of the worldboue
the line./The year after Christ under the line.

35
Hortensius, Lyuy, Salust, Ovid, all 3962./1.

Were Fam'de in Rome, valiant Guiderius next,
The Britains as their sovereign Liege install,
Twenty eight years he gouernes, much perplexed 3978./17

With Roman war: now chanc'st Seianus fall. Guiderius.

Under Tyberius, now as says the text: 3985/24.

John Baptist preached, and by King Herod did, 3994./33.

Pylate was Judge, and Christ was Crucifide.
36
Now Aruiragus reigns, and takes to wife 4006/45

The Emperor Clodius daughter: I^wries King Aruiragus.

Was eat with worms: Grave Seneck breathed this life,
And Simon Magus did his Money bring
To buy the Holy Ghost, his Fame was rife
Amongst the Romans: now did Nero sing
Upon a hill Troyes burning to his Lyre,
Having before set stately Rome a fire.
37
Saint Mark in Alexandria Martyrd was,
At' Jerusalem James for the Gospel did,
Paul suffered too, whose boldness did surpass, 4017/56.

Peter likewise in Rome was Crucified, 4019./58.

Queen Voada a gallant British Less,
Marched with five thousand Ladies by her side,
and in one battle (if report be true,) 4029/68

Full fourscore thousand valiant Romans slew. 4024./73.

38
Next Aruiragus, Brittan Marius guided, Marius

Now was the Temple of the highest defaced,
His City sacked, and those that Christ derided, 4024/73

Burnt, starved, or slain, Jerusalem quite raced,
Josephus lived, Domitian Rome divided,
and after Tytus in the Throne was placed: 4070/108

Ignatius life in Rome among Lions vanished,
Saint John whom Christ loved, was to Pathmos banished.
93
In Rome now lived Cornelius Tacitus,
Suetonius, younger Pliny, Iuvenal,
Valerius Flaccus, and Patauius,
and the Lascivious Poet Martial,
and under Traian: Aulus Gellius,
Plutarch and Apuleius: now the wall
From Tyne to the Scotch Sea was made for strength,
Being one hundred and twelve miles in length.
48
Coylus built Colchester: now Iustine wrote, 4087/126

and with his Books and Life Christ's Faith defended, Coyll.

Egyptian Ptolomee the Stars did note, 4141./180.

and Mathematickes found. Lucius ascended
The State next Coyll, who first set aflote
Baptizme in England, by the Church commended Lucius.

For our first Christian King: he mounts the Spheres,
and without King, leaves Brittan fifteen years.
49
Seuerus The Emperor did five years supply 4169./208.

The British Throne, then of the Gout he did Seuerus.

At York, to Bassianus his ally, 4174./213.

Leaving both Rome and Brittans Islle to guide
Six years this Caracalla lifted high, Caracalla.

His Crowned state in Tirany and pride: 4179./218.

Tertullian now and Origin were known, Carassus.

Carassus next assumes the British Throne, 4187./226.

50
Gouernd eight years, then by Alectus did, Alectus. Asclipiodale

After three years bold Asclepiodale,
Alectus slew, in hight of all his pride,
And Roman Wallus, by whose timelesse fall
Walbrooke took name. He thirty years supplide 4193./232.

The kingdom, then exchangd his Mortal state,
Artabanus great Artaxerxus slew,
S. Albon martyred, left this life for new. 4223/262.

51
COill killed Asclepiodale, and reigned Coill.

Twenty seven years: Constantius succeeds 4250/289.

By marraying British Hellen, having gained Constantius.

The Roman Diadem: His virtuous deeds
The favor of the multitude attained 4271./310.

Next: Constantine (sur-nam'd the great,) who reads Constantine

The Bible first in Brittan: Arrius preached, 4284./325

And th'Arrian errors through the whole world teacht
52
Now at Jerusalem Queen Hellen found
The very Cross whereon our Savior did, 4290./329.

And the three nails his feet and hands did wound, Octauius

Octauius next fifty four years supplide
The Diadem, and then was laid in ground,
Three hundred eighteen Bishops now applide
The Nycene Counsel, now did Ambrose reed,
And Athanasius that set down the Creed.
53
With learned Basil, and about their days
Iulian-Apostat lived: the next ad^anced 4344./383.

Was Maximus, whom the bold Brittans raise,
To Vrsula a pittious Fortune ehanced,
With eleven thousand Maids passing the Seas Maximus

To Britain less, their lives were all intranced:
S. Ierom flourisht, writing Books Divine, 4388./387.

So did in Hyppone learned Augustine.
54
GRatian succeeds, whom the bold Brittans slew 4352./391.

After four years, in whose unhappy ^aigne Gratian

Ambrose the Millein Bishop famous grew,
And Chrisostom did the true faith maintain
In Constantinople, a Doctrine new
Th'Hereticke Pell^ges did in Carthage feign,
Where all his errors to his pride imputed,
Were by two hundred and seven Clerks confuted. 4380/419

55
Algelmond reigned first King of ^ombardy,
at Millen The Emperor Theod^ did,
Alaricus sacked Rome. The Monarchy 4381/422.

and Throne of France first ^mond supplide,
The Scots and Picts unpeople Brittany,
But Constantine the Britains valiant guide, 4394./443.

Who came from Britain le^e, the Throne asc^nds, Constantine

and rules ten years, (...) (...) Romes tribute ends.
59
COnstans a Fool, the son of Constantine, 4404./443.

Was from a Monk by Vortiger made King, Constans.

And having one year gouernd, did resign 4409./448.

To the Duke Vortiger, who governing Vortiger.

Eighteen whole years, two Lords of Saxon line,
H^ngest and Horseus called, an army bring
To Land in Britain, where not long they tarried,
Till Vortiger Prince Hengists daughter married.
57
For which the Britains him deposd, electing
Young Vortimer his son to sway the state, Vortimer.

He the allyans of those Lords rejecting, 4426./465.

Whom Vortiger his Father raisd so late,
Governed six years, the land in peace protecting,
Whom his fair Step-dame brought to timelesse Fate,
By cursed poison, which no sooner chanced, 4432./471.

But Vortiger was once again advanced. Vortiger.

58
In these dissentious days Gensericus
The Vandall King took Cartage. Attila 4402./441

King of the Hunnes, even to Thermopilus
Ore-came all Greece, Illyria, Thracia,
Against whom bravely fought Meroneus,
The most renowned King of Gallia, 4411./450.

Named Gallia, France, and till King Pepius time,
All the French Kings descended of his line.
59
Venice was now first founded and begun, 4417/456

Of such poor people, as to shun the rage
Of Tyrant Attila the samous Hun,
From Aquilea fled: whose pride to assuage,
The Roman Aetius a brave battle won,
Slew eighteen thousand Hunnes (in his young age) 4418./457.

Aetius enuide for raising Romes Dominion,
Was murdered by his Master Valentinian.
60
Which Emperor at Thrasila was slain
By one of Etius soldiers, Vortiger
Of Britains awful seat, possessed again,
The Saxons with the British Peers confer,
Where at a VVatch-word given by Hengists train, 4432./471.

Four hundred British Barons murdered were; Hengist.

The King surprisde, and being in prison pent,
Gave to them Norfolk, Suffolk, Sussex, Kent.
61
And of this Hengist Brittan changed the name,
Was cleaped-Hengists Land; since England called,
Next Constantines two younger Sons proclaim
Their rights in England, being naught appald
at Hengists might, stird by their Fathers Fame, 4442/482.

Ambros and Vter seek to be instald: Aurelius Ambros.

They land at Totnes, Vortiger they burn,
Kill Hengist too, for whom the Saxons murne.
62
Now Merline Aurelius, Aurelius Ambres reigned
Thirty three years, made Stone-henge, which till now
Has on the plain of Salsbury remaind,
He dead, the Brittans to his Brothers vow
Like homage, and in State have entertaind
Vter Pendragon, to whose throne they bow 4461/500.

Sixteen whole years: He doats on Cornwayles wife, Vter Pendragon.

and for her love bereaues her Husbands life.
63
Of her he Arthur got: In France Clodouens 4478./517.

Gouernd as King, the first that was Baptized
In Italy: great Theodoricus Arthur.

King of the Astrogothes, who enterprisde
Against Odeacer battle, bold Honoricus
Gouernd in Affricke, who so much despisde
True Faith, that he for the Arrians in one hour,
By shops exild, three hundred thirty four.
63
Arthur the worthy, next the State ascended,
Fought twelve set battles, and the order made
Of the Round Table, whose renown extended
Through all the world, whilst Arthur does invade
Foreign Dominious, and Christ's Faith desended, 4504./533.

Mordred at home, his Crowne' and Queen betrayde: Mordred.

Twixt whom, at Arthurs back return again,
War was commenst, in which both Kings were slain.
65
Next Arthur, Constantine, Duke Cadors Son, 4504/543

After his Uncle six and twenty years Constantine.

Had governed England, his estate begone,
Slew Mordred Sons in fight, with Saxon Peers,
That aided them in batta^le, these wars done
After four Summers, he ascends the Spheres: 4482/521.

Iustine a Swine-heard, by ambition fierd,
By crafty means The Imperial Seat aspyerd.
66
Now lived in Italy the famous Dame 4488/527

Analasiantha, with Athalarius
Her Son, by whom her Sovereignty first came,
She could both Greek and Latin well discuss,
Whose reverence many Histories proclayme,
Daughter to The Emperor Theodoricus:
Justinian, the Gracian Empire swayes,
The Persians to their State Cosroe raise.
67
Justinian in his Captains much renowned, 4505/545

Narses the Eunuch, a right (...) Knight,
And Bellisarius, whose name was crowned
Through all the world: Twice Carthage won in fight,
Twice rescude Rome: his fame in Persia sowned,
Thrace, Greece, th'Affricke G^aths, he put to flight:
For much more service The Emperor from his head,
Tore out his eyes, he for'st to beg his bread,
68
Aurelius Conanus slew in field, 4507./546.

Constantine, Arthurs Nephew, three years swade, Aurelius Conanus.

Then did his due to death and nature yield, 4509./548.

And Vortigore his Son is Sovereign made,
Who did but four years Brittans (...) weild, Vortigorus.

When Malgo did the (...) invade, 4513./542.

Who slew his first Wife, her chaste Bed for sooke, Malgo.

And to his Bride, his Brothers Daughter took.
69
King Totylus sacked Rome the second time,
What in the first he spoiled, he now repaired, 4539./578.

Altinus king of Lumbards, full with Wine,
Calls for a Mazer (which he might have spared)
Of his Wives Fathers Scull, for which in fine,
She loathed her Husband, and yet further dared:
Unto his loyal Bed she proved untrue
With Helme-child, who after Albine slew.
70
CAreticus by help of Irelands King, 4577./586.

Called Gurmond, Brittan Malgo did expel, Careticus. Ethelfrid.

Whom after three years Ethelfrid did bring
To ruin, and in battle prosperd well,
About this time Sybert The East Saxon King,
Erected Westminster: Ethelfrid fell, 4574./613.

And Cadwan, Duke of Northwales, him defeated, Cadwan.

And two and twenty years in peace was seated.
71
Queen Tredegunde of France in the mean season, 4549./588.

Lawdry the Earl of Soysons dearly loved,
And for his ^ake destroyed the King by Treason,
Against Gregory, (sir-nam'd the great) was moved
By ^ohn the Patr^arch (against all reason)
The Churches Primacy which he improu'd, 4586/625.

Arabian Mahomet his Alkeron made,
Frensh Brunchild lived, who had Princes ten betrayde.
72
CAdwallin, Cadwans Son next Bittan guided, 4596/335.

Benet the Monk, Paynting and Glazing found, Cadwallin.

The Sarasins by Mahomet provided,
Wan Persia, where Ormisda long sat crowned,
And in short space having their powers di^ided,
Conquered all Egypt with the Climats round:
Damascus likewise was subdude by them,
So was rich Antioch and Jerusalem.
73
Three years Cadwallader (esteemed the last 4644./683.

Of Brittan Princes) gouernd: and he dead, Cadwallader

The Kingdom wholly to West Saxons past, 4684/723.

Of whom King Iue first impald his head, Iue reigned 37 years. Ethelard.

And next him Ethelard, whose reign was grast
By reverent Beda, of whose works we read:
Of Clearkly Books on several Subjects styled,
Thre^ore and eyghteene Volums well compiled. 4685/724

74
Next Ethelard, reigned Cuthred, whom succeeds 4690/729.

Sigebert, and he not one full year did reign, Cuthred.

But was deposde for many tyrranous deeds, 4706./745.

And after besely by a Swine-heard slain, Sigebert.

Kinulphus to the Kingdom next proceeds,
Who after by a man of Sigeberts train 4709/748.

Was murdered in the night, as he should pass Kinulphus.

Unto his Mistress, a brave British Less.
75
The Sarasins pierce Europe, Rhodes they wasted, 4702/749

The Firmament two days appears to burn,
The Emperor Constantine his Army hasted
The Sarasins by arms to ouerturne,
Where thirty thousand Pagans of death tasted,
When Constantine expites, the Christians mourn:
His Throne and State Justinian next maintained,
And from the Turks, Affricke and Libia gained.
76
The next West Saxon King was Brithricus, 4739/778

Who eyghteene years after Kinulphus fall Brithricus.

Reigned King, came from the blooud of Cerdicus,
And queld the Danes in many a bloody brall,
Wiu'd Ethelburgh, by whom, as Books discuss
He poysond was: yet whilst he governed all
S. Albons, Winchcombe Abbeyes were both built,
Blood rayn'd, which seemed like Crosses where it was spilt.
77
Egbert the Sexon, thirty seven supplyde 4756/795

The Soueraignety, now reigned Prench Charles the great, Egbert.

Eyghteene whole days the Sun his light denyde,
Hyren the Empress from The Imperial Seat
Her young Son Constantine deposde through p^de,
And after did him cruelly entreat:
She causd his eyes be torn out of his head,
And four years after gouernd in his stead.
78
King Ethelwolfe, the fore-nam'd Egbert's Son, 4793/832

As Chroniclers affirm, Oxford erected, Ethelwolf.

a Priest at first, in Orders he begone,
Till after marrying, he the State affected,
The Warlike Danes his Kingdom ouer-ron, 4804./843.

But are expled: Sergius is Pope elected: Os Porci (...) (...).

Whose name Os Porcy seemed so vile, that they
Changed it, and from him all Popes to this day.
79
Four Sons each other in the State succeedes 4816./845.

King Ethelwald, who governed not a year Ethelwald.

When Ethelbert his Brother don'd the Weeds 4817./856.

Imperial, and next him does appear Ethelbert.

The third Son Etheldred, (whose body bleeds 4824./863.

By the bold Danes) who after slaughterd were Etheldred.

By the fourth Son: at Brixium as Books tell,
Three days together blood in thick shewers fell.
80
Young Alured from Ethelwolfe the last, 4833/872,

Twenty nine years six months, the Scepter bore, Alured.

Hungar and Hubba quite through Scotland past,
Bells were first used in Greece (not known before) 4862/901

In six set battles, Alured disgrast Edward.

The warlike Danes, then did: The Peers adore
Edward his elder Son, who nobly bears
The British Scepter four and twenty years.
81
Nine Popes in less then nine years were instald,
Adelwald, Edwards Brother, twice rebelling
Was by the Elders Prowess twice appald,
And after slain, the Huns and Hungars quelling
All Europe, were much feared: a Princess called 4872/911.

Elflede, King Edwards Sister much excelling:
after the throws in her first Childbirth tryde,
For evermore her Husbands Bed denide.
82
And proouing arms, by them she honor sought,
She tamed the VVelch-men, and the Danes disgraced, 4886/925

Next Edward Adelstane the battles fought, Adelstane.

Of the bold English, and the Castles raced
(as the proud Danes reard) and to ruin brought
The Sarafins even from Hetruria chased: 4896/915

Th Italian Guards: they G^n overthrow,
Where blood three days out of a Well did flow.
83
Now Gui of Warwick, Danish Colebrand slew,
And England of all Tribute quite releast,
King Edmond did the Soueraignety pursue, 4901/940

When Adelstane at Malmsbury deceast, Edmond.

Slain after five years: by succession true
Eldred his Brother reigns, whose pomp increast: 4907/949

Edmonds two Sons being young, the Peers complain, Eldred.

and think their Uncle of more worth to reign.
84
France, Tuskaine, Germany, the Hungars wast, 4915/954

Hugh King of Italy, by Fire destroys
The navy of the Sarazens, then past
To Traxinetum, Edwin next inioyes 4916/955.

The Scepter ( Eldred having breathed his last) Edwin.

At Kingstone crowned, whose heart was set on toys,
He Dunstan banished, his Lands and Treasure lauisht,
and his near N^c upon his Crowne-day ravished.
85
And next he slew her Husband, for all which
after four years he was depriude his state,
Edgar his Brother, a Prince wise and rich, 4920./959

In all things ^ust, severe, and Fortunate,
ascends the Throne, no Sorcerer nor Witch Edgar.

His sentence spard, Thieves, Bribers he did hate:
To him Ludwallis, Prince of Wales obayd,
Three hundred Wolves for Tribute yearly paid.
86
Forty seven Monasteryes this King erected
Red Crosses made, and on men's Roabes were seared,
When Duffus had four years the Scots protected, 4927/966

Donewald a Scotch Lord, that no bad thing feared,
Him basely slew, and from his Throne derected,
From which, ^xe months no Moon or Sun appeared:
The Turks by Euecus Earl of Bygar,
Were Spain expold, he first King of Nauar.
87
King Edgar in his sixteenth year expyres, 4939./975.

When his Son Edward was at Kingstone crownde, Edward

Slain by his traiterous Stepdame, who desires
The Crown for her Son Etheldred: he found
Exter Abbey, Swayne of Denmark fires 4936/978

Cities and Towns in England, burning round: Etheldred.

King Etheldred reigned in this Kingdom free,
Thirty eight years: His murdered Brother three.
88
Now Stephen was made first King of Hungary,
And thirty nine years reigned. Alphons of Spain 4961/1000

Besiedging great Visenum valiantly,
Was with an arrow killed, and strowed the plain:
All the Lord-Danes that lived here tyranously,
Were by the English Wives in one night slain:
Jerusalem was by the Turks possessed,
Whom twice the bold Venetian Duke distressed.
89
King Edmond (sir-nam'd Iron-side) next his Father Edmond Iron-side.

Inioyes the Kingdom, against whom Swanus Son
The bold Canutus all his Dan^s does gather,
Twixt whom were many battayles lost and won, 4977/1016

After much bloods effusion they chose rather,
By single strife to end the broils begone:
Their valors were in epuall balance tryde,
and after Combat they the Land divide.
90
Edrick of Stratton, valiant Edmond slew, 4978/1017.

And from Canutus had a Traitors meede,
The valiant Dane in Styles and Honors grew, Canutus.

He Scotland wan, and Norway: To his seed
Leaving four Kingdoms, Vice he did eschew,
Nor ever did a juster Prince succeed: 4993./1032.

English and Dan^s he atton'd unto his doom,
and after went on Pilgrimage to Room.
91
Robert the Norman Duke, for valor famed,
Hyes to the holy wars in Palestine,
He gone, his young Son William is proclaimed 4896/1038.

The Norman Duke: Now seeks a Throne divine Harrold. Harefoote.

Canutus when he twenty years had reigned,
and Harrold Harefoote unto whom incline
The Dan^s in England, next the Scepter swayes,
and three years past: at Oxford ends his days.
92
Hardi-canutus the same number filled, 5002/1041

and drinking did: whom the good Edward (Sainted Hardicanutus

For holy works) succeeds, no blood he spild,
Nor with known sins his high profession taynted, 5004/1043

He married as the great Earl Goodwin wild, Edward

Th'Earles Daughter Edgitha, and nothing wanted:
That a just Prince should have, one and twenty years,
In zeal and clemency the Crown he wears.
93
This Goodwin, Alphred Edward younger Brother,
Traytorously slew, and by his power he yoaked
The King himself, betray de his Sovereign Mother,
By Bishop Robert to these illes provoked, 5008/1047

But Heaven no longer could such mischief smother, 5016/1055

Swearing by Bread, he by the bit was choked:
The swallowing Sea devoured all his Lands,
Which to this day bear name of Goodwins sands.
94
William the Bastard Duke first landing hear, 5014/1053

Was by the King received, and Englands Crown
Promised by Edward, which no English Peer
Was known to contradict, after lenthome
With greatest pomp, and Harrold the same year
Earl Goodwins son, a man of great renown:
Arriude in Normandy, and with oaths deep,
Swear (the King dead) for him the Crown to keep.
95
But Edward dead, Harrold usurps the seat, 5027./1066.

Whom Fauston and the Norwey King invade Harrold.

Upon the North, both whom he did defeat,
And bravely slew in battle. William made
A new Incursion against whom in it is hear,
Harrold his Ensigns in the field displayde:
The Norman Duke preuaylde: and Harrald slain, 5028/1067.

William (the first so called) begins his reign. William.

In Brutes time whilst he gouernd Brittan, Anaeus Siluius reigned amongst the
Latins. Dercitus in Assyria, Athletets in Corinth: Pipinus in Thus^an, Codrus
in Athens, Lanquet.
in whose days the Ark of God was taken by the Philistims.

In Locrynes reign David was anointed King over Israel.

In Guendolins reign, he (...) Vriah, and married Bersheba.

In Madans days, Solomon built the Temple, etc.

From Brute to Caelar, the Brittans were not Tributary Stow.
to any, the government of the Romans from Caesar to Theodosius, lasted 483.
years. In Theodosius the youngers reign, the year of Christ 443. the Tribute
(...).

The government of the Saxons continued the space of 600. years in continual
war and hostility, either with the Brittans, the Danes, or the Normans.

The opinions of those that write of the first inhabiting of Harding.
this Island are diverse, and how it came first to receive the name of Albion,
some think of the Chalky and white Cliffe which seems to wall it in from the
Sea. But Hugh Genisis, a Hugh Genesis.
Roman Chronicler, writing of all the Kings and Kingdoms of the World, from
the Vniuer sall Deluge, to Christ. Writes, that Danaus, King of Greece, had
fifty Daughters, and Aegiptus as many Sons, who being married, and the women
the first night murdring their Husbands, were for the offense banished, and
sailing on the Seas, were driven upon this Island, which Albiana called after
her Name Albion: with these Ladies he reports that Spirits engendered, and
begotte Giants, who lay with their Mothers and Sisters (led only by their
lusts) till they had multiplied themselves to the number of twelve thousand.
But Idoubt not, but that this Land may contend with any other whatsoever, for
her antiquity, being inhabited with the first, which being continually vexed
within it self with ci^ (...) and foreign invasions, her Marian.
Monuments and remembrances, have by these wars bin de^oured, which have left
the certainty of our first Antiquity doubtful to the world, and not truly
re^embred by any that have undertook her first discovery.

Here moreover, we could have took fit occasion to have recorded all the
Genealogies before the flood, with a brief report, who after the flood peopled
every other Kingdom, and from whom every Region took her Name: but it had bin
a By Mirandula.
course, too strange and different from our purpose, which is only to find
out such things as have alliance to this Land of Brittan, and the memorable
things best known to us.

We infist not much in Aeneas travels, of his landing at Carthage, his love to
Queen Dldo, her killing her self at his departure from her land, the funer
all of his Father Anchises, with his wars against king Turnus, for the
beauteous Laninia These, because they are amply set down in Virgils 12. Virgil.
Books of his Aeneids, we thought better rather superficially to pass them
over with a bare remembrance, then to be too palpably tract in a History so
common to all men Which we (the rather to) omit, because we hasten to the
antiquittes, and the successiue Souer aigneties of our native Island, whose age
(our purpose is) to derive from the first Inhabitants, and so to continue it
even to this present government.

The Antiquity of London was held to be long before Rome. For Brute landed
here in the year of the Lord 2855. in the year before Christ 1108. Rome was
built long after, Eusebius.
in the time that Riuallo ruld in Britain, the year after the flood 155^.
after Comerus, the first king of Italy, 1414 after the destruction of Troy, 432
after Brute arriuedin in this Land of B^tain 355.

The end of the sixteenth CANTO.
Argumentum
OF all great Brittans Kings, truly descended
From the first Conqueror next we shall entreat,
How they have sayld, or how their hands extended
Through any foreign Realms by Conquest great,
How they begun, and how their reigns they ended,
Till royal James claymes his Monarchall Seat;
In whom three kingdoms, first by Brute divided,
United are, and by one Scepter guided.
ARG. 2.
From Norman William a true note collected,
Of all the kings and Queens that here protected.
CANTO. 17.
1
William, the Norman Duke is next invested, William the Conqueror.

Sixth of that Duchy entering by stern war, 5028/1067

A troublous reign he lived, and sildome rested
From rough rebellious arms: yet every bar
His Sword removed, Hertford his pride detested, Roger Earl of Hert^ord

But for his Treason was confined far:
Earl Walter too, into that faction led, 5037/1076

Disclosde the plot, and for it lost his head.
2
Duke Robert, Williams Son, by th'instigation 5042/1081

Of the French King, does Normandy invade,
Against whom William raysde the English nation,
And when no Prince betwixt them could persuade,
They met and fought, with much loud acclamation,
Robert unhorsed his Father, and then stayde
His warlike hand, whom by his voice he knew,
And raisd him: for which, peace between them grew.
3
William inuading France, in Caan expyerd, 5050/1089

And there lies buried by his warlike Peers,
after he many Towers and Towns had fierd,
Reigning over England one and twenty years,
Four Sons he left, one Danghter much admierd:
Robert and Richard, who ascends the Spheres
Before ripe age: William who next does sway,
Henry called Bewclack, and fair Adela.
4
Whilst our great Conqueror lived, the King of Danes, 5030/1069.

Canutus by the English Out-Lawes aided,
Inuades the North, but William him restraynes,
Henry the Emperor Bauaria invaded, 5031./1670.

Malcolm that ore the troublous Scots then reigns
Peirces Northumberland, at this time vaded
The Saxons glory, Otho them defaced, Otho Duke of Bauaria.

after the Thuringas he by arms had chaced.
5
Eudochia who had seven years worn the Crown
Of Graciaes Empire, was by marriage tide Pope Gregory the seventh.

Unto Rhomanus, one of high renown,
(Sir-nam'd Diogenes.) Gregory denyde
Marriage to Priests, the Russ. Duke was put down 5030/1069

By Prince Demetrius, near to him allyde:
William four Castles built, his Foes to tame,
At York, at Lincoln, and at Nottighame.
6
Henry then Casar for some sin detected, 5037/1079

Did by the Pope stand excommunicate,
and being of his Feudor King rejected,
To Gregory submits him and his State,
Now lived the famous Oswald much respected,
Bishop of Sarum: Casar absolu'd late:
(The second time condemnd) against Gregory sped, Robert Bishop of Rauenna, made
pope by the name of Clement.

Stating Rauennaes Robert in his sted.
7
Vradislaus was the first King made
Of Boheme, and of all the Countries near,
Ansell who then Galisiaes Scepter swayed, 5047/1089

Did against the Sarazens in arms appear,
And wan from them Tolledo, by the aid
Of Christian Princes: Rufus gouernd here
Next after conquering William, thirteen springs Will. Rufus

He sat invested in our Throne of Kings. 5050/1089

8
Twice Robert made incursion, but suppressed 5051/1090.

By Williams power, the Scots invade again
But are appeasd, the Welshmen Rees inuest,
Who in a conflict was by William slain: 5055./1044

lerusalem by Pagan Arms oppressed,
Th'assembled christian kings by force maintain: 5061/1100.

Where did in battle as the rumor ran,
The Babilonian Souldan, Soliman.
9
The Norman Robert, chusd King by election
Of Palestine, refusd the Sacred style,
Which Bulloin Godfrey took to his protection,
Scotch Malcolm with his son entering by guile
Northumbers Marches, came to the deiection
By valiant Robert, who was Earl that while: 5060/1099

(Both slain in field) K. William the same year,
Erected the great Hall in Westminster.
10
Duncan usurps in Scotland, not two years
He gouernd there, but in his bed was slain, 5060./1099

Donnald restored, not long the Scepter bears,
But Edgar (that ambitious was to reign)
By arms suppressed him, and the Dia'dem wears, 5062./1101

Rufus being hunting, Tyrrell of his train,
By glauncing of an Arrow, the King slew,
Henry next gouernes, by succession true.
11
Thirty five years did Henry Beauclarke guide Henry Beuclarke.

Th'Helme-Royall, he for Thest strict laws decreed,
Robert returned from Palestine, defide
Henry, who after parley were agreed, 5062/1101

Long their truce lasted not, Beu-clarke denide
His Brothers pension, great dissentions breed: 5067/1106

After much war, Duke Robert they surprise,
Who for a prisons breach forfeits his eyes.
12
Norwich Cathedral Church is founded new,
S. Bartholmewes built, by Reior a Musician,
In Belgia great Inundations grew,
Being almost drowned: Now upon good condition
Peace twixt the Emperor and King Henry grew,
Whose daughter was with much hye superstition
Made Empress: Maud the English Queen being dead
Henry takes Adelisia in her stead. Adelisia daughter to the Duke of Louaine.

13
The King of England with French Lodwicke tryes
Great discords, where the English gain the best,
In their return by Sea great Tempests rise, 5071/1110

Where all the yssue-Royall most and least
Perished, with many Nobles grane and wise,
Where eight-score souls at once are sent to rest: 5081/1120

Of all the ship, one Butcher and no more,
Escapt the seas, and swam unto the shore.
14
Geffrey plantagenet (the Emperor dead)
Wives Maud the Empress, unto whom she bare
Two sons, Henry and Geoffrey: now life fled
From Beu-clarke, who to Stephen resignes his Chair,
But ere he rests him in his earthy bed, 5096/1135.

He is renowned for many buildings rare:
Dunstable Priory, Reading Abbey, and
Windsore fair Castle, that on hye does sland.
15
Duke Bohemond in Asia wars maintaining,
Was by the Turks surpised, restored again
By Tanered, who in Puell after reigning,
Infinite Turks were by his valor slain,
Baldwin defies the Souldan, thereby gaining Gazim and Damascus,

Two famous Towns: Now Alphons rules in Spain:
Laws the gro^e in France, in Scotlands rights,
Malcolms first (...), that Alexander ^ight.
16
Alexius did the Gracian Empire sway,
Henry in Rome, the Pope-^om Pascall guids,
In Hungary (...) Stephen: about that day
A blazing-Starre appears, and long abides,
Two Moons are seen, and in Flaminia
Blood reigns; Michaell the Duke of Venice rides 5083/1122.

Against the Pagans, who were made his pray Rhodes, Chiu^, Samos, Lesbos,
Mitelene.

At ^oppen: After in his (...) feturne,
He many of the Emperors towns did burn.
17
Charles Earl of flaunders in the Church was slain
By the proud B^ggis provost, which related, 5085/1125

William the son of Cort-hose did complain,
And by French Jews was next Earl instated,
Balach the Parthian did proud wars maintain 5086/1125

Against Baldwin, which was by rough steel debated:
Baldwin surprizd, fair Stons Towers quite raced,
And fair Jerusalem once more defaced.
18
Stephen Earl of Bulloin son to The Earl of Bloys, K. Stephen

and Addela next Henry rules as King,
Though Maud the Empress had th'applausiue voice,
Of many English peers, through which wars spring,
Gloucester and Chester Earls, after much choice 5102/1141

Of fields and battles, such an Army bring,
That Stephen is took, and unto Bristow sent,
After releast, by London and by Kent.
19
These Counties raise an army and surprise
Gloucester, for whom the Barons change King Stephen, 5107/1136

David of Scotland does against England rife,
after much war then discords are made ecuen,
By th'Empresse means his Barons him despise,
First Stephen preuailes, the Lords their Lands bereauen:
But gathering head, at Wilton they prevail,
Where the King flies, whom Gloucester does assail.
20
Henry, Ma^ds son, after K. Stephens decease,
Is proclaimed King, which soon attones their strife
By which mild Stephen reigns all his days in peace, Eustace son to King
Stephen.

His son, the French Kings Sister takes to wife,
Gersa the son of Bela began increase
His fame among the Hungars, and his life
Was fearful to the Germans; Jews swayd France,
The Turks grim Alaph to their Crown advance,
21
Earl Roger ruled Sicilia. Almany 5114/1153

Great Barbarosse, Romes Empery Conrade,
Adrian of England held the Papacy,
In Scotland raignd Malcolm a beauteous maid, 5115/1154

The English Jews at Easter Crucify
A Christian child, and life for life they paid:
Next Stephen, King Henry, second of that name, Henry the 2

Son to the Empress Maud the Peers proclaim. 5116/1155

22
Thirty five years his prosperous reign does last,
In which he Englands (...) augmented,
With Scotland, Ireland, and then further past
To th'Orcad Isles, whose forces he prevented,
Britain, Poictou, and Guien he made fast
To The English Crown, (...) that but late dissented,
His sword appeasd, and after well protected,
Which done great Rutland Castle he erected.
23
Two Suns at once within our skies apeare,
And in the Moon a bloody Crosfe was seen, 5118/1157

Jews of France sent over Margaret here,
His daughter, to be made young Henry's Queen,
By which the discords that both Realms did fear
In this alliance quite dispersed been:
Once more the King against Scotland is provoked,
Pope Adrian drinking, with a Fly was choked. 5120./1159

24
Vradislaus for his valor shown,
At Milleins siedge, was by the Emperor made
Bohemians second King, his Arms well known,
A fair red Rampant Lion: Baldwin laid
On his black hearse, Almerious is grown
King of Jerusalem, who bravely staid
Th `Aegiptian power, and in one gloriou^day,
Wan from the Souldan Alexandria.
25
Now Thomas B^ket who before had fled
To Rome, and there complaind him of the King,
Was to his Sea restored, after struck dead
In Canterbury Church (a p^tious thing)
Him Rome Cannoniz'd for a Saint, which bred 5132./1171.

Much superstition: Salladine does bring
A puissant host ^his Conquests he began, 5133/1172

And by the sword Egypt and Sarry wan
26
Henry, King Henry's son, was twice instated
And Crowned in England in his Fathers days,
By which much uproar was by war debated,
The sons against the father tumults raise,
The Pope against The Emperor Frederick animated,
Frederick submits, and at his foot he lays
His princely head, whilst with a Lordly check, 5137/1176.

The Pope his foot sets on the Emperors neck.
27
Andronicus having his Master slain, 5143./1183

(The child Alexius left to his tuition)
Three years the Gracian Empire does maintain,
Baldwin the fifth, (a Chiln of fair condition)
Is Crowd in Syon: Saladin again 5144/1183

Against Palestine does make new expedition:
Subdues Jerusalem, and ^nce his days,
The Infidel the holy kingdom sways.
28
Henry the son before the Father dies, 5149./1186

Whose wars his Brother Richard takes in hand,
And by hostility the King defies,
Unable against his puissant son to stand,
Sickness and grief of thoughts the King surprise,
Who dying, to Prince Richard leaves the Land: 5150/1189.

Richard in A^nes a bold reputed Knight,
Who for his stout heart Cordelyon hight. Richard Cordelion.

29
Eleven full years, nine months and twenty days 5151/1189.

He sat inthr^'d Now Bayliffes first begun
In London: many Christian princes raise
Fresh powers, to gain Jerusalem late wun,
Almaine, France, England, Burgoine (whom most praise)
To this, Sicilia, Venice, Pysa run, 5152./1191

And quell the Pagans. Richard Cipresse took,
And Acon, where the French King him forsook.
30
Frederick the Empetor, having late subdude
The less Armenia, where his Fame was sowned,
Through greatest part of Asia began inttude, 5151/1190

And of that Tri-part world was sovereign Crowned,
But by misfortune or by rashnes^ude,
Was after in the flood Selephins drowned:
Richard exchanged with Gui of Lessingham
The Crown of Cipresse, for Jerusalem. 5154./1193

31
Grac'st with the title of the holy King,
Returning with a small and slendet train
Toward England, where his Brother John usurping,
Took to himself a short rebellious reign,
The Austrich Duke, King Richard envying,
Surpised him first, then gave him to be slain
To s fierce Lion, whom unarmed he beat,
And from his bulk his warm heart tore and eat.
32
Thence ransomed, (after war) prince John submits, 5154/1193.

Whilst Saphandenus Egipts Empire swayde,
In Spaines Tribunal the eight Alphons sits,
Emericus Hungariaes King is made,
To Innocent the third, The Emperor submits,
Who eighteen years the Papal Crosier staide, 5159/1198

He first deuisd Auricular confession,
Which since his time, the Popes keep by succession.
33
Richard besideging Gailerd long with Steel,
Was with an Arrow from the Castle wounded, 5161/1200

Shot by the hand of one Peter Bazeele,
He slain, Retrait the valiant English sounded,
His want, the Clergy, Peers, and Commons feel,
In whom Religion, power, and state abound:
Next him King John succeeds by the Lands doom, King John

Who whilst he reigned despisd the threats of Rome.
34
Reigned seventeen years, him phillip King of France 5162/1201.

Inuades, in Arthur Duke of Brittons name,
Whose powers the English John surprisd by chance,
Imprisoning Arthur whence these Garboyles came,
The Persians David to the Throne advance,
Who with his Indian Troops marched with much Fame,
Of Parthia and Armenia Conqueror,
And of Tartaria the first Emperor. 5164/1203

35
Five Moons were all at once in Torkeshire seen,
After which portent many storms insude,
prince John having incurd the popes fell spleen,
Stands with his Land accursed, which some allude
To Bishop Lanchton, who at Rome had been, 5167/1206.

And sought in Canterbury to intrude:
In Suffolk was a strange Fish took, that bore
The shape of man, and six months lived a shore.
36
The Mayor and Shrieffes in London were first made, 5170/1209

Wales twice rebelling was by war appeasd,
The English at Sluice the Navy of France invade,
A thousand twenty sail at once they ceasd,
Pope Innocent great Coesars pomp all aid,
Making such Laws as searce the Empire pleased,
Only such princes should as Emperors stand,
As should receive their Crowns at the popes hand.
37
Of whom the Saxon Duke Otho was first, 5173/1212

Venice subdues Coreyra, and the Isles
Adjacent, Otho by the popeaccurst,
For taking to himself the Empires styles,
Against him Menace war pope Innocent durst,
and traind into these broils by prayers and smiles:
Frederick the second, who the Diadem wears
after Duke Otho, three and twenty years.
38
John for a yearly tribute to Rome paid,
Of twice five hundred Marks, absolues his Land,
King Alexander is the Scotch King made, 5174/1213

(After deceased William, to command,)
He twenty and four years the kingdom staide,
Against King John the English Barons stand,
And to their faction the French Jews bring,
Whom in John's stead they seek t'elect as King. 5177./1216.

39
Amidst these tumults John by fate expires,
(As some suppose) by poison: whom succeeds
Henry his son: him more the Land desires
Then Jews, hated for some bloody deeds, Henry the 3.

For him the people make triumphant fires, 5179./1220

A general joy his hye instalment breeds:
at nineteen years, the kingdom he attained,
and fifty fix years over his subjects reigned.
40
Our Ladies Church in Westminster he reared, 5181/1220.

Now Hocata the second puissant King
Of great Tartaria, was renownd and feared,
He first the Title of great Caan did win,
The drooping Scotch King was by Henry cheared,
To whom he gave his Sister (next of Kin) 5182/1221

Fair Ioane Robert: Graciaes Empire swayd.
Who to his Empress took a beauteous Maid.
41
She was before betrothed to a great peer
Of Burgoine, he the Emperors pomp despysing,
Entered his armed palace without fear, 5183/1222

The Damsel in the Emperors arms surprising,
He first cut off her nose (revenge severe)
And from that place himself disguising:
To her'fore bribed Mother posting fast,
Th'in constant Dame into the Seas he cast.
42
The Scots in Cathnes their proud Bishop burn,
Because he cursed such, as their tithes denide, 5184./1223

Wards were first granted, Frederick does return 5186./1225

Toward Asia, and the Souldan puffed with pride,
Vanquished in field, and now no longer mourn
Those Christians that in Palestine abide; 5190/1229

England with France makes war, and after peace,
Tumults in Wales arise, but soon surcease.
43
Frederick, King Henry's Sister takes to wife, 5196/1235.

Called Isabell: Henry takes Elanour,
Daughter to The Earl of Prouence, ending strife
Twixt them before begun, about that hour
His spousals were solemnized, and joys rife,
In th'Element appeared a war like power 5198/1237

Of men in arms, of di^ers wings compacted,
The Merton Statute now was first enacted.
44
This year the famous faction first begun 5201/1240

Of Guelfes and Gibelines, Tartarian Caan
Inuades the Hungars, and their kingdom won, 5202/1241

Where their King Bela was in battle slain,
The Mother eats her Child, and Sire, the Son,
So great was hunger among the Hungars than:
Now London Aldermen were first elected, 5203./1242

and Frederick once more by the pope rejected.
45
Pope Innocent the fourth from The Emperor flying 5204/1243.

To Lions: to the Cardinals first gave
Red hats. A Jew in Spain Christ's faith denying,
picrst a huge rock, there found a hallow Cave,
In it a Marble stone which with Steel trying,
He finds a Book inclosd with praecepts grave, 5206/1245

Which spoke of Christ, by which the Story says,
The stiffe-neckt Jew was turned to Christian faith.
46
Henry with London City late displeasd,
For sentence against one Margaret Viell past, 5209/1248

Into his power the Cities Charters ceasd,
Which by submission they regained at last,
Young Alexanders Father long diseads
Expired in Scotland, the young prince in have
at nine years Crowned, to whom Henry affide, 5213./1252.

His Daughter Mary, whom he took to Bride.
47
In Italy blood issued out of bread 5214/1253

As out of wounds, French Jews was surprisd
By the great Souldan: Mango Caan's made head
Of the rude Tartars, who being well aduisde, 5219/1254

Received the Christian Faith, and after sped
against the Turks, in Crosses red disguisde:
Alphons of Spain bestows his Daughter fair
On young Prince Edward, Henry's hopeful heir.
48
Richard of Cornwall, Brother to the King, 5218/1257

At Aquisgraue was Emperor elected,
and Alphons of Castile the State affecting, 5219/1258.

Was by the Electors from the State rejected,
Albertus Magnus flourisht in his spring,
And Michael Paleologus, respected
For his great wars in Greece, who Baldwin slew, 5221./1260.

and thirty five years in the Empire grew.
49
At Oxford the mad Parliament began, 5225/1264.

King Henry with his Barons does contend,
They fought near Jews, many a valiant man
Of Noble blood came to a timeless end,
The King against his Peers the best he can,
Strives by the Sword, his Barons to offend: Richard of Cornwayle Brother to
the King and Emperor.

Who Manger all his force the battle won,
Surprisd the King, his Brother, and his Son.
50
Prince Edward entered Asia, and there fought 5233./1272

against the Turks, where he achieved much fame,
at length his life was by a Sarazan sought,
Who with a Knife to his Pauilion came
Empoysoned: and his death had almost wrought,
For in his princely arm he fixed the same:
Richard, King Henry's Brother, and Romes king 5233/1272

First dies, and after Henry, the same spring.
51
Next whom, Prince Edward Long-shankes was inucsted, Edward the first.

and thirty four years reigned, admired and feared,
Th'vsurping pride of Priests, he much detested, 5235/1274

Bounty and Virtue in this Prince appeared,
Nicholas the third made Pope, from The Empire wrested 5238/1277

Two Kingdoms for two Nephews, much indeered: 5240/1279

Of jews at once (that in their wealth took pride,)
Two hundred eyghty four, for Coining did.
52
Lewellen next rebeld, slaino by the hand
Of Roger Mortimer. After not long
David his Brother did against Edward stand, 5246/1285.

A dangerous Rebel, and infaction strong,
Yet perished likewise, with his warlike Band
Of Welsh revolted: (other things among)
King Edward joys, to quell the French-mens scorn,
and for Prince Edward at Carnaruan borne.
53
Alexander Issu-lesse fell from his Steed
And brake his neck, the Carmelites began. 5247/1286.

Phillip the fair, in France was King decreed,
Two Women in Heluetia lived than,
Who in their Wombs did two strange Monsters breed,
One bore a Child that had the face of man,
and body of a Lion: the other bred 5248/1287

One with two bodies, from the Girdle-sted.
54
The Scotch King dying Issulesse, contention
In Scotland grew, who should succeed the State,
The strife Edward atton'd, and after mention 5253./1292

Made of their Title, which these Lords relate,
He arbitrates their fierce and hot dissension,
And to John Balioll prized at highest rate 5254/1293

He gives the Crown, which pleased Scotland well,
Madock and Morgan now in Wales rebel. 5255/1294

55
Edward thrice war'd against Scotland, and prevailed, 5260/1299

The French Kings Sister Margaret took to Wife,
and to his Son the Princedome he entayled Edward the 2. the 1. Prince of
Wales.

Of Wales, proud Ottoman began great stufe
With Christendom, and many Towns assailed,
In him the Empire of the Turks took life: 5261/1300

Pope Boniface the eight suruiued than,
He first in Rome the Iubilee began.
56
Creat Tamor Ca^ gouernd Tartaria,
Albert the Empire, France, King Phillip guided, 5267./1306.

Prince Ladislaus ruld Hungaria;
Clement the fifth the seat of Rome divided,
Transporting it to France, which from that day
Seauenty four years continew'd undecided: 5268/1307.

Seraph the Egiptian Souldan-ship supplide, Edward 2.

Edward the first in his Scotch garboiles did.
57
The second Edward him succeeds, and reigns 5269/1308

Full eighteen years, a Prince of no renown,
He ryots, Lusts, and wantonness maintaind
Among private unthrifts, and his peers put down,
Henry the Emperor having bravely gaind, Henry 7. Em.

Many great fields was with an iron Crown 5270/1309.

at Milleine Crowned, where he aduancst his name,
The Crutched Fryares first into England came.
58
Peirs Gaueston twice banished by the Peers,
Was by the King recald: John Tamer rose 5076./1315

In rebel arms, destroyed by his own fears,
Phillip the long, their King the Frenchmen chose,
The hauty Spencers triumphed many years
Over the Nobles, who themselves oppose
against their pride: the Spencers they exile,
Whom the loose King revoked in small while.
59
Twenty two Barons (for the Spencers love) 5283/1322.

The King cut off: the Sun six hours appeared
Of sanguine hew, his glorious brightness strove
with his red Mask, which at the last he cleared,
Edward his force did twice against Scotland prove,
(Both times the soil with English blood besmeared:) 5^84/1323

The Queen and Prince the Spencers could not brook
And like two exiles their own Land forsook.
60
Sir John of Henault Lands in the Queens aid,
And hy the Barons help, the King pursued,
who after in strong Barkley Castle laid
Sir Roger Mortimer, a man indude
With Pride and Tyrrany the King betrayde, 5287/1326

and with the Kings blood (...) Tower Imbrude:
Baldock, the Spencers Minions to the King,
The Conquering Peers unto destruction bring.
61
Edward King Edwards Son, fifty years bore Edward the 3.

Englands rich Scepter: Charles the French King did,
Leaving no issue of the Royal store, 5288/1327

Therefore King Edward being next alyde,
Claymes France, to which the Doncipeeres restore
Phillip Valois, and Edwards claim deride:
Sir Roger Mortimer (long graft boue reason 5291/1330

By the Kings Mother) was condemned of Treason.
62
Edward the Blacke-Prince was at Woodstocke borne, 5293/1332

King Edward fought the fi^ld called Haldonne Hill
In Scotland, After some few days out-worne,
The King his claim to France does menace still,
Petrach the Laureat lived, the French in scorn,
Four hundred Sail with armed Soldiers fill: 5301/1340.

These Edward meets at Siuce, whom fame has sounded,
Thirty three thousand of French to have slain and drowned.
63
The order of the Garter was first made,
Soon after was the famous Cressie field,
Don Petro by his Spanish Peers betrayde,
Was to their violent fury forced to yield,
Edward wan Callis: John next Phillip swayde 5309/1348

In France, and mena'st with his warlike Shield:
The brave Black-Prince at Poytieres battle won 5317./1356

The field, the French King Prisoner, and his Son.
64
Melchella was now Souldan, Amurath
Emperor of Turkey, and with Conquest fought, 5324/1363.

(A persecutor of the Christian Faith)
The French King-Iohn having his peace now bought,
at Sauoy did: and Charles the sixth next has
The Crown of France, Don-Peter aid besought: 5327/1366

Who late exiled from the Crown of Spain,
Was by the Black-Prince repostest again.
65
The Duke of La^caster France ouer-run. John a Gaunt Duke of Lancaster

Unfought withal: Sir Robert Knowles likewise
Marched by the City Paris: now begun 5334/1373.

Great Baiazeth among the Turks to rise,
The brave black Prince (from France where he had won
So many Noble fields) returning dies: 5337./1376.

The King himself (as our best writers say)
Expird, of June the two and twentieth day.
66
Richard the second, son to the bold Prince Richard 2.

Edward (sit-namd the Black) at years eleven
Began his rule, whom many men convince
Of wanton riot, and a course uneven,
Well tutored in's minority, but since 5341/1380

He managed state, too much neglecting heaven:
Gunnes were deuisd first by a German Friar,
France does the Kingdom of Nauar desire.
67
Queen ^ane of Naples flourisht, Bohemes King
Vinceslaus, was Almaine Emperor made,
Twixt Portugal and Castile discords spring,
Two Popes contend; the Genowayes invade
The bold Venetians, and to battle bring
Their Nauall powers, both Ensigns fly displaid: 5342/1381

Jack Straw dies, stabd in Smithfield by the care
Of William Walworth, at that time Lord Mayor.
68
A wondrous Earthquake did whole England shake, 5343/1382

King Richard the Almaine Emperors daughter wiude,
The Turks in Christendom great vprores make, 5346/1385

John Galeazo in those days suruiu'd,
Duke John of Gaunt, does a brave voyage take
To conquer Spain, and in his purpose thriu'd:
The Barons of the Realm themselves withdrew, 5347/1386

And many of the King seducers slew.
69
The Duke of Lancaster his daughter Kate, 5349/1389

Married to Henry Castiles eldess son,
His second daughter had the Queene-like state
Of Portugal, by which all wars were done,
The Turk in Hungary suppreft but late, 5350/1389.

Seeks by his power all G^eece to ouer-ron: The Academy of (...) leine found.

Against Constanti^opolis, he laid
at eyght-yeare siedge: now Colleines School was made.
70
Robert of Scotland dying, John his heir 5356/1395

Succeedes next: Richard (Queen Anne beiug dead)
Espousd French Isabel: then did prepare
For Ireland, where is voyage slowly sped, The Duke of Gloucester and Earl of
Arundell.

He put to death his Uncles, for the care
Of him and his Realms safty (sore misled)
Hereford and Norfolk Dukes the Combat claim, 5359/1398

and both are banist in King Richards name.
71
The S^ithian Tamberlaine the Turks subdude,
and kept their Emperor in an Iron Cage,
Hereford against his sentence, durst intrude
Himself int'England, and against Richard wage
A threatened war: the Peers Richard exclude
From government, who in his strength of age
Resignes his Crown, his Dignity, and Fame, Edward the fourth.

To Henry Bullingbrooke, fourth of that name.
72
Against whom the Duke of Exeter, Richards Brother, 5360/1399

The Dukes of Surry and Aumarle conspyre,
With Gloucester, who his hatred cannot smother,
And Salsbury, all these his life conspyre,
and for it lost their lives, with many other
Of the same faction, seeking to aspyre:
Richard is slain in Prison, after shown
Through London streets, to have his death well known.
73
Owen Glendoure raysd arms: Hotspur rebeld,
Woorster, Northumberland, with others more, 5362/1401

Whom Edward met at Shrewsbury, and queld,
Giving those Lords a Mortal overthrow,
The Milleine Duke, that many years excelled Galiazo Duke of Milleine.

In Tyranny, at length was laid full low:
Leaving to John his Son the Dukedomes Seat, 5363/1402

This year was stated Mahome^ the great.
74
Charles of Cremona, by the Treason did 5367/1460.

Of base Cabrinus Fundulus, his slave,
Th'Arch-Byshop Scroope, that Edward late defide,
Surprizd in field, came to a timelesse grave,
In Poland at Cracouia full of pride,
Was founded th'Accademy: some deprave 5368/1407

The Burgoin Duke, that did his hands imbrew
In Orleance blood, whom he by Treason slew.
75
Saint Andrews University begone 5372/1411

In Scotland, John the Milleine Duke is slain
Of his own Subjects: Ladislaus won
The City Rome, which he gave up again, Henry the S.

King Edward dying, left unto his son
Henry the fifth, a fair and prosperous reign: 5374/1413.

Ten years he did his Royal fame advance,
and to his Crown annexed the Realm of France.
76
Great Amurath swayed Turkey: John, Castile:
The sixth Charles, France; Pope Martin, Peter's Chair:
at Henry's claim to France the Frenchmen smile,
With many taunts they Englands puissance dare,
King Henry crossed the seas, and in small while 5377./1416

at Agin-court, managed a fight so rare:
That in one battle he the Land ore-tun,
Leauiug the Crown successiue to his son.
77
Jeremy Prague, and John Husse dye by fire 5378/1417

about religious causes, Ziscaled
The Thaborytes, and further began aspire
against the Emperor to list his head,
French Katherine was Crowned Queen by great desire
Of all our English peers: Duke Clarens sped 5382/1421

against the Dolphin, but (alas) in vain,
By multitudes he was ore-set and slain.
78
Henry t'auenge his Brothers death, prepares 5383/1422

again to invade France, where he breaths his last,
Pale death that in his rigor no man spates,
Beteaues him life: his infant son not past
Eight months of age, assumes the Lands affairs Henry the sixth

Under protection: Bedfards Duke was great 5389/1428

With Regency of France, a Sorceting Maid, Ioane de pusill.

Fought on the Dolphins part, and brought him aid.
79
Who in small time was King of France proclaymde,
at Orleance brave Mountacute is slain,
Prince Sigismond is Roman Emperor named, 5394/1433.

Eugenius does the papal Sea maintain, Eug. 4.

Phillip guides Milleine: now was Talboot famed,
Who many lost Towns did in France regaine: 5398/1437

Now flourisht Francis Forza in his pride,
The Lions in the Tower this year all did.
80
Zeuza lives Persiaes King: for Sorcery 5399/1438

Dame Elen Cobham the Protectors Wise,
With diverse others were found treacherously 5420/1441

To have cnnspyred against King Henry's life,
Dame Margaret to the King of Scicily
Sole-Daughter (which began much future strife) 5406/1445

To Henry's Bed, with Suffolk crossed the Scas,
now lived the brave Prince Huniades.
81
Humphrey the Duke of Gloucester, was deprived 5408/1447

His harmless life at Bury: Suffolk now 5411/1450

Was banished England, where he long had strived
By the Kings grace to make the Barons bow,
Jack Cade, a mutit ous Rebel, now suruiu'd,
Dating the Kings Edicts to disalow:
This was the year of Iubilee: In Menz, 5413/1452.

Faustius first printed, at his own expense.
82
The Turkish Mahomet sacked and despoylde 5414/1453

Constantinople: at this time was fought 5415/1454

Saint Albons battle, where the King was foyld,
and by the Duke of york a prisoner blought
To London: the sixth Henry being much toyld 5416/1455

With Kingdoms cares, his peace and quiet sought,
Making proud york protector: now was famed
George Castriotus, ( Scanderbag sir-nam'd,)
83
Great Warwick at Northampton the King met
In battle, of the Barons many slew,
Surpri'd the King in person without let, 5420/1459

The Duke of Torke reuiues his claim anew,
Whom many of the chiefest Lords abet, 5421/1460

And in the Parliament his right pursue:
Being Titled heir apparent to the Crown,
at Wakefield him, King Henry's Queen put down.
84
Great Warwi^ke at Saint Albons she made fly,
Rescuing the King her husband in small space,
Torkes son the Earl of March began to defy,
and sought by arms King Henry to displace,
Near Torke both powers each other soon discry,
Where the fourth Edward has the King in chase: Edward 4.

and now the victors Lord it where they please,
Whilst Margaret with her young son crossed the Seas.
85
Twelve Kingdoms, and two hundred Cities more, 5224/1463

Great Mahomet subdues: next Exham field
Was fought by them that Henry would restore,
But to King Edwards powers perforce they yield, 5225/1464

Who wives the Lady Gray, she that before
Was wife to Sir John Gray: Warwick, his shield
aduancst against the King, whom he had Crowned,
and for French Bona seeks him to confound.
78
Edward flies England, Henry is restord, 5431/1470

and Edward with an army Lands again,
Where Warwickes pride upon his shield is scord,
Edward ore-comes his powers on Barnet plain,
Earl Warwick by the Commons is deplord, 5432/1471

Edward the fourth once more usurps his reign:
Gloucester kills Henry's son, then madly fares
Against Henry, whom he murdered at his Prayers.
87
Cassanus gouernd Persia, Mistress Shore 5435/1474

Was famous for her beauty: Hungary
Mathias ruld, The Pope (not known before) 5436/1475

at twenty five years made the lubily
The Duke of Clarens is lamented sore, 5444./1483

Being in a Wine-but murdered treacherously:
Edward expyres: two sons he leaves behind,
Three Daughters, and a Brother most unkind.
88
The eleauenth of April, and the eleauenth sad year Edward the 5

Of his young age, fifth Edward gins his reign,
But ear he yet was Crowned, Richard (too near)
His Uncle did his hands with murder stayne,
Both Edwards Children by his doom severe,
Were Butcherd in the Tower, and foully slain:
now famous wearc, Gaza, Sabellicus
Pycus Myrandula, Aldus Minutius.
89
George Valla, Hermolaus Barbarus,
Pelitian Platine, with a many more,
Marcilius Ficinus, Pomponius Latus
With Johannes de monte regio,
Now Venice and Ferara peace discuss, 5445/1484

Great Baiazeth sustaines an overthrow
By the bold Souldan, next instated came
Usurping Richard, called third of that name. Richard the 3.

90
Two years, two months, and two days he inioyes
Regality, whilst Charles the eight swayes France,
And Innocent the eight his power imployes
In Rome, his Bastards to inhance
Richard, the Duke of Buckingham destroys,
Who thought the Earl of Richmond to advance: 5446/1485

Henry Earl Richmond, M^lford Haven sought,
Where landing, he the field of Bosworth fought.
91
Richard there slain, Henry the seventh sits Crowned, Henry the 7.

Twenty three years: Vgnerus Persia guides:
Frederick the Empire: Henry, to make found
The breach that Torke and Lancaster deuides,
a happy nuptial contract does propound
With fair Elizabeth, whom soon he brides:
She heir to york: This year (a disease new)
The Sweating sickness first in England grew.
82
Spaines Ferdinand, the kingdom of Granade 5448/1487

Wan from the Sarazens: Lambert a Child
Taught by a Priest called Simon, came to invade
England with a new style, by him compiled
As Son to Clarens: in this claim were made
Chiese Leaders, Francis Louel once exiled: 5450/1439

Broughton, and Lincolnes Earl, with whom took part,
A valiant German that hight Martin-Swart.
83
These Henry slew in battle, and arrear'd
A Tax of the Tenth-penny through the Land, 5451/1490.

For which the Commons in the field appeard,
And kill Northumbers Earl: with a strong band
Henry invaded France: Columbus cleard 5453/1492

The unknown Seas, and boldly took in hand
The Indies first discovery: Insurrection 5456/1495

By Perkin Warbeck, in foreign protection.
84
In Italy a Stone exceeding great
Fell from the air: Lord Audly now rebeld, 5457/1496.

Henry and the Scotch King of peace entreat,
The Turk the bold Venetian forces queld, 5459./1498

Who at Dyrachium sought him to defeat,
Katherine of Spain, a Lady that excelled,
Was fianst to Prince Arthur, Sforce subdude 5461/1500

Milleine, and all the Frenchmen did exclude. 1462/1501

85
Margaret King Henry's Daughter was affyde
Unto Scotch James: In Germany blood raind, 5460/1502

Elizabeth the Queen in Childbed did,
The French this year from Naples were constrainde 5469/1508

By Ferdinand of Spain: Now in his pride
Lived Prestor-Iohn, Great Ismael Sophy gaind, 5470/1509

Upon the Turk in many a warlike strife,
Henry the seventh at Richmond ends his life.
86
At eyghteene years Henry the eight succedes
And thirty eight years reigned, his Brothers Wife Henry the eight.

He marries by the Popes dispense, which breeds
Among the Cardinals murmr and strife,
Emson and Dudley hated for their deeds, 5471/1510.

To please the Commons were deprived of life:
Now Doctor Collet lived, a man of fame,
Erasmus too, derived from Rhoterdame.
97
The Turkish Tyrant Selimus by war, 5473/1512

Two Aegiptian Souldans chaste and slew,
The Muscouites the stout Pollonians bar,
Some rights, for which great battles t'ween them grew,
France still retains the memorable searre
Of Henry's valor, who that time o'rethrew 5474/1513

Turwin and Turney: in whose streets appear,
Turrets as many as be days ^'th year.
98
A peace with France, King Jews, Mary wives,
Sister to Henry, and within few days 5475/1514

Expyres, Charles Brandon against the Frenchmen strives,
At Tilt and Barriers where he won great praise,
and fetched the Queen thence: Francis next suruiues
The King of France: Charles Brandon now assayes
The Queen, and marryes her, in small while after, 5476/1515

Mary was borne, King Henry's eldest Daughter.
99
Charles Duke of Austrich is made King of Spain, 5478/1517

The Cities tumult chanced on Ill-May-day,
Cardinal Woolsy flourisht: now complain
The Popes allies against Luther: Turks display 5479/1518

Their Ensigns against Belgrade: once again 5481/1520

Zuinglius began against the Pope t'inuaye:
Whose Doctrines, learnd Erasmus seemde to abet,
Henry at Arde in France, the French King met.
100
Charles is Crowned Emperor: th'eyght Henry writ 5481/1520

A Book against Luther: This year lost his head
The Duke of Buckingham, and now did sit
In the Turks Throne, a Prince with fury led, 5483/1522.

Who Belgraue did besidge, and threatened it
Great Solomon: The Emperor Charles him sped
For England, where at Windsore he was called
Unto the Garter, and there Knight installed.
101
Christierne of Denmark banished, with his Wife 5484/1523

Enter this Land, where they were well entreated,
The Earl of Surry in his Northern strife,
In many sundry fights the Foe defeated,
Storms and tempestuous Gusts this year were rife,
And in Granade, a Prodince fayrely seared, 5487/1526.

Were Cities swallowed, the great Turk makes head,
From whom the Hungars king, drowned as he fled.
102
The Annabaptists sect was first begun, 5488/1527

Charles Burbons Duke sacked Rome, and there was slain,
Vaivad grew great in Fame, this year the Sun
Appeared three Suns at once. Katherine of Spain,
(Before prince Arthurs wife) the king is wun,
To be diuorst from; this divorce in vain 5490/1528

Cardinal Woolsie seeks (by means) to cross,
Which to his ruin turns, and favors loss,
103
Tindall the holy Scripture now translated, 5491/1530

Th'arrested Cardinal at Leister did, 5493/1523

And Ferdinand is King of Rome created,
Anne Bulloine next became King Henrtes Bride,
And Thomas Cromwell whom the Clergy hated,
Made of the Counsel, the Kings Sister tide
In marriage to Charles Brandon, dies forlorn, 5494/1533

Elizabeth was now at Greenewich borne.
104
For Treason did the holy Maid of Kent, 5494/1536

Lady Anne Bulloine like wise lost her head,
Erasmus after seauenty Winters spent
Expi'd, whose fame through Christendom is spread,
Lady Jane Seamors beauty did content
The King so well, he took her to his bed, 5498/1537.

And on Saint Edwards Eeue this year, took life
noble Prince Edward, by the kings late Wife.
105
Friar Forest did for Treason: One of Spain, 5499/1538

For eating Flesh upon a day of Fast,
Was hanged in Paris (and took down again)
His Lady burnt: A full conclusion past,
Of Marriage tweene the King and Lady Anne 5500/1539

Of Cleeue, which solemn contract did distaste
The Kings soon after: who for her rare feature,
Wiu'd Lady Katherine Howard, a fayer Creature.
106
Cromwell next lost his head: the disputation 5501/1540.

Begun at Rat'isbone: Henry th'eyght is styled
The King of Ireland, by his proclamation,
and Lady Katherine Howard, who defiled
Her unchaste body, with much lamentation
Led to her death: now Luther was re^led 5504./1533

In the Popes Trident Counsel, the King wed
The Lady Katherine, Lat'mer to his Bed.
107
The Turkish Barbaressa famous grew
In Germany, at Mounster blood did reign,
Troubles with Scotland: next these did ensue
The Counsel held at Spyre: now once again
Henry invaded France, and did pursue 5505/1544.

The Bullenois, since many did complain
Against the Stews, they were abandond quite,
The pope the Wormace Counsel did accite.
108
Luther expyres, soon after dies the king, 5507/1546

Henry the eight, whom the sixth Edward then 1508/1547

Succeedes at nine years old, now first began spring
That reformed Church, which at first many men Edward the 6.

Impugn'd: Masses no more the Churchmen sing,
Next Musele-borrow field did happen, when
Much blood was spilt a both-sides, Bonner now, 5509/1548

(Great in his Fathers days) the king makes bow.
109
Stephen Gardener is cast into the tower,
The Brother Seamers (falling at dissension
By means of their proud Wives) begin to lower
Each upon other, which without prevention,
Causd timelesse Fate, both their sweet lives deuower, 5500/1549

First Arundell, then Kit had firm intention
To change the State, but both were hanged in chains,
Bulloine was given up by the French-mens traynes.
111
At Feuersham was murdered by his Wife 5512/1551,

Arden, by help of Mosby and Blacke-Will, 5514/1553.

The Trade with Musco did now first grow rife, Cu^ford Dudley to the D.
Northumberland.

Mong The English Merchants, by the Nauiall skill
Of one Gabato, he that first gave life
To these adventures. Many rumors fill
The Land with news, that Edward lately did,
Mean time the Lady Iane's made Guilfords Bride.
112
Edward at sixteen years ofage deceast,
The Duke Northumberland proclaims Queen Jane, Q. Jane.

But soon her young and Infant title ceast,
The Commons by their power Mary maintain, Q. Mary.

Sister to Edward: her high State increast,
And next her Brother she begins her reign:
Guilford and Jane, with whom the Queene's offended,
Sent to the Tower where their sweet lives they en^ded.
113
Bourne preaching at Panles-Crosse, the Mass maintaining, Bourne Cannon of
Paul's

A sudden tumult at his Sermon raisde,
A man unknown his Doctrine much disdaining,
Threw at his face a Dagger: Ridley praysd
Among protestants: and Cramner favor gaining Ridley Bishop of London Cra^mer
Archbishop of C^terbury.

In Edwards days, were for Arch-traitors blazed
And did by fire, Northumberland that sped
To Cambridge: on the Tower Hill lost his head.
114
The Turkish Solomon with his own hands
Slew his son Mustapha, the Cardinal Car^al Poole

In Henry's days but late exild his Lands,
Was by the Queen re^cald, now began to fall
The protestants; against them strictly stands
The Catholic Clergy: the proud Genowayes brall
With the French King, who after in small while,
Wan by the Turks aid the rich Corsicke I Will.
115
Englands great Queen espousd Phillip of Spain, 5515/1554

Sir Thomas Wyat for rebellion did, Coortney earl of Devonshire.

Duke Suffolk Father to the Lady Jane,
Was at the Tower beheaded, Coortney allyde
To the blood Royal once more they restrain
Of Liberty: the fourth Paul full of pride
Supplies the pope-dome, the same year did chance,
Much warr^ and trouble between Spain and France.
116
Lady Elizabeth was keptin hold,
and by the Queen committed to the Tower, 5516./1555

There harshly vsd, her life to danger sold,
By soldiers thence remooud to Wood-stocke Bower,
Sir Henry Benning-field (somewhat too bold)
Upon her just proceedings looking sower: 5517/1556.

a blazing Comet twelve full nights appeared,
Great Lones of Money by the Queen were reared.
117
Great dearth in England: For base murder did
at Salisbury Lord Sturton: Callis lost, 5510./1558

Which was by England many years supplide,
Since the third Edward, the proud Clergy mgrost
all the spiritual fruits, to glut their pride,
Phillip took fea, and left the English Coast, K. Phillip.

For grief of which Mary soon after craisd, 5520/1959.

and did, with Cardinal Poole, (in England raisd)
118
Next whom the fair Elizabeth is Crowned;
a Princess with all gracious Thewes indude, Q Elizab.

She did the Gospel quicken, and confound
Romes Antichrist, all such as he pursude
With fire and Inquisition, she guirt round
With safety, and her Lands pure face imbrude
With blood of Innocents, her prospetous reign
Cleard, and wipt off each foul and bloody stain.
119
Henry the French King in the ^ilt was laid Henry the 2

Breathless at Paris, Paul's is burnt, a peace 5521./1560.

Between the Realms of France and England made,
Newhauen siege, and a great plag^les increase,
Lord Henry Stewart to the hests obayd
Of the Scotch peers, whose v^gings never ^ease: 5525./1564

Till to their general comforts, he was seen
Espousd to Lady Mary Scotlands Queen.
120
Now came the Baden margra^ with his wife 5246./1565.

To London, she here brought him a new son,
Whom the Queen Christend, breathing a new life
In his decaid estate. Now was begun 5227/1566.

The Burse on Cornhill, whose renown grew rife
In every place, where Traffickes gain is won:
In Scotland to restore a kingdom torn,
James (of that name) the fixed, this year was borne.
121
Henry of Scotland was by Traitors slain,
And Shan Oneile in Ireland put to flight 5528/1567

By bold Sir Henry Sidney, with the gain
Of a great battle, where their Treasons light
Upon the Traitors: with a gallant train,
The Muscouite lands in his Emperors right 5530/5569

T'establish Traffic: now as rebels stand
Th'Earles of Nor thumber land and Westmerland.
122
Debate with Scotland: and in Norfolk grew
Conspiracy, the Queen in person came 5531./1570

To Gressams Burse, to take a princely view,
To which she gave at his request a name,
Royal Exchange: this year the Christians slew
Many proud Turks, and beat them back with shame 5532/1571.

Into their Foretresses, and Cities walled,
This was the battle of Lepantho called.
123
A massacre in Paris, now their heads
The Norfolk Duke lost, and Northumber land, 5533./1572

A blazing star, six months together spreds
Her fiery rays, now by the violent hand
Of one George Brown, who murdrous futy leads, 5524/1373.

Was Master Saunders slain (the matter scand)
Anne Dreury (for that fact) and Saunders wife,
George Brown, with trusty Roger lost his life.
124
By Furbusher, Cathaia was made known, 5435./1576.

The Essex Earl this year at Dinelon did
In Ireland, where his Fame was dreadful grown,
Ioh (...) Cassimerus did through London ride,
Desmond rebeld, Drake that had compast rowne 5542/1582

The world, and many dangerous Fortunes tried,
Was Knighted by the Queen, Mounsier arrived,
Thinking the English Monarchesse to have wiued.
125
William the Prince of Orange was betrayde, 5543./1582

And with a Pystoll by a soldier slain,
Poland Musco into England made 5544./1583.

avoyage, and did six months here remain,
Purser and Clinton Pyrars, that denaide
allegiance to the Queen, at length were taken
By William Barrowes: Antwerpe sacked and spoyld
By Parmaes Duke, who long against it toyld.
126
Northumberland himself in the Tower slew, 5546/1585.

Iago, Domingo, and Carthagen,
By Drake and Furbusher (whom most men knew)
Carletle and many gallant Englishmen
Surprisd and ^ckt, the Earl of Liester grew
Great in the Land, and sayld to Flushing then: 5547/1586

Where his Commission he at large relates,
Being made chief General to the Belgian states.
127
Ambassadors from Denmark gratulate
Her highness reign, the Earl of Arundell
Convict, aleague twixt England and the state
Of Scotland, Noble Candish furnished well
In two good ships well mand and builded late, His twn ships the Desire and
Content.

Compast the world: the fourteen Traitors fell,
and suffered for the guilt, at Zutphen did,
Noble Sir Phillip Sidney soldiers pride.
128
His death a general grief among soldiers bred, 5549/1588.

a Parlyment. The great At made of Spain
Rode on the English Coast, and against us sped,
But by our Fleet they were repulst again,
at Tilbery, the Camp was bravely led
By Elizabeth in person, in whose train
all Englands Chiualry mustred and met,
Leister mean time to Nature paid his debt.
129
Portugal voyage; Lodwicke Grewill pressed
For murder: the bold Duke of Guise betrayed
And slain, by the third Henry, when he least
Suspected Death, a Friar no whit dismayed,
(Incouragd by the Guisians as it is ghest) Henry 4. killed

Murdered the King, then Henry Burbon laid
Claim to the Crown, whom England so supplies,
That by her aid, his warlike Fortunes rise.
130
Whom Essex, Willoughby, Norris assist,
Sir Roger Williams with a many more,
Strong Paris they besiege, and as they list 5552/1591

March thorough France, maugre the common foe,
Hacket is hanged in Cheap, who did persist
In blasphemy: In London began to grow 5553/1592

a grievous Plague: Lopes arraind and tried,
Drawn from the London Tower, at Tyburne did.
131
Cales sieg'd and won, the Duke of Bulloine lands 5555/1594

In England: th'Islands voyage, this year came 5557/1596.

Ambassadors from Denmark, from whose hands
The Queen received rich presents: Now with Fame
The Earl Cumberland renownd in foreign Lands 5558/1597

Wan John de Porterico, sacked the same:
Lord Burleigh (Treasurer) submits to fate, 5559/1598.

Since the sixth Edward Counselor of state.
132
Essex is sent for Ireland, against Tyrone,
a Muster at Mile-end: Essex comes back 5560/1599

With a small train of followers, after whom
Lord Montioy speeds, against the dangerous pack
Of Irish Rebels, whose brave valors shown
In his hye Conquests, and their fatal wrack:
The treacherous Gowry against King James conspired, 5561/1600

whose safety heaven couserud, the world admired.
133
Peace betwixt Spain and France: from Barbary,
and from the Russian Emperor Legates come,
To gratulate the Queens hye Sovereignty;
A sudden Insurrection, for which some
Suffered, some Find, some set at Liberty,
Suppressed without the clamor of the Drum:
Ambassador from Scotland, The Earl of Mar,
Desmond sent Prisoner from the Irish war. 5563./1602.

34
Martial Byron arriues from France: great joy
For victories in Ireland, since their pride
Was queld by The English, who their powers employ
To end the wars: soon after the Queen did The death of Q. Elizabeth.

At Richmond, in her death she did destroy
All former mirth, this Virgin Queen supplide,
Forty four years, five months a prosperous rain,
To Englands honor, and the fear of Spain.
133
To Register her virtues, I should spend
An age of time, yet think my scope too small,
The pages of this Volume would extend
Beyond strict number, yet not quote them all,
Therefore her praises, in her death I end,
They are so boundless that they cannot fall
Within the compass of my apprehension,
Being subject to no limit, no dimension.
136
And to attempt that task, I should alone
My own sick weakenesle to the world bewray,
And of her worth the smallest part or none,
Unto the Readers covetous eyes display,
Therefore since she has left an earthy Throne,
For heavens hye Mansion (there to reign for aye)
I leave her shrind among Angels, there to sing 5594/1603.

Vn-ending praises to the eternal King.
137
KIng James the sixth in Scotland, of that name
In England first, her true and lawful heir,
Next Queen Elizabeth the peers proclaim, King James.

And gladly plant him in fa^e Englands Chair,
Whose Virtues, Graces, Royal gifts, and Fame,
Zeal, Justice, Learning, all without compare:
For thousands such, my Muse must' needs adore him,
Vnriuald yet, by such as raignd before him.
138
His praise is for my pen a strain too hye,
Therefore where he begins I make my pause,
and only pray that he may still supply
Great Britains Empire with the Lands applause,
That as he has begun to rectify
This Commonweal, and st^blish virtuous Laws:
He still may'inioy his Queen, and issue Royal,
Among subjects ever true, and Peers still loyal.
139
But where is the harbor and the happy Bay,
Where after storms I may in safety ride,
The Gusts and Tempests now begin t'allay,
Whose many boisterous flawes my Bark has tried,
A gentle Land-wind with my sails does play,
and (thanks to Heaven) I now my haven have spide,
And maugte the Seas wrath: Behold at last,
Here does my shaken Ship her Anchor cast.
HE that expects in this brief Epitomy of Chronicles, that infinitnes of
laber, to survey all the particular kingdoms of the earth, and every destinct
accident happening in the, must not only allow me an Ages limit (and all too
little) but with all assist me in the search of many Authors, whose works are
(some rare to be found) and others not at all extant. But my purpose was not to
troble the world with such prolixity or confusion of History, only in a brief
Index, or short Register, (to comprize many and the most noted things) and to
confer their times with our history of England: In which, if I have any way
failed the Readers expectation, by inserting things frivolous, or omitting
things Material, I must excuse it thus; I have more will then Art, and more
Endeavor then Cunning; yet, I make no question, he that shall succeed me in the
like labor, will use some mittigation of his Judgment against me, and say at
the least: It is done, though not well done: Only thus much let me speak in
my own behalf: With Ages past I have been too little acquainted, and with
this age present, I dare not be too bold.

FINIS.

