THE RAPE OF LVCRECE

A True Roman Tragedy.

With the several Songs in their apt places, by Valerius, the merry Lord
amongst the Roman Peers.

Acted by her Majesty's Servants at the Red Bull, near Clarken-well.

Written by Thomas Heywood.



LONDON Printed for I.B. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard at the Sign
of the Pide Bull. 1608.

To the Reader.
I Thath been no custom in me of all other men (courteous Readers) to commit
my plays to the press the reason, though some may attribute to my own
insufficiency, I had rather subscribe in that to their seueare censure, then
by seeling to avoid the imputation of weakness, to incur a greater suspicion
of honesty: for though some have used a double sale of their labors, first to
the Stage, and after to the press, For my own part I here proclaim my self
ever faithful in the first, and never guilty of the last: yet since some of
my plays have (unknown to me, and without any of my direction) accidentally
come into the Printers hands, and therefore so corrupt and mangled, (coppied
only by the ear) that I have been as unable to know them, as ashamde to
challenge them. This therefore I was the willinger to furnish out in his native
habit: first being by consent, next because the rest have been so wronged in
being published in such sauadge and ragged ornaments: accept it Courteous
Gentlemen, and prove as favorable Readers as we have found you gracious
Auditors.

Yours T. H.

Dramatis personae.
1 Seruius King of Rome. 2 Tarquin The proud. 3 Tullia Wife of Tarquin
Superbus 4 Arnus and the two Sons of Tarquin. 5 Sextus the two Sons of
Tarquin. 6 Brutus Junior 7 Collatinus 8 Horatius Cocles. 9 Mutius sceuola. 10
Lucretius 11. Porsenna King of the Tuscans 12. Porsennaes Secretary 13. Pub:
Valerius. 14. The priest of Appollo. 16. 2. Sentinels. 17. Lucretia ravished by
Sextus 18. Myrable. Lucretius Maid 19. The Clown.
THE Rape of Lucrece.
SENATE Enter Tarquin Superbus, Sextus, Tarquinus, Tullia, Arnus, Lucretius,
Valerius, Poplicola, and Senators before them. Tullia WIthdraw, we must have
private conference
With our dear husband.

Tarq. What would thou wife?

Tullia Be what I am not, make thee greater far
Then thou canstay me to be.

Tarqu. Why I am Tarquin.

Tul. And I am Tullia what of that?
What Diapasons more in Tarquins name
Then in a Subjects? or what is Tullia
More in the sound, then to become the name
Of a poor Maid or waiting Gentlewoman?
I am a princess both by birth and thoughts,
Yet all is but Tullia, there is no resonance
In a bare style: my title bears no breadth,
Nor has it any state, oh me, i am sick!

Tarq. Sick Lady?

Tul. Sick at heart.

Tarq. Why my sweet Tullia?

Tul. To be a Queen I long, long and am sick
With ardence, my hot appetite's afire,
Till my swollen feruor be delivered
Of that great Title Queen, my heart's al royal,
Not to be circumscribed in seruill bounds,
While there is a King that rules the P^res of Rome.
Tarquin makes legs and Tullia courtesies low,
Bows at each nod, and must not near the state
Without obey sance, oh! I hate this awe, my proud heart cannot brook it.

Tar. He are me wife.

Tul. I am no wife of Tarquini if not King:
Oh had God made me man, I would have mounted
Above the base tribunals of the earth,
Up to the clouds, for pompeous soueraintie,
Thou art a man, oh bear my royal mind,
Mount heaven and see if T^llia lag behind,
There is no earth in me, I am all fire,
Were Ta^quin so, then should we both aspire.

Tar. Oh Tullia, though my body taste of dullness,
My soul is wingde: lo I soar as high as thine,
But note what flags our wings! forty five years
The King thy father has protected Room.

Tul. That makes for us: the people covet change,
Even the best things in time grow teadious.

Tar. It Would seem v nnaturall in thee my Tullia,
The reverend King, thy Father to depose:

Tul. A kingdoms quest, makes Sons and Fathers foes.

Tar. And but by Seruius fall we cannot climb,
The balm that must annoint us is his blood.

Tul. Lets laue our brows th^n in that crimson flood,
We must be bold and dreadlesse, who aspires,
Mounts by the lives of Fathers, Sons, and Sires.

Tar. And so must I, since for a kingdoms love,
Thou can despise a Father for a Crown:
Tarquin shall mount Seruius be tumbled down
For he usurps my state, and first deposde,
My father in my swathed Infancye,
For which he shall be countant to his end.
I have sounded all the Peires and Senators,
and though unknown to thee my Tullia,
They al embrace my faction, and so they,
Love change of state, and new King to obey.

Tul. Now is my Tarquin, worthy Tullias grace
Since in my arms, I thus a King embrace.

Tar. The King should meet this day in Parliament,
With all the Senates and Estates of Rome:
His place will I assume, and there proclaim,
All our decrees in Royal Tarquins name.

Flourish Enter Sextus, Arnus, Lucretius, Val^rius, Colatine and Senators. Lucr.
May it please thee Noble Tarquin to attend
The King this day within the high Capitol?

Tul. Attend?

Tarq. We intend this day to see the Capitol,
You knew our father good Lucretius?

Lucre. I did my Lord.

Tar. Was not I his Son?
The Queen my Mother was of royal thoughts
and heart pure, as vnb^emisht Innocence.

Lucre. Why asks my Lord?

Tar. Sons should succeed their fathers, but anon
You shall hear more, high time that we were gone.

Floris^. Exeunt: manent Colatine and Val^rius Col. There Is morrall sure in
this, Valerius,
Heeres model, yea, and matter too to breed
Strange meditations in the provident brains
Of our grave Fathers: some strange project lives
This day in Cradle that's but newly borne.

Vale. No doubt Colatin^ no doubt hee^es a giddie world, it Reeles, it has got
the staggers, the commonwealth is sick of an ague, of which nothing can cure
her but some violent and ^ddaine affrightment.


Cola. The wife of Tarquin would be a Queen, nay on my life she is with child
till she be so.


Valor. and longes to be brought to bed of a Kingdom, I divine we shall see
some ^uffling to day in the Capitol.


Cola. If ^here be any difference among the Princes and Senate, whose faction
will Vale^ius follow?


Valor. Oh Collatin^! I am a true Citizen and in this I will best show my
self to be one, to take part with the stronger. If Se^ius ore-come, I am
Liegeman to Serutus, and if Ta^quin subdue, I am for Viue Tarquinius.


Col. Val^ius, no more, this talk does but keep us from the sight of this
solemnity: by this the Princes are entering the Capitol: come, we must attend.


Exeunt. SENATE Tarquin, Tull^, Sextus, Arnus, Lucretius one way, B^utus
meeting them the other wa^ very bumerously. Tar. This place is not for fools,
this parliament
assembles not the strains of Ideotisme:
Only the grave and wisest of the land:
Important are the affairs we have inhand.
Hence with that mome.

Lucr. Brutus forbear the presence.

Brut, For bear the presence, why pra'y?

Sext. None are admitted to this grave concourse,
But wise men: nay good Brutus.

Bru. You Will have an empty parliament then.

Arn. Here is no room for fools.

Bru. Then what makst thou here, or he or he? oh Jupiter? if this command be
kept strictly, we shall have empty benches: get you home you that are here,
for here will be nothing to do this day: a general concourse of wise-men^
tw'as never seen since the first Chaos. Tarquin if the general rule have no
exceptio^s, thou will have an empty Consistory.


Tul. Brutus, you trouble us.

Bru. How powerful am I you renowned Deities, that am able to trouble her that
troubles a whole Empire? fools exempted, and women admitted! laugh Democritus,
but have you nothing to say to Madmen?


Tarq. Madmen have here no place.

Bru. Then out a doors with Tarquin: what is he that may sit in a calm Valley,
and will choose to repose in a tempestious mountain, but a madm^n? that may
live in tranquilous pleasures, and will seek out a kingdomes-cares, but a
madman? who would seek innovation in a commonwealth in public, or be
ouer-ruld by a cursed wife in private, but a fool or a madman? give me thy
hand Tarquins shall we two be dismissed together from the Capitol?


Tar. Restrain his folly.

Tul. Drive the frantique hence.

Arnu. Nay Brutus.

Sex. Good Brutus.

Bru. Nay soft, soft good blood of the Tarquins, lets have a few cold words
first, and I am gone in an instant: I claim the privilege of the nobility of
Rome, and by that privilege my seat in the Capitol. I am a Lord by birth, my
place is as free in the Capitol as Horatius thine, or thine Lucretius. Thine
Sextus, Arnus thine, or any here: I am a Lord and banish all the Lords from the
presence, and you will have few to wait upon the King but Gentlemen: nay I am
easily persuaded then, hands off, since you will not have my company you shall
have my room:

My room indeed, for what I seem to be,
Brutus is not, but borne great Room to fr^e.
The state is full of D^opsie, and swollen big
With windy vapors, which my sword must pierce,
To purge the infected blood: bred by the pride
Of these infested bloods, nay now I go.
Behold I vanish, since it is Tarquins mind,
One small fool goes, but great fools leaves behind Exit.

Lucre. It Is pity one so generously derived
Should be deprived: his best induements thus,
And want the true directions of the soul.

Tar. To leave these delatorie trifles, Lords,
Now to the public business of the Land,
Lords take your several places.

Luc Not great Tarquin, before the King assume his regal throane
Whose coming we attend.

Tulli. He Is come already.

Lucr. The King?

Tar. The King:

Col. Seruius.

Tar. Tarquinius:

Lucr. Seruius is King.

Tar. It was by power divine,
The Throane that long since he usurped is mine.
Here we enthroane our selves Cathedral state,
Long since detained us, justly we resume,
Then let our friends, and such as love us, cry
Live Tarquin and enjoy this soueraintie.

Omues. Live Tarquin and enjoy this soueraintie.

Flourish. Ent. Vale^ius. Val. The King himself with such considerate Peers
As stoutly embrace his faction, being informde
Of Tarquins usurpation, armed comes,
Near to the entrance of the Capitol.

Tarq. No man give placethe that dares to arise
And do him reverence, we his love despise.

Enter Seruius, Heratius, Seuo, Soldiers. Ser. Traitor.

T^. Usurper.

Ser. Descend.

Tul. Sit still.

Ser. In Tarquins name, Rooms great imperial monarch
I charge thee Tarquin disinthrone thy self.
and throw thee at our feet, prostrate for mercy.

Hor. Spoke like a King.

Tar. In Tarquins name, now Romes imperial Monarch,
We charge thee Seruius make free resignation,
Of that archt wreath, thou have usurped so long.

Tul. Words worth an Empire.

Hor. Shall this be brookt my Sovereign?
Dismount the Traitor.

Sex. Touch him he that dares.

Hor. Dares:

Tul. Dares?

S^r. Strumpet, no child of mine.

Tul. Dotard, and not my father.

Ser. Kneel to thy King?

Tul. Submit thou to thy Queen.

Ser. Insufferable treason! with bright steel
Lop down these interponents, that withstand
The passage to our throane.

Hor. That Cocles dares.

Sex. We with our steel, guard Tarquin and this chair.

(...). A Seruius.

(...). A Tarquin.

Tar. Now are we King, indeed our awe is builded
Upon this royal base, and slaughtered body
Of a dead King? we by his ruin rise
To a Monarchall Throane.

Tul. We have our longing.
My fathers death gives me a second life,
Match better the^ the first, my birth was seruitud
But this new breath of reign is large and free,
Welcome my second life of Soueraintie.

(...). I have a Daughter, but I hope of mettle,
Subject to better temperature: should my Lucrece,
Be of this pride, thief hands should sacrifice
Her blood unto the Gods that dwell below,
Theabortiue brat should not out live my spleen,
But Lucrece is my Daughter, this my Queen.

Tul. Tear off the crown, that yet empales the Temples
Of our usurping Father: quickly Lords,
And in the face of his yet bleeding wounds,
Lets us receive our honors.

Tar. The same breath
Gives our state life, that was the Usurpers death.

Tul. Here then by heavens hand we inuest our selves:
Music, whose loftiest tunes grace Princes crownde,
Unto our Noble coronation sound.

Flourish Enter Valerius with Heratio and S^uola. Tar^. Whom does Valerius to
our state present?

Val. Two valiant Romans, this Horatius Cocles,
This Gent. called Mutius Sceu^la,
Who whilst King Seruius wore the Diadem,
Up held his sway and Prince-dome by their loves:
But he being fa^ne, since all the Peers of Rome
Applaud King Tarquin in his soueraintie,
They with like suffrage greet your coronation.

Hor. This hand alyde unto the Roman Crown,
Whom never fear dejected or cast low,
Lays his victorious sword at Tarquins feet,
And prostrates with his sword, allegiance.
King Seruius life we loved, but he expirde
Great Tarquins life, is in our hearts desirde.

Sex. Why? whilst he rules with Justice and integrity,
Shall with our dreadles hands, our hearts command,
Even with the best employment of our lives,
Since fortune lifts thee, we submit to fate,
Our selves are vassailes to the Roman state.

Taro. Your rooms were empty in our train of friends,
Which we rejoice to see so well supplyde:
Receive our grace, live in our clement favors,
In whose submission our young glory grows
To his ripe height: fall in our friendly train,
And strengthen with your loves our Infant reign.

Hor. We live for Tarquin.

Sex. And to thee alone, whilst Justice keeps thy Sword and thou thy Throane.


Tar. Then are you ours, and now conduct us straight,
In triumph through the populous streets of Rome,
To the Kings Palace our maiesticke seat:
Your hearts though freely profferd we entreat.

Sennat, as they march Tullia treades on her father and stays. Tullia. What
block is that we tread on?

Lucr. It Is the body
Of your deceased Father Madam, Queen
Your shoe is crimsend with his vital blood.

Tul. No matter, let his mangled body lie,
and with his base confederates strewe the streets,
That in disgrace, of his usurped pride,
We ore his truncke may in our Chariot ride:
For mounted like a Queen, twould do me good
To wash my Coach-nailes in my fathers blood.

Lucre. Here Is a good Child.

Tarq. Rem oue it, we command, and bear his carcass to the funeral pile
Where after this direction, let it have
His solemn and due obsequies, fair Tullia,
Thy hate to him grows from thy love to us.
Thou shewst thy self in this unnatural strife,
an unkind Daughter, but alouing wife.
But on unto our Palace this blessed day,
A Kings increase, grows by a Kings decay.

Exeunt. Brutus alone. Bru. Murder the King, a high and capital treason.
Those Giants that wagde war against the Gods,
For which ore-whelmed Mountains hurld by Jove,
To scatter them, and give timelesse Graves,
Was not more cruel then this butcherie.
This slaughter made by Tarquin, but the Queen,
A woman, fie, fie, did not this she parracide.
ad to her fathers wounds: and when his body
Lay all besmeard and staind in the blood royal,
Did not this Monster, this infernate hagge
Make her unwilling, Chariater drive on,
and with his shod wheels crush her Fathers bones,
Break his crazed scull, and dash his brains
Upon the pauements, whilst she hold the raines?
The affrighted Sun, at this abhorred object,
Put on a mask of blood, and yet she blushed not,
Jove art thou just, have thou reward for piety?
and for offense no vengance? or can punnish
Fellons, and pardon Traitors, chastise murdrers,
and wink at parracides? If thou be worthy
as well we know thou art, to fill the Throane
Of all eternity, then with that hand
That flings the trisalitie thunder, let the pride
Of these our Irreligious monarkisers
Be crowned in blood: this makes poor Brutus mad,
To see sin froliqu^, and the virtuous sad.

Enter Sextus and Arnus. Arn. Soft, heeres Brutus, let us acquaint him with the
news.


Sex. Content, now Cosen Brutus:

Bru. Who I your kinsman? though I be of the blood of the Tarquins, yet no
cosen, gentle princes.


Ar^. And why so B^tus, scorn you our all yance?

Brut. No, I was cosen to the Tarquins, when they were subjects, but dare
claim no kindred, as they are sovereigns: Brutus is not so mad though he be
merry, but he has wit enough to keep his head on his shoulders.


A^n. Why do you my Lord thus loose your hours, and neither profess war
nor domestique profit? the first might beget you love, the other ri^ches.


Bru. Because I would live: have I not answered you because I would live?
fools and Madmen are no rubes in the way of Usurpers: the firmament can brook
but one Sun, and for my part I must not shine: I had rather live an obscure
black, then appear a fair white to be shot at, the end of all (...), I would
(...) Ser^ius bin a shrub, the wind had not shook him, or a madman he had
not perished: I covet no more wit nor employment then as much as will keep life
and soul together, I would but live.


Aru. You are to ^atyricall cosen Brutus, but to the purpose: the King dreamt
a strange ominous dream last night, and to be resolved of the event, my
brother Sextus and I must to the Oracle.


S^xt. And because we would be well accompained, we have got leave of the
King that you Brutus shall associate us, for our purpose is to make a merry
journey on it.


B^u. So you will carry me along with you to be your fool, and make you merry.


Sex. Not our fool, but --

Brut. To make you merry: I shall, nay, I will make you merry, or tickle you
till you laugh, the Oracle; i will go to be resolved some doubts private to my
self: nay Princes, I am so much endeerd both to your loves and companies, that
you shall not have the power to be rid of me, what limits have we for our
journey?


Sext. Five days: no more.

Bru. I shall (...) me to your preperation, but one thing more, goes Colatine
along?


Sex. Collatine is troubled with the common disease of all new married men,
he is sick of the wife, his excuse is forsooth that Lucrece will not let him
go, but you having neither wife nor wit to hold you, I hope will not
disapoint us.


Bru. Had I both, you should prevail with me abouea another.

Arnus We shall expect you.

Bru. Horatius Cocles, a and Mutius Sceuola are not engadge in this expedition,


Arnus No they attend the King, farewell.

Bru. Lucretius stays at home to, and Val^rius.

Sext. The Palace cannot spare them,

Bru. None but we three?

Sex. We three.

Bru. We three, well five days hence.

Sex. You have the time, farewell.

Exeunt Sextus and Arnus Bru. The time I hope for, cannot be conscribde,
Within so short alimit, Rome and I
Are not so happy, what is the reason then
Heaven spares his rod so long? Mercury tell me:
I hat'e: the fruit of pride is yet but green,
Not mellow, though it grows apace, it comes not
To his full height: Jove often delays his vengeance,
That when it haps t'may prove more terrible.
Despair not Brutus then but let thy country
And thee take this last comfort after all,
Pride when thy fruit is ripe must rot and fall.
But to the Oracle.

Exit. Enter Horatius Cocles, Mutius Sce^ola. Hora. I would I were no Roman.

Sceuo. Cocles why?

Hora I am discontented and dare not speak my thoughts,

Sceuo. What, shall I speak them for you?

Hora. Mutius do.

(...). Tarquin is proud.

Hora. Thou have them.

(...). Tiranous.

Hora. True.

(...). Insufferable lofty.

Hora. Thou have hit me.

(...). And shall I tell thee what I proph^sie
Or his succeeding rule?

Hora. Noe lle dooe't for thee, Tarquins ability will in the weal,
Beget a weak unable impotence:
His strength, make Rome and our dominions weak,
His soaring high make us to flag our wings,
And fly close by the earth, his golden feathers,,
Are of such Vastnes that they spread like sails,
And so be calm us that we have not air,
Able to raise our plumes, to taste the pleasures of our own Elements.

(...). We are one heart, our thoughts and our desires are suitable.


Hora. Since he was King he bears him like a God,
His wife like Pallas or the wife of ^oue,
Will not be parlied without sacrifice,
And homage sole due to the deities.

Enter Lucretius. (...). What have with good Lucretius,

Lucre. Have small speed,
I had an earnest suit unto the King,
About some business that concerns the weal
Of Rome and us, twi'^ not be listened to,
He has took evppon him such ambiticus state,
That he abandons conference with his Piers,
Or if he chance to hear our tongus so much,
As but to hear their summons he despises,
The intent of all our speeches, our aduises,
And counsel: thinking his own judgment only,
To be aprooued in matters military,
And in affairs domesticke we are but shouts,
And fellows of no parts, viols vnstrung,
Our notes to harsh to strike in princes ^ares,
Great Jove amend it,

Horat. VVhither will you my Lord?

Lucr. No matter where if from the court, I Will home to Collatin^,
And to my daughter Lucr^ce; home breeds safety,
Dangers begot in Court, a life retierd
Must please me now perforce: then noble Sce^la,
And you my dear Horatius, farewell both,
Where industry is scornd lets welcome sloth.

Enter Collatin^. Horat. Nay good Lucretius do not leave us thus,
See here comes Collatine, but where is Valerius
How does he taste these times.

Collat. Not giddily like Brutus, passionately
Like old Lucretius with his tear swollen eyes, Not laughing like
Nor bluntly like Horatius Cocles here,
Mutius Sce^la. He has usurped a stranger garb of humor,
Distinct from these in natures every way.

Lucret. How is he relisht can his eyes forbear,
In this strange state to shed a passionate tear,
Can he forbear to laugh with Sceuola,
At that which passionate weeping cannot mend.

Horat. Nay can his thought shape ought but melancholy
To see these dangerous passages of state,
How is he tempered noble Collatine?

Collat. Strangely, he is all song, he is ditty all,
Note that, Valerius has given up the Court
And weand himself from the kings consistory
In which his sweet harmonious tongue grew harsh,
Whether it be that he is discontent
Yet would not so appear before the king
Or whether in applause of these new Edicts.
Which so distaste the people, or what cause,
I know not but now he is all musical.
Unto the counsel chamber he goes singing,
And whilst the king his wilful edicts makes,
In which nones tongue is powerful save the kings.
He Is in a corner, relishing strange aires.
Conclusiuely he is from a toward hopeful gentleman
Transeshapt to a mere balleter, none knowing
(...) this transitation.

Enter Valerius. Horat. See where he comes. Morrow Valerius.

Lucret. Morrow my Lord,

Valor. The first Song.
When Tarquin first in Court began,
And was approved King:
Some men for sodden joy began weep,
And I for sorrow sing.

Sceuol. Ha, ha, how long has my Valerius
Put on his strain of mirth, or what is the cause?

Valor. The second Song.
Let humor change and spare not,
Since Tarquins proud I care not:
His fair words so bewitch my delight,
That I dote on his sight.
Now all is gone new desires embraceing,
And my deserts disgracing.

Horat. Upon my life he is either mad or loue-sicke,
Oh can Valerius, but so late a statesman,
Of whom the public weal deserved so well
Tune out his age in songs and Cansonets,
Whose voice should thunder conusell in the ears
Of Tarquin, and proud Tullia? think Valerius
What that proud woman Tullia is, twill put thee
Quite out of tune.

Valor. The third Song.
Now what is love I pray thee tell,
It is the fountain and the well,
Where pleasure and repentance dwell,
It is perhaps the sansing b^ll,
That rings all in to heaven or hell:
And this is love, and this is love, as I hear tell.
Now what is love I pray you show,
A thing that creepes and cannot go:
A prise that passes to and fro,
A thing for me, a thing, for more,
And he that proves shall find it so,
And this is love, and this love, sweet friends (...)

Lucre. Valerius I shall quickly change thy cheer,
And make thy passionate eyes lament with mine,
Think how that worthy Prince our kinsman King
Was butchered in the marble capitol.
Shall Seruius Tullius unregarded die
Alone of thee, whom all the Roman Ladies,
Even yet with teare-swolne eyes, and sorrowful souls
Compassionate, as well he merited;
To these lamenting dames what can thou sing?
Whose grief through all the Roman Temples ring.

Valor. The fourth Song.
Lament Ladies lament
Lament the Roman land,
The King is fra thee hent,
Was doughtie on his hand,
We Will gangn ito the Kirk,
His dead corpse well embrase,
And when we sea ha dea^
We (...) will cry alas. Fala la lero la
Tararara roun tar etc.

Harat. This music mads me, I all mirth despise.

Lucr. To hear him sing draws rivers from his eyes.

Sceuola. It pleases me, for since the Court is harsh,
And looks as kaunce on soldiers, lets be merry,
Court Ladies, sing, drink, dance, and every man
Get him a mistress, coach it in the Country,
And taste the sweets of it, what thinks Valerius,
Of Sceuolous last council?

Valor. The fifth Song.
Why since we soldiers cannot prove,
And grief it is to us therefore,
Let every man get him a love,
To trim her up, and fight no more.
That we may taste of lovers bliss,
Be merry and bl^h, embrace and kiss,
That Ladies may say, some more of this,
That Ladies may say, some more of this.
Since C^urt and Country both grow proud,
And safety you delight to hear,
We in the Country will us shroud,
Where lives to please both eye and ear:
The Nightingale sings Iug, Iug, Iug,
The little Lamb leaps after his dug,
And the pretty milke-maids they look so s^ug,
And the pretty milke-maids, etc.
Come Sceuola, shall we go and beidle?

Lucr. I Will in to weep.

Horat. But I my gall to grate.

Sceuo. I Will laugh at time, till it will change our Fate.

Exeunt they. Manet Collatine. Colat. Thou art not what thou seem, Lord
Sceuola,
Thy heart mournes in thee, though thy visage smile,
And so does thy soul weep, Valerius,
Although thy habit sing, for these new humors
Are but put on for safety, and to arm them
Against the pride of Tarquin, from whose danger,
None great in love, in counsel or opinion
Can be kept safe: this makes me lose my hours
At home with Lucrece, and abandon court.

Enter Clown. Clown. Fortune I embrace thee, that thou have assisted me in
finding my master, the Gods of good Rome keep my Lord and master out of all
bad company.


Collat. Sir the news with you.

Clow. Would you ha Court news, Camp news, City news or Country news, or
would you know what is the news at home?


Collat. Let me know all the news.

Clown. The news at Court is, that a small leg and a silk sto^kin are in
fashion for your Lord: And the water that god Mercury makes is in request with
your Lady. The heaviness of the kings wine makes many a light head, and the
emptines of his dishes many full bellies, eating and drinking was never more
in use; you shall find the baddest legs in boots, and the worst faces in
maskes. They keep their old stomakes still, the kings good Cook has the most
wrong: for that which was wont to be private only to him, is now usurped among
all the other officers: for now every man in his place to the prejudice of the
master Cook, makes bold to lick his own fingers.


Col. The news in the Camp.

Clo. The greatest news in the camp is, that there is no news at all, for
being no camp at all, how can there be any tidings from it?


Col. Then for the Camp.

Clo. The Senators are rich, their wives fair, credit grows cheap and
traffic dear, for you ha many that are broke, the poorest man that is, may
take up what he will, so he will be but bound to a post, till he pay the debt:
There was one Courtier, lay with twelve men's wives in the suburbs, and pressing
further to make one more cuckold within the walls, and being taken with the
manner, had nothing to say for himself, but this, he that made twelve made
thirteen.


Col. Now Sir for the Country.

Clo. There is no news there but at the Alehouse, there is the most receipt, and
is it not strange my Lord, that so many men love ale that know not what ale is.


Col. Why, what is ale?

Clo. Why ale is a kind of juice, made of the precious grain called Malt: and
what is Malt? Malt's MALT. and what is MALT M much, A ale, L little, T thrift,
all is, much ale's, little thrist.


Col. Only the news at home, and I have done.

Clo. My lady must needs speak with you about earnest business, that concerns
her nearly, and I was sent in all have to entreat your Lordship to come away,


Col. And could thou not have told me Lucrece stay,
And I stand tri^ing here fellow away.

Clo. I Mary sir, the way into her were a way worth following, and that's the
reason that so many seruing-men that are familiar with their mistresses, have
lost the name of Seruitors, and are now called their Masters followers. Rest
you merry.


Sound Music. Apolloes Priests with Tapers, after them, Aruns, Sextus, and
Brutus with their oblations, all kneeling before the Oracle. Priest. O thou
sacred God enspire
The Priests, and with celestial fire
Shot from thy beams, crown our desire,
That we may follow.
In these thy true and hallowde measures,
The utmost of thy heavenly treasures
According to the thoughts and pleasures
Of great Apollo.
Our hearts with inflammations burn
Great Tarquin and his people mourn
Till from thy Temple we return
With some glad tidings.
Then tell us, shall great Rome be blessed
And royal Tarquin live in rest,
That gives his high Ennobled breast
To thy safe guiding?

Oracle. Then Rome her ancient honors wins
When she is purgd from Tullius sins.

Brutus. Gramercies Phoebus for these spelles,
(...) alone alone excelles.

Sextus. Tullia perhaps sind in our gransiers death
And has not yet by reconcilement made
Atone with (...), at whose shrine we kneel.
Yet gentle Priest let us thus far prevail,
To know if Tarquins seed shall govern Rome
And by succession claim the Koiall wrath.
Behold me younger of the Tarquins Race
This elder Aruns both the sons of Tullia.
This Iunius Brutus though a madman yet,
Of the high blood of Tarquins.

Priest. Sextus peace. Tell us O thou that shin'st so bright
From whom the world receives his light,
Whose absence is perpetual night,
whose praises ring.
Is it with heavens applause decreed,
When Tarquins soul from earth is freed
That noble Sextus shall succeed
In Rome as king.

Brut. I Oracle have thou lost thy tongue?

Arun. Tempt him again fair Priest,

Sext. If not as king, let Delphian Phoebus yet
Thus much resolve me who shall govern Rome,
Or of us three, bear greatest pre-eminence.

Priest. Sextus I will, yet sacred Phoebus we entreat,
Which of these three shall be great
Which largest power and state repleat
by the heavens doom.
Phoebus thy thoughts no longer smother.

Oracle. He that first shall kiss his mother
Shall be powerful and no other
Of you three in Kome.

Sext. Shall kiss his mother.

Brutus falls. Brut. Mother earth to thee an humble kiss I tender.

Arun. What means Brutus?

Brut. The blood of the slaughtred sacrifice made this flore as slippry as the
place where Tarquin treades, it is glassy and as smoth as ice: I was proud to
hear the Oracle so gracious to the blood of the Tarquins and so I fell.


Sext. Nothing but so, then to the Oracle.
I charge thee Aruns, Iunus Brutus thee,
To keep the sacred doom of the Oracle
From all our train, lest when the younger lad
Our brother now at home sits dandled
Upon fair Tulliaes lap, this understanding
May kiss our beauteous M^ther and succeed.

Arun. Let the charge go round,
It shall go hard but I Will prevent you Sextus.

Sext. I fear not the madman Brutus, and for Aruns let me alone to buckle with
him, I Will be the first at my mothers lips for a kingdom.


Brut. If the madman had not been before you Sextus, if Oracles be Oracles,
their phrases are mystical, they speak still in clouds: had he meant a
natural mother he would ha spoke it by circumference.


Sext. Tull^a, if ever thy lips were pleasing to me, let it be at my return
from the Oracle.


Aruns. If a kiss will make me a king, Tullia I will spring to thee, though
through the blood of Sextus.


Brut. Earth I acknowledge no mother but thee, accept me as thy son, and I
shall shine as bright in Rome as Apollo himself in his temple at Delphos.


Sextus. Our superstitions ended, sacred Priest,
Since we have had free answer from the Gods,
To whose fair altars we ha done due right
And hallowed them with presents acceptable,
Lets now return, treading these holy measures,
With which we entered great Apolloes temple.
Now Phoebus let thy sweet tuned organs sound,
Whose spherelike music must direct our feet
Upon the marble pauement: after this
We le gain a kingdom by a mothers kiss.

Exeunt. Sennat. Atable and Chaires prepared; Tarquin; Tullia, and Collatine,
Sc^uola, Horatius, Lucretius, Valerius, Lords. Tarquin. Attend us with your
persons, but your ears
Be deaf unto our counsels.

The Lords fall off on either side and attend. Tullia. Further yet.

Tarqu. Now Tuilia what must be concluded next?

Tullia. The kingdom you have got by policy
You must maintain by pride.

Tarq. Good Tullia.

Tullia. Those that were late of the Kings faction
Cut off for fear they prove rebellious.

Tarq. Better.

Tullia. Since you gain nothing by the popular love,
Mainetaine by fear your princedome.

Tarq. Excellent, thou art our Oracle, and save from thee
We will admit no counsel, we obtaind
Our state by cunning, t'must be kept by strength.
And such as cannot love, we will teach to fear,
To encourage which upon a better judgment,
Andto strike greater terror to the world.
I ha forbid thy fathers funeral.

Tul. No matter.

Tarq. All capital causes are by us discust,
Trauerst and executed without counsel.
We challenge too by our prerogative,
The goods of such as strive against our state,
The freest citizens without attaint,
Arraigne or judgment we to exile doom,
The poorer are our drudges, rich our pray,
And such as dare not strive our rul eobey.

Tul. Kings are as Gods, and divine scepters bear,
The Gods command for mortal tribute fear.
But royal Lord, we that despise their love,
Must seek some means how to maintain this awe

Tarq. By forrenie leagues, and by our strength abroad,
Shall we that are degreed above our people,
Whom heaven has made our vassals reign with them?
No kings above the rest tribunald hie
Should with no meaner, then with kings ally:
For this we to Ma^lius Tusculan
The Latin King ha given in marriage
Our royal daughter: now his peoples ours,
The neighbor princes are subdude by arms:
And whom we could not conquer by constraint
Them ha we sought to win by courtesy,
Kings that are proud, yet would secure their own,
By love abroad, shall purchase fear at home.

Tullia. We are secure, then yet our greatest strength
Isin our children: how dare treason look?
Us in the face, having issue, barren princes
Breed danger in their singularity
Having none to succeed, their clame dies with them:
But when in topping on three T^rquins more,
Like Hydraes heads grow to revenge his death,
It terrifies black treason.

Tarq. Tullia's wise, and apprehensiue, were our pri^ely sons
Sextus and Aruns back returned safe,
With an applausiue answer of the Gods,
From th'oracle, our state were able then,
Being Gods our selves, to scorn the hate of men.

Enter Sextus, Aruns and Brutus. Sext. Where Is Tullia?

Arun. Where Is our mother?

Hor. Yonder princes at Counsel with the king.

Tul. Our sons returned.

Sext. Royal mother.

Arun. Renowned Queen.

Sex. I love her best, therefore will Sextus do his duty first.

Aruns. Being eldest in my birth i will not be youngest
In zeal to Tullia.

Brut. To It lads.

Arun. Mother a kiss.

Sext. Though last in birth, let me be first in love.
A kiss fair mother.

Arun. Shall I lose my right?

Sex. Aruns Shall down were Aruns twice my brother
If he presume fore me to kiss my mother.

Ar. I Sextus, think this kiss to be a crown, thus would we tug fort.

Sext. Aruns thou must down.

Tarq. Restrain them Lords.

Br. Nay to it boys, o it is brave, they tug for shadows, I the substance have.


Arun. Through armed gates, and thousand swords i will break
To show my duty let my valor speak.

Breaks from the Lords and kisses her. Sext. Oh heavens ye have dissolved me.

Aru. Here I stand, what I ha done to answer with this hand.

Sex. Oh all you Del^ian Gods look down and see,
How for these wrongs I will revenged be.

Tar. Curb in the proud boys fury: let us know
From whence this discord rises.

Tul. From our love, how happy are we in our issue now,
When as our sons! even with their bloods contend,
To exceed in duty we accept your zeal,
This your superlatiue degree of kindness
So much preuailes with us, that to the king
We engage our own dear love twixt his incensement,
And your presumption, you are pardond both.
And Sextus though you faild in your first proffer,
We do not yet esteem you least in love, ascend and touch our lips

Sext. Thank you, no.

Tul. Then to thy knee we will descend thus low,

Sex. Nay now it shall not need: how great's my heart!

Ar. In Tarquins crown thou have now lost thy part.

Sex. No kissing now Tarquin, great Queen adieu:
Aruns On earth we ha no foe but you.

Exit. Tarq. What means this their unnatural emnity?

Tul. hate borne from love.

Tarq. Resolve us then, how did the Gods accept
Or sacrifice, how are they pleased with us.
How long will they applaud our souerai gnty?

Brut. Shall I tell the king.

Tarq. Do Cosen, with the process of your iorny.

Brut. I will. We went from hither, when we went from he^e arrived thither when
we landed there, made an end of our prayers when we had done our Orisons, when
thus quoth (...), Tarquin shall be happy whilst he is blessed, govern while he
reigns, wake when he sleeps not, sleep when he wakes not, quaffe when he
drinks, eat when he feeds, gape when his ^outh opens, live till he die, and
die when he can live no longer. So Phoebus commends him to you.


Tarq. Mad Brutus still, Son Aruns What say you.

Arun. That the great Gods to whom the potent king
Of this large Empire, sacrificed by us.
Applaud your reign, commend your sovereignty:
And by a general Synod grant to Tarquin,
Long days, fair hopes, Maiestique government.

Brut. Adding withal, that to depose the late king, which in
others, had bin arch treason, in Tarquin was honor: what in
Brutus had been usurpation, in Tarquin was lawful succession
and for Tullia, though it be parricide for a child to kill her father,
in Tullia it was charity by death.
To rid him of all his calamities, Phoebus himself, said she, was a good
child, and shall not I say as he says, to tread upon her fathers skull,
sparkle his brains upon her chariot wheel,

And wear the sacred tincture of his blood
Upon the servile shoe? but more then this,
After his death deny him the due claim
Of all mortality, a funeral,
An earthen sepulcher: this this, quoth the Oracle,
Save Tullia none would do.

Tul. Brutus no more, lest with our surpast eyes of wrath and fury
We look into the humor; were not madness
And folly to thy words a privilege
Even in thy last reproof of our proceedings
Thou had pronounc^ thy death.

Brut. If Tullia will send Brutus abroad for news, and after at his return
not endure the telling of it; let Tullia either get closer ears, or get for
Brutus a stricter tongue. God boy.


Exit. Tarq. Alastis madness, pardon him, not spleen,
Nor is it hate, but frenzy, we are pleased
To hear the Gods propitious at our prayers.
But wluthers Sextus gone? resolve us Cecles,
We saw thee in his parting follow him.

Hor. I heard him say, he would straight take his horse
Unto the warlike Gabines enemies.

Tarq. To Rome and you save them we have no opposites.
And dares the boy, confederate with our foes?
Attend us Lords, we must new battles wage,
And with brght arms confront the proud boys rage.

Exeunt. Manet Lucretius, Collatine, Horatius, Valerius, Sceuola. Hor. Had I as
many souls as drops of blood
In this brancht veins, as many lives as stars
Stuck in yond azare roof, and were to die
More deaths then I see wasted weary minutes
To grow to this, I Would hazard all, and more,
To purchase freedom to this bondag'd Rome.
I Am vexed to see this virgin conqueresse wear shackles in my fight.

Luc. Oh would my tears would rid great Rome of these prodigious fears.

Enter Brutus. Brut. What weeping ripe Lucretiu^ possible now Lords, Ladies,
friends, fellows, young mad^ap, galla^ts and old courtly ruffins, al subjects
under one tira^ny, and therefore should be partners of one and the same
unanimity. Shall we go single our selves by two and two, and go talk treason
then it is but his yea, and my nay, if we be call d to question: Or shals go use
some violent bustling to break through this thorny servitude, or shall we
every man go sit like a man in desperation, and with Lucretius weep at Romes
misery: now am I for all things, any thing or nothing, I can laugh with
Sceuola, weep with this good old man, sing oh ^one ^one with Valerius, fret
with Horatius Cocles, be mad like my self, neutrize with Collatine. Say what
shal's do?


Hor. fret.

Val. Sing.

Lu^ Weep.

Scen. Laugh.

Brut. Rather lets all be mad that Tarquin still reigns, Romes still sad.

Col. You are madmen all that yield so much topassion.
You lay your selves too open to your enemies,
That would be glad to pry into your deeds.
And catch advantage to ensnare our lives.
The kings fear like a shadow dogs you still,
Nor can you walk without it: I commend
Valerius most, and noble Sceuola
That what they cannot mend, seem not to mind,
By my consent lets all wear out our hours
In harmles sports, hawk, hunt, game, sing, drink
So shall we seem offenseles and live safe.
In dangers bloody jaws where being humerous dance
Cloudy and curiously inquisitiue.
Into the kings proceedings there armde fear
May search into us, call our deeds to question,
And so prevent all future expectation:
Of wished amendment let us stay the time,
Till heaven have made them ripe for just revenge,
When opportunity is offered us.
And then strike home, till then do what you please:
No discontented thought my mind shall cease.

Brut. I am of Collatines mind. Now Valerius sing us a baudy song. and makes
merry, nay it shall be so.


Valor. Brutus shall pardon me.

Sceu. The time that should have been seriously spent in the State house, I ha
learnt securely to spend in a wenching house, and now I prosesse my self any
thing but a Statesman.


Hor. the more thy vanity.

Luc. The less thy honor.

Valor. The more his safety, and the less his fear.

Brut. We ha been mad Lords long, now let us be merry Lords, Horatins maugree
thy m^lancholy, and Lucretius in spite of thy sorrow, I Will have a song a
subject for the ditty.


Hor. Great Tarquins pride, and Tulliaes cruelty.

Brut. Dangerous, no.

Lucr. The tyrannies of the Court, and the ^assalage of the City.

Sceu. Neither shall I give the subject.

Br. Do, and let it be of all the pretty wenches in the Suburbs of Rome.

Sceu. It shall, it shall, shall it Valerius?

Val. Any thing, according tomy poor acquaintance, and little conuersance.

Brut. Nay you shall stay Horatius, Lucretius so shall you, he remoues himself
from the love of Brutus, that shrinkes from my side till we have had a song of
all the pretty suburbians: sit round, when Valerius?

The sixth Song.
Valor. Shall I woe the lovely Molly,
She Is so fair, so fat, so jolly,
But she has a trick of folly,
T herefore (...) ha none of Molly. No no no, no no no.
I Will have none of Molly no no no.
Oh the cherry lips of Nelly,
They are red and soft as ielly,
But too well she loves her belly,
therefore i will have none of Nelly. No no etc.
What say you to bonny Betty,
Hayou seen a less to pretty?
But her body is so swetty,
Therefore i will (...) none of Bety. No no no, etc.
When I dolly with my Dolly,
She is full of melancho (...).
Oh that wench is postile^t holy,
Therefore i will have none of Dolly. No no no, etc.
I could fancy lovely Nanny,
But she has the loves of many,
Yet her self she loves not any,
Therefore i will have none of Nanny, No no no, etc.
In a flax-shop I spide Ratchel,
Where she her flax and tow did h^chel,
But her cheeks hang like a satchell.
Therefore i will ha none of Ratchel. No no no, etc.
In a corner I met Biddy,
Her heels were light her ^ead was giddy,
She fell down and somewhat did I,
Therefore i will have none of Biddy. No no no, etc.

Brut. The rest we will hear within: what offense is there in this Lucretius,
what hurt's in this Horatius? Is it not better to sing with our heads on then
weep with our heads off, I nere took Collatin^ for a politician till now.
Come Valerius, we will run over all the wenches of Rome, even from the community
of lascivious Flora to the chastity of divine Lucrece, come good Horat.


Exeunt. Enter Lucrece, Maid and Clown. Lucr. A Chair.

Clo. A chair for my Lady, Mrs. Mirable do you not hear my Mrs call.

Lucr. Come near sir, be less officious.
In duty, and use more attention,
Nay gentlewoman we exempt not you
From our discourse, but you must afford an ear
As well as he, to what we ha to say.

Maid. I still remain your handmaid.

Lucr. Sir I ha seen you often familiar
With this my Maid and waiting gentlewoman.
As casting amorous glances, wanton looks,
And pretty beckes, sauouring incontinence.
I let you know you are not for my service
Unless you grow more civil.

Clo. Indeed madam for my own part I wish Mrs Mirable well as one fellow
servant ought to wish to another, but to say that ever I ^long any sheep eyes
in her face, how say you mistress Mirable did I ever offer it?

Nay mistres I ha seen you answer him
With gracious looks and some uncivil smiles,
Retorting eyes, and giving his demeanure
Such welcome as becomes not modesty.
Know henceforth there shall no lascivious phrase,
Suspicious look or shadow of incontinence
Be entertaind by any that attend on Roman Lucrece.

Maid. Madam I.

Lucr. Excuse it not for my premeditable thought
Speaks nothing out of rashness, nor vain hear say.
But what my own experience testifies:
Against you both let then this mild reproof
Forewarne you of the like, my reputation
Which is held precious in the eyes of Rome,
Shall be no shelter totheleast intent
Of loosenes, leave all familiarity:
And quite renounce acquaintance, or I here discharge you both my service.

Clown. For my own part madam, as I am a true Roman by nature, though no
Roman by my nose, I never spent the least lip labor on mistress Mirable never
so much as glaunc'd, never used any winking or pinking, never nodded at her, no
not so much as when I was asleep never asked her the question so much as what is
her name, if you can bring any man woman or child, that can say so much behind
my back; As for he did but kiss her, for he did but kiss her and so let her
go, let my Lord Callatine in stead of plucking my coat, pluck my skin over my
ears and turn me away naked, that wheresoever I shall come I may be held a
raw seruingman hereafter.


Lucr. Sir you know our mind.

Clow. If ever I knew what bolongs to these cases, or yet know what they mean,
if ever I used any plain dealing, or were ever worth such a jewel, would I
might die a beggar, if ever I were so far read in my grammar, as to know what
an Interiection is, or a conjunction copulative, would I might never have good
of my ^: why do you think madam, I have no more care of my self being but a
stripling then to go to it at these years, flesh and blood cannot endure it, I
shall even spoil one of the best faces in Rome with crying at your unkindness.


Lucr. I ha done, see if you can spy your Lord rerurning from the Court, and
give me notice what strangers he brings home with him.


Enter Collatine, Valerius, Horatius, Sceuola. Clown. Yes I Will go, but see kind
man he saues me a labor.

Collatine. Fair Lucrece, I ha brought these Lords from Court
To feast with thee, sir prepare us dinner.

Lucrece. My Lord is welcome, so are all his friends, the news at Court Lords?


Hor. Madam strange news: Prince Sextus by the enemies of Rome
Was nobly used and made their General,
Twice has he met his father in the field,
And foild him by the warlick Gabines aid:
But how has he rewarded that brave Nation,
That in his great disgrace supported him?
I Will tell you Madam, he since the last battle
Sent to his father a close messenger
To be received to grace, withal demanding
What he should do with those his enemies:
Great Tarquin from his son receives this news,
Being walking in his Garden, when the messenger
Importunde him for answer, the proud king
Lops with his wand the heads of poppies off,
And says no more, with this uncertain answer
The messenger to Sextus back returns.
who questions of his fathers words, looks, gesture,
He tells him what the hawty speechles King
Did to the heads of poppies, which bold Sextus
Straight apprehends, cuts off the great men's heads,
And having lest the Gabines without Governors,
Flies to his father, and this day is welcomed
For this his traiterous service, by the King
With all due solemn honors to the Court.

Sceuo. Curtefie strangely requited, this none but the son of Tarquin would
ever have enterpris'de.


Vale. I like it, I applaud it, this will come to somewhat in the end, when
heaven has cast up his account, some of them will be called to a hard reckoning.


Colla. Leave all to heaven.

Enter Clown. Clow. My Lords, the best plumporedge in all Rome cooles for your
honors dinner is piping hot upon the table: and if you make not the more have,
you are like to have but cold cheer, the cook has done his part, and there is
not a dish upon the dresser but he has made smoke for you, if you have good
stomachs, and come not in while the meat is hot, you will make hunger and cold
meet together.


Col. My man's a Rhetorician I can tell you,
And this conceit is fluent. Enter Lords,
You must be Lucrece guests, and she is scant
In nothing: for such princes must not want.

Exeunt Manet Valerius and Clown. Clow. My Lord Valerius, I have even a suit
to your honor, I ha not the power to part from you, without a relish, a note,
a tone, we must get an a^re betwixt us.


Valor. Thy meaning.

Clo. Nothing but this, John for the king, has bin in many ballads, John for
the king down din^, John for the king, has eaten many sall^ts John for the
king sings hey ho.

Valor. Thou would have a song, would thou not?

Clow. And be everlastingly bound to your honor, I am now forsaking the world
and the Diuill, and somewhat leaning toward the flesh, if you could but teach
me how to choose a wench fit for my stature and complexion, I should rest
yours in all good offices.


Valor. I Will do that for thee, what is thy name?

Clow. My name sir is Pompie.

Valor. Well then attend,
He sings. The seventh song.
Pompie I will show thee the way to know
A (...) dapper wench
First see her all bare, let her skin be rare,
And be (...) with no part of the french:
Let her (...) (...) clear, and her brow severe,
Her cie-browes thin and fine:
But if she be a punke, and love to be drunk,
Then keep her still from the wine.
Let her stature be mean, and her body clean
Thou can not choose but like her.
But see she ha good clothes, with a fair Roman ^ose,
For that's the sign of a striker.
Let her legs be small, but not v^d to sprall,
Her tongue not too loud nor cocket,
Let her arms be strong and her fingers long.
But not used to diue in a pocket.
Let her body be long and her back be strong,
With a soft lip that entangles,
With (...) iuory breast, and her hair well dr^st
Without goldlace or spangles.
Let her foot be small, clean legd withal,
Her apparel not too gaudy:
And one that has not bin, in no house of sin,
Nor place that has been ba^dy.

Clo. But gods me I am trifling here with thee, and dinner cooles o'th table,
and I am called to my attendance, oh my sweet Lord Valerius.


Exeunt. (...). Enter Tarquin, Porsenna, Tullia, Sextus, Aruns. Tarquin, Next
king Porsenna, whom we tender dearly,
Welcome young Sextus, thou have to our yoke,
Suppressed the neck of a proud nation
The warlike Gauines, enemies to Rome.

Sextus. It was my duty royal Emperor,
The duty of a subject and a son.
We at our mothers intercession likewise,
Are now atoned with Aruns, who^ we here receive into our bosom

Tul. This is done like a kind brother and a natural son.

Ar. We enterchange a royal heart with Sextus and graft us in your love.


Tarq. Now king Porsenna, welcome once more, to Tarquin and to Rome.


Por. We are proud of your aliance, and Rome is ours,
And we are Romes, this our religious league,
Shall be carved firm in characters of brass,
And live for ever to succeeding times.

Tar. It shall P^rsenna, now this leagues established,
We will proceed in our determinde wars
To bring the neighbor Nations under us.
Our purpose is to make young Sextus General
Of all our army, who has proved his fortunes
And found them full of favor, we will begin
With strong Ardea, ha you given in charge
To assemble all our Captains, and take muster of our strong army?

Aruns. That business is dispatched.

Sextus. We ha likewise sent for all our best commanders to take charge
According to their merit, Lord Valerius,
Lord Brutus, Cocles, Mutius, Sceuola,
And Collatine to make due preparation of such a gallant siege.

Tarq. This day you shall set forward, Sextus go,
And let us see your army march along
Before this King and us, that we may view
The puissance of our host prepared already,
To lay high reard Ardea waste and low.

Sex. I shall my liege.

Tul. Aruns associate him.

Ar. Ariuall with my brother in his honors.

Exeunt Aruns and Sextus. Tar. Porsenna shall be hold the strength of Rome,
And body of the Camp under the charge
Of two brave Princes to lay hostile siege
Against the strongest city that withstands
The all commanding Tarquin.

Porsen. It Is an object, to please Porsennaes Eye. Soft March.

Lucret. The host is now upon his march,
You from this place may see,
The pride of all the Romain chiualry.

Sextus, Aruns, Brutus, Collatine, Valerius, Sceuola, Cocles, with soldiers
drum and colors, march over the stage, and cong^ to the King and Queen.
Porsen. This sight's more pleasing to Porsennaes (...),
Then all our rich Attalia pompous feasts,
Or sumptuous Revels, we are borne a soldier:
And in our manage sucked the milk of war.
Should any strange fate lowre upon this army,
Or that the merciles gulf of confusion
Should swallow them, we at our proper charge,
And from our native confines vow supply
Of men and Arms to make these numbers full.

Tar. You are our Royal brother, and in you
Tarquin is powerful and maintains his awe.

Tul. The like Porsenna may command of Rome.

Porsen. But we have in your fresh varieties
Feasted too much, and kept our self too long
From our stone seat, our prosperous return
Has bin expected by our Lords and Pieres.

Tar. The business of our wars thus forwarded,
We ha best leisure for our entertainment,
Which now shall want no due solemnity.

Porsen. It has bin beyond both expectation
And merit, but in sight of heaven I swear
If ever royal Tarquin shall demand
Use of our love, it is ready stor'de for you,
Even in our Kingly breast.

Tar. The like we vow, to King Porsenna, we will yet a little
Enlarge your royal welcome with Rarieties,
Such as Rome yields: that done before we part
Of two remote dominions make one heart.
Set forwards then, our sons wage war abroad,
To make vspeace at home, we are of our self
Without suppo^ance, we all fate defy,
Aidlesse, and of our self we stand thus hy.

Exeunt. Two soldiers meet as in the watch. 1 Sol. Stand, who goes there?

2 Sol. A friend.

1 Stir not, for if thou do I Will broch thee straight upon the pike, The word.


2. Soul. Porsenna.

1. Sol. Pass, stay, who walks the round to night,
The General, or any of his Captains?

2. Sol. Horatius has the charge, the other Chieftens
Rest in the Generals tent, there is no commander
Of any note but revel with the Prince:
And I among the rest am chargd to attend
Upon their Rouse.

1. Sol. Pass freely, I this night must stand,
Twixt them and danger, the time of night.

2. Sol. The clock last told eleven.

1. Sol. The powers celestial, that ha took Rome in charge protect it still.

Again good night, thus must poor Soldiers do,
Whilst their commanders are with dainties fed,
They sleep on Down, the earth must be our bed.

Sennet. A banquet prepared. Enter Sextur, Aruns, Brutus, Valerius, Horatius
Sceuola, Collatine. Sext. Sit round the enemy is pounded fast
In their own folds, the walls made to oppugn,
Hostile incursions become a prison
To keep them fast for excution;
There Is no eruption to be feared.

Brut. What shals do? come a health to the Generals health, and Valerius that
sits the most ciuilly shall begin it, I cannot talk till my blood be mingled
with this blood of grapes: Fill, for Valerius thou should drink well, for
thou have been in the German wars, if thou loust me drink vpse freeze.


Sext. Nay since Brutus has spoke the word, the first health shall be imposed on
you Valerius, and if ever you have bin germanis^d let it be after the Dutch
fashion.


Valor. The General may command.

Brut. He may, why else is he called the Commander?

Sext. We will entreat Valerius.

Val. Since you will needs enforce a hie-German health, look well to your
heads, for I come upon you with this dutch Tassaker, if you were of a more
noble science then you are, it will go near to break your heads round.

The eight a Dutch song.
O Morke gyff men (...) man,
Skerry merry vip,
O morke gyff men (...) man
Skerry merry vap.
O morke gyff men (...) man,
that tik die scine long o drieuan can;
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vap,
and skerry merry runke (...) bunk^.
Ede hoore was a haie dedle down
Deal drunk a:
Skerry merry runk, ede bunk, ede ^oor was drunk a
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene
Skerry merry vip,
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene,
Skerry merry vap,
O daughter yeis ein alto kleene,
Ye molten slop, ein year a leene
Skerry merry vip, and skerry merry vap
And skerry merry runk ede bunk
Ede hoore was a bay dedle down
Dedle drunk a:
Skerry merry, runk ede bunke ede hoor was drunk a.

Sext. Gramercies Valerius, came this hie-German health as double as his double
double ruff, i would pledge it.


Brut. Were it in Lubeckes or double double beer their own natural, liquor
i would pledge it, were it as deep as his ruff, let the health go round about the
board as his band goes round about his neck, I am no more afraid of this dutch
fauchio^, the^ I should be of the heathenish invention.


Col. I must entreat you spare me, for my brain brooks not the fumes of wine,
their vaporous strength offends me much.


Herat. I would have none spare me, for i will spare none, Collatine will pledge
no health unless it be to his Lucrece.


Sext. What Is Lucrece but a woman, and what are women?
But tortures and disturbance unto men.
If they be foul they are odious, and if fair,
They Are like rich vessels full of poysnous drugs,
Or like black serpents armed with golden scales,
For my own part, they shall not trouble me.

Brut. Sex^ sit fast, for I proclaim my self a woman's cha^pion, and shall
unhorse thee else.


Vale. For my own part, I Am a marride man, and I Will speak to my wife to thank
thee Brutus.


Aru. I have a wife too, and I think, the most virtuous Lady in the world.


Sce^. I cannot say but that I have a good wife too, and I love her: but if she
were in heaven, beshrew me if I would wish her so much hurt as to desire her
company upon ear^h agin yet upon my honor, though she be not very fair, she
is exceeding honest.


Brut. Nay the less beauty the less temptation to dispoile her honesty.


Sce. I should be angry with him that should make question of her honor.


Brut. And I angry with thee if thou should not maintain her honor.


Aru. If you compare the virtues of your wives, let me step in for mine.


Colla. I should wrong my Lucrece not to stand for her.

Sext. Ha, ha, all captens, and stand upon the honesty of your
wives, is it possible think you, that women of young spirit and full age
Of fluent wit, that can both sing and dance,
Read, write, such as feed well and taste choice cates,
That straight dissolve to purity of blo^d.
That keep the veins full, and inflame the appetite,
Making the spirit able, strong and prone,
Can such as these their husbands being away
Emploid in foreign sieges or elsewhere,
Deny such as importune them at home?
Tell me that flax will not be touched with fire,
Nor they be won to what they most desire.

Brut. Shall I end this controversy in a word?

Sext. Do good Brutus.

Brut. I hold some holy but some apt to fin,
Some tractable, but some that none can win,
Such as are virtuous, Gold nor wealth can move,
Some vicious of themselves are prone to love.
Some Grapes are sweet and in the Gardens grow,
Others vnprunde, turn wild neglected so.
The purest oar contains both Gold and dross,
The one all gain, the other naught but loss.
The one disgrace, reproach and scandal tai^ts,
The other angels and sweet featurde saints.

Colla. Such is my virtuous Lucrece.

Ar. Yet for her virtue not comparable to the wife of Ar^ns.

(...). And why may not mine be ra^ckt with the most virtuous?

(...). I would put in for a lot, but 1000 to one I shall draw but a blancke.


Vale. I should not show I loved my wife, not to take her part in her absence,
I hold her inferior to none.


Aruns. Save mine.

Vale. No not to her.

Brut. Oh this were a brau^ controversy for a Jury of weomen to arbitrate.

Col. I Will hazard all my fortunes on the virtues
Of divine Lucrece, shall we try them thus?
It is now dead of night, lets mount our steeds,
Within this two hours we may reach to Rome,
And to our houses all come vnpreparde,
And unexpected by our hy praisd wines,
She of them all that we find best imploid,
Devoted and most huswife exercised,
Let her be held most virtuous, and her husband
Win by the wager a good horse and armor.

Ar. A hand on that.

Vale. Here Is a helping hand to that bargain.

Hor. But Shall we to horse without circumstance?

Sce. Sceuola will be mounted with the first.

Sext. Then mount Cleuall, Brutus this night take you the charge of the army,
I Will see the trial of this wager, 'twould do me good to see some of them find
their wives in the arms of their lovers, they are so confident in their
virtues, Brutus we will enterchange good night, within be thou, but as provident
ore the army as we (if our horses fail not) expeditious in our journey, horse,
horse, horse.


(...). Enter Lucrece and her two maids. Luc. But one hour more and you shall
all to rest,
Now that your Lord is absent from this house,
And that the Masters eye is from his charge,
We must be careful and with providence
Guide his domestic business, we ha now
Given ore all feasting and leaud reuelling,
Which ill becomes the house whose Lo: is absent,
We banish all excess til his return,
In fear of whom my soul does daily mourn.

1. Madam so please you to repose your self
Within your Chamber leave us to our taskes,
We will not loiter though you take your rest.

Lu. Not so, you shall not ouerwatch your selves
Longer then I wake with you: for it fits
Good huswifes when their husbands are from home,
To ey their servants labors and in care,
And the true manage of his household state,
Earliest to rise, and to be up most late.
Since all his business he commits to me,
I Will be his faithful steward til the camp
Dissolve and he return, thus wives should do,
In absence of their Lords be husband too.

2. Madam the L. (...) his man was thrice for you here to have entreated you
home to supper, he says his L. takes it unkindly he could not have your
company.


Lu. To please a loving husband, I Will offend
The love and patience of my dearest friend,
Me thinks his purpose was unreasonable
To draw me in my husbands absence forth
To feast and banquet, twould have ill becomd me,
To ha left the charge of such a spacious house, without both L. and Mistres,
I am opiniond thus, wives should not stray,
Out of their doors their husbands being away: L. (...) shall excuse me.

1 Ma^d. Pray Madam set me right into my work,
Being abroad I may forget the charge.

Lucrece. Imposde me by my L. or be compeld
To stay out late, which were my husband here,
Might be without distaste, but he from hence,
Which late a broad, there can no excuse dispense.
Here take your work again, a while proceed,
And then to bed, for whilst you sow, I Will read.

Enter Sextus, Aruns, Valerius, Collatine, Horatius, Sceuola. Aruns. I would
have hazsarded all my hopes, my wife had not been so late a reuelling.


Vale. Nor mine at this time of night a gamboling.

Hor. They wear so much cork under their heels, they cannot choose but love
to caper.


Sce. Nothing does me good, but that if my wife were watching all theirs were
wantoning, and if I halost, none can brag of their winnings.


Sex. Now Collatine to yours, either Lucrece must be better imploid then the
rest, or you content to have her virtues ranckt with the rest.


Colla. I am pleased.

Hor. Soft, soft, lets steal upon her as upon the rest, lest having some
watchword at our ariual, we may give her notice to be better prepared, nay by
your leave Coll^tine, weel limit you no advantage.


Colla. See Lords, thus Lucrece revels with her maids, In stead of Riot
quaffing and the practice of hy laualties to the rauishing sound of chambring
music, she like a good huswife Is teaching of her husband sundry chares.
Lucrece.


Lu. My L. and husband welcome, 10 times welcome,
Is it to see your L^crece you thus late
Ha with your persons so hazard left the camp,
And trusted to the danger of a night so dark, and full of horror?

Aruns. Lords all is lost.

Hor. By Jove I Will buy my wife a wheel and make her spin for this trick.

Sce. If I make not mine learn to live by the prick of her needle for this, I
me no Roman.


Col. Sweet wife salute these Lords, thy continence
Has won thy husband a Barbarian horse, and a rich cote of arms.

Lucrece. O pardon me, the joy to see my Lord,
Took from me all respect of their degrees,
The richest entertainment lives with us,
According to the hour and the provision
Of a poor wife in the absence of her husband:
We prostrate to you howsoever mean,
We thus excusde Lord Collatin: away.
We neither feast, dance, quaffe, riot nor play.

Sex. If one woman among so many bad, may be found good, If a white wench may
prove a black swan, it is Lucrece her beauty has relation to her virtue, and
her virtue correspondence to her beauty, and in both she is fellowlesse.


Colla. Lords will you yield the wager?

Aru^s. Stay, the wager was as well which of our wives was fairest too, it
stretched as well to their beauty as to their continence, who shall judge that?


Hor. That can none of us, because we are all parties, let Prince Sextus
determine it who has bin with us, and bin an ey witness of their beauties.


(...). Agreed.

Sce. I am pleased with the censure of P. Sextus.

Aruns. So are we all.

Colla. I commit my Lucre^ wholly to the censure of Sextus.

Sex. And Sex^us commits him wholly to the dispose of Lucr.
I love the Lady and her grace desire,
Nor can my love wrong what my thought admire.
Aruns, no question but your wife is chaste,
And thrifty, but this Lady knows no wast.
Val^rius, yours is modest something fair,
Her Grace and beauty are without compare,
Thine (...) well disposed and of good feature,
But the world yields not so divine a creature.
(...), thine a smug less and grant well.
But amongst all bright Lucrece does excel.
Then our impertiall hearts judging eyes,
This verdit (...) fair Lucrece wins the prise

Col. Then Lords you are indebted to me a horse and armor.

Omnes. We yee'd it.

Lu. Will you taste such welcome Lords, as a poor unprovided house can yield?

Sex. Gramercie Lucrece, no we must this night sleep by Ardea walls.


Lu. I but my Lords, I hope my Collatine will not so leave his Lucrece.

Sex. He must, we have but idled from the Camp, to try a merry wager about
their wives, and it is the hazard of the kings displeasure, should any man be
missing from his charge: the powers that govern Rome make divine Luc. for ever
happy, goodnight.


(...). Will not my husband repose this night with us?

Hor. Lucrece shall pardon him, we ha took our leaves of our wives, nor shall
Collatine be before us, though our Ladies in other things come behind you.


Col. I must beswaid: the ioies and the delights of many thousand nights meet
all in one to make my Lucr^ce happy.


Lu. I am bound to your strict will, to each goodnight.

Sex. To horse, to horse, Lucrece we cannot rest,
Til our hot lust imbosome in thy breast.

Exeunt, manet Lu. Lu. With no unkindness we should our Lords vpbraid,
Husbands and Kings must always be obaid.
Nothing save the high business of the slate,
And the charge given him at Ardeas siege,
Could ha made Collatine so much digress
From the affection that he bears his wife.
But subjects must excuse when kings claim power.
But leaving this before the charm of sleep,
Cease with his downy wings: upon my eyes,
I must go take account among my servants
Of their days task, we must not cherish sloth,
No covetous thought makes me thus provident,
But to shun idleness, which wise men say,
Begets rank lust, and virtue beats away.

Exit. Enter Sextus, Aruns, Horatius, Brutus, Sceuola, Valerius. Hor. Return
to Rome now we are in the mid way to the Ca^p?

Sex. My Lords it is business that concerns my life,
To morrow if we live we will visit thee.

Val. Will Sextus enjoin me to accompany him?

Sce. Or me?

Sex. Nor you, nor any, it is important business
And serious occurrences that call me,
Perhaps Lords I Will commend you to your wives.
Coslatine shall I do you any service to your Lucrece?

Col. Only commend me.

Sex. What, no private token to purchase our kind welcome?

Col. Would Royal Sextus would but honor me to bear her a slight token.


Sex. What?

Col. This Ring.

Sex. As I am Royal I will seet delivered.
This Ring to Lucrece shall my love convey,
And in this gift thou do thy bed be^ray.
To morrow we shall meet, this night sweet fate,
May I prove welcome though a guest ingrate.

Exit. (...) He Is for the city, we for the camp, the night makes the way
tedious and melancholy, prithee Valeri^s a merry song to beguile (...).

He sings. The ninth Song.
Valor. There was a young man and a maid fell in love,
Terry dery ding, terry dery ding, tery tery (...).
To get her good will he often did,
Terry dery ding, terry dery ding, langtido dill^.
There Is many will say, and most will allow, terry dery, etc.
There Is nothing so good as a terry dery dery dery, etc.
I would wish all maids before the^ be sick, terrie derie, etc.
To enquire for a young man that has a good terrie dery, etc.

Hor. Good Valeri^s, this has brought us even to the skirts of the camp, enter
Lords.


Exit. Enter Sextus and Lucrece. Lucr. This ring, my Lord, has opt our gates
to you,
For though I know you for a royal Prince,
My sovereigns son, and friend to Collatine:
Without that key you had not entered here.
More lights, and see a banquet strait provided,
My love to my dear husband shall appear,
In the kind welcome that I give his friend.

Sext. Not loue-sicke, but love lunatike, loue-mad,
I am all fire, impatience, and my blood
Boyles on my heart, with loose and sensual thoughts.

Lucr. A chair for the Prince, may't please your highness sit.

Sext. Madam, with you.

Lucr. It will become the wife of Collatine to wait upon your trencher.

Sext. You shall sit, behind us at the camp we left our state,
We are but your guest, indeed you shall not wait,
Her modesty has such strong power ore me,
And such a reverence has fate given her brow,
That it appears a kind ofblasphemy,
To have any wanton word harsh in her ears,
I cannot woe, and yet I love boue measure,
It Is force, not suite, must purchase this rich treasure.

Luc. Your highness cannot taste such homely cates.

Sex. Indeed I cannot feed, but on thy face,
Thou art the banquet that my thoughts embrace.

Lucr. Knew you, my Lord, what free and zealous welcome
We tender you, your highness would presume
Upon your entertainment, often, I many times
I have heard my husband speak of Sextus worth,
Extol your worth, praise your perfection,
I dote upon your valor, and your friendship prise next his Lucrece.

Sext. Oh impious lust, in all things base, respectles and unjust,
Thy virtue, grace and fame I must enjoy,
Though in the purchase I all Rome destroy.
Madame, if I be welcome, as your virtue bids me presume I am,
Carouse to me a health unto your husband.

Lucr. A woman's draught my Lord to Collatine.

Sext. Nay, you must drink off all.

Lucr. Your grace must pardon the tender weakness of a woman's brain.

Sext. It is to Collatine.

Lucr. Me thinks twould ill become the modesty
Of any Roman Lady to carouse,
And drown her virtues in the juice of grapes.
How can I show my love to my husband,
To do his wife such wrong, by too much wine
I might neglect the charge of this great house,
Left soly to my keep, else my example
Might in my servants breed encouragement
So to offend, both which were pardonlesse,
Else to your grace I might neglect my duty,
And slack obeisance to so great a guest:
All which being accidental unto wine,
Oh let me not so wrong my Collatine.

Sex. We excuse you, her imperfections like a torrent
With violence breaks upon me, and at once
Inuert and swallow all that's good in me.
Preposterous fates, what mischiefs you inuolue
Upon a captive Prince left to the fury
Of all grand mischief, has the grandame world
Yet smothred such a strange abortiue wonder,
That from her virtues should arise my sin:
I am worse then what is most ill, depriude all reason,
My heart all fiery lust, my soul all treason.

Lucr. My Lord, I fear your health, your changing brow
Has shown so much disturbance, noble Sextus,
Has not your ventrous travel from the camp,
Nor the moist rawnes of these humorous night impairde your health?

Sext. Diuinest Lucrece no. I cannot eat.

Lucr. To rest then, a rank of torches there, attend the Prince.

Sext. Madam, I doubt I am a guest this night
Too troublesome, and I offend your rest.

Lucr. This ring speaks for me, that next Collatine you are to me most
welcome, yet my Lord, thus much presume, without this from his hand, Sextu^
this night could not have entered here, no, not the king himself, my dor^s the
day time to my frinds are fre^e, But in the night the obdure gates are less
kind,

Without this ring they ca^ no entrance find. Lights for the Prince.

Sex. A kiss and so godnight, nay for your rings sake deny not that

Lucr. Jove give your Highness soft and sweet repose.

Sex. And thee the like, repose with (...) content,
My vows are fixed, my thoughts on mischief bent.

Ex^it with torches. Lucr. It Is late, so many stars shine in this room,
By reason of this great and princely guest,
The world might call our modesty in question,
To revel thus our husband at the Camp,
Have and to ^est, save in the Princes chamber,
Let not a light appear, my hart's all sadness,
Jove unto thy protection I commit
My chastity and honor to thy keep,
My waking soul I give whilst my thoughts sleep,

Exit. Enter (...) and a S^ngman. Clo. Soft, soft, not to loud, imagine we were
now going on the ropes with eggs at our heels, he that has but a creeking
shoe, I would he had a creek in his neck, tread not to hard for disturbing
Prince Sextus.


Ser. I wonder the P. would ha none of us stay in his chamber and help him to
bed.


Clo. What an ass art thou to wonder, there may be many causes thou know
the Prince is a soldier, and soldiers many times want shift, who can say
whether he have a clean shirt on or no? for any thing that we know he has
used staves aker a late, or has taken a medcin to kill the itch, what is that to
us, we did our duty to (...) our service.


Ser. And what should we enter farther into his thoughts, (...) shals to bed?
I Am as drousie as a doremouse, and my head's as (...) as though I had a
nightcap of lead on:


Clow. And my eyes begin to glue themselves together, I was til supper was done
altoge^ (...) your repast, and now after supper I am only for your repose. I
think for the two virtues of eating and sleeping, there is never a Roman spirit
under the cope, can put me down.


Enter Myrable. Myr. For shame what a coniu^ing and catter-walling keep you
here, that my Lady cannot sleep: you shall have her call by and by, and send
you all to bed with a witness.


Clow. Sweet mistress Myrable, we are going.

Myr. You are too loud: ^ome, every man dispose him to his rest and i will to
mine.


Ser. (...) with your Torches sir.

Clow. Come then, and every man sneake into his k^nnell

Exeunt. Enter Sextus with his sword drawn and a Taper light. Sex. Night be as
secret as thou art close, as close
as thou art black and dark, thou ominou. Q^ene
Of Tenebrouse filence, make this fatal hour,
as true to Rape as thou have made it kind
To murder and harsh mischief: Cintheamaske thy cheek,
And all you sparkling Elamentall fires,
Choke up your beauties in prodigious fogges,
Or be extinct in some thick ^aparous cloud,
Least you behold my practice: I am bound
Upon a black adventure, on a deed
That must wound virtue, and make beauty bleed.
Pause Sextus, and before thou runst thy self
Into this violent danger, weigh thy sin,
Thou art yet free, beloved, graced in the Camp,
Of great opinion and undoubted hope,
Romes da^ling in the universal grace,
Both of the field, and senate: were these fortunes
To make thee great in both, back yet, thy fame
Is free from hazard, and thy style from shame.
Of fate, thou have usurped such power over man,
That where thou pl^dst thy will, no mortal can.
On then, black mischief hurrie me the way.
My self I must destroy, her life betray,
The state of King and Subject, the displeasure
Of Prince and people, the revenge of noble,
And the contempt of base, the incurdveng^nce
Of my wronged kinsman Colatine, the Treason
A Against diuin'st Lucrece: all these total cursses
Foreseen not fearde upon me Sextus meet,
To make my days harsh^so so this might be sweet
No jar of clock no ominous hateful howl
Of any starting Hound, no horse ro^gh breathed from the
Of any drowsy Groom, wakes this charmed silence, entrals discouerd in her bed
and starts this general silence forward still, Lucr.
To make thy lust live, all thy virtues kill.
Here, here, behold! beneath these Curtains lies,
That bright enchantresse that has daz^d my eyes.
Oh who but Sextus could commit such waste?
On one so fair, so kind, so truly chaste?
Or like a rauisher thus rudely stand,
To offend this face, this brow, this lip, this hand?
Or at such fatal hours, these reuells keep,
With thought once to defile thy innocent sleep,
Save in this breast, such thoughts could find no place,
Or pay with treason her kind hospital grace:
But I am lust-burnt, all bent on what is bad,
That which should calm good thoughts makes Tarquin
mad. Madam, Lucresse?

Lucr. Whose that? oh me! beshrew you.

Sex. Sweet, it is I.

Luc. What I?

Sex. Make room.

Luc. My Husband Colatine

Sex. Thy husband's at the Camp.

Luc. Here is no room for any man save him.

Sex. Grant me that grace.

Luc. What are you?

Sex. Tarquin and thy friend, and must enjoy thee.

Lucr. Heaven such sins defend.

Sex. Why do you tremble Lady? cease this fear,
I am alone, there is no suspicious (...),
That can bewray this deed: nay start not sweet.

Luc. Dream I, or am I full awake? oh no!
I know I dream to see Prince Tarquin so.
Sweet Lord awake me, rid me from this terror,
I know you for a Prince, a Gentleman,
Royal and honest, one that loves my Lord.
And would not wrack a woman's chastity,
For Romes imperial Diadem, oh then
Pardon this dream, for being awake I know,
Prince Sextus, Romes great hope, would not for shame
Provoke his own wrath, or dispoile my fame.

Sex. I Am bent on both, my thoughts are all on fire,
Choose thee, thou must embrace death, and desire,
Yet do I love thee, will thou accept it?

Luc. No.

Sex. If not thy love, thou must enjoy thy (...),
where fair means cannot, force shall make my way:
By Jove I must enjoy thee.

Lucr. Sweet Lord stay.

Sex. I Am all impatience, violence and rage,
And save thy bed, naught ca^ this fire (...)

Luc. No, I cannot.

Sex. Tell me why?

Luc. Hate me, and in that hate first let me dye.

Sex. By ^oue i will force thee.

Lucr. By a God you swear to do a de^ils d^de: sweet Lord forbea^
By the same Jove I swear that made this soul,
Never to yield unto an act so foul. Help, help.

Sex. These cushens first shall stop thy breath,
If thou but shreekest: hark how i will frame thy death.

Luc. The death: I care not, so I keep vnstain^,
The vnceaz'd honor I have yet maintaind.

Sex. Thou can keep neither, for if thou but (...),
Or le^st the least harsh noise Jar in my ear,
I Will broach thee on my steel: that done, strait murder
One of thy basest Grooms, and lay you both
Graspt arm in arm, on thy adulterate bed.
Then call in witness of that mechall (...),
So shall thou die: thy (...),
Thy name be odious, thy suspected body
Denide all funeral rites, and loving Colatin^
Shall hate thee even in death: then save all this,
and to thy fortunes add another friend,
Give thy fears comfort, and these torments end.

Lucr. I Will die first, and yet hear me: oh as you are nobl^,
If all your gracious and best generous thoughts
Be not exilde your heart, pi^tie, oh pity
The Virtues of a woman: mar not that
Cannot be made again: this once defilde,
Not all the Ocean waves can purify,
Or wash my stain away, you seek to
That which the radiant splender of the Sun
Cannot make bright again: behold my tears!
Oh think them pearled drops, destilled from the heart
Of soul chaste Lucrece: think them Orators,
To plead the cause of absent Colatine, your friend and kinsman.

Sex. Tush, I am obdure.

Luc. Then make my name pure: keep my body pure:
Oh Prince of Princes, do but weigh your sin,
Think how much I shall loose how small you win.
I loose my honor of my name and blood,
Lost, Romes imperial Crown cannot make good.
You win the worlds shame, and all good men's hate,
Oh who would pleasure, buy at such dear rate?
Nor can you t^arme it pleasure: for what is sweet,
Where force and hate, jar and contention meet?
Weigh but for what it is that you urge me still,
To gain a woman's love against her will?
You Will but repent such wrong done a chaste wife,
and think that labor's not worth all your strife.
Curse your hotlust, and say you have wronged your friends,
But all the world cannot make me amends.
I took you for a friend, wrong not my trust,
But let these chaste terms quench your fiery lust.

(...). No, those moist tears, contending with my fire,
Q^ench not my heat, but mak^ it climb more higher:
I Will drag thee hence.

Lucr. Oh!

Sex. If thou raise these cries, lodged in thy flaughtered
arm^ some base Groom dies,
And Rome that has thy name admired so long,
Shall blot thy death with scandal from my tung.

Lucr Jove guard my innocence.

Sex. Lucrece, thar't mine
In spite of Jove and all the powers divine.

He beare^ her out Enter a Seruingman Ser. What Is a clock tro? my Lord bad me
be early ready with his Gelding, for he would ride betimes in the morning: now
had I rather be up an hour before my time then a minute after, for my Lord
will be so infinitely eangrie if I but over sleep my self a moment, that I
had better be out of my life then in his displeasure: but foft, some of my
Lord Colatines menlye in the next chamber, I care not if I call them up, for it
grows toward day: what Pompy, Pompy.


Clo. Who is that cal's?

(...). It Is I.

Clow. Whose that, my Lord Sextus his man? what a pox make you up before day?


Ser. I would have the key of the Gate to come at my Lords horse in the stable.


Clo. I would my Lord Sextus and you were both in the hayloft, for Pompy can
take none of his natural rest amongst you, here is (...) Ostl^r, rise and give
my horse another pecke of hay.


Ser. Nay good Pompy help me to the Key of the stable.

Clow. Well, Pompy was borne to do Rome good, in being so kind to the young
Princes Gelding, but if for my kindness in giving him Pease and Oats, he
should kick me, I should scarce say god a mer^ie horse: but come, i will go with
thee to the stable.


Exe^nt. Enter Sextus and Lucrece unready. Sex. Nay, weep not sweet, what is
done is pastrecall,
Call not thy name in question, by this sorrow
Which yet is without blemish, what has past
Is hid from the worlds eye, and only private
Twixt vs^faire Lucrece, pull not on my head,
The wrath of Rome if I have done thee wrong,
Love was the cause, thy fame is without blot,
And thou in Sextus have a true friend got,
Nay sweet look up, thou only have my heart,
I must be gone Lucrece a kiss and part.

Lu. Oh!

She flings from him and Exit. Sex. No? peuish dame farewell, then be the bruter
Of thy own shame, which Tarquin would conceales
I am armd against all can come, let mischief frown,
With all his terror ar^d with ominous fates,
To all their spleenes a welcome I Will afford,
With this bold heart, strong hand, and my good sword.

Exit. Enter B^utus, Valerius Horatius. Arnus, Sc^ola, Colatine. Bru. What so
early Valor. and your voice not up yet? thou wast wont to be my Lark and raise
me with thy early notes.


Val. I was never so hard set yet my Lord, but I had ever a fit of mirth for my
friend.


Bru. Prithee let us hear it then whilst we may, for I divine thy music and
my madness are both short lived, we shall have somewhat else to do ere long, we
hope Valerius.


Hora. Jove send it.

Bru. Horatius, Me thinks our wars go not well forward,
Horatius we have greater Enemies to bustle with then the
Ardeans if we durst but front them Horatius.

Hor. Would it were come to fronting.

Bru. Then we married men should have the advantage of the batchelers Horatius,
especially such as have reuelling wives, those that can caper in the City,
while their husb^ds are in the Camp, Collat why are you so (...)? the thought
of this should not trouble you, having a Luc. to your bedfellow.


Colla. My Lord I know no cause of discontent, yet can not I be merry.


Aru. I should be frolique if my brother were but returned to the Camp, and in
good time behold Prince Sextus.


Omnes Health to our general.

Sex. Thank you.

Br. Will you survey your forces, and give order for a present assault, your
soldiers long to be tugging with the Ardea^s.


Sex. No.

Col. Have you seen Lucretia my Lord, how fares she?

Sex. Well, I Will to my Tent.

Arn. Why how now what is the matter brother?

Exeunt the brothers. Bru. Thank you, No, well, I Will to my Tent, get thee to thy
Tent and a coward go with thee, if thou have no more spirit to a speedy
encounter.


Vale. Shall I go after him and know the cause of his discontent?


Sce. Or I my Lord?

Bru. Neither, to pursue a fool in his humor? is the next way to make him
more humerous, I Will not be guilty of his folly, Thank you! no, before I wish
him health again when he is sick of the sullens, may I dye, not like a Roman,
bu a runagate.


Sce. Perhaps he is not well.

Bru. Well, then let him be ill.

Enter Clown. Valle. The news with this hasty poast?

Clow. Did nobody see my Lord Colatine? oh, my Lady commends her to you, here is
a letter.


Col. Give it me.

Clow. Fie vppon't, never was poor Pompy so ouer-labourde as I have bin, I
think I have spurd my horse such a question, that he is scarce able to wighee
or wag his tail for an answer, but my Lady bad me spare for no horse flesh,
and I think I have made him run his race.


Bru. Cosen Colatine the news at Rome?

Coll. Nothing but what you all may well pertak: read here my Lord.
Brutus reads the letter. Dear Lord, if ever thou will see thy Lucrece,
Choose of the friends which thou affectest best,
And all important business set apart,
Repair to Room: commend me to Lord Brutus,
Valerius Mutius, and Horatius,
Say I entreat their presence, where my Father
Lucretius shall attend them, farewell sweet,
Th^affaires are great, then do not fail to meet.

Bru. I Will thither as I live,

Exit. Coll. I (...) I dye,

Exit. (...). To Room wi^h expedi^ious wings weel'e fly.

Exit. (...). The news, the news, if it have any s^ape
Of^adnes, if some prod^gye have chanst,
That may beget revenge, I Will cease to chafe,
Vex, martyr, grieve, to^ture, torment my self,
And tune my hu^our to strange strains of mirth:
My soul deuines some happiness, speak, speak:
I know thou have some news that will create me
Merry and musical, for I would laugh,
Be new transhapt, I prithee sing Valerius that I may air
with thee.

Vale. First tell us what is the project of thy massage?

Clow. My Lords, the princely Sextus has been at home, but what he has done, I
may partly mistrust, but cannot altogether resolve you: besides, my Lady swore
me, that whatsoever I suspected I should say nothing.


Vale. If thou will not say thy mind, I prithee sing thy mind, and then thou
may save thine oath.


Clow. Indeed I was not sworn to that, I may either laugh out my news or sing
am, and so save my oath to my Lady.


Hora. Howe's all at Rome, that with such sad presage,
Distu^bed Colatine, and noble Brutus
Are hurryed from the Camp with Scenola?
And we with expedition amongst the rest,
Are charged to Rome? speak, what did Sextus there with thy fair mistress?

Valerius, Horatius and the Clown their Catch. Vale. Did he take fair Lucrece
by the (...) man?

Clow. Toe man.

Vale. I man.

Clow. Ha, ha, ha, ha man.

Hor. And further did he strine to go man?

Clow. (...) man.

Hor. I man.

Clow. Ha, ha, ha man, hafa derry derry derry down a, hey fa derry dino.

Val. Did he take fair Lucrece by the heel man?

Clow. Heel man.

Val. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man.

Hor. And did he further strive to feel man?

Clow. Feel man.

Hor. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, etc.

Hor. Did he take the Lady by the shin man?

Clow. Shin man.

Val. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man.

Hor. Further too would he have (...) man?

Clow. Bin man.

Hor. I man.

Clo. Ha ha ha ha man. Hey fadery. etc.

Val. Did he take the Lady by the knee man?

Clo. Knee man.

Val. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man.

Hor. Further then that would he be man.

Clo. Be man.

Hor. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man. hey fa derie, etc.

Val. Did he take the Lady by the thigh man?

Clo. Thigh man.

Val. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man.

Hor. And now he came it somewhat nigh man.

Clow. Nigh man

Val. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man, Hey fa dery, etc.

Val. But did he do the the other thing man?

Clow, Thing man?

Val. I man.

Clo. Ha ha ha ha man.

Hor. And at the same had he a fling man.

Clow. Fling man.

Hor. I man.

Clow. Ha ha ha ha man, hey fadery, etc.

Exeunt. A Table and Chair Covered with black. Lucrece and her maid.

Luc. Mirable.

Maid. Madam.

Luc. Is not my father old Lucrecius come yet?

Maid. Not yet.

Luc. Nor any from the Camp?

Maid. Neither madam.

Luc. Go, be gone, and leave me to the truest grief of heart
That ever entr^d any Matrons breast. Oh!

Maid. Why weep you Lady? alas why do you stain
Your modest cheeks with these offensive tears?

Luc. Nothing, nay nothing: oh you powerful Gods,
That should have Angels guardent on your throne,
To protect innocence and chastity! oh why
Suffer you such inhumane massacre
On harmeles virtue? wherefore take you charge,
On sinles souls to see them wounded thus:
With Rape or Violence? forgive white innocence,
Armor of proof against sin: or by oppression
Kill Virtue quite, and guerdon base transgression?
Is it my far^ above all other women?
Or is my sin more heinous then the rest,
That amongst thousands, millions, infinites,
I, only I, should to this shame (...) borne,
To be a stain to women, natu^es scorn? oh!

Maid. What ailes you Madam, troth you make me weep
To see you shead salt tears: what has oppressed you?
Why is your chamber hung with mourning black?
Your habit sable, and your eyes thus swollen
With ominous tears: alas what troubles you?

Luc. I am not, thou did deceive thy felfe,
I did not weep, there is nothing troubles me,
But wherefore do thou blush?

Maid. Madam not I.

Luc. Indeed thou did, and in that blush my guilt thou did betray
How came thou by the notice of my sin?

Maid^. What sin?

Luc. My blot, my scandal and my shame:
Oh Tarquin! thou my honor did betray,
Disgrace^no time, no age (...) wipe away, oh!

Maid. Sweet Lady cheer your self, i will fetch my Vyol
And see if I can sing you fast a sleep,
A little rest would wear away this passion.

Luc. Do what thou will, I can command no more,
Being no more a woman, I am now
Deuote to death, and an inhabitant
Of the other world: these eyes must ever weep,
Till fate has closde them with eternal sleep.

Enter Brutus, Collatine, Horatius, Seeuola, Valerius one way, Lucretius
another way. Luc. Brutus!

Bru. Lucretius!

Luc. Father!

Col, Lucrece!

Luc. Collatine!

Bru. How cheer you Madam? how is it with you cosen?
Why is your eye deiect and drowned in sorrow?
Why is this funeral black, and ornaments
Ofwiddow-hood? resolve me cosen Lucrece.

Hor. How fare you Lady?

Old Luc. What Is the matter girl?

Col. Why how is it with you Lucrece, tell me sweet?
Why do thou hide thy face? and with thy hand
Darken those eyes that were my Suns ofioy,
To make my pleasures flourish in the Spring?

Luc. Oh me!

Val. Whence are these sig hes and tears?

Sceu. How grows this passion?

Bru. Speak Lady you are h^m'd in with your friends,
(...) in a pale of safety, and (...)
and cirkled in a fortress of your kindred,
Let not those drops fall fruiteles to the ground,
Nor let your sighs ad to the senseless wind.
Speak, who has wrong you?

Luc. Ere I speak my woe,
Swear you will revenge poor Lucrece on her (...).

Bru. Be his head archt with gold.

Hor. Behis hand ar^d with an imperial Scepter.

Old. Luc. Be he great as Tarquin throand in an imperial seat

Bru. Be he no morethen mortal, he shall feel
The vengefull edge of this victorious steel.

Luc. Then seat you Lords, whilst I expose my wrong.
Father, dear husband, and my kinsmen, Lords
Hear me, I am dishonored and disgraced,
My reputation mangled, my renown
disparaged, but my body, oh my body

Col. What Lucrece?

Luc. Staind, polluted and defilde.
Strange steps are found in my adulterate bed,
And though my thoughts be white as innocence,
Yet is my body soild with lust burnd sin,
And by a stranger I am strumpited,
Ravished, enforced, and am no more to rank among the Roman Matrons.

Bru. Yet cheer you Lady, and restrain these tears,
If you were forced, the sin concerns not you,
A woman's born but with a woman's strength: who was the Rauisher?

Hor. I, name him Lady, our love to you shall only thus appear
In the revenge that we will take on him.

Luc. I hope so Lords, it was Sextus the Kings Son.

Omnes. How? Sextus Tarquin!

Luc. That unprincely Prince, who guest-wise entered with my husbands Ring,
This Ring, oh Collatine! this Ring you sent
Is cause of all my woe, your discontent.
I feasted him, then lodgd him, and bestowde
The choicest welcome, but in dead of night,
My Traitorous guest came armed unto my bed,
Frighted my silent sleep, threatend, and praide
For entertainment: ^despised both.
Which hearing his sharp pointed Semitar,
The Tyrant bent against my naked breast,
Alas, I begd my death, but note his tyranny,
He brought with him a torment worse then death
For having murdered me, he swore to kill,
One of my basest Grooms and lodge him dead
In my dead arms: then call in testimony
Of my adultery, to make me hated
Even in my death, of husband, father, friends,
Of Rome and all the world: this, this, oh Princes, Ravished and killed me at once,

Col. Yet comfort Lady, I quit thy guilt, for what could
Lucrece do more then a woman? had thou did polluted,
By this base scandal, thou had wronged thy fame,
And hinderd us of a most just revenge.

All. What shall we do Lords?

Bru. Lay your resolute hands upon the sword of Brutus,
Vow and swear, as you hope meed for merit from the Gods
Or fear reward for sin, from devils below:
As you are Romans, and esteem your fame
More then your lives all hum^rous toys set off,
Of madding, singing, smilings, and what else,
Receive your native valor, be your selves,
And join with Brutus in the just revenge
Of this chaste ravished Lady, swear

All. We do.

(...). Then with your humors here my grief ends too,
My stain I thus wipe off, call in my sighs,
and in the hope of this revenge, forbear
Even to my death to fall one passionate tear.
Yet Lords, that you may crown my innocence,
With our best thoughts, that you may henceforth know,
We are the same in heart we seem in show.
and though I quit my soul of all such sin, The Lords whisper
I Will not debar my body punishment:
Let all the world, learn of a Roman dame,
To prise her life less then her honored fame.
Kills her self
Lucr. Lucrece?

Col. Wife.

Bru. Lady.

Sce. She has slain herself.

Val. Oh see yet Lords if there be hope of life

Bru. She Is dead, then turn your funeral tears to fire and indignation, let
us now redeem Our misspent time, and over take our sloth With hostile
expedition, this great Lords, This bloody knife, on which her chaste blood
flower, Shall not from Brutus till some strange revenge fall on the heads of
Tarquins.


Hor. Nowe's the time to call their pride to count,
Brutus lead on, We Will follow thee to their confusion.

Val. By (...) we will, the sprightfull youth of Rome,
Trickt up in plumed harness, shall attend
The march of Brutus, whom we here create our genrall against the Tarquins.

Sce. Be it so.

Bru. We embrace it: now to stir the wrath of Rome,
You, Colla ine and good Lucretius,
With eyes yet drowned in tears, bear that chaste body
Into the market place: that horrid object,
Shall kindle them with a most just revenge.

Hor. To see the father and the husband mourn
Ore this chaste dame, that have so well deserved
Of Rome and them, then to infer the pride,
The wrongs and the perpetual tyranny
Of all the Tarquins, Se^Wuius, Tullius death,
and his unnatural usage by that Monster
Tullia the Queen all these shall well concur in a combind revenge

Bru, Lucrece, thy death we will mourn in glittering arms
and plumed caskes: some bear that reverend load,
Unto the forum where our force shall meet
To set upon the pallas, and expel
This viperous brood from Rome: I know the people
Will gladly embrace our fortunes: Sc^uola,
Go you and muster powers in Brutus name.
Valerius, you assist him instantly,
and to the mazed people freely speak the cause of this concourse

Val. We go.

Exeunt (...) (...) Bru. And you dear Lord, whose speechles greef is boundles,
Turn all your tears with ours, to wrath and rage,
The hearts of all the Tarquins shall weep blood
Upon the funeral Hearse, with whose chaste body,
Honor your arms, and to th'assembled people,
Disclose her innocent wounds: Gramercies Lords,
A great shout and a flourish with drums and Trumpets, That universal shout
tells me their words
are gracious with the people, and their troops
are ready imbat^eled and expect but us,
To lead their troops, Jove give our fortunes speed,
We Will murder, murder, and base rape shall bleed.

Alarm, Enter in the fight Tarquin and Tullia flying, pursude by (...), and
the Romans march with drum and Colors, Porsenna, Arun^. Sextus, Tarquin, and
T^llia meets and join with them: To them Brutus, and the Romans with drum and
solaiers: they make a stand. Bru. Even thus far Tirant have we dogd thy
stepes,
Frighting thy frighted fear with horrid steel.

Tar. Lodge in the safety of Porsennaes arms
Now Traitor Brutas we dare front thy pride.

Hora. Porsenna tha^t unworthy of a scepter,
To shelter pride, lust, rape, and tyranny,
In that proud Prince and his confederate sons.

Sex. Traitors to heaven, to Tarquin, Room and us,
Treason to Kings, does stretch even to the Gods,
And those high Gods that take great Rome in charge,
shall punish your rebellion.

Col. Oh Devil! Sextus speak not thou of Gods,
Not cast those false and fained eyes to heaven,
Whose rape the furies must torment (...), of Lucr: Lucrect:

Sce. Her chaste blood sul cries for vengeance to the Etheriall deities

Lucr. Oh twa's a foul deed Sextus,

Vale. And thy shame shall be eternal, and outline her fame,

(...). Say Sextus loved her, was she not a woman,
I, and perhaps was willing to beforc'd,
Must you being private subiect^ dare to (...)
Wars loud alarm against your potent King?

Por. Brutus therein thou do forget thy self, And wrongst the glory of thine
Ances^ors, stayning thy blood with Treason.


Brut. Tuscan know the Consul Brutus is their powerful foe.
Ali Tarquin. Consul?

Hora. I consul, and the powerful hand of Rome
Graspes his imperial sword: the name of King
The tirant Tarquins have made odious
Unto this nation: and the general knee,
Of this our warlik people, now low bends
To royal Brutus where the kings name ends.

Bru. Now Sextus where is the Oracle, (...) (...)
My Mother earth it plainly did foretell,
My noble virtues should thy sin exceed,
Brutus should sway, and lust-burnt Tarquin bleed

Vale. Now shall the blood of Seruius fall, as heavy as a huge mountain on
your Tyrant heads, orewhelming all your glory.


Hor. Tullias guilt shall be by us reuengd, that in her pride,
In blood paternal, her rough coach-wheeles did.

Lucre, Your Tirannies,

Ser. Pride,

Col And my Lucrece fate, shall al be swalowd in this hostile hate.

Sex. Oh Romulus, thou that fiirst reard yon walls,
In sight of which we stand in thy soft bosom,
Is hanged the nest in which the Tarquins build,
Which in the branches of thy lofty spires,
Tarquin shall perch, or where he once has (...).
His high built airy shall be drowned in blood,
alarm then, Brutus by heaven I vow,
My sword shall prove thou nere wast mad till now.

Bru. Sextus, my madness with your lives expires,
Thy sensual eyes are fixed upon that wall,
Thou nere shall enter, Room confines you all.

Por. A chargethen.

Tar. Jove and Tarquin.

Hor. but we, cry a Brutus.

Bru. Lucrece, force and victory.

Alarm, the Ramans are beaten of. Alarm. Enter Brutus, Horatius, Valerius,
Sc^uola, L^cretius, Colatine. Bru. Thou Iouiall hand hold up thy scepter high
And let not justice be oprest with pride,
Oh you Senators leave not Room and us,
Graspt in the purple hands of death and ruin, the Tarquins have the best.

Hora. Yet stand, my foot is fixed upon this bridge.
Tyber, thy arched streams shall be changd crimso, with
Roman blood, before I trudge form hence.

(...). Brutus retire, for if thou enter Rome,
We are all lost, stand not on valor now,
But save thy people, lets survive this day
To try the fortunes of another field.

Valor. Break down the bridge, lest the pursuing enemy
Enter with us and take the spoil of Rome.

Hor. Then breakt behind me, for by heaven I Will grow,
And root my foot as deep as to the center, before I leave this passage.

Lucr. Come you are mad.

Collat. The foe comes on and we in trifling here hazard our self and people.


Hor. Save them all, to make Rome stand, Horatius here will fall.

Brut We would not lose thee, do not breast thy self
Among thousands if thou frontst them thou art wingde,
With million swords and darts, and we behind
Must break the bridge of Tiber to save Rome,
Before thee infinits gase on thy face,
And menace death, the raging streams of Tiber are at thy back to swallow
thee.

Horat. Retire to make Rome live, it is death that I desire.

Brut. Then farewell dead Horatius, think in us
The universal arm of potent Rome
Takes his last leave of thee in this embrace.

All embrace him. Hor. Farewell.

All. Farewell.

Brut. These arches all must down to interdict their passage the town.


Exeunt. Alarm, Enter Tarquin, Persenna, and Aruns, with their pikes and
Targetieres. All Enter, enter, enter. A noise of knocking down the bridge
within. Hor. Soft Tarquin, see a bulwark to this bridge.
You first must pass, the man that enters here
Must make his passage through Horatius breast,
See with this target do I buckle Rome,
And with this sword defy the pussa^t army of two great king.

Porsen. One man to face an host,
Charge soldiers, of full forty thousan Romans,
There Is but one daring hand against your host,
To keep you from the sack or spoil of Rome, charge, charge.

Aruns. Upon them Soldiers, Enter in several places, Sextus and Valerius
(...). Alarm Alarm. Sex. Oh cowards, slaves, and vassals what not enter?
Was it for this you placed my regiment
Upon a hill, to be the sad spectator
Of such a general cowardice? Tarquin, Aruns,
Porsenna, soldiers, pass, Horatius quickly,
And they behind him will deuolue the bridge
And raging Tyber that is impassible,
Your host must swim before you conquer Rome.

Val. Yet stand Horatius, bear but one brunt more
The arched brunt shall sink upon his piles.
And in his fall lift up thy real me to heaven

Sext. Yet enter.

Val. Dear Horatius, yet stand, and save a millio^ by one powerful hand


Alarm and the falling of the bridge. Arun^ and all. Charge charge, charge.

Sex. Degenerate slaves, the bridge is fallen, Romes lost.
Valor. Horatius thou art stronger then their Hosts,
Thy strength is virtue, theirs are idle boastes.
Now save thy self and leap into the waves.

Hor. Porsenna, Tarquin, now wade past your depths,
And enter Rome, I seele my body sink
Beneath my pondrous weight, Rome is preserved,
And now farewell: for he that follows me
Must search the bottom of this raging stream^,
Fame with thy golden wings, renown my crest,
And Tiber take me on thy silver breast.

Exit. Por. He Is leapt off from the bridge and drowned himself.

Sext. You are deceived his spirits soars too hie
To be choakt in with the base element
Of water, lo he swims armd as he was,
Whilst all the army have dischargd their arrows.
Of which the shield upon his back stick full.
Shout and flourish. And hark the suit of all the multitude.
Now welcomes him a land, Horatius fame
Has chekt our armies with a general shame;
But come, to morrowes fortune must restore,
This scandal, which I of the Gods implore,

Por. Then we must find another time fair prince,
To scourge these people, and revenge your wrongs.
For this night i will betake me to my tent

A table and lights in the tent. Tarq. And we to ours, to morrow we will
renown
Our army with the spoil of a Rich-towne.

Exit Tarquin cum suis. Enter Secretary. Por. Our secretary.

Secret. My Lord.

Por. Command lights and torches in our tents.
Enter souldsers with torches. And let a Guard ingirt our safety rownd,
Whilst we debate, of military business: come sit and lets consult.

Enter Sceuola disguised. Sceu. Horatius, famous for defending Rome.
But we ha done naught worthy (...).
Nor of a Roman, I in this disguise
Have past the army and the puissant guard
Of king Porsen^a; this should be his tent
And in good time, now fate direct my strength
Against a king to free great Rome at length.

Secret. Oh I am slain, treason, treason.

Por. Villain what have thou done?

Secret. Why slain the king.

Por. What king?

Sce. Porsenna.

Por. Porsenna lives to see thee tortured,
With plagues more diuillish then the plague of hell.

Sceu. Oh too rash M^tius, have thou mist thy aim?
And thou base hand that did direct my poniard
Against a peasants breast, behold thy error
Thus I will punish, I will give thee freely
Unto the fire, nor will I wear a limb,
That with such (...) shall offend his Lord.

Por. What will the madman doe^

Sce. Porsenna so punish my hand thus, for not killing thee.
Three hundred noble lads beside my self
Have vowed to all the Gods that Patron Rome,
Thy ruin for supporting tyranny;
And though I fai^e, expect yet every hour,
When some strange fate thy fortunes will devour.

Por. Stay Roman, we admire thy constancy,
And scorn of fortune, go return to Rome,
We give thee life, and say the King Porsenna,
Whose life thou seek st is this honorable,
Pass freely, guard him to the walls of Rome,
And were we not so much ingadge to Tarquin,
We would not lift a hand against that nation that breeds such noble spirits.

Exit. Sce. Well I go, and for revenge take life even of my foe.

Por. Conduct him safely, what 300 Gallants
Sworn to our death, and all resolved like him!
We must be provident, to morrowes fortune
We Will prove for Tarquin, if they fail our hopes,
Peace shall be made with Rome, but first our secretary,
Shall have his due rights of funeral, then our shield
We must address next sor to morrowes field.

Exit. Enter Brutus, Horatius, Valerius, Collainte, Lucretius marching. Bru. By
thee we are consul, and still govern Rome,
Which but for thee, had bin dispoild and taken,
Made a confused heap of men and stones,
Swimming in blood and slaughter, dear Horatius
Thy noble picture shall be carved in brass,
And fixed (...) thy perpetual memory in our high capitol.

Hor. Great consul thanks, but leaving thislets march out of the city.
And once more bid them battle on the plains.

Vale. This day my soul divines we shall live free
From all the furious Tarquins: but where is Scenola? we se not him to day.
Enter Scenola. Here Lords behold me handlesse as you see,
The cause I mist P^rsonna in his tent,
And in his stead killed but his secretary.
The mazed King when he beheld me punish
My rash mistake, with loss of my right hand
Vnbegd and almost scornd he gave me life,
Which I had then refused, but in desire to venge fair Lucrece
Rape.

(Soft alarm. Hor. Dear Sc^nola thou have exceeded us in our resolve,
But will the Tarquins give us present battle?

Sceu. That may ye hear, the skirmish is begun already twixt the horse.


Lucre. Then noble consul lead our main battle on.

Bru. Oh Jove this day balance our cause, and let the innocent blood
Of Rape staind Lucrece crown with death and horror
The heads of all the Tarquins, see this day
In her cause do we consecrate our lives,
And in defense of Justice now march on:
I hear their martial music, be our shock
As terrible as are the meeting clouds
That break in thunder, yet our hopes are fair,
And this rough charge shall all our hopes repair.

Exeunt, Alarm, battle within. Enter Porsenna and Aruns. P^rsenna. Yet grow
our lofty plumes vnflagd with blood,
And yet sweet pleasure wantons in the air, how goes the battle Aruns?

Aruns. It Is even ballanct, I enterchang'd with Brutus hand to hand, a dangerous
encounter both are wounded, and had not the rude prease divided us, one had
dropped down to earth.


Por. It Was bravely fought, I saw the King your father free his person from
thousand Romans that begirt his state, where flying arrows thick as atoms hung
about his ears.

Aruns. I hope a glorious day, come Tuskan king, lets on the^.

Al^rum, enter Horatius and Valerius. Hor. Aruns stay that sword that late did
drink the consuls blood
Must with his keen phange tire upon my flesh, or this on ^ine.

Aruns. It sparde the consuls life to end thy days in a more glorious strife.


Vale. I stand against thee Tuscan.

P^rs. I for thee.

Hora. Where ere I find a Tarquin, he is for me.

Alarm, Fight, Aruns slain, Porsenna Expulst. Alarm, Enter Tarquin with an
arrow in his breast, Tu^ia with him, pursude by Collatine, Lucretius, Sceuola.

Tar. Fair Tullia leave me, save thy life by flight,
Since mine is desperate, behold I am wounded
Even to the death, there stays within my tent
A winged Iennet, mount his back and fly,
Live to revenge my death since I must die.

Tul. Had I the heart to tread upon the bulk
Of my dead father, and to see him slaughtered,
Only for love of Tarquin and a crown,
And shall I fear death more then loss of both?
No this is Tulliaes fame, rather then fly
From Tarquin, among a thousand swords she will die.

All, Hew them to pieces both.

Tar. My Tullia save, and ore my caitiue head those meteors wave.

Colla. Let Tullia yield then.

Tul. Yield me cuckold no mercy, I scorn let me the danger know.

Sceu. Upon them then.

Lucr. Lets bring them to their fate,
And let them perish in the peoples hate.

Tul. Fear not, I Will back thee husband.

Tar. But for thee, sweet were the hand that this chargd soul could free.
Life I diepise, let noble Sext^s stand
To avenge our death, even til these vitals end,
Scorning my own, this life will I defend.

Tul. And I Will sweet Tarquin to my power guard thine,
Come on you slaves and make this earth divine.

Alarm, Tarquin and Tullia slain. Alarm, Brutus all (...). Brut. Aruns this
crimsin favor for thy sake,
I Will wear upon my forehead maskt with blood
Till all the moistures in the Tarquins veins
Be spilt upon the earth and leave thy body
As dry as the parcht summer, burnt and scorcht with the canicular stars.

Hora. Aruns lies dead by this bright sword that's here about his head.

Colla. And see great consul, where the pride of Rome lies sunk and fallen.


Vale. Besides him lies the queen mangled and hewd amongst the Roman soldiers.


Hora. Lift up their slaughtered bodies, help to rear them against this hill
in view of all the camp, This sight will be a terror to the so, and make them
yield or fly.


Brut. But where is the rauisher, injurious Sextus that we see not him?

Short alarm, Enter Sextus. Sext. Through broken spears, cracked swords,
vnboweld steedes
Flaude armors, mangled limbs, and battered caskes,
Knee deep in blood, I ha pierct the Roman host to be my fathers rescue.

Hora. It Is too late, his mounting prid's sunk in the peoples hate.

Sex. My father, mother, brother, fortune now,
I do defy thee, I expose my self,
To horrid danger, saftie I despise,
I dare the worst of peril I am bound.
On till this pile of flesh be all one wound,

Vale. Begirt him Lord, this is the Rauisher.
There Is no revenge for Lucrece til he fall.

Lu. Cease Sextus then.

Sex. Sextus defies you all, yet will you give me language ere I (...):

Bru. Say on.

Sex. It Is not for mercy, for I scorn that life
That's given by any, and the more to ad
To your immense unmeasurable hate,
I was the spur unto my fathers (...),
It Was I that awde the Princes of the Land,
That made thee Brutus mad, these discontents,
I ravished the chaste Lucrece, Sextus I,
The daughter and thy wife, Brutus thy cosen.
Allide indeed to all, it was for my Rape,
Her constant hand ripped up her innocent breast, it was Sextus did all this.

(...). Which i will revenge.

Hor. Leave that to me.

Lucr. Old as I am i will do it.

Scenol. I have one hand yet left, of strength enough to kill a rau^sher.


Sex. Come all at once, I all: yet hear me Brutus, thou art Hon^rable.
And my words tend to thee: my father did
By many hands, what is he among you can challenge
The least I smallest honor in his death?
If I be killed amongst this hostile ^hrong
The poorest snakie soldier well may claim
As much renown in royal Sextus death,
As Brutus, thou, or thou Horatius.
I am to die, and more then die I cannot,
Rob not your selves of Honor in my death.
When the two mightiest spirits of Greece and Troy
Tugde for the mast^ie, Hector and Achilles,
Had pu^ssant Hector by Achilles hand,
Did in a single monomachie Achilles,
Had (...) the ^orthie, but being slain by ods,
The (...) (...) had as much honor
As saint Achilles in the Trojans death.

Br^t. Had thou not done a deed so execrable,
That Gods and men abhor, i would love thee Sextus,
And hug thee for this challenge breathed so freely:
Behold, I stand for Rome as General,
Thou of the Tarquins do alone survive,
The head of all these garboyles the chife actor
Of that black sin which we chastise by arms.
(...) Romans with your bright swords be our lists
And ring us in none dare to offend the Prince
By the least touch lest he incur our wrath:
This honor do your Consul, that his hand
may puni^h this arch mischief, that the times
Succeeding may of Brutus thus much ^ell,
By him pride, lust, and all the Tarquins fell.

Sext. To ravish Lucrece cuckold Collatine:
And spill the chasest blood that ever ran,
In any matrons veins, repents me not
So much as to ha wronged a gentleman
So noble as the Consul in this strife.
Brutus be bold, thou fightst with one scorns life.

Brut. And thou with one that less then his renown
Priseth his blood or Romes imperial crown

Alarm, a fierce fight with sword and target, then after pa^se and breath.
Brut. Sextus stand fair, much honor shall I winn^
To revenge Lucre^, and chastise thy sin.

Sext^ I repent nothing, may I live or die,
Though my blood fall, my spirit shall mount on hie.

Alarm, fight with single swords, and being (...) wounded and panting for
breath making a stroke at each togeher with their gantlets they fall. Hor. Both
slain: oh noble Brutus this thy fam^
To after ages shall survive, thy body
Shall have a fair and gorgious Sepulcher:
For whom the matrons shall in funeral black
Mourn twelve (...) moons, thou that first governed Rome,
And swaid the people by a consuls name.
These bodies of the Tarquins we will commit
Unto the funeral pile: you Collatine
Shall succeed Brutus, in the consuls place.
Whom wi^h this Laurel wreath we here relate
Crown him with a (...). Such is the peoples voice, accept it then.

Col. We do, and may our power so just appear
Rome may have peace, both with our love and fear.
But soft, what march is this?

Flourish P^rsenna, drum, Collatine and (...) Por. The (...) king, seeing the
(...) slain.
Thus armed and battelled offers peace to Rome.
To confirm which, we will give you present hostage
If you deny, we will stand upon our guard,
And by the force of arms, maintain our own

Val. After so much effusion and large wast
Of Roman blood the name of peace is welcome,
Since of the (...) none remain in Rome.
And (...) rape is now revenged at full.
Twere good to entertain (...) league.

Col. (...) we embrace whose royal presence.
Shall grace the Consul to the funeral pile.
March on to Rome, Jove (...) our guard and guide,
That has in us veng'd Rape and punished pride.

(...)
