Londini Emporia, OR Londons Mercatura.

Expressed in sundry Triumphs, Pageants and Shows, at the Inauguration of the
Right Honorable RALPH FREEMAN into the Maiorty of the Famous and far Renowned
City LONDON.

All the Charge and Expense of the laborious proiects, both by Water and Land,
being the sole undertaking of the Right Worshipful Company of the
Cloath-Workers

Written by THOMAS HEYWOOD.

-- Redeunt Spectacula. --
MY TRUST IS IN GOD ALONE.


Printed at London by Nicholas Oaks, 1633.

To the Right Honorable RALPH FREEMAN, Lord Mayor of this Renowned Metropolis
LONDON.
Right Honorable,
THE Triumphs and Sollemnities of this Day, are dedicated and devoted to this
your happy Inauguration, which as Time warranteth, so Custom confirms: And
herein has this City a Priority above any Metropolis in Europe: For Rome it
self when the Monarchy of the world was under her sole Jurisdiction, never
received her Praetor, Consul, or Dictator with the like Pomp and Sollemnity:
yet is it derived unto you from Antiquity, and I wish it may continue to all
Posterity. And Sir, for your own part I am not altogether unacquainted with
your Modesty, which would willingly have euaded this honorable trouble, but
now you find that the Condition of Honor is such, that it inquireth after him
who regards it not, courteth him that affects it not, and follows him
fastest who most flies it, as knowing that it is not the Place which makes
the Person, but the Person which makes the Place truly Honorable, which now
has invited you to your merit, howsoever against your minds, according to that
of the (...) her Lyui. Decad. Li^. 4^ (...) interdum non cupientibus su^t.
Ad^ising you withal (...) this your high Office and Calling, to observe the
necessary adjuncts thereto belonging, namely, Aff^bility with Authority and
with your Sword and Power, Commiseration and ^itty: Neither can I wish you a
better President to imitate then your Predecessor, of whom I may say, Semper
honos nomenque suum laudesque manebunt.
Not questioning but that we may speak the like of your self, and the two
worthy Gentlemen the Sheriffs, your Assistants, when Time, shall summon you to
resign your places to these which shall succeed you: And thus I humbly take my
leave of your Lordship, with this Sentence borrowed fr^^ Seneca, Bonum est
laudari, sed praestantius est esse laud (...).

Your Lordships Humbly devoted, THOMAS HEYWOOD.

LONDONS EMPORIA, OR MERCATVRA.
MErcatura, i. Merchandise, the Greeks call Emporia, and Empor^s a Merchant,
the Hebrews Meker. From hence (it seems) the Poets call Hermes (the Son of
Jupiter and Maia) Mercury, making him the God of Merchants and Merchandise. The
mystery whereof has in the ancient times been held glorious, and the
professors thereof illustrious as those, by whose Adventure and Industry
unknown Countries have been discovered, Friendship with foreign Princes
contracted, barbarous Nations to humane gentleness and courtesy reduced, and
all such useful commodities in foreign Climats abounding, and in their own
wanting, made conducible and frequent, nay, many of them have not been only
the Erectors of brave and goodly structures, but the Founders of great and
famous Cities: (for so says Plutarch in Solon) Merchandise it self, Lib. (...)
according to Aristotle, consists of three things, Navigations, Foeneration,
and Negotiation, all which are commendably approved, if considerately and
conscionably used.

Eight Offices of Piety are in a Merchant required. 1. Rectitudo conscientiae,
Uprightness of Conscience, which is most acceptable to the Creator, (and
therefore ought to be more prized by the Creature) then any vainglorious
Title: as styled by our best Theologists, the indulgent Mother of all Virtues
whatsoever. ^. Simulationis and dissimulationis seclusio, i. A seclusion or
separation from all dissembling or equivocation. 3. Fra^dem deuitare, i. To
abandon all fraud or deceit in bargaining, but in all Covenants and Contracts
to observe truth and irreprooueable fidelity. 4. Iustitiam exerceri, i. To
exercise Justice: which excludes the practice of Iuiury, Extortion, and
Oppression. 5. Superbiam deponere, To lay by all pride, for (as divine Plato
says) He who knows himself best, esteems of himself the least: We
read also in Socrates, that pride is a vice which of young men ought to be
carefully avoided, of old men utterly abiured, of all men suspected and feared.
6. Beneficientia vti, i. Out of his abundance to be open-handed unto all, but
especially unto the poor and indigent. 7. Au^ritiam fraenare, i. To bridle the
insatiate desire of getting, for the auaritious man wants as well what he
has, as what he has not: who has great travail in gathering Wealth, more
danger in keeping it, much Law in defending it, most torment in departing from
it. 8. Sollicitudines resecare, i. To renounce all care and trouble of mind,
which may hinder Divine contemplation, but rather to fix his thoughts upon
that Heavenly treasure which the Moath corrupts not, the Fire cannot waste,
nor the Sea wraeke: All these things desirable being known to be eminent in
your Lordship, was the maine inducement to entitle this present Show by this
apt Denomination, Londini Emporia: (...) lib. 1 ^. 1.
Further of Merchants we read Horace thus, Impiger extremos currit Mercator ad
Indos,
Per mare pauperiem fugiens, per saxa per ignes.
The Merchant to the farthest Indies flies,
Through seas, rocks, fires, lest Want should him surprise.


Concerning this Company of the Cloath-workers, none has been more ancient,
as claiming their place from the first institution, and though in count the
last of Twelve, yet eueryway equal with the first or any: the reasons are
pregnant, and briefly these: The Nobility of the Land are called Pares, (that
is) Peers. For their parity and equality, as having preualent voices in the
high Session, o^ Court of Parliament. The two famous Universities are equal
Sisters: neither can one claim priority above the other, yet because they
cannot be named at once, those of Cambridge say, Cambridge and Oxford: Those of
Oxford say, Oxford and Cambridge, which neither adds nor detracteth from the
other: In all numbers there is a compulsiue necessity of order, only for
method sake, not that we can properly say, this Figure in it self is better
then that, being all of them only helpers to make up an Account: since that
all the Lord Majors of this honorable City: (from which of the Twelve
Companies soever they be Elected) bear one Sword, receive one Power, and
retain like Authority: (There being no difference at all in place, office, or
in granting Privileges or Immunities etc.) I hold them all equal without
difference, or if any shall claim priority or precedence above the rest, let
it be conferred upon that which breeds the best Magistrates, and of this
Company have been these after named, not of the least Eminence, as Sir William
Heart, L. Mayor Anno 1559. Sir Rowland Hayward An. 1570. who was twice L. Mayor
at the least. Sir James Howell An. 1574. Sir Edward Osborne An. 1583. Thomas
Skinner, who dyed before he was Knighted, 1596. Sir John Spencer An. 1594. Sir
Michael Moseley 1599. Sir John Watts 1606. And now this present year 1633. the
Right Honorable Ralph Freeman: Neither is it the least Honor to this right
Worshipful Fraternity, that it pleased Royal King James, (of sacred memory)
besides diverse others of the Nobility, to enter into the freedom and
brotherhood of this Company.

Show water.
I come now to the first show by water which is a Sea-chariot, beautified and
adorned with shel-fishes of sundry fashion and splendour, the Fabric it self
being visible to all, needs not any expression from me. This Chariot of no
usual form or figure, is drawn by two Griffons.

The supporters to the Arms of this Worshipful Company: Those which ride upon
these commixt Birds and Beasts bearing staves with pendants falling from their
tops, in which are portray'd the Arms of the two Sheriffs now in place: The
speaker is Thamesis, or the Genius of the River Thames, increased to this
nauigable depth by the meeting of the Tame and Isis, he being seated in the
front of the Chariot with his water Nymphs clad in several colors about him,
seems asleep, but at the approach of the Lord Majors Barge, he rowzeth
himself as being newly wakend from a Dream, and speaks as follows.

The Speech by Water.
CAn Thamesis himself so far forget?
But it is so long since Tame and Isis met,
That it is not rare; for we two are grown old,
And being Rivers, subject to take cold:
Forced with extremity of pain to groan,
(...) River ^^at this ^^ne clin^^g by sun^^^ water^^gines.
As troubled with the gravel and the stone.
(Whole shelues are in our raines) but (Fates so please)
By Artists help we late have got some ease.
Thanks to our Patriots: O when I look
On you, I must acknowledge to a Brook
My River had been turned, had not your care
Been ever studious for our best welfare.
(My recollection help me) you are he
That up to Stanes and down as far as Lee,
Are my great Lord in chief; first then I bow To Stanes upward an^ down to
Lee, the L. Mayor com^mandeth the Thames.

To your Inauguration, and I now
Rowse me in my Sea Chariot, drawn or led
By your own Griffons: Birds, who have the head
Of Eagles, Lions body, wings beside,
All Symboles of that Praetor, who shall guide
So great a state; know further, Griffons can
Snatch from the Earth the harnest horse and man
To pray on them at pleasure, these imply
That you must always have an Eagles eye
To out gaze the Sun, and keep that Aquilant sight
To see what is wrong, and to distinguish right.
The Lions strength and boldness you must have
(With all his pity,) for to such as crave
Or yield unto him, aining themselves dying,
Scorning to kill, he will not touch them lying:
But such as strive or shall oppugn his laws,
He rends and tears them with his Kingly paws.
The wings your Griffons bear, import what speed
should be applied to such as justice need:
But why should I though best of Neptunes sons
(Whose stream almost by your permission runs)
Instruct him who can teach? since the last year
Till this day, never ran my Tides so clear
As now they do, were never so become
With Barges, Ensigns; Trumpets, Fyfe and Drum,
Me thinks you make me young again to view
Old customs kept, and (in them) all things new.
Though I by name of Thamesis ame known
My streams are yours, you welcome to your own,
Pass, and return safe, thus much on we build,
What Is on my Waters wanting Land shall yield.
^he first ^how by ^and.
THe first Show by Land, Presents it self in Paul's Churchyard, which is a
Shepherd grazing his flock upon an Hill adorned with several Trees, and
sundry sorts of Flowers, he fitteth upon a Dyall to which his sheepe-hooke is
the Gnomon, (a Symbol of his care and vigilance,) upon the same plat-forme
where his Sheep are resting in several postures, appears a Woolfe ready to
cease upon his prey, at whose presence though his Dog seem terrified and
flies for refuge to his master, yet he stands ready at all hours with a bold
spirit and wakefull eye, both for the defense of his charge and offense of the
common adversary the Woolfe, which reflecteth upon the office of the Praetor
this day Inaugurated wherein is expressed, not only the care he ought to have of
his flock, but of the profit also which arises from the fleece, from which
the mystery of the Cloath-Workers deriueth its Original. Pastor or Opilio in
the Roman tongue, and in ours a Shepherd: the Hebrews call Roheh, from which
some are of opinion Rex and Roy are derived, the Greeks call him Poimin, which
properly implies Ouium pastor or a f^eder of Sheep: to which charge none ought
to aspire who is not lawfully called, but this Shepherd enters by the Door
which is the voice of a free election, and is not that Mercinarius pastor of
whom it is thus spoken, He sees the Woolfe coming, and leaves the Sheep
and flleeth, etc. I shall not need to swell my pages by reciting the sundry
profits and emoluments arising from this most necessary Mystery, without which
no Common. Weal were able to subsist, nor to reckon up into how many several
Provinces and Countries this commodity of Cloth is transported and vended, nor
what several sorts of wares (by barter, and commerce) are in exchange of that
brought over into our own Kingdom, therefore to cut of circumstance, I
proceed to the Shepherds Speech as follows.

The Shepherds Speech.
IF a true Shepherd you desire to see,
Look this way, for he is embleam'd here in me:
But you grave Praetor raised to this high state,
He whom as now I only personate
The numerous throng, which you this day behold
Are your own Sheep, this City is their fold,
And by your grave descretion they shall best,
Know where to browze by day, by ^ight to rest.
As I, so you must on a Dial sit
Which has no Gno^on but my staff to it,
And such your Sword is now, your wakefull eye
Must still be open to watch where you can spy
The Ravenous Woolfe to press, and block the way,
Least he on any of your Flock should prey:
Although my Dog fly from him, who has binne
Rent with his pawe, and fears his horrid grinne,
Yet at all hours (you see) I ready stand
With armed heart, and Sheepe-hooke in my hand,
(So with your Sword must you) both with an hye
Undaunted Spirit, and with a Vigilant eye,
Least any e^^ious thorn, or schratching bryer,
May race their Skins, or on their Fleeces tyer,
And that your charge so carefully be borne
They may be never But in Season shorn:
Great reason too you have, for by this Trade,
(Of which Great Freeman, you first Free were made)
The whole Land's Cloth, no Mystery, no Art,
Science, or Manifacture, that has part
In Theory or Practick, but must all
Give due respect to this in general:
For since the Trade of Clothing first begun,
Both from the scorching of the summers Sun,
And blustering North-Winds, Rich, Poor, Young and Old
Have been defenc'd, nor could that Fleece of Gold
Colchos still boasts, (in the'Auncient Poets road
So useful pr^oue, or make so fine a thread
With ours, (low pris'd because not counted rare)
No remote Climat's able to compare:
It is that only Marchand Zewhich brings
All nouels wanting here, even foreign Kings
Have thought themselves Rich Habited to have worn
Such Cloth as for the commonnesse we scorn,
Oh bless then our increase, those that have been
In The Worlds remote parts, and strange Nations seen,
For want of Cloth find them go naked there,
Yet men like us, and the same Image bear,
Make much Sir of your great Charge, it is not mine,
Y' are the true Shepherd, I my place resigns.
THe second Show by Land, presented in the upper end of Cheape-side, ^he second
^how by ^and.
is a Ship most proper to the Trade of Merchant-aduenturers: neither know I
whom more aptly to employ as Pilot therein then Mercury, whom the Poets feign
not only to be Diactorus, or Internuntius betwixt the gods and men: as also
the Leader of the Graces, the Inuenter of Wrestling, the Deviser of Letters,
the Patron of Eloquence, etc. (From whence he has sundry attributes and
denominations conferred upon him) but he is also termed the god of Barter,
buying, selling, and com^merce in all Merchandise whatsoever.

We read of two only imployd by the gods in Embassy unto men, namely, Iris
and Mercury: The difference betwixt their employments is, that Iris (for the
most part commanded by Iun^, (as being her chief Attendant) and never by the
rest of the gods, vnless^ to foretell War, Famine, Pestilence, or some
strange Disaster: And Mercury was negotiated but in sports, pastimes, marriage
Feasts, sollemne meetings, Shows, Ouations, Triumphs, spectacles of the like
nature, and therefore more proper to this Days employment. He is figured like
a young man, fresh colored and beardlesse: In his right hand holding a Golden
Purse, in his left a Caduzcaem, (a Rod with two Snakes twined and internoded
about it,) their Heads meeting at the top, and their Tails at the bottom,
which the Egyptians held to be an Embleame of Peace: and in ancient days
Great men imployde in the affairs of State, or foreign Embassies, boar such
Staves, from whence they were called Caducaeatores: He wears Wings upon his
Hat and Heels, intimating his Celerity: and behind him stands a Cock,
denoting his Vigilance: so much for the person, I come now to his Speech.

Mercuries Speech
I Mercury, the Patron of all Trade,
Of Traffic and Commerce, am this day made
A speaker from the Gods: (for my quick motion
Can sail as well upon the Land as Ocean:
And who the Merchant better can assure,
Then Mercury, the Lord of Mercature?
To you, this Day with state and power endowed, Bowin^ the Lo^^ Maio^

Whose winged Ships all foreign Seas have plowed,
And mauger, surge, gust; or tempestuous flawe
Discovered what our Pole-starre never saw.
They from cold Arctos to the burning Zone
Have washed their keeles to find out lands unknown.
Crossing the Boreal and the Australl lines,
To view the set and rise of all the Signs.
To you whose Factors in both Indies lie,
The East and West: (all parts both far and nigh,)
^
(...) up, then down the Volga steer,
To k^^^ i^ Musco what is che^pe or dear:
And wh^^ Hespe^i^n Tagu^ can afford,
(To (...) this noble Island) take ab^^rd.
There Is nothing the brave Persian can ^old rare,
Bu^ his her brought by your great Cost and Care.
The potent Turk (although in faith adverse)
I^ p^^^d th^^ he with England can commerce.
What Genoua, Luca, Florence, Naples yeeldes,
What grows, or's found through all the Latian fields.
What is in China, Greece, or Ormous sold,
(That Diamond worthy to be set in Gold.)
For Norway, Danske, France, Spain, the Netherlands,
What Is best in them, comes frequent to our h^^ds.
And for transportage of some surplus ware,
(Our own wants furnished) what we best can spare.
No rarity for profit or for pleasure,
But brought to us in an abundant measure.
To this brave Isle, (by Neptune moared round)
You give a Wall; not fixed on any ground,
But moving 'tweene the Ocean and the Air,
Which as you build, (...) yearly you repair.
And (though a wooden Fabric) so well knit,
That should inua^^^^ force once menace it
With loud voic't Thunder, mixed with Sulpherous flame,
'Twould f^^ke, or send them back with fear and shame.
Compa^^ Motto (...) trust (...) God (...)
Grave Sir, (...) you need
To follow now, then him whom you succeede^
Next on your Motto think: so happy prove,
Let yo^^ (...) be in him that reigns above.
THe third Show by Land, ^hird (...) by (...)
is a Model devised for sport to humor the throng, who come rather to see
then to hear: And without some such intrude^ Anti-maske, many who carry their
ears in their eyes, will not stick to say^ I will not give a pin for the
Show. Since therefore it consists only in motion, agitation and action, and
these (expressed to the life) being apparently visible to all, in vain should
I employ a speaker, where I presuppose all his words would be drowned in noise
and laughter, I therefore pass to the fourth and last.

Which is a curious and neately framed Architect, beautified with many proper
and becoming Ornaments: The Show Land.
bearing the Title of The Bower of Bliss. An Embleame of that future
Happiness, which not only all just and upright Magistrates, but every good
man, of what condition or quality soever in the course of his life, especially
aims at: I dwell not on the description thereof, I will only illustrate the
purpose for the which it was intended: This Pageant is adorned with four
persons, which represent the four Cardinal virtues, which are behoouefull
unto all who enter into any eminent place or Office. Prudence, Temperance
Justice, and Fortitude, which are so concatinated amongst themselves that the
one cannot subsist without the other.

The first Prudence, Reformeth Abuses past, ordreth affairs present, and
fore-seeth dangers future: Further (as Cicero observes) Justice without
Prudence is resolved into Cruelty, Temperance into Fury, Fortitude into Tyranny.

Next Temperance, which as Hermes says, is Rich in losses: Confident in
perils, Prudent in assaults, and happy in it self. As a man cannot be
Temporate unless he be Prudent, so none can be truly valiant unless he be
Temperate, neither can Justice exist without Temperance -- since no man can be
truly just, who has not his breast free from all purturbations.

Then Justice (which according to Cicero) is the badge of Virtue, the staff of
Peace, the maintenance of Honor. Moreover, Justice and Order are the
preseruers of the Worlds peace, the just Magistrate is in his word Faithful,
in his thought sincere, in his heart Upright, without ^eare of any but God and
his Prince, without hate of any but the wicked and irregular.

Last Fortitude, which (as Epictetus observes) is the companion of Justice, and
never contendeth but in Rrighteous Actions, it contemns Peril, despises
Calamities, and conquers Death, briefly Fortitude without Pr^dence is but
Rashness, Prudence without Justice is but Craftines, Iuststice without
Temperanc^ but Tyrany, Temperance without Fortitude but Folly.

Amongst the rest of the Persons placed in this structure, are the three
Theological Virtues, Faith, Hope, and Charity, as hand-maides attending to
conduct all such pious and religious Magistrates, the way to the caelestiall
Bower of Bliss, (of which this is but a mere representation and ^igne) who
aim at that Glorious Place, leaft they anyway deuiate from the true path that
leads unto it. I proceed to the Speech.

Prudence the Speaker.
Grave Praetor, with your Censors, (Sheriffs elected,
And now in place) it is from you expected,
That having your Authority from Kings,
(And many hundred years since) all such things
As Custom (by Time strengthened) has made good,
You should maintain, withal your liuelyhood,
Which that you will perform, we doubt the less.
When we consider who is your patroness,
The Holy and blessed Virgin, (further) this
Fabric before you placed, The Bower of bliss.
If we to greater, less things may compare
These present, but the petty Symbols are
Of what is future; for bare Prudence here
P^^t and confined in humane knowledge, there
Shall be reduced to Wisdom that is Divine.
Tempe^ance (which is bare Abstinence) shall shine
In clarity immaculate: Justice, which
Often swayes the Balance so, that to the Rich
It most inclines, shall by an equal Scale,
(Lea^ing nor this, nor that way) so prevail,
That Right in glorious Star-wreaths shall be crowned,
And Injury in tenebrous Lethe drowned.
Brave Fortitude which chiefly does subsist
In opposition of the Antigonist,
(Whether that he the Bodies mortal state
Seek to supplant, or Soul in^idiate)
Shall stand impugnable, and thenceforth be
Fined and repur'd to all Eternity:
When you arrive at yo^ Caelestiall Tower,
Which aptly may be titled FRE^MANS Bower.
The way to find which, through these virtues lies
Called Cardinal: The stepps by which to rise,
These Graces show, Faith, Hope, and Love attend you:
Who on their unseen wings shall soon ascend you.
These (when all Earths pomp ^a^les) your prayers shall bring
Where Saints and Angels Haleluiahs sing.
I cannot without just taxation of ingratitude, omit to speak something of
this Worshipful company of the Cloth Workers, at whose sole charge the
Tryumphs of this day were celebrated, for the Master the Wardens and the
Committi, chosen to see all things accomodated for this business then in motion,
I cannot but much commend both for their affabillity and courtesy, especially
unto my self being at that time to them all a mere stranger, who when I read
my (then imperfect) Papers, were as able to judge of them, as attentively to
hear them, and rather iudicially considering all things, then nicely carping
at any thing, as willing to have them furthered for his honor, to whom they
are dedicate, as careful to see them performed to their own reputation and
credit, in both which, there was wanting in them neither encouragement nor
bounty: and as they were unwilling in any vain glory to show new presidents to
such that should succeed them, so they were loath out of parsimony to come
short of any who went before them, less I could not speak in modesty, and
more I forbear to utter least I might incur the imputation of flattery, I
come now to the twelve celestial Signs, which may aptly be applied unto the
twelve Months during the Lord Mayors government.

The Speech at Night.
Sleep may you soundly Sir, to morrow pressed
To a years trouble for this one nights rest,
In which may Stars and Planits all conspire,
To warm you so by their celestial Fire
Aries whose Gold-Fleece Greece does so renown
May both enrich you and this Glorious ^owne,
That Taurus in your strength may so appear,
You this great wieght may on your Shoulders bear:
Gemini
That the two Twins the Mothers blessed increase,
May in this City still continue peace.
That Cancer who incites to hate and spleen
May not in your fair Government be seen
That Leo waiting on your judgment seat
May moderate his rage and scorching heat,
Virgo
That the Celestial Maid may you advice
Virgins and Orphans still to patronize
And rather then your justice here should fail,
Libra no more be seen with Golden scale
And that the Scorpions sting may be so charmed
The poor may not be wronged, ^
nor innocent harmed,
That Chirons bent bow so may guide your will,
You may still aim, but never shoot to kill:
And Capricorn though all things said to dare
Though he have power, yet may have will to spare
That as Aquarius does his water power
You may your goodness on this City shower,
Pisces, the last of Twelve, the Feet they guide,
From Head to Foot, O may you so provide.
I conclude with the excellent Artist Mr. Gerald Chrismas, whose worth being
not to be questioned (as a prime Master in his profession,) I am of opinion
that there is not any about the town who can go beyond him, of whom I may
boldly speak, that as Art is an help to nature, so his experience ^s, and
has been an extention to the trial and perfection of Art, therefore let
every man in his way strive to be eminent, according to that of Ovid. 2 De pont.

Artibus ingenuis quaesita est gloria multis.
FINIS.

