A CONSOLATORIE EPISTLE TO THE AFFLICTED catholics, set forth by THOMAS HIDE
Priest.

Be strong, and take a Good heart unto you, al you that put your trust in our
lord.

Psalm. 30. printer's or publisher's device ECCE AGNVS DEI.


Imprinted at Louaine by John Maes, for John Lion. 1579.

WITH PRIVILEGE. Subsig. Strick.

The oven proves the potters vessel, so does temptation of trouble try the
righteous.

Eccles. 27. Our lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation, and
how to reserve the unjust to be ponished, at the day of judgment.

2. Pet. 2. You must suffer patiently, that you may be known to be his
disciples for whom you suffer.

Zepherin. epist.
A CONSOLATORIE EPISTLE.
IT is written, Math. ^
that Christ and his disciples went into a ship, when suddenly arose a
great tempest in the sea, so that the ship was covered with waves.
Christ slept. His disciples avvaked him and said, master save us, we
perish. Christ said unto them, why are you fearful, you of little faith?
Then he arose, rebuked the vvindes, and there followed a great calm. We must
so conceive of Christ's works, Grego^h mel 2 it cap. 18. Luc.
that we beleaue them to be don in verity, and to implie an other thing in
signification, to show one thing by power, and to signify an other in
mystery. It lacks not mystery, that Christ and his disciples went into a
ship, and that this ship was te^pested. You have heard de Christ's fact,
mark the mystery. Aug serno. 14. ^e verb Domini.
This ship resembled the church militant, wherein al christian passengers do
sail, and be tossed with tempests, whiles they drive toward their country,
the quiet haven of heaven, that is the church triumphant. The sea resembles
the course of the world, which is always troublous. And by the te^peste is
signified al such pressure, and persecution, as they must expecte, that follow
Christ into this ship. It was revealed to saint John the wel-beloued
Apostle of Christ, Apoc. 2.
that the church should have great persecution. Behold the devil shall cast
some of you into prison to be tempted, Beda in 2. ca. Ap^c.
and you shall have tribulation ten days. By the term of ten days is
signified, either the ten persecutions which the church suffered under the
Emperors, or else the whole tracte of troubles, which she shall endure in her
peregrinatio^. There has been no age of men, nor course of time sithe^ce
Christ, wherein this ship, (that is to say the militant church of Christ)
has not ben tempested. Psalm. 36
The ungodly drew out their svvorde, bente their bow to cast down the
simple, and to slaie such as goo the right way. These words of the prophet
were verefied after Christ's ascension, Augu in Psalm. ^9. Ruffin in Psalm. 36.
when there arose great tempests, to wit diverse persecutions against the
church, open persecution, and secret persecution, persecution violent, and
persecution fraudulent, persecution of tyranny, and persecution of heresy,
the one openly, the other secretly, the one by sword, the other by word. Of
these te^pestes, heresy was more contrarious to the church, August. tract 5.
in euang. Joan.
then tyranny. For heresy transformethe her self into the Angel of light,
proceadeth gilfullie, deceives the simple, strikes greuouselie with the
sword of the tongue, and shedeth blood cruelly, by killinge Christ in his
members. Tyra^nie deals not with scripture, not with drifte of learning, nor
by order of just proufes, but by cruelty, and dint of sword. Yet has the
church gained more by tyranny then by heresy, for tyranny makes martyrs,
heresy begets Apostats. Tertul. ^le praescrip c. 4.
Of them that persecuted the church with tyranny and heresy, they were most
ingrate and greatest persecutors, who being some time christians, and fallinge
from christianity, became professed enemies to the christian religion.
Theodor. ^ib. 4. c. 1
so was Valens the Emperor, who of a catholic became an Arian. so was
Iulianus, who borne of christian parents, and brought up by learned
christians, became Apostata. Eusebius li. 10. cap. 8
so was Licinius who of a christian, became a persecutor. Euagr. lib. 4. ca. 10.
There lacked not in this part, some number of the feminine tribe, to put to
their shrewde heads and helps, as Theodora, Iustina, Hiero. 4. ciesc.
Philomenes, Prisca, Maximilla, and Lucilla. It is not my final intention to
enlarge of persecution, nor of persecutors, but brefelie to show to the
persecuted catholics of our time, that if now they find al possible
oppressions under heresy and tyranny, it may not seem strainge unto them, if
they consider how Christ's ship was covered with the waves, how the church
has been persecuted eue^ from her infancy, and that she lacks not at this
time her Valentes, her Iulians, her Licinia^s, her Theodoras, her Iustinas, her
Lucinas. This point I will touch, a point not impertinent to note, why
Christ permits his church to be so sore tempted, and why the devil raised
so many blouddie battles of cruel persecutions, in the very prime of the
church. It is the corruption of our sinful nature, to forget our dutiful
service to God, when we be secure, and hold our desires in quiet. Grego.
homel. 17. in cap 4. Matthew.
We gase upon the gaie glitterings of the wanton world, we feed our
appetites with the delicate cherishinges of the flesh, so that our hearts
begine to be estrainged from God, and to leese the sense and feelinge of
godliness, until God send vexation, that gives understanding. When
prosperity had brought in liberty, and impunitie of sin corrupted
discipline, Eusebius. li. ^. cap. 1.
when christians declined from devout conversation, and committed great
disorders, God waxed angry, and sterred against the^, against their churches,
against there priests and pastors, the puissante power of persecutors, to
revenge his conceived anger. Cyprian de lap.
When long peace had corrupted Gods heavenly discipline, and fervor of
faith began to cool in the house of God, God began judgment in his own
house, and by severity of correction, erected faith that lay a sleep, and
as it were in contempt. Semblably God deals now with his people, knowinge
the lewsenes of their life, and saying the drines of their faith, he rayseth
up a great tempeste, wherein they be pitiouslie tossed, with many hurles of
the unquiet sea. Certes for many hundred years, the christian world, the
christian religion, the faith catholic, was not so mightelie shaken as it
has been in these later tempests of our times, when both violent and
fraudulent persecution have assaide even by penal laws, to raze out of
christian men's hearts, the general faith of Christ, and to persecute them
that further not such a special faith, as the spirit of the world teaches.

To you therefore (dearly beloved country men) to you that be afflicted
catholics for religion, in what case and place soever you be, I address this
consolatorie epistle, wherein my endeavor is to declare such comfortes, as the
self cause of religion seems to yield. Saying now the violent winds blow
and bluster not only against the kingedomes of the world, but against the
church that is the kingedome of god, and knowinge that they have shaken out of
the ship many, and to many lost christians, I offer unto you that yet
remain and suffer in the ship then co^fortes, even out of the body and
bosom of religion. I make common to you that suffer for religion such
co^fortes, as I labored to gain to my self in the great trobles of these
countries, wherein were used many mischeuous means to deface religion.

First the^ recognize you with me, why and for what cause you suffer. If you
suffer for any horrible fact, or enormious sin, the name of God is
blasphemed among you. 1. Pet. 4.
If you suffer for murder, theft, or sacrilege, you suffer with dishonor,
shame, and sin. If you be felons, there is an haulter, if you be traitors,
there is an axe, if you be heretics, there is a stake, faggot, and fire. But
the cause of your sufferinge is known, and by your known acts testified to
the majesty of the christian world. It is known, that you suffer as
christians for Christ's sake, that you suffer as catholics for the catholic
faith, and that you suffer as open christians, and co^fessant catholics. You
stood in the first front against the violent innovation of religion. You were
deprived of honors, of lordeshippes, of lands, and liuelehood. You have
sustained great and long affliction, you sustain yet disgrace, imprisonmet,
and banysheme^t. And why? is it a fault to be a christian? Is it sin to
confess the faith of Christ? or is it blame worthy to be a member of
Christ's catholic church? If you be christians, if you be catholics, if you
be afflicted christian catholics for the catholic religion, If (I say) when
you stand in these terms, there be no other cause why you suffer, then surely
you suffer directly, for the catholic cause. In the house of God there is no
cause more honorable, no cause more glorious, the^ the catholic cause. This
cause almighty God commended, when he commanded the world to hear his son
Christ. For this cause Christ came into the world, and he suffered more
tribulation, then any creature is able to suffer. Had there ben any cause more
noble then this, Christ would have chosen it, and suffered for it.

But there was no worn that made a more manifest show of true virtue, there
was no trial so far from al suspicion, as to suffer for religion. As Christ
has his saints in heaven that honor him in quiet love: so has he his
saints in earth, that honor him with troubled love. As there is in heaven
nothing more precious, the^ the glorious love of his saints: so is there in
earth no thing more acceptable, then the afflicted love of the just, who for
his love, suffer for his religion. If there be no creature, Aug de ciuit. Dei
lib 10. cap 1. Idem de spirit and lit. c. 61.
that serves God in rule of religion but man only, if religion be a service
propre to God, and be so called because the soul of man fallinge from God
through sin, rebindeth her self again to him by that service, and man ca^
show to God no other supreme service, nor sovereign honor but religion, then
surely it is religion that man has bound him self unto, and then is it
religious, (that is to say a matter of conscience) to keep that do^de, and
rather to suffer for it, then to incur Gods displeasure. Nor should any well
informed christian doubt, whether he might suffer for this cause, justice
takes away doubt, and to doubt is lack of faith, for faith doubts not
but that we should suffer, and Christian fortitude chooses rather to suffer,
the^ to lose piety. If good me^ have suffered torments for concealinge the
secrettes of their freindes, should not we suffer for co^seruinge the
sacraments of our faith? If evil me^ suffer for wro^ges don to the common
weal, shall not good me^ suffer for such rightes, as belo^ge to the church of
Christ? Many have died in co^battes whiles they adue^tured to help their
freindes, may we die for men's sake, and refuse to die for God? what should I
speak of the Gentiles, who sustained grievous pains in doubtful affairs,
only for vain glory? Should we christians refuse to suffer for verity,
what they sought to suffer, for vanity? I need say no more. Christ the
teacher of sufferaunce and humility, suffered all that he suffered, to make his
church glorious, and he suffered first to show example to us, to suffer
after. And after him so many glorious Martyrs, and members of his church
suffered for the common cause of the church, that now to suffer for the same,
it should not seem impertine^t to the duty of a christian. If now then (you
afflicted catholics) you suffer for this cause, (as in deed you suffer)
doubteles in this name you glorify god, in this name you honor God. And what
thanks deserve you now when you fear god, live in his laws, obey his
church, and choose rather to endure greefes, 2. Pet. 4*
to bear wro^ges for conscience sake to God, the^ to follow the gospel of the
world? It were no praise for you, if you suffered for your sins, but when
you suffer for that cause, which is justifiable to all the christian world,
which is commended of al good men, and approved of God him self, as Gods own
proper and personal cause, when now (I say) you suffer for that cause,
doubtless this is thank worthy of God. This cause is so importante, that none
can suffer for it, but by the gracious gift of God, and God geaueth this gift
to none, but to his special freindes. This joins you near unto God, causes
you to set less by the world, diminishes your pains in purgatory, and
increases your final reward in heaven. This is such a cause, as for the which
who so has not the gift to suffer, ought to seek it by prayer, and penance.
So long as you suffer for this cause, you have little cause to fear the power
of your mighty adversaries. Philip. 1.
What is to them cause of perdition, God vvil turn to your salvation. for
unto you it is given not only to believe in Christ, but to suffer also for
his sake. Mark the gift, and consider the grace. God that is the geauer of
gifts and graces, God that has called you to his eternal glory by Christ
Jesus, will make you perfect, 1. Pet. ^
will stre^gthen you, and establishe you, after you have suffered a little
affliction. In deed it is but little, Yet does it prepare unto you, 2. Cor. 4*
an exceeding and eternal weight of glory. For what seek you in this
sufferinge? Not to follow the laws of men, which be corrupt and crooked, but
to do the will of God, that is just and right. And for what suffer you? not for
felony or theft, not for murder or treason, not for heresy or sacrilege,
but for truth and justice, for unity and verity, for faith and religion.
You suffer not for vice, but for virtue, you suffer not for the things that be
temporal, but for the things which be eternal. Rejoice you constant
christians, rejoice you afflicted catholics, 1. Pet. 4.
You that be now pertakers of Christ's passion, shall rejoice much more at
the revelation of his glory. What Christ suffered in the bitter passage of
his death, he suffered as head, Augu in Psalm. 86.
it remained that he was to suffer in his members. Collos. 1.
You be his members. You fulfill that in your flesh, that lacked of his
passion, and you fulfill it for his body, which is the church. Christ
suffers no more in flesh wherein he ascended into heaven, but he suffers in
your flesh, which yet trauaileth on the earth. What lacked in the head,
August. in ps. 42.
is supplied in the members. And therefore you suffer as members of his body
for his body, which is the church, and you suffer for the trial of your
faith, which is tried to this end, that it might be found to honor when
Christ comes, in whom you believe, for whom you suffer, and by whom you shall
receive the end of your faith, even the salvation of your souls.

Saying then religion is the sovereign honor, 1. Pet. 1.
and the only supreme service that you owe to God, saying it is the most
glorious and honorable cause, for which you can suffer, respect of no
creature, love of no felicity, fear of no adversity, should withdraw you
from this cause. Love of parents and country, love of wife and children, love
of goods and honors, love of liuelehood and life, must give place to this.
They that for this cause forsake the temporal wealth of the world shall receive
the spiritual blessings of God our lord. This says our lord. Math. 19
Every man that forsakes his house, or his brothers, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands for my name sake, shall receive an
hundred fold. He promises more then this, to them that dye for his sake.
Math. 16
This says our lord. He that leeseth his life for me, shall find the same.
There be diversities of christian duties, diversities of honor, obedience, and
love. There is a love dew unto our parents, and this has his limitation. Who
so loves them above Christ, is not Christ's disciple, nay whosoever hates them
not for Christ, is not his disciple, and he that forsakes not al, and bears
not Christ's cross for Christ's sake, can not be his disciple. When faith is
called in question, Luc. 14.
when christians be conuented for religion, and Gods cause must be answered,
they be our mothers, they be our brothers, which do the will of our father in
heaven. Math. 12
If they believe in Christ, they must prefer us that fight for Christ, if
they believe not, let the dead bury the dead. Hiero. epist. 1.
There is a love dew unto our natural father, so long as he withdraws us
not from our heavenly father. We must not acknowledge any longer our parent
age, kindred, stock, or other creature, the^ they acknowledge God their
creator. Ide^ epist. 10.
Our parents may do what shall best like them of their goods and substance,
with our souls they have not to do. Our souls be not theirs by who^ we were
generate, but his, to whom we be regenerate. Ide^ epist. 1.
Though thy nephewe a little ladde and playnge boy hang about thy neck,
though thy mourninge mother with re^te hears and blubbered chekes show thee
her pappes wherewith she gave thee suck, though thy feeble father lie at thy
thresholde, pass by thy father, pass by thy mother with dry eyes, and hasten
to the cross of Christ, cruelty in this case, is the only kind of piety,
and piety for God, is no cruelty. Ide^ epist. 53.
There is an honor and obedience dew to princes and civil rulers of the world.
These duties also have their limitation. The children of Israel said unto
their ruler Iosue. Iosue 1.
As we have obeyed Moses, so vvil we obey thee, look only to this, that
our lord God be with thee, as he was with Moses. As who would say, we will
obey thee so long, as thou obeiest God, God is to be obeyed, and so is Iosue,
God before Iosue, God above Iosue, and rather God then Iosue. Daniel. 3
The children of Israel obeyed king Nabuchodonosor inal that he might
command by authority of a king. But when he proclaimed, that his subjects
should kneel down and adore his Idol, they denied that obedience. Daniel. 6
Daniel obeyed king darius in externe matters, but when the king gave out
edicte, that whosoever prayed to any other God but to him should be cast to the
lions, he forsook the court, entered his chamber, and there prayed thrice adaye
upon his knees. Likewise Mathathias said. 1. Macha. cap. 2.
We vvil obeie the law of our fathers, we vvil not harke^ unto the
commandments of the king. Was it not objected to Christ's Apostles, that
they contraried the senate and counselers? and thereunto S. Peter made this
brief Apology. Act. 5.
We must obey God rather then men. Eusebius. hist. li. 4. cap. 15.
What time the holy man and blessed Martyr saint Policarpe was brought
before the proconsul, and required to swear to Caesar, and to revile Christ,
he made this answer. I have served Christ four score years and six, and to
this day Christ never injured me, nor did ought, why I should revile him. My
self am a Christian, and we christians be taught to give to princes, and
seculer powers such honor, as is not contrary to our religion. In these
duties then, this is the limitation, our sovereign love, honor, and
obedience, is dew only to god, and these may be done with out dishonor or
prejudice to princes, as the children of Israel did, as Daniel did, as
Mathathias did, as the Apostles did, as saint Polycarpe did, who obeyed God,
and men, but rather God then men, who gave to Caesar what belonged to Caesar, and
to God what belonged to God. Kings, princes, and pote^tates of the world, be
the servants of God, God is their master, we may not obeie the servant
against the master. Aug. 11. quaest. qui resist.
When inferior authority commands what we should not do, we must refuse
that authority, and fear the superior power. If the Emperor command one
thing, and God an other, he must pardon us, though we obeie not, he
threateneth prison, God threateneth hell. In Gods cause, we must obeie God and
not me^, when men be contrary to God, nor should we therefore be called
disobedient subjects, or discontented persons, if in Gods matters we
prefer God, before men. This is the scope I leauel at, that our sovereign
obedience, must be to God in all duties without exception, and that in the
house of God, there is no greater cause nor greater obedience, then to suffer
for the love of God. Saint Paul enflamed with this love, and with the zeal
of Gods house, bras^e out these words. Who shall separat us from the love of
God, Romans ^.
shall tribulation or anguishe, or persecution, or honger, or nakedness, or
peril, or svvorde? I am sure that neither death, nor life, neither angels,
nor rule, nor power, neither things present, nor things to come, nor high,
nor low, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us, from the love of
God. What sterred up the stout standinge of the Confessors, the blouddye
battle of the Martyrs, the chaste combat of the virgins, but the love of
Gods house? This moved s. Athanasius that holy co^fessor to say, Eusebius.
hist. li. 10 cap. 34.
let us go to meet with our persecutor, that he may perceive how much greater
the power of him is that defends us, then the power of him that persecuteh
us. This moved that courageous captain and glorious Martyr. Basil in Cord.
Mart.
S. Gordius when he was exhorted to keep his faith secret in his heart, and
to deny it with his mouth, ope^lie to say, cord credimus, we believe in
heart to justice, and confess with mouth to salvation, God is my helper, I
fear not what man ca^ do. That noble woman, and holy martyr S. Iulitta,
Basil ser. in Iulit.
complained to the judge of injuries do^ne unto her, sought for justice at his
hands. His answer was, that nor she nor any such as she was (which adored
not the emperors gods, which were not of the Emperors religion,) should
expecte justice, or plead wrong. Why then (said she) I have done, farewell my
living, adewe my life. Consider you now, you afflicted catholics that God
makes you worthy to suffer for his love, and to render your supreme obedience
to his holy name, wherein you have to comfort your selves, that God reputeth
you for his freindes, for to his freindes he gives this special gift. You
suffer wrongs, you sustain the princes indignation, you bear the displeasure
of the magistrates for your obedience to gods church. This point you choose
not, and gladlye would you have it otherwise. But if you choose it for pieties
sake, your choice, is justifiable. S. Basil in the like case made this answer.
Theodo. lib. 4. cap. 17.
Of the emperors fre^dshippe favor and furthera^ce, I do well esteem so long
as it is joined with godliness, without that I hold it pernicious. It was said
to Maris a devout clerk, be of the Emperors religion, and he will make thee
an Arche bishope. I may not so be said he, least I offend God that is my
Emperor. His promotion I will not take, because he is not of my religion.

Math. 18
This is our lords lesson, Let him be unto thee as an heathen and publican,
that hears not the church. As the heathen which never came to the faith
perishes: so does the heritike that has forsaken the faith. Out of the
church no religion can serve, no faith can save. he that is found out of the
church, is a stranger from the children of God. Nor ca^ he have God for his
father, Aug. li 4 de sym. cap. 10.
that has not the church for his mother. O you trobeled christians, and you
afflicted catholics, behold, here have you many great and ghostly
comfortes to consider. For what seek you, when you suffer for the church?
Nothing (I wene) but what the self cause requires, to wit, that you do the
will of our lord, which you be sure to find in his church. For of his church
our lord said, Esaiae 62
Thou shall be called a city sought for, and not forsaken. In his church you
can not be deceived of his will, for in his church he is always resiant, and
therefore is his church called, Ezech. 48
Dominus ibidem, Our lord is therein. Note here what tempests and trobles the
church has had. The church has been laid at, and shaken from every part,
and quarter of the world. The Archeheretikes of each part, men of condemned
memory, gave the first onset with violent shot of tongues, and al possible
policy of pen. The crooked crewe of their ungracious of spring put to
their batteries, and shaked the weak walls of them, that were not fast in
faith. The ship now tottered, the ship now was tossed with many
contrarious winds. Many were shaken in the ship, and al made wrecke, that
kept not within bourde. The sterrers of this tempest were fraudulente
persecutors, who could temper their tale in such wise, cover their
hypocrisy with so lively colors, that they obtained credit of good natures.
Tertul. de praescript. cap 7.
To such men it is agreinge to rack the scriptures, to corrupt the fathers,
and with sweet words to tole and baet the readers that see not the hook of
falsehood, wherewith they choke them. Ambr de fide cr^h. contra Arian. cap. 1.
Because these mismeaninge men, have in outward show many points common with
the catholics, they intrappe incircu^specte readers, and infecte the simple
beleauers, as it were with one drop of poison, among many soft and sugered
words. And heresy has been always accompanied with tyranny, that uses
worldly wisdom and pestile^te policy to further her proceadinges. Yet
could neither of these proceed so far hitherto, as to put out the catholic
name. Theodo. li. 3. c. 15
They used many subtle sleightes with the catholics, as Iulianus used, when he
bid his soldiers (that would receive their pay) cast frankensence into the
fire, Eusebius. li. 5. ca. 27.
as Theodotus used, when he offered a byshoprike to Natalius, Theod li. 4 cap.
17
as Modestus used, when he went about to persuade Basil to yield to the time,
and to use the favor of the Emperor. But fair means, finenesse, and
flattery could not prevail against the fast, firm, and well understanding
catholic. foul means, cruelty and violence lacked not, Eusebius li. 8. cap. 3.
contempt, disgrace, indignities, abasement were added. Aulters were rased,
churches destroyed, Euag. li. 4 cap. 4. Sezom. li. 5. c. 17.
priests deprived, catholics injured by imprisonmentes and torments. Then
were not catholics permitted to bear office in the common weal, only
because they were catholics. Theodorus lib. 4 cap. 1.
Now were al factions and fashions of pretended religions suffered to make
their asse^bles, and openly to use their religion, but only the catholic.
Now were bishopes and priests compelled out of their churches, spoiled of
their goods, and called before lay judges. Now were the priso^s replenished
with christians that were not suffered to be releaued, such was the mercelesse
tyranny of the persecutors. Certs these were great te^pestes, these were both
fraudulent, and violent persecutions, yet did not these prevail. And why?
Dominus ibidem. Though now the world like the bublinge sea boyie and break
out his force, though the potentates of the world execute their furye
against you, fear you not, fail you not, fainte you not, you I say that
sail in the ship which now is tempested with contrarious winds, fear you
not, our lord is with you, you be safe, Dominus ibidem. Asee, who is that
lord by whom you be governed in this ship. Ambr. lib. de Sal. ca. 4
Christ the son of God is hopsted into the mast of the ship, that is on the
cross. God the father governs the hinder part, the holy ghost sits in
the foreparte. There be xij. roers in this ship, to wit the twelve Apostles,
and these drive forward the ship, bringinge her through the straightes of
this troblesom sea into the quiet port. Aug ser. 14. de verb. de.
Christ our lord that prayed for his church, does still pray. Though this
ship be tossed, yet can she not be drowned, because Christ prays. Chrysos.
ho. 24 in 1. Math. oper. imperf.
Though this ship be shaken with the violent winds of seculer atte^ptes,
yet is she safe from wrack, because Christ governs. And the holy ghost
our lord, that sits in the fore part of the ship, strengthens al such
as be windeshake^, the holy ghost dilateth the hearts of the^, that be in
tribulation. When Christ told his disciples that they should be accused,
Math. 10
conuented, and reviled, for his names sake, he told the^ also that he would
not leave them comfortless. I vvil send you a comfortor. Joan. 15.
This comfortor gave them strength to bear all that the malice of the world,
was able to lay upon the^. It came to pass as Christ foretold, they were
cast out, conuented, and reviled. did they grudge at it, did they murmr for
it? Act. 5.
The story says, They went out from the counsel house reioysinge, that
they were vvorthie to suffer reuiles for the name of Jesus. Act. 16.
Paulus and Silas were put in prison, and vvhipped cruelly, they did not
repine, the story says? They sange at midnighte, praienge and praisinge our
lord. This joy in this correction, this iocunditie of spirit in this
tribulation, came of the holy ghost, that sits at the foreparte of the
ship, and gives comfort in all tempests and tribulations. This promise of
comfort extended not only to Christ's disciples, but in them to their
ofspringe, and to the whole corpse of Christ's church whersoeuer it be scatered
in dispersion. Who emboldened the persecuted Christians, to stand in the
confession of their faith so constantly, to profess their religion so
confidentlie, even to the face of the tyrannes, when they made these stout
asseuerations? Ego Christianus sum. I am a christian. Hila lib. co^t. Co^st.
Catholicus sum, I am a catholic. Arianus non sum, I am not an Arian.
Haereticus esse nolo, I will not be an heretic. They were nickenamed, Tripart.
lib. 6. c. 7 Hist. eccl. lib. 5 c. 16
called men of Galile, called Homousions and murderers of Prophets. The tyran
exclamed against them. Ad bestias, away with these wretched christians, away
with them, send them to the beasts, have them to the lions, hale them to the
leopardes, away with these naughty wretches to the mines, let them dig
metalles.

Now were these miserable men sent ad campum Martyru^, where they were done to
death. Now did the cutthrotes scour their swords, in the bowels of the
christians. Now did the bloud-suckers dyp and wash their hands, in the
bloudde of the saints. Who now did comfort them, who now did strengthen
them, but the holy ghost, that governs the foreparte of the ship, and
comfort the windeshake^ in all tempests and tribulation. To cast a little
more to this, this comfort has well appeared in these latter persecutions of
our times. What halteringe, what hanginge, what hewinge down of christians,
what murderinge, what quateringe, what martyringe of catholics has there ben,
since the party protestant began his new no gospel? What mischeuous
machinations have the sectaries practiced, to underprop their ruinous
religion? What lamentable tragedies have they made, that now shake so
mightelie the whole frame of Christ's faith? And yet notwithstanding al
their possible oppressions, al their pernicious plottes, faith endures, the
church stands, the catholic increases. And of this you that be in this
storm tottered and tossed, do see what you comfort your selves in. As there
be many in many quarters of our country, that suffer for the catholic
cause: so be there many that be brought by their sufferinge, to know the
catholic name, to enquire of the catholic church, and to learn to confess
the catholic faith. Yea there be many that never knew the catholic
religion, which now in the common trobles of catholics come unto it, receive
it, believe it, and suffer for it. It may be presumed by common intendement,
that there is not left among you any number of the catholic race. In deed it
is rather miraculous then marvelous there should be any, consideringe there has
not ben for some number of years any outward face, any open exercise of the
catholic faith, consideringe there is no place, where catholics be not pried
for, apprehended and imprisoned, no prison so vile where they be not harbored,
yea those places which were ordained for theifes, murderers, bankeroutes,
heretics, and treitors, be made the lodginges of holy fathers, of reverend
bishopes, of priests, of gentlemen, and gentlewome^, finally co^sideringe the
laws of the realm be against the catholics, and that catholics be
deprived, spoiled, hated, disgraced, persecuted, and some of them executed.
Notwithstanding all this, Gods church has her faitheful flock, that
confesses the catholic truth openly, maugre the devil, heresy, and
tyranny. And hot withsta^dinge al worldelie disgraces, ouertwhartes, injuries,
persecution, and execution, yet is there left some good number, that never
bowed their knees to Baal, never received the breaded communion, neither went
to the schismatical service. Yea some number that be ready to render their
goods to the world, and their souls to God, as willinge in this quarrel to
dye, as to live. Blessed be the name of God that has raised a catholic
youth, to supplye the ruful ruin of them, which have perished with Chore,
Dathan, and Abiro^. It is the blessed will of God, that the glory of his
militant church should multiply in persecution, should increase under
oppression, and that out of the blood of one catholic sufferinge death for
Christ, should arise many holy christians. The blood of the martyrs (says
S. Cypria^) is the seade of the church, whereof arise and encrese mo, as of the
seed in the field springs new corn. The church was among the Israelites
when they lay under the cruel bondage of Pharao, and of them it is written,
Exodus 1.
The more they were oppressed, the more they increased. Act. 8.
The church was but a little flock, when the first persecution began at
Jerusalem, and yet there of Christ's gospel spread mightelie. It is Gods
gracious gift, that his church should prosper, when she is persecuted. Hila.
de Triniitate lib 7.
When she is oppressed then she is increased, when she is injured, then she
ouercometh, even then she co^quereth, when she seems to be ouercomed. The
church is like the palm tree, the greater weight is laid on it, the brother
it spreads. The church is like camomil, the more you tread on it, the
thicker it waxes. It is written of the persecuted. Aug. de ciuitate lib. 22.
cap. 6.
They were imprisoned, tied in chains, whipped, killed, and torn in pieces,
yet they increased. The story mentions of a notable woman, who hearing that
many christians should be put to death, took her child in her arms, ran
to profess her faith, and to dye with them. The officer meetinge her,
demanded whither she went, she told, him to the place of the christians. Why
(said he) they shall be al put to death. And I goo (quoth she) to dye with
them. But why (said he) do thou carye thy child with thee? she answered my
child shall take such part, as the mother does. You that be now te^pested in
the ship of Christ, you that bear affliction for the church of Christ,
abide in the ship, leap not out, be not tipte over bourde, your governors
be sure, skilful, and sufficient to save you in all te^pestes, your twelve
roers will drive you into a safe port, where no malice of man, nor machination
of devil, shall ouertrowe you. You have the help of God the father, that
governs, you have the promise of Christ his son, that prays, you have
the comfort of the holy ghost, that strengthens. God the father helps
you, god the son prays for you, God the holy ghost strengthens you. The
holy Trinity in one deity governs you, and will not leave to give you grace
and fortitude to endure what affliction so ever, for the glory of his holy
name.

Furthermore it should be to you no little comfort, to recognize the manifold
benefits, and blessings of God, which you enjoy, whiles you keep your selves
within the ship of Christ. Christ has but one ship, that is one church,
one in unity of faith, one in unity of profession, one in unity of
sacraments, one in unity of head. They that be not of this one church of
this one faith, under this one head, enjoy not the healpe of the father,
enjoy not the prayer of the son, nor the assistance of the holy ghost. To
be of Christ's church, in Christ's unity, is of such importance, that a
constant christian should rather chose to die, the^ to aparte from it. It is
no less glory to suffer martyrdom for the conservation of unity, the^ it
is, Hist. eccl. li. 6. c. 34
not to offer to idolles, yea rather it is a greater martyrdom, for in the
one, each man suffers for him self, in the other each man suffers for
the whole church. Now then you that be in unity, suffer for this unity, and
chrise happy be you, who^ god makes worthy so to suffer. They that forsake
the general faith of Christ's church, and trust to some one article, leap
out of the ship, and seem to catch at a little bourde there of. The beleuinge
of any one article will not save us, the not beleuinge of any one, will condemn
us. They that forsake antiquity, universality, consent, and unity, enter
into the streams of schism, drive at the rock of heresy, whiuer up and
down at every blaste of doctrine, and populer flaterie, and shall never find
place of rest, or quiet port to arrive. Behold, in how many great perilles
they be, whom this trobelous storm has shaken out of the ship. Do they not
endomage, and hasarde their souls, when they enter into schism, and ro^ne out
of schism into heresy? As by schism they bereue them selves of charity: so
by heresy they bereue the^ selves of faith. How can they separat from the
body, but they aparte also from the head? They can hardly dismember them
selves from the church, and firmly hold the right faith, saying faith is
the gift of God, that flows from Christ as from the head, into his body
and me^bres. An easy leap it is out of schism into heresy, and as easy to
proceed from heresy to Apostasy, for in heresy there is no stop, nor
stay. Scantly shall you find an opinatiue head that falls into one
heresy, but slideth from point to point into a multitude, until he dislike
every point of the catholic faith, which point perdie is plain Apostasy.
And the^ from Apostasy into Atheism, and Epicurisme, the way is made plain.
As then it ca^ not but comfort you to conceive, that you keep with in the
ship, out of schism in unity: so it cannot but recomforte you, that you be
under unity of head, in unity of faith, that faith which Christ preached,
that faith which his Apostles received, that faith which the christian world
believes, that faith which our forefathers lived in, even that Catholic
Roman faith which now you live in, and for which you suffer. Of this faith
you have the right sense and felinge, when you hold Christ in the
foundation, when you confess the substance of Christ's doctrine understood
by that holy spirit, which first penned it. Great is the obedience of your
faith, in all doctrines, in all sacraments, in all articles, and in all
Apostolic and churchelie traditions. In obedience of this faith, you believe
that Christ's word is Christ's work, and that by the mighty power of his
word, he is made present with you, and gives remission and grace. In
obedience of this faith, you pray unto Christ's saints in heaven, you pray
for Christian souls in purgatory, that they may pray for you in heaven. In
obedience of this faith, you ground your hope, that God will not leave
unrewarded your prayers, your penance, your fastinges, your alms, nor any good
work else what soever. When you suffer now for the general faith of Christ,
you suffer for every point, that christian justice binds you to confess.
And this is a full confession of the faith catholic, wherein you have to
acknowledge the blessings of God, that makes you worthy to suffer for
faith, in obedience of faith, for unity, in unity, for charity in verity.
And here upon have you to muse and meditate, when greefes recurre, that you
suffer for the church of Christ, and for the faith of Christ with Christ,
that suffered paineful death, to make his church glorious. They that be not
of this church, and of this faith, be whithoute charity, Aug. li. 2 con.
Crescon c. 13
nor can they be pertakers of Gods charity, which be enemies of his unity.
Though they receive the sacrament of faith, though their faith be whole
and sound, it does not avail them, so long as soundnes of charity, is
killed with the dedlie wound of schism, Idem lib. 1. contra D^n. cap. 8. Ide^
tract. 19. in euang. Joan.
by whose only death, what ever things be sound of them selves, be drawn
to death. And schismatikes may do good works, but good works do not
profit them. Though they pray, though they fast, though they give alms,
though they live continent, though they keep virginity, al does not help,
al does not profit, because they break unity. Put to this, so long as they
be divided from Christ's church, they receive not the life of his holy
spirit, for out of his church his holy spirit gives not life.

The church is the mystical body of Christ, they must be of his body, that
will live of his spirit. Gregor. expla. 5. Psalm. paenitent.
Heretics live not of his spirit, schismatikes live not of his spirit,
excommunicat persons live not of his spirit, and why? Because they be not of
his body. What life the^ have they? they have the life of their bodies, but
lack the life of their souls. they live in their flesh, and die in their
spirit, they die alive. they live without faith, without charity, without
church, without altar, without priest, without sacrifice, without God.
Consider then the lamentable loss of them that be leapte out of the ship
now in the time of this tempeste. Consider the damage and dainger of them,
which dismember them selves from Christ and his church. Schism bereueth them
of unity and charity, schism seperareth them from Christ and his church,
schism joins the^ to the synagoge of the devil, schism spoyleth them of
sanctification and grace. And where there is a communion of prayers, and of al
good works common to them that be united in Christ, schism bereueth the^ of
the fruit of al prayers, of al good works, and of al sacrifices, finally
schism excludes them from heaven, and leads the^ to hell. Behold, you that
be of one unity in the house of God, behold, what they lose by schism, and
see what you gain by unity. You (I say) that be in the ship of Christ,
you that be confessant catholics, al you that suffer for the catholic unity,
let your comfortes increase to understand these blessings of God, to wit that
you be of one faith, of one charity, of one church, of one unity, under one
head, that you be of the communion of saints, that you be pertakers of
sanctification, of remission and grace, that you be pertakers of al good works
done in the whole christian world, of al sacrifices, of al prayers, of al
penance, of al fastinges, and of what else soever be done in the universal
church of Christ, and that in the end, you be sure to be pertakers of
Christ's death and merits, which is all that you labor for, when now you
bear the cross of Christ. And for what thing soever God permits you
presently to bear his cross, (his judgments be secret,) in effect you
suffer on the cross, which thing must be your comfort. For if you suffer for
your sins, you suffer upon the cross of the good thief. If you suffer for
justice sake (as sufferinge for religion you can not but suffer for justice)
then may you take more comfort thereof, because you suffer upon Christ's own
cross.

And what if the professed enemies of the church nickename you? What if they
revile you? yea what if they hate you? The conjunction of souls united in God,
the dislikinge of spirits aparted from God is such, Cypr. ad Quir. de^ lib. 1.
pist. 3. ib. 4. pist. 2.
that their can be no entier likinge, nor louinge alia^ce between faith and
infidelity, truth and falsehood, light and darkness, Antechriste and
Christ. They that break charity, will not like of you that keep unity, nor
will they commend you, that be gone from you. The devil (that is auctor of
division,) is always sterringe against the united members of Christ. It is
his trick to blemishe and abase, to infame and obscure the glorious name of
the^, that be of better note and conversation, to the end they might find
less reputation, among the children of the world. Porphirius was a reuiler
of christians, Hist. eccl. lib 6. cap. 16.
and a rayler at their religion. when he could not find ought that he might
justly reprehende in Origenes commentaries, he began to nickename him, and to
raise at his person. In like manner does the party protestante, mislikinge with
the catholic cause, and with the catholic only for the cause, being
insufficie^te to answer their matter, nickename their persons, that they
might make them odious by reprocheful names, and false intended crimes. What
ado make they, when they chapter (as they do co^monlie,) upon the names of
Rome, pope and papiste? How rappe they out their railinge rhetorike, when
they hear the consented doctrine of Christ's church alleged? As they
discourse smothelie, and make a populer show of sugered words conningelie, so
yet when al is said, the sum of their drifte is, to make their rouinge
advantage, upon the names of Rome, Pope, and papistrie. And what else do they
say in substance against the believed doctrines of the church, but that the
beleuers be papists, and the doctrines papistrie. As it may be, that a good
natured man would shonne a contumelious speech: so it should not grieve a right
informed catholic that lives in the fear of God, and in the faith of Gods
church, to be reproched by the ungodly, which have no fear, nor faith, no
remorse what God sees, nor what the world says. As for the names of
papiste, and papistrie, they bring in deed with them a prejudice among the
children of the world, and were invented by the first founders of the fifth
gospel, to bring religion in contempt, and to make the catholic odious,
whereas in truth these names be not infamous by diriuation, but by calumnious
interpretation. It should not greatly move an understanding christian, to be
called papiste, for if he consider a principal ground of our christianity, he
can not be a saved christian, that is not a pure papiste. In the beginning of
the gospel, Chrisost. ^o. 3. in ^ict. Apost habent eunde^ spirit. 2. Cor. 4.
christians began to be odious, even then they were reviled, mocked, called
fools, and witless folk, because they followed Christ. Even then they were
spoiled, and all that would injury the^, might make their pray of them. It
may come to pass again in the revolution of a few years, that the name of a
christian, will be as odious with the Machiauelian, that uses religion but for
a polecie, as now is the name of papiste with the protestante, that is
indifferent to any religion. As odious was the christian name some number of
years after Christ, as now is the name of papiste, and as much malice did
the enemies of christianity work against the known christians, whom they
called scoffinglie Christicolas, to wit worshipers of Christ, as now the
enemies of Christ's church work against the catholics, who^ they call
odiouslie Papistas, to wit such as show their obedience to the pope, that is
Christ's vicar, Peter's successor, the high preeste, and head bishop of the
whole christian world. You be the children of the church, you be the children
of unity, if you be nickenamed for duties sake where dewtie is dew, that is
out of course, and blame worthy in the^, that so name you. But the case
being as it is remediless, the servants of Christ must hold them selves
co^tente to suffer terms, and tauntes, raylinges, and reproaches, saying
Christ their lord and master, could not escape them. Math. 11
Was not Christ reviled with opprobrious words, importinge shame and sin?
Was he not said to be a freinde to publicans and sinners? Was he not called
Samaritan? and albeit there was never found in him excess, yet they called
him a wine bibber, and a man of meat above measure. Yea they left not his
divine works untouched, in them also they said he wroughte by a devil, and
the prince of diuelles. Math. 9. and 12.
When they could not abide his doctrine, for his doctrines sake, they glaunced
at his person. It can not be defended but you be sinners. But what sin is
implied in the name of papiste? Doubtless none at al, but that under this name,
they would make odious not only your persons, but your faith and
religion, which is that only religion and faith, of whose communion whosoever
be not, be not of Christ's faith, and communion. Among us that be in
banisheme^te, it is counted more irksome in these rebellious attemptes, to be
forced from country to country, from state to state, to be sacked, to find
penury, and in every part to see a fearful face of misery, then to hear a
few syllables, and them not of ill sound another, if they be well taken. Words
be often as they be taken, and as the minds of the^ be, that speak them. S.
Peter and the devil used like words, August. tract 6. in epist. Joan. Joan. 18.
when both confessed Christ to be the son of God. Christ asked the Jews
for who^ they sought, they answered, for Jesus of Nazareth. Their words were
good, their meaning ill. The Jews mocked Christ, when they saluted him thus,
Aue rex iudaeorum. Math. 27
The christians honor him with the same words, when they knele down and say,
Aue rex, etc. Words that may have good meaning, should not offe^de good
meaning me^, though miscrea^tes misco^stre the^. Should we not abide the
word Galilaea, Triper. li. 6. cap. 7.
for that Iulianus Apostata cast out a tauntinge blasphemy against Christ,
what time he cried out vicisti Galilaee, thou of Galilee have ouercomed? Or
because he called the christians, men of Galilee? Triper li. 6. ca. 32.
Should we have less reverent opinion of Christ, because that unhappy man
Felix treaseror to Iulianus, called Christ Mary's son, vsinge these words?
Ecce quibus vasis Mariae filio ministratur. Asee in what vessels they serve
Mary's son. Or should we forsake the faith of Christ's deity and
co^substantialitie with God his father, because the Aria^s called the
catholics Homousia^s? what reproaches, calu^nes, and slau^ders the enemies of
Christ invented against the christians, the churchelie stories bear
witness, but if you mark who they were that reproched Christ, and who they
be that now nickename the christians, you shall see little cause to be offended,
but rather cause to pray, that they may be amended. Hiero in proc dialo aduer.
Pelag.
To good me^ it has not ben grievous, to have the displesure of the evil. As
for displeasure of heretics, good me^ have sought it, and thought glory to'
bear it. Ide^ epist. 80.
S. Hiero^ endeavored to' make the enemies of the church his enemies, and
wrought to S. Auste^ that it was his glory to be detested of heretics. How
much they deteste your honor, your fame, and your persons, it is apparente
when they blaspheme your religion, call you papists, rebels, and treitors.
But this their demeanor makes good your cause and renoumeth your perso^nes,
Grego. li. 1. super Eze bo. 11.
among the good. For then does there appear some evident justice in you, when
you displease them, that please not God. No man can be grateful to almighty
God, and to his enemies in the same thing. For he denies him self a freinde
to God, that pleases his enemy. And it may be feared lest they that blemyshe
the good parts of devour christians, (who^ they can not charge but for
religion, which in deed is Gods part,) will fall as far out with God, if his
grace te^per not their defectes. Chrisost. hom. 7. cap. 3. in Tim^. 2.
Cain maligned his brother Abel, and therewith contemned God. Iosephes brothers
regarded him not, and they regarded God as little. The children of Israel
rejected Moses, and in him they rejected God. It is said to be a machiauelian
policy to terrify the untoward and recusante part, with the odius terms of
rebel and traitor, when great purposes be intended. Though it can not be but
grievous to a true meaning man that is of civil loialtie, to be pressed with
terms of hapnous crimes not at al intended, and that for his dew service to
God: yet should not this point infirm the confession of a constante
catholic, that fears God above al, knowinge that it has been proper to
tyrannycal states in times of persecution, to alter the worshepers of Christ,
by terrors and torments, to terrify the devout christians with word and
sword, therbye to win them to their purpose, therbye to make them indue
their affections, to love and to hate what they loved or hated, or else to have
no quietness. Indede we be neither rebels nor traitors to princes, if we leave
undone the commaundeme^te of the prince, and do the commandment of God. When
Daniel prayed thrice adaye to God contrary to the kings commaundeme^te, when
the Apostles preached contrary to the wills of the rulers, it was neither
treason, nor rebellion, nor were they rebels or traitors. Though the rage of
the rulers go so far as to cast us to the ho^s, as they cast Daniel,
though they whippe us, as they wipped the Apostels, we must suffer with
Daniel, and say with the Apostles, we must rather obey God in doing our
dewtie, the^ man forbiddinge the same. And what is our comfort herein, but
that god has ways enoughe to deliver us, as he delivered Daniel, as he
delivered the Apostles, or else will stre^gthen us to die in his quarrel, whether
shall be more for his glory, and the edefyinge of his holy church. But let
the^ hate you, let the^ call you what the^ lists for religions sake, be
co^tente to bear, it is gods cause, it is Christ's quarrel, leave to him the
revenge. If you were guilty of that violent innouatio^ of religion which opened
the way to a ruffia^like rushinge into al vice, if you were guilty of a
monsterous mass of tragecal treaso^s, if you sowed sedition at home, or
maintained rebellion abroad, if having no church at home to rob, you sought
abroad in the countries adioyninge to rob churches, to break images, to be
hang men to the images of Christ and our lady, to dismount aulters, to kyl
priests, and to defile with profane hands the precious body and blood of
our savior Christ in the holy sacrament of the altar, if (I say) you were
guilty of these horrible factes, and in this resspecte they called you
heretics, traitors, church robbers, and murderers, surely then you should
not be offended, for such factes, deserve such names. And these names perdie
importe much more, and be of greater consequence, then the terms of papiste,
and papistrie. Now because you follow not their course which forsake the high
way, and under the name of Christ's cross, have so crossed the way, broken
down the hedges, trodde down so much good corn, and so many fair pastures
of piety, that except they come back, they can never come to God. Because (I
say) you follow not this course of procedinge, they afflicte you by all
possible means, they persecute you with words, they persecute you with
swords.

1. Cor. 2.
You have not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit which is of
God. If the world hate you, Christ our lord loves you. Harken what our
lord says. Joan. 15.
If the world hate you, you know that it hated me before, if you were of
the world, the world would love his own. Because you be not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates
you. The servant is not greater then the lord, if they have persecuted me,
Math. 5.
they vvil also persecute you. Blessed be you when they shall curse you, and
persecute you, when they shall say al ill against you, making lies of you for
my sake, be you glad and rejoice, because your reward is great in heaven,
for so have they persecuted the prophets, that were before you. And why did
the world hate our lord, that came for love to save the world? This says
our lord. Joan. 7.
The world hates me, because I testify that the works of the world be
ill. Here may I say, and truly say, that if heresy be a spiritual idolatry,
if schism heresy and blasphemy be now the works of the world, then
surely the world hates you, because you testify that the works of the
world be ill, you testify in your faith, you testify in your life. Why were
you berefte of dignities, offices, liuelehood, and liberty? Why be you in
bonds and bondage, in prysonmente, and banisheme^t? why be you yet displaced,
abased, and defaced in the world? I speak unto you, o you worthy confessors,
and co^fessante catholics, that lie at home in chains, and feed on the
noisome airs, of unsavory prisonnes. I speak unto you that have suffered a
long, and lingeringe martyrdom, Cip lib. 2 epist. 4.
and still do suffer paineful fight not ouerco^med. Doubtless you be daily
crowned, the longer you fight, the more is your victory, the greater is your
reward. And you that bear about you your paineful endurance, to whom al your
country is but a prison, and you that have your hearts wrapped in heuines to
see religion abandoned, to se gods honor contemned, to see Gods servants
punished, al you do testify, that the works of the world be ill. Repose you
therefore your comfort in God, his works be right, he disposes al things
sweetly, and works to good end. He permits not you to suffer for his
cause but to the end you might take profit of it, and such profit, as
tends to the health of your souls. In this suffering you can not but take
comfort in the equity of your cause, against which men have no more power
then God gives, no more then God permits, for all power is of God. If God
permit evil men to plage the good, that turns to their comfort, if they
consider, Aug. in Psalm. 54.
that God works good of their ill, and suffers the evil to live either to
be amended, or that the good by them might be exercised. God deals with you
as the angrye father deals with his child, whom after he has beaten,
casts the rod into the fire, Idem in Psalm. 73.
makes much of him, and leaves to him his patrimony. It is gods ordinary
mercy, to instruct the good by the evil, and to expercise those that shall be
saved, by the temporal power of the^, that shall be damned. In this exercise
this is the comfort, that he uses evil men but for a time, as the father
uses the rod to beat his child. This is the comfort, such as be now
called flagella Dei, such as be punishers and persecutors of gods people,
have but their time, in the end they be cast into the fire, as Pharao was,
as Herod was, Isa. 10.
as Assure was, of whom it is said, Assure the rod of my fury. The church
has now her Pharaos, her Assurs, and her Herodes, which be the rods and
whippes of Gods people. God will cast these rods also into the fire, for he
is both merciful and just, knowinge their malicious machinations, and saying
their wicked atte^ptes against the throne of his majesty, against the
wealth of his holy church, he will trippe them in their turn, and turn them
into the fire, in good time. This says our lord. The revenge is mine, Deuteronomy. 32
I vvil so pay them in time, as they shall fail of their standinge. Arise o
lord in time, let all the kings of the earth fear thy name. Psalm. 10^
Arise and have mercy upon Sion, for it is time to have mercy upon her, pea
the time is come. There is risen a great tempeste in the sea, thy ship is
covered with waves, thy church is sore afflicted. Math. 13 2. Cor. 6.
The enemy sows darnel in the land of our lord. Belial would have
fellowship with Christ, 2. Tim. 4
Alexander the copersmyth does the saints much ill. What shall I say? Math. 27
Barrabas is lowsed, Christ is bound, the laws be chainged, catholics that
now be afflicted for justice sake, suffer by lay laws such punishementes, as
traitors and heretics suffered, when the church laws were in place. August.
epist. 48 Vincent.
But recomforte here your afflicted spirits, o you afflicted catholics,
consider you the difference of the cause in sufferinge. When good and evil men
do the same things, and suffer the same pains, they are not to be discerned
by their doings or sufferinges, but by the causes, why they so do, Exodus 5.
or suffer, mark the point. Pharao afflicted gods people with grievous
labors. Here the persecutor was a wicked man, the persecuted were the people
of God. Exodus 32
Moses afflicted the same people for their disobedience against God and him.
Here the persecutor was a good man, the people persecuted were evil. Pharao and
Moses did the like things, both afflicted the people, but both had not like
purpose, and entention. The one afflicted with tyrannical affection to oppress
them, the other punished with charitable zeal, to amend them. Semblably
Iesabel slew the true prophets of God. 3. Reg. 18
Elias slew the false prophets of Baal. Christ whiype the Jews, Joan. 2.
Idem 19
the Jews whipped Christ. The Apostles were delivered to the power of men to
be punished, Act. 16.
1. Cor. 5.
the Apostles delivered me^ to the power of the devil to be tormented. In good
times when God was feared, and the church laws reverenced, catholics
punished heretics, now heretics persecute catholics. In this similitude of
punishementes, the cause of punishemente is to be discerned, and so be the
minds of the^ that be punishers, for the punisheme^te may be like, yet the
cause unlike, the punishemente one, the cause not one. In the cause this is to
be noted who be the doers, who be the sufferers, who do for justice and
verity, who suffer for sin and iniquity, who do to hinder, and who do to
profit. Between the church of Christ, and the synagoge of the devil, this is
the difference, the church afflicts for love, the synagoge for hatred. the
churce to correct, the synagoge to deiecte, the one to revoke from error, the
other to provoke into error. Genesis 16.
Sara corrected Agar her maid, that fled from her, and was willed by the
Angel to return. In Agar schismatikes and heretics be represented, August.
epist. 48.
who set them selves proudelie against the church, that is their maistris
and mother, and therefore be corrected by her, that after they be made humble by
wholesome discipline, they might return to her. Our lord gives a manifest
note, how to discern them that suffer for his sake, where he says, Aug li. 1
de sermo in Mo^te.
Blessed be they that suffer persecution for justice sake, because theirs is
the kingdom of heaven. When he adds, For justice sake, comfortinge them that
so suffer with the promis of his heaue^lye kingedome, heretics be excluded
from this reward, because they suffer not propter iustitiam, for justice.
Where there is not a sound faith, there ca^ not be justice, for the just man
lives by faith. Nor can schismatikes enjoy this reward, because where there
is not charity, there can not be justice. When therefore the doers do like,
and the sufferers suffer like, we must discern the minds of them that be
doers, and the cause of them that be sufferers. Certain it is, that both good
and evil do some time afflicte, use the like punishementes, and pretend the
same cause, even the cause of religion. The difference is, both do it not in
like order, with one mind, nor to one end. In the cause of religion, the good
afflicte the evil by censures and church law to repress division, to eschew
error, and to save verity. The evil afflicte the good against law and order,
to serve their intended purpose, to prefer their faction, and to maintain
heresy. In the cause of religion the good afflict the evil, for disobedience
and breach of justice, the evil afflicte the good, for kepinge obedience, and
holdinge with justice. And here in the name of justice is implied truth of
doctrine, which stands in inward belefe, and outward profession. And this
profession may be either in words or in works, so that who so suffers for
any fact wherbye he confesses the faith, and bears witness of Christ,
suffers for truth and justice. Mat. 14.
So did John Baptist suffer, so do they now suffer, that be persecuted for the
catholic cause, they that be persecuted for seruinge of god, they that say
Mass, they that hear Mass, brefelie al they that suffer for the confession
of Christ's church, suffer for justice. You therefore o you persecuted
catholics, to you I speak again, you directelie suffer for justice sake. You
abide by it, you stand in the face of the persecutors, to you belongs the
promis of Christ, yours is the kingedome of heaven. You glorious confessors,
what honor should Christ have now in our miserable country, if you were not
open co^fessors of his honor? You suffer this affliction for his honor, you
suffer for the honor of his saints, you suffer for the honor of his
sacraments, you suffer for the honor of the universal church. You blessed
sufferers, endure you to suffer so long as God would you to suffer, and
blessed be you that suffer, for yours is the kingedome of heaven.

And you afflicted catholics, you that lie and live as straingers scattered in
dispersion, to you now I speak, you leese not the name of confessors. Many of
you stood in the first front of the fight, and confessed your dewtiful
obedience before the face of the maiestrate. Many of you fled without
prejudice, but not without mind to fight again. You have been afflicted by
degrees, you have be^ forced out of your country, into this country, where
in time you were brought out of credit by them, that wished you well neither
at home nor abroad. Co^spiracies were made, terrible treasonnes contrived, the
factious part rebelled, and now began civil and unnatural war. What
ouertwhartes found we, into how many suspicions ra^ne we, What obloquies,
and terms of treason sustained we, that mea^t not unjustly? If we look to
the common trobles of these countries, they have not be^ so common to this
people, as proper and personal to us. The sackage and spoils which the guilty
deserved, fell upon us that deserved them not. We have been grieved not only by
the heretic, whose treasons we misliked, but by the catholic also, to who^
we fled to be releued. And we have be^ so grieved by both, that necessity
forced to chainge our place, hardelye were we suffered to remain in place,
and not without troble in whatsoever place. Thy judgments (o lord) be
secret, thy mercies be great, to thee we must singe mercy and iudgeme^te,
for thou have kept us, and still do comfort us, in these co^tinewed trobles.
O you holy fathers and Monks of Scheme, o you devout brothers and virgins of
Sion, you prelates and priests, you lords and ladies, and you that be of pope
Gregory's famous seminaries at Rome, and Reimes, the risinge help and hope of
your decayed country, al you of what note so ever you be, that be banished
catholics, and bear affliction for the catholic cause, al you do testify to
the world, that the works of the world be ill, al you report to good men's
consciences in open truth, that you suffer for justice sake. How many of you
were at home in good case and place to serve God, and your country? But when
Gods honor was displaced, you chose to relinquishe al, and to trust to his
holy providence. You that have enjoyed much worldly prosperity, refuse not
now to sustain adversity, and to say with holy Job. Job 1.
Dominus dedit, etc. our lord gave it, our lord has taken it away, blessed
be the name of our lord. What ever the iudgeme^te of the world be, it is no
syn to be in banishment, it is no shame to be poor for Christ's sake. Pro. 28.
Better is the poor that lives barelie, the^ the ritche man that walks
crokedlie. And better is a little with the fear of God, then great treasures
without his fear.

Humiliation is the christian exaltation, Jacob. 1.
therefore is the christian willed to rejoice in it. When he is brought to be
poor, when he is made an outecast not reputed, he must rejoice in poverty, in
ignomie, and in pressure, for these be the exaltations of christians, these be
the prefermentes of saints, who be exalted of God, when they be contemned of
the world. And the^ the comfort is, that God makes them poor in substance,
to make them ritche in faith, the comfort is, that our lord leaves them not
hopeless. This says our lord. Esa. 41.
Probaui te in camino paupertatis. I have tried thee, in the fornaice of
poverty. It is often seen, that our lord takes from his freindes the
worldelie parts and pelf wherein they trusted, that they might put their whole
trust in him. What soever God has taken from us, yet has he not left us
destitute, such is his merciful providence. 2. Cor. 4.
We be in poverty, but not utterly without somewhat, we be persecuted, but
not forsaken, we be cast down, yet we perish not. God gave us liuinges, some
in one degree, some in an other. Some had much, some had little, al had
inoughe. How much be we al bound to render daily thanks unto God, who of
his goodness vouchesafed to give us somewhat, that we might leese for his sake.
Let us confess in Gods name, the rechelesnesse we had of Gods house, and
the ouermuche care we had of the world. God knew us to be wantonness, and
far ro^ne out of that course of righteousness, which our holy fathers had in
Christ's church. Yet does he not beat us cruelly as he might of justice, but
hydeeth the fearful scourge of his grievous correction, and shows the soft
rod of his sweet discipline. Blessed be the name of God, that adversity
has opened our eyes, which prosperity had shut. And blessed be his name
again and again, that we may justly say. Our lord is at hand. Philip. 4.
Psalm. 9.
Our lord is our helper at our need, and in our tribulation. We may justly
say, Psalm. 22.
Virga tua and baculus tuus: etc. Thy rod and thy staff has comforted me.
Though God beat us with his rod, yet he bears us up with his staff. He
beats us with the rod of his outward correction, and gideth us with the
staff of his inward direction, the direction of the holy ghost who in our
correction directs us, gives us grace and strength to bear, that we
murmr not, nor despair in affliction. As for banishement why should we
think it punishment, saying all the world is but a banisheme^t, all the world
is but a city of punishementes and dwellinge place of wretched me^. The godly
christian can not be banished from Christ where ever he be, in Christ there is
no banysheme^t, and without Christ al is banyshement. But if this banyshement
be a punishment, yet does God turn it to our benefit. If it be a punishment
to lack our country (which is now the country of deuisio^ and schism) yet
is it our benefit to be where we may live in unity, where we may serve God
openly, and confess our faith frelie. If it be a punishment to lack the
company and comfort of our freindes, yet is it our benefit to be out of the
company of schismatikes and heretics. God commanded Moses to will his people
to depart from the tabernacles of Chore and his accomplices, who were swalowed
into the earth alive, for the sin of schism. Who knows not that the very
place of schism and heresy, has in it a secret infection. Who knows not
that the common corruption of the time breadeth dulnes of devotion, where there
is no open exercise of piety. Yea the leauinge undone of devout vsages, the
discontinuance from saying and hearing of religious acts, works
insensibilitie of sin. How many good folks live now where heretics bear
the swaye, out of saying and hearing of catholic religion, which desire to
see and hear, what we see and hear? For alas, what days see they? what
threats hear they? In what trobles be they? what lack of unity, what loss
of charity find they? Were there no outeward persecution, yet is this an
inward persecution to hear the disorders, and to see the outrages of evil
men. What an exercise is it to the catholic, to live among uncivil
protestants, to live among such, as be not so little as heretics. What a
coraze is it to hear their blasphemous words, and to see their shamles
works? What man that is of any christian sense, or catholic zeal, can hear
with patie^t ears Gods anointed priest and prince of his people, to be called
Antechrist? Christ's saints to be dishonored, Christ's sacraments to be
contemned, and Christ's holy name to be blasphemed? To the good and godly,
this is a persecution, August. epist. ad Sebast.
though there were no other persecution. For what does so persecute the good,
as the life and manners of the evil? Now an persecuted Loath when he lived among
the Sodomites, 2 Pet. cap. 2. August ser 24. de verb. apost.
but making his abode among unclean, proud, and blasphemous livers, he
suffered persecution, not in sufferinge any punishment, but in hearing and
saying that which was ill. To catholics which be in this case, this may be
said. Though it be a grievous exercise to co^uerse among evil livers, yet may
good men so do without mayme of innoce^cie. It is a holy heuines, Ide^ epist.
ad Sebast.
and (if it may be so called) a happy misery, to be trobeled (so you be not
intangeled) with other men's vices. This is the persecution that al men suffer,
which will live holelie in Christ. It is not so commendable to be good with the
good, but to be good among the evil. Grego. 1. ca lib 1. in Job. Job. 30.
Job that lived in the land of gentiles, says of him self. I have been a
companion of drago^s, and a felovve of Ostriches. The prophet says. Ezech. 2.
Thou son of man faithless people, and renegates be in thy company, thou
dvvellest among scorpions. Phil. 2.
The Philippians lived in the mids of a crooked and perverse nation, yet S.
Paul willed them to be fauteles, and to shine as lights in the world. Apoc.
2.
It was said to them that were of the church of Pargamos, I know thy
works and where thou dvvellest, even where sathanas seat is, yet do
thou keep my name, and have not denied my faith. Grego. in Job. lib. 20. cap.
29.
He refuses to be an Abel, that will not abide Cains malice. In one barn lies
corn and straw, in the threshinge flower, the corn is trodden under the
straw. Do we not see in the feldes, flowers growinge among brambles? Euenso
malicious sinners be joined with the just, and they be approved good, which
endure good among the evil. But to return to us that live in banyshemente, in
that we be departed from those tabernacles, and from the feloshippe of those
schismatikes, in that we now live out of our country, in a country where we
live in Christ's unity, this is our benefit, and this is our comfort, that
God turns this temporal punyshement, to our spiritual benefit. I am no
prophet nor the son of a prophet, yet for that we profess the faith of the
prophets, the faith of the Apostles, and the ancient catholic Roman
faith, for that we stand in the disgrace and indignation of them, by whose
laws we were deprived of our liuinges, and like to be deprived of our lives
also, had we not fled, I doubt not but God that fed the prophet Elias when
he fled from Iesabel, will feed us also, for other cause we had none to
flee, but for Gods cause only. Exodus 2.
We fled as Moses fled out of Egipte, from the face of Pharao. 3 Reg. 17
We fled as Elias fled from Achab and Iesabel. We fled as Christ bid
us into an other city. Now in what place or case so ever we be, Psalm. 59.
See that we put our confidence in God, and he vvil bring to naught such as
trobble us.

We that have suffered, and still do suffer for so just, so noble, and so
honorable a cause as religion is, may not be dismayed with the trobles of the
world. God calls by the rod of correction, and by the mercies of his
consolation. It is the right course and direct way wheroye God calls his
freindes to him, to begin with them in tribulation. The hope of the one, is
the comfort in the other, and a sovereign comfort it is to understand, that
the things which be trobelous pass away, the things which be glorious
endure for ever. Therefore is the tribulation of this world called light, not
in respect of the quality of tribulation, but in respect of the will, 2. Cor.
4.
the hope and the reward of them that through tribulation contend to glory.
Who is ignorante, but God declares a singular love toward them, Hebr. 12
whom he corrects. Whom he loves, he corrects, and beats every son,
whom he receaueth. And why does he correct but to amend us? Why would he
amend us, Aug. ho^. 46. homel. 50.
but to make us worthy of him. We have therefore cause to rejoice in
correction, for if we be just, then be we tried, if we be unjust, then be we
amended. The children of the world do marvel, why God so deals with his
freindes, why he abaseth them so greatly in this world, who^ he chose so
highelie before the world. Job 3.
God commended his faitheful servant Job, by the testimony of his own mouth.
Yet was he brought to such abasemente, that him self bemoned his calamitous
case, and doleful days upon a dungehil. Were not the prophets and saints of
the old testamente persecuted? Heb. 11.
tried with mockinges, with scourginges, with prisonment? were they not
stoned, hevven asunder, and slain with svvorde? vvalked not they up and
down destitute and trobeled? did they not wander in wilderness, in
mountains, in dens and caves of the earth? they would not be delivered of
their troble, that they might inherit a better resurrection. Even so it fell
to the Apostles and saints of the new testamente, 1. Cor. 4.
Whom God set forth for the lowest of al, as men appointed to death, as men
that were made gasinge stocks to the world, as men that were fools for
Christ's sake, men that were naked, hungered, thristed, and had no certain
dvvellinge place, men that were accounted the filthe and scouringe of the
world. Among the children of women there was not a greater then John
Baptiste yet was he imprisoned, and done to death. It is gods ordinary
mercy, first to amend his children by correction, and after to deliver them
from damnation. And in this life God spares the wicked, and not the elect, in
the life to come, he spares the elect, and not the wicked. He suffers his
servants to be brought to the lowest, because he sees how to advance them
in the higheste. He deiecteth them outewardelie even to contempt, because he
brings the^ inwardly, to things incomprehensible. If God thus afflicte them
whom he has chosen and loves, what are they like to suffer, whom he does hate
and reprobate? The prophet took it for Gods good blessinge, that he was made
humble by tribulation. Psalm. 118
This he says, It is good for me that thou have humbled me, before I was
corrected, I sinned. And he speaks further in the person of the^, who seek of
God to be assayed in this world by tribulation. Prove me o lord, assaye me,
burn my raynes, and my heart. Psalm. 25.
It was S. Austin that said, Hic ure, hic seca, vt in eternum parcas. Cut me
here, sear me here, that thou may spare me for ever.

Albeit holy me^ live perfectelie in this life, Ruffin. in Psalm. 2^.
yet desire they fatherly correction, that they may goo to their country so
much the more perfect, by how much God correctinge the^ here, purges their
little sins. For when the ruste of sin is scoured out by correction, when
the blottes of sin be rased out through the sword of persecution, they
thus persecuted and purged, can not but come with comfort, to the iudgeme^te
seat of our lord. And for that the present course of this life, Grego. li.
5. cap 15 in Job.
is but the way where in they ru^ne toward their country that be here
passengers, least they should love the way, or those things which they find
in the way, instead of their country, they be knocked and whipped forward
with trobles by the way, which yet by gods good mercies, and comfortable
graces, they overcome. All that is borne of God, ouercometh the world. Joan. 5.
And they be so borne that forsake the things of the world, which be against
God. They overcome, that withsta^de concupiscence, Ber ser. 1. in octa. pasca.
ambition, and pridie of life, which the world loves. They overcome, that
forsake liberty, schism, and heresy, which the world prefers. And they
overcome, that suffer afflictions for Christ's sake, which the world shonneth.
You that be borne of God, and now suffer for Gods house* you suffer in the
world, that you may not be condemned with the world. 1. Cor. 11
Content your selves with this kind of suffering. This daily affliction is a
kind of martyrdom, and a certain effusion of bloudde, which they shed in a
mild, Ber. ser. 1 in octa. pascae.
but a long martyrdom, that can not once die for Christ. In this prolonginge
of death by daily punishment, the devil shows his craftines, for sekinge
your death by slow and dull sword, he coueteth to kyl your souls, and not
your bodies. He coueteth to take from you, the glorious name of martyrdom. But
you may be martyrs without stroke of sword, if you keep patience in your
hearts. Cipr. de exhor. ad Marty. cap. 10.
For notwitsta^dinge we defer the honor of martyrdom properly to them,
that endure in torments for Christ even to death, yet be they martyrs also,
which bear witness of Christ in conversation of life, and confession of
faith. They be called martyrs, which be co^tente for Christ's sake to suffer
rebukes, Grego. ho. 35.
reuiles, slanders, and what persecution of tongues so ever. This is the secret
martyrdom of the mind, the other is the open martyrdom of the body by
death. That any be a martyr, God requires not effusion of blood but faith,
for defense whereof a man may dewtifullie shed his bloudde. And martyrdom is
in work and in will, Ber. in nata. S. Innocen. ser. 1.
as it was in S. Stephan, or in will only, as it was is S. John Euangeliste,
or in work only, as it was in the blessed Innoce^tes. The merit of
martyrdom in S. John that suffered not, Aug. lib. de bon. con. ca. 21
and in S. Peter that suffered, was not uneven. But be it that God permite the
powers of the world, to put you to open martyrdom, as some good and constant
catholics among you have been put of late years, then truly above al, you
shall overcome the world, and become open martyrs. For this is the victory
that ouercometh the world, fides nostra. By this the Martyrs conquered when
they suffered. August. lib. 2 de sermon. in Monte.
Though they were killed in body, yet could they not be made to yield in
soul. The tormentors were ouercomed, because they could not do what their
will was to do, their will was to kill Christ in the^, and to extincte Christ's
faith, which thing they could not do. And therefore we singe and rejoice of
the martyrs glorious triu^phes. We keep their death days, which he called
their birthe days, because in their death and martyrdom, they overcome the
world, they be borne again, newly baptized, and begin to live with God in
eternity of glory. Blessed and thrice blessed be then, to whom God gives his
gracious gift to overcome the world by death. It is the requital that we
can make to Christ, when blood is recompensed with bloudde, Hiero. epist. 22.
and when we that were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, do willingly
shed our blood for him. Marye this is not in your power, but in your worthiness,
which is not of you, but of God. But if God make you worthy to goo that way,
the way is made easy and plain before you. Aug. ser. de temp. 46.
Christ your head is gone that way. Many thousand Martyrs are gone that
way. Old me^, young men, children, and maids, are gone that way. Popes,
Bishopes, priests, kings, Senators, cou^selors, noblemen, noble women, holy
widows, devout virginnes, babes, and infantes, are gone that way. Into that
way, you have him to lead you by him self, to him self, that was made the
way for you, Jesus Christ that said, I am the way. And when you goo that
way, Cypri. de exhor. Mar cap. 12.
your eyes be closed in the persecution of the earth, the heavens be opened to
you that be persecuted. Antechriste threateneth, Christ defends, death
goes before, life follows, temporal life is lost, eternal life is found.
And what comfort, what joy, what security, will it be to pass gloriouselie
in pressure, and sode^lie to shut the eyes of your body with which you saw
men, and by and by to open the eyes of your soul, to see your savior Christ.
Howsoever it pleases Gods holy will to deal with you, endure you under
correction* for God offers him self therein unto your, as to his children.
Heb. 1^.
There is not a child of his, whom he corrects not, whom he loves he
proves. In this endured correction, you have this comfort, that God gives
you grace to confess him, and fortitude to suffer for him. You have this
comfort, that there comes nothing to you, but what you may make your
profit of. Among many profits, this is not the least, that it brings you
to join your selves near unto God, it moves you to do more penance, to make
more prayer, to receive more often the holy sacraments, by means and virtue
of which, God assisteth you, God strengthens you, and will make that perfect
in you, which he has begone. Above the rest of comfortes which you have in
this endured affliction, the most sovereign comfort is to remember, that
what ever the iniquity of time, or malice of men shall work against you for
your religion, you can suffer no more then Christ him self suffered to make
his church glorious, no more then Christ's saints suffered when they
confessed Christ, and his religion, even to death. Nor can you suffer for a
better cause, then for which Christ and his saints suffered. And how much
better is it for you so to suffer, then to live in a false felicity of the
world, and to die from God, in schism and heresy. How lamentable should your
loss be, if now you should follow the new no faith of the world, and
lack God in the world to come, because you lacked justice of faith. You se
how the storm endures, the sea is trobeled, the ship is te^pested, and how
Christ sleapeth in the ship. What now must you do but goo to Christ, as
his disciples did, awake him, as they did, say unto him as they did. O lord
save us. Fear you not so to do, for you have Christ in the ship with you,
he is the governor of the ship, he governs you in the way. Isa. 48.
And your faith (I doubt not) is now stronger then the faith of Christ's
disciples was, when they were in the ship with him, for they had not yet seen
the cross, the death, the resurrection, and ascension of Christ. They could
not but be waueringe, as men that were not yet confirmed nor comforted, with
the holy ghost. Your faith is strengthened by the fruits of these, your
faith is confirmed, by the doctrine of the Apostles, by the preachinges of the
Confessors, by the death of the martyrs, by the uniform consent of your
forefathers, finally by the general practice of the whole christian world.
You that be so many ways confirmed in your faith, can not but goo unto
Christ with good currage, and boldly awake him, and frelie say unto him.
Domine salua nos. And to him must you become humble supplia^tes, that he
vouchesafe to quiet the tempests of the sea, as he did at the prayers of his
disciples. As Christ then in raysinge that tempeste, did prepare the minds of
his disciples to bear trobles, and inform their understanding to make their
refuge unto him, that he might show the mightenes of his power: Euenso does
he still dispose, that great trobles come upon his faitheful servants, which
yet he quieteth in good time, after they have prayed unto him. And that, we
should pray, it is his holy will. This has he said. Psalm. 29.
Thou shall call upon me in the day of tribulation, and I vvil hear thee. He
showed us an example hereof, when he went in to the monute Oliuet, before his
passion to pray. And certain it is, that prayer is of valor either to take
away tribulation, or to give strenghte to bear it. Holy writers affirm,
that to give strength is a far greater grace, then to take it away, and
that our lord does more benefit us, when he gives strength to sustain
persecution, then when he takes persecution from us. No doubt but Christ's
disciples which be now in the ship windeshaken, and sore beaten with the
cruel tempests of the sea, call upon him, make their contineual prayer that he
vouchesafe to arise, to rebuke the winds, and to make calm the tempeste. No
doubt but they say and daily say. Arise o lord, save us, and help us out
of tribulation. But for that Christ hears not their prayers by and bie, for
that Christ releueth not their miseries presently, Christ seems to them
asleep, whereas in deed it is his merciful dispensation, and divine power, not
to recomforte the afflicted so sone as they call, but first to exercise, and to
prove their virtues, to prove their faith, their hope, their charity, to
prove their humility, patience, and constancy. It is written, Deuteronomy 13
August. tract. 43. in Euan. Joan.
Our lord God tempts you to know whether you love him or no. that is, God
makes you to know whether you love him. He knows you, you know not your
selves, he makes you to know your selves by just trialles and proufes. Idem
quaest. 60 de quaestio. 83.
And yet does he not te^pte you to know you, but permits you to be tempted
to make you to be known to your selves and to oaths, how much you have
profited in his love, which doubteles men can not understand, but when God
tries you. And Christ our lord is said to sleep, when of his mercy he
prolongeth justice, when of his mercy he suffers sinners uncorrected, and
just livers to be punished, when he suffers the evil to be exalted, and the
good to be dejected, the^ to have prosperity and peace of the world, these to
find adversity, and trobbles in the world. But the holy scripture must
needs be true. Psa. 120.
He that keeps Israel does not slumber, nor vvil sleep. And therefore must
not the afflicted leave of to pray, though God protract his mercy for a time
to try the constancy of their faith and to exercise their virtues.
Chrisost. ^o 13 in cap. 7. ^at open ^nper.
Some things be not denied though for a time deferred. And God deferreth for
a time, to give them in more convenient time. Grego. in Job li 9. cap. 5.
God deferreth that the ill affection of our hearts might be better purged, and
that the things which we long for, August. Ver. 1. de verb. do.
might be better welcome when they be obtained. Things that be obtained
easelie, be less regarded. God keeps for us in store what he will not give by
and bye, that we may learn to long for great things, with long and great
desire. I cry (says Job) and thou hear me not. I stand and thou lokest
not on me. In time of persecution the holy church stands in faith, and
cries in desire. Grego in Job lib. 20. c 22.
But God almighty (such is his hidden judgment and secret counsel) uses to
defer the prayers of them that be persecuted, to the entente their merits
might increase, and they be heard rather to their merit, then to their desire.
And it helps to increase the understanding of godly me^, when their desires
be not accomplished, but after a time. For desire kindeleth of delaie, and
understanding increases of desire. We must ask, we must seek, we must
knock. Our lord has said. Ask you, and you shall receive. Seek and you
shall find. Knock and the door shall be opened. We must perseauer eager and
feruente in prayer, not doubtinge but in time we shall receive what we ask, in
time we shall find what we seek, and after we have knocked, the door will be
opened. That sweet lady of consolation, and queen of comfort, with all the
heavenly court to whom you so often pour forth your mourninge plaintes, will
not want to make intercession for you, before the thrown of his majesty.
Their prayers will not fail, but gain you comfort in your distresses. And
assure your selves, that God will hear you, and them for you, for he is al
ways nighe to them that be afflicted. Christ may seem long a sleep to you
that be afflicted, to you it may seem timely that Christ take pity of his
church so pitiouslie afflicted with heresy, and tyranny. But it is not our
part to appointe him time, he knows best what is necessary for us. To him
we must humble our souls, and pray for such times, as may be most for his
honor. It was said to them of Bethulia, Judith 4
Understand you that God vvil hear your prayers, if still you persevere in
fasting and prayer. God almighty has appointed time, and knows when and
how to deliver the Godly out of temptation. 2. Pet. 2. Tob. 3.
After a storm he makes fair wether. After weepinge and heuines, he gives
mirthe and joy. The ship has been shaken with no less storms at other
times, then at this time. Christ quieted those, and Christ will quiet these.
Doubt you not but he will bring his trobeled freindes through the mids of
these tempests, and repose them in quiet haven. I conclude with these
considerations.

Christians are now put together,

Catholics are in the forge not as coals that burn and turn to ashes, but as
gold that is tried. The forge is the world, you are the gold, tribulation is
the fire, God is the work man.





Hard things may be mollified,

Though God suffer for a

The wisdom of the world

As there is but one God, one Roman church, that is but one, under one
head. The Lutheran, the Caluinian, and Puritan faith, is a new no faith, a
new no religion, founded upon man's fancy, without Gods word or
authority. It has no church, no bishop, no priest, no altar, no
sacrifice, and consequently no God. And they of this new no faith, having
no ground in Christ, nor of his church, dissente in their own grounds,
without unity from verity. You have the grounds of Christ. You have the
authority of Christ's church. You have the testimonies of Christ's saints.
You have the confirmations, of general councelles. With you is the uniform
consent of the people of God. With you is the public practice of the
Christian world. You should not be discomforted to suffer for such a cause, as
has so many great, so many good, and so sufficience grounds, for such a
cause (I say) as with which concur so many comfortes. As that you sustain
the greateste cause under the cope of heaven, the common cause of Christ's
catholic church, the cause of religion, which is the supreme service and
sovereign honor, that you can offer unto God. That God makes you worthy,
gives you grace to confess, and fortitude to suffer. That you enjoy in the
unity of Christ's church, the bounty of his blessings. That you be safe in
this church, through the mighty power of your guides and rulers. That you be
pertakers of al prayer, of al sacrifice, of al good works, and shall be
pertakers of Christ's death and merits. That in sufferinge you be daily
crowned, that you have victory, and shall have reward. That in sufferinge,
your virtues be exercised, and your merits increased. That you suffer
directelie for justice, that you suffer but for a time. That by suffering God
makes you low, to bring you to the highest, makes you ritche in faith, and
turns your temporal punisheme^te to your spiritual benefit. That you
overcome the world, that you shall not be condemned with the world. That you
be open confessors. That you have secret martyrdom, that you have al possible
comfortes with which faith is strengthened to make you open Martyrs. If any
of you take comfort in any of these comfortes, give the praise to God, and call
upon him in all your pressures and sufferinges. God will be your help and God
must be your hope. If there be remedy, it will once fall, if there be none,
thank God of al. Believe well, and live well. Do well and die well, that you may
die to live with God. God the father of al mercies, and the God of al comfort,
comfort you in all your tribulation with the same comfort, wherewith our selves
are comforted of God.

Fare you well. At Louaine, the last of September. 1579.
A Prayer.
Almighty God father of al mercies, and God of al comfort, have mercy on us
the afflicted members, of thy catholic church. Forgive us our sins, give us
time to do penance, grace to resist sin, and peace to serve thee in holiness.
Comfort us that be thy prisoners, reliue us that be straingers in dispersion,
succor all that be afflicted, for confessinge thy holy name. Make us worthy
to suffer, give us strength to bear, and constancy to confess. Let no
fear, nor force remove us, from thy unity. Let no craftines of the devil
deceive us, nor devise of man, overcome us. Discern (O lord) thy cause,
humble thy enemies, recomforte thy freindes, that they may give thanks unto
thee, and glorify thy name, in thy holy church. Grant this (O lord) for
Christ's sake our lord, that suffered bitter death, to make his church
glorious.

He that takes not his cross and follows me, is not worthy of me.

Math. 10. depiction of Jesus carrying the cross

All that vvil live godly in Christ, shall suffer persecutions.

2. Tim. 3. If the^ you suffer not for Christ, vvaigh whether you have yet
begone to live godly in Christ.

August. in Psalm. 57. Hanc epistolam consolatoriam, ex fide duorum
presbyterorum Anglorum, quorum integritas and eruditio nobis cognita est,
excudi posse censeo.

Ioh. Molanus, censor.

depiction of the Crucifixion

God forbid that I should glory in any thing, but in the cross of our lord
Jesus Christ.

Gal. 6.
