THE HISTORY OF SUSANNA. Compiled according to the Prophet Daniel, amplified
with convenient Meditations; sung by the devoted honourer of the divine Muses,
GEORGE BALLARD.

Conscia^ens rectiridet mendacia fame.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Harper for William Hope, at the Unicorn in Cornhill
near the Royal Exchange. 1638.

The contents of the whole.
OLd Scripture-blessings Heaven confirms on
A Saintly Hebrew-dame in Babylon:
Her bright triumphant Virtue tramples down
Men's lust assaulting, winnes the Daphnean Crown
Of glory, over seeming shame. Two foes
To her renown, implunge themselves in woes
Which folly brings. Who would this sum behold
In special, it the sequel shall unfold,
With ample satisfaction in the same,
To all, that bear good will to Susan's name.
The Author's Petition; To the fairest of all Beauties, the King of Glory, the
everlasting Sun of righteousness, and the consolation of Men and Angels, who
reigns and shines for ever in Trinity and Unity.
Eternal glorious Lord Triumphant on
Thy pure Celestial fiery burning thron,
Whose locks, and garment's brightness far out-goes
The shining whiteness of Mount- Salmon-snowes:
One portion of whose beauty mortals can
Not comprehend, if not in form of man.
Most amiable Helion fair, from whom
Continual streams of heavenly ^lames do come
Into our boldned breasts: whose lightsome rays
Illumine infant-babes to chaunt thy praise.
Vouchsafe that from above the splendent Pole,
Thy beams divine may luminate my soul.
O thou that learnd'st old Isay's son to sing
The songs of Sion run'd on silver-string:
(Great God of Moses* God of Muses too)
Teach me to sing, as thou taught'st him to do;
While I do represent Susanna's story,
Which Daniel penned unto thy pristine glory.
Fill me with Sions fountain streams, to chant
Thy praise (O God) in praising such a Saint.
Furnish my lines, with secret power to kill
Unjust revenge, and carnal fires to chill;
That that immortal chastity, and honor,
May (with thy blessed gifts conferred upon her)
All Readers move to studious admiration
Of Susan's goodness, in her imitation;
That babes unborn, while World endures may dread
Thy s^cred Laws, in hope of bounteous meed;
And Vice (when her unseemly self is seen,
Unstript from vestments of so fair a Queen,
As Virtue, peering in deformed hew
Of Viper-spots, unto the public view)
May be abandoned from the souls of men,
Unto the place of torment Satan's den.
So (if so blessed) these lines in time to come,
(Bearing thy glory) shall not find a tomb,
But (fraught with Susan's lively honor) vie
With during Annals of Eternity.
To the right Honorable ANNE, Countess of Northumberland, all prosperity
here, and in the World to come sempiternall welfare.
Excellent MADAME,
BEing assured, that your Ladyship very well-(...) there is no ornamen^ (...)
eminent virtues, (...) sublime (...) emboldned to (...) into the Sanctuary of
your protection, renowned Susanna's History: which to your Honor may challenge
worthy relation, for manifold respects; worth your gracious acceptance, and
leisurefull meditation. To speak a little in her payses: Susanna was a Lady
Princely descended from the royal blood of the loins of Judah, whence our
^^^iour pleased to derive his happy incarnation. Her virtues to her birth in
highness were parallel. Her very infancy gave divine presaging promises to
the world, of her future goodness. Her countenance in the cradle, manifested
infallible tokens, to character succeeding honor. Her riper wisdom was
discreet to preserve the honor of her soul immaculate. Her elevated
cogitations enspheared themselves in the first Move^ (a higher Orb^e, the^
(...) Circles of frailty) He^ intaminate affection devoted her best service to
the glory of her Maker, knowing it the end of her Creation. Her modesty was the
exact model of all her actions. A good conscience she held the most
inestimable flower, that grew within the border of Time: far sweeter then the
Roses of England, more fragrant then Iudaean Balmes, or the Cynamons of Egypt;
for the same shall be transplanted into the Garden of Paradise. The Temple of
her heart she soly dedicated to her Redeemers service; that neither the
attractive allurements, nor menacing reproaches of monstrous Magistrates, nor
obloquy, nor ignominious death (which she accounted as a pleasant object (in
comparison) or a haven of harbor to fly unto, ^o her Creators presence,
against the assaults of the swelling waters of wickedness) rather then to
pollute her Nobility with dishonorable (...): or to defile the Sanctum
Sanctorum of her soul* (the receptacle of the holy Tri^^^y) with uncleanness:
the rougher her ^rosse, the richer was her Diadem: the more her malignant
Adversaries powerful oppression, the more her patience in a const^^^
resolution, is laudable with all Posterity. She perceived her conflict could
be but momentany, ^ncooth; her triumph everlastingly glorious: impalled about
with crowns of continuance. Her tears, suspi^^tions, and orizons were as the
former and later rain, and winds of Heaven, to foster those diviner seeds,
which the Almighty had sown in the Eden furrows of her bosom, unto a joyful
harvesting. In her affliction she found variety of Soule-solacing dainties,
wherewith she repasted her spirit in supernatural contemplations Her Chastity,
her Charity, her Hospitality were remarkable. Finally, whatsoever virtues,
whatsoever comeliness, whatsoever proportion, what endowments, and rare
qualities of body and mind soever, can commend women were wonderfully complete,
and conspicuous in Susanna. For which her soul has never-ending felicity; her
name immortality. She was undoubtedly a Darling of the Omnipotent Deity: who
miraculously raised a little Daniel by heavenly power to vindicate her
injuries, in bringing down the mightiness, and esteem of ancient cunningly
combi^^d Senators, to sudden confusion. In coun^^^^^cing therefore Susanna's
story ((...)) for Susanna's sake, your Ladyship shall perpetuate through all
Generations your name, living in a like sympathy of your own true Nobility's
blessings; and shall demonstrate your clemency herein, in pardoning the errors
of a boldness in affe^^ion of him, that cannot be an Alien, nor (...) Infidel
to your worthy perfections; neither thinks now, that he over-presumeth upon,
or any way insinuates, but voluntarily, according to your merit, confirms
(...) Dedication upon your Honor,

Rem^yning at your Honors service to be commanded, G. B.

THE PROPOSITION Apologicall to the Learned Readers.
NO Story of transformed Dames (of old)
By Poets changed into stars of gold,
Into clear Fountains, Birds, and branches green;
Nor of the Pagan-prays'd Ephesian Queen,
Who (naked) bathed with Virgin-Nymphs of Wood
In bubling stream; whose Nymphs about her stood,
Like Ivory pales (in vain) to hide their Dame,
From Cadmus Kinsman, that a Heart became:
No laud of her; but I Encomiums sing,
Of new Titania bathing in a Spring;
More constant, chaste, more beautiful divine:
Of whom Diana was a former sign.
Who weare's of glory an unchanging crown,
(A star which never falls from Heaven down)
Had she been known Thessalian Bards among,
Her stories true had in their times been sung;
Not one, but two Acteons found her, laving
Her dainty limbs in Fountains ever-waving.
Who unattended (by her Virgin-train)
To beastly Monsters changed the lustful twain.
Her peerlesse form, and virtues do inspire
My bosom with a holy warming fire:
Emboldning me (whom Fortune barred to climb
The Muses Mountains in my Sylvan-rime,
To sing her praises, which will du^e even
Longer on Earth then shining Lamps in Heaven.
And I admire her Legend has (so long
Poets so plenteous) never yet been sung.
Susanna that eternal Saintly thing,
Merits a worthier Muse than mine to sing
Her honored Fame, my boldness should be dumb,
In this attempt; saving in days to come,
My mean untutored pains (perchance) may call
More learned men to come and mend it all.
Sect. I.
ARGUMENT*
In Babylon liv's Ioachim,
Blessings God showrs down on him*
Living single* Noble Lords
Would w^^e him, he dislikes their words.
ON Shinar^plains, where haughty Ninus would
His Babel-tow'r to heaven should be extolled,
Stands scitua^^ within a wall of stone*
Bitumenate the City Babylon*
Where dwell'd an Hebrew Lord of ^aintlesse fame*
And high descent, Lord Ioachim by name*
A man to whom the Governor of heav^^*
Virtue and riches bounteously had given;
(...) Slighted their profer'd Virgins; nor did he^
Regard their portions, nor their pedigree;
Hearing his wise forewarning parents say,
How many perils, in such wedding lay;
He vowed to marry, but to marry one
Of Judah's Tribe, and not of Babylon.
MEDIT. I. Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.
PRide, and Idolatry are Babel's sins,
Whence all the woe of Sion still begins.
He, that from Babylon, a good wife take's,
Snatcheth an Eeele out of a bag of Snakes.
Before the flood good Fathers (by divine
Instinct of goodness) did their sons confine
By marriage, not to mingle with the strain,
Of feminines sprung from condemned Caine:
Who tempted men to fall from God above,
Instead of him unliving Gods to love.
The man, that wives, with an Idolatresse,
Marries temptation, never wants distress.
Cursed is such wedding; to declare how foul,
Such wedding render's man's eternal soul.
God made men's wives a monstrous brood bring forth
Of ugly Giants, to amaze the Earth.
Who for their pride, and cruel acts removed
Amongst men, with men of the old world were drowned.
And who have so been married since the flood,
Begotten have a Gigantean brood:
Such Nimrod was, such were his workers on
The lucklesse Tower of confusion.
Of whom old Bards ingeniously did feign,
To war with Heaven, fals-thirsting thereto reign,
Heaping huge hills on hills, and chambring on,
To pull Jove down from his supernall throne.
Cruel Idolatry, and Pride are Twins,
Which God abhorres, too seldom pardoned sins;
The One banished Angels from the Courts of Heaven,
The Other has Kings of Diadems bereaven:
Both making children of the holy lands,
Distressed bondmen in Chaldean bands.
How happen's then, that any captive-lord
In Babylon, with blessings should be stored?
He, that from heaven, sent hels infernal^ slashes,
On sinne-blind Sodom burned to dust and ashes*
For unrepented crimes, has also given
To penitents, 'midst earthly hell, a heaven.
He is the true God, when his people turns,
Does rain down blessings, and his scourges burns.
Else Ioachim had known no day of mirth
In Babylon, nor no such heaven on earth.
God thinks on kindness when for sins he scatters
The sons of Sion, among many waters.
Rods for amendment sending upon those
Which sleep in sin, he wakens them with woes.
When sinners turn to him, they do not want,
Vineyards he gives, which they did never plant,
And corne-full acres, which they have not sown,
And towns of strangers given them for their own.
Let no man trust in sin, nor though sinne-driven,
From man's society, despair in heaven:
For God, on a sin banished man put on
A Crown imperial in great Babylon.
Making him after (for presumptuous ills)
Graze among Cattle on a thousand hills:
And after that, gave him his Crown again,
To make him know, a King of Kings does reign.
Se^^. II.
ARGUMENT.
Babel Ladies try their (...)*
To g^ine Lord Ioachims good will*
Susan (who deserves the Bay^s*)
Winnes his love, her beauties praise.
NOw, when the Babylonian Lords could not
Tangle Lord Io^chim in Loves Gordian knot;
When they perceived 'twould be in vain for them
To turn unto their bent his passion-streame:
They all su^ceast their hopeless suits to move,
Leaving him freedom to select his love;
But now some Feminines of Babylon
To gain his love, did gay adornments d'on.
They went apparrell'd in the Hebrew fashion,
Swelling their minds with vain imagination.
(...) This love^ now attends Time to ^inde,
Wherein his Love should know his loving mind.
The youthful Lady, marriageable grown,
Virtue and Beauty gaind her such ^^downe,
That every man (informed of her Name)
Far in the Orient, spread her newborn fame;
For unto her, this attribute was given:
Susan the fair, who fears the God of heaven.
Her form and virtue (interblending rays)
Transplended theirs, that lived before her days.
Before her, such a beauty was not seen
Within the City of King Ninus Queen;
Clearly in whose complexion glory shone,
Like Titan in serenest Horizon,
Beyond expression beautiful, her Nation
Admired her form, with more than admiration.
Some parallel her by the fond compare
Of mundane things, some call her Phoenix fair;
Some said her front seemed like an Iv'rie hill,
Whereon some god did Nard and Amber spill:
Her lovely cheeks resembling summer-fields,
Which damaske-rose, and silver lilly yields:
Her hairs the golden threads; or in the skien,
Like bright Apollo's morning-beames; hereyn
Sparkling like Diamonds, or stars that shone
With influence, to comfort lookers on.
Others affirm, her head's a little heaven
Imperial, where blessed Angels liven,
Her breathing like perfumed wind, which moves
In balmy sweet Egyptian autumne-groves.
Her teeth like orient pearl, whose comely rows,
Her lips (like Rubie) very seldom shows
In her discourse* whose voice to st^nders by,
Soom'd like supernal seav'n-spheer'd harmony.
Some said her neck a turret seemed of one
Smooth pollisht snow-white Alablaster-stone:
And that the same (for evermore) inzon'd
A Carquenet of costly diamond.
Her paps two Swan-down worlds, that each contains
Like Rivolets, bright Azure branched veins.
Such kind of commendation did but stain
Her holy countenance in a purer grain,
Then blushing rose, then Vespers crimson sky,
Then snow-bals tincted with vermilion dye.
What man soever Susanna's praise would sing,
Had need carouse the Helliconian spring;
Had need Arion's silver Harp, and voice,
Or of King David's, a diviner choice;
Else, he can never truly blazon forth,
Sufficient praises of Susanna's worth.
MEDIT. II. Auri sacra fames.
WHen men on plenti's swelling Ocean sail,
Attended on with honor's windy gale;
Worldlings will be their servants: earthly treasure,
Attracteth friends, and momentany pleasure.
Women to wealthy men conjoyne alone,
Like steel unto Septentrionall stone*
If pleased Fortune's Sunny beamlings shine,
Serenely on some boon estate of thine:
If bounteous heavens builder daine to ^hrow
His left-hand-blessings on thy crowned brow;
Thou shall not want sufficient friends, that will
Augment the portion of thy plenty still.
Then ( Iove-like) thou in welcome-golden shower,
May overcome Danae, in her brazen tower.
Nations in blinded times of old bare love
To Heaven, when they de^sied Jove:
But (now-adayes) no Jupiter i^ found*
For (in all lands) Pluto a god is (...)
And through the Christian world in moder^^ times,
In female-hearts, god Mammo^ highly climbes.
Gold is a Load-starre to their loves, it can
Draw them to fancy any wealthy man.
To win a golden Husband, some devise,
To cover all Natures informities:
If fairness dwindles in their cheeks, they will
Water't with Clarets, and bestow their skill.
Lest Titan's kisses stain their painted skin,
Their fannes, and veiles shall mew their beauties in*
If they have bouncing limbs* the same are pennd
In leatherne prisons, proportion to amend:
If they want grace (by art) in fac^ they bring
Of white and red a second beauty's Spring:
Such when I see (Lord) how completely vain,
(Think I) is all god Mammon's following train.
Such yeeld's this world, affording other some,
Contemning gold, which covet wealth to come.
Not in this world: whose parents that did breed them,
With blessed food Helcias-like did feed them.
And they (not worldly minded) never marry;
But where they find the fear of Heaven tarry.
Slighting Earth-treasures, they will not approve
Mortals for mortal riches worthy love.
They with Susannan virtues are endi^^ae,
Of them, i^ but a slender multitude.
Who happily trained in faintly education,
Can join their love with Christian moderation.
With so much comeliness as their complexions,
A man would deem full of divine perfections.
And such (like Capharean Lanternes) give
Them light, which in nocturnall darkness live.
Such when I see;* I seem to see the graces
Of heavenly Angels, shrin'd in human^ faces;
And then I think, if such perfection dwells
With Saints abiding in terrestrial cell.
In mortal mansions of flesh, what stories
Can show the heavenly ones supernall glories?
Sect* III.
ARGUMENT.
Ioachim to Helcias ^oes,
His love unto Susanna shows
Her Sire assents; his speeches ^^ines
Her heart, and marriage-day obtaines*
NOw when Susanna's beauty through the town,
And Provinces was b^azon'd up and down,
Some Noble Lords (who lived in Babylon)
Sought her in marriage, (...) her Paragon
Of fairest beauties (so all tongues agreed)
Who, her in wooing, had as hapless speed,
As those gay Dames, that (whilome but in vain)
Supposed the young Lord Ioachims love to gain;
For old Hel^ias (though his daughter could
Not fancy them, fearing in time she would)
(...) Susanna listening to her constant Lover,
Her whispering friends (in corners) do discover
A glorious combat in her countenance,
By all the Graces fought in puissance:
A pleasant battle, none of them would yield,
To lose the glory of that honored field.
Aurora's blush of ruby countenance,
Nor Maiden- Cynthia's silver-radiance,
Nor deawly Vesper's Crimson-colour'd sky,
Nor via lactea's heavenly milken die*
Nor Doves, nor Roses, could such colors show,
As in her countenance did come, and go.
It seems her judgment wisely did approve
His Courtly learning in the school of Love:
For yer Titania, with her horned brow,
Wa^dred on high 12 heavenly mansions through,
She was affianc'd, at her father's boo^d,
To Ioachim her overjoyfull Lord.
Glad, as our Lovers, were their friends, and they
Prefixed the wedding's ceremonial day,
Which soon expires; and in his nuptial bands,
The mariage-god conjoyns them heart and hands.
Glad Io-Peans Hymen then did sing,
And to their wedding pomp, and glory bring.
What shall I say? such marriage (unbereaven
Of happiness) was forecontriv'd in heaven.
To tell the Bride, and Bridegroom's going forth,
With various music, quaintest songs of mirth,
When spangled anadems bedeckt the brow
Of Madam Bride, time scanteth me to show.
Suffice it you, she was attended on,
By all the stately trains of Babylon:
And through that town, to honor Susan's name
Loud Cymbals ring out: Naptha bonfires flame:
Tilts, Tournaments, and great triumphant sport,
Honored her Nuptials in great Babels Court.
MEDIT. III. Verus amor odit moras.
THe best love-potion is, whoever prove
Virtuous affection; it obtains love*
True love resembling unction powered upon
The Crown of Aaron, thence descending on
His beard, and garment-skirts* that left behind
Odours, which to devotion moved the mind.
It Is like the fine dew of Hermoni^^-fountains,
Gently distilling upon Sion-mountains.
It Is purest fire, extracted from the Pole,
Surpassing that, that fond Prometheus stole
It (being enkindled by Celestial breath)
Burns till extinguished by the hand of death
In virtuous souls of men. Beauty alone,
^n^ends it not, it dures when beauty's gone
(...) profit* not on pleasure it depend's,
Pleasure and profit on true love attends:
True love disdaineth all ignoble ends:
It (...) hearts in that contentive chai^*
Which World's great builder did for man ordain*
Not in the earth; where blood and wrong abounds,
But in the bosom of Elizian grounds.
By love and wedlock, highest God (who then
Made two of one) made them two one again:
Leaving the same for signals to abide
Of Heavens bridegroom, and his holy bride.
Could men of such a Theme no verses make:
Mountains, and Rocks would warblings undertake,
Loud echo answ'ring them again) would sing,
And shame upon unthankful men would bring:
Our souls Redeemer by his (...) divine,
To honor these turned water into wine,
At Galilean Canaan* God declared
Heav'n-joyes unto a wedding feast compared.
But for true-love, and marriage-propagation,
The World had still remained in desolation.
O love and wedlock (chasing wanton fires,
Which in our souls the Paphian god inspires)
In you the poor man's joys (...) abound:
As his, whose brows with fined gold are (...)
You empty dwellings fill, and are a sign
Of Sions bridegroom, and his love divi^^
Your praise (alas) my Muse too saintly sings.
Let some good Angel spread his shining wings,
Descending on them from supernall Quire,
And bring with him some sempiternall Lyre.
To strike with aires of Heaven the ears of men,
And show how much indebted mortals been
To Heaven for these, let duller worldlings be
Ravished, to hear celestial melody*
When he shall strike his more than Orphean string,
Stones, streams, and woods will dance about, and sing.
Sect. IV.
ARGUMENT.
Ioachim, and Susann's love
Crowned with blessings from above:
They have beauteous children, fair
Mansions, and Gardens rare.
Our married Lovers, full of high content,
Live merry, lives in Fortune's blandishment:
God showr's abundant blessings on them down
Giving them children, wedlock joys to crown,
In whose composure, Elements conspire,
To turn themselves into eternal fire.
The virtuous Offspring of the patient Ioh,
(For beauty famous in this earthen Globe,
Whose fairnes shamed the finest flowers of May)
Were not more amiably fair then they.
Lord Ioachim, and Lady Susan were,
(When ever named) Music to every ear.
Their joy abound's on earth, and Fortune's Sun,
With golden-beames, on them serenely shone
No sadning want, no sorrow-bringing strife,
Was known to burden their good mariage-life:
But in their bosom, dwell'd a purer love,
Then what the Tur^le beare^s his fellow-dove.
Their dwellings for the years bine seazo^s stand,
Like little Temples in a holy Land,
Within adorned, with polisht Ivory posts.
And with refined gold of Ophir-coasts.
Gardens, and Orchards they had many a one,
(And such, as then, were paralleled by none)
Surrounded with Bitumen'd walls of stone.
Gardens they had, in every month were green,
Where trees, and herbs were still in glory seen.
Where Nightingales continual songs did sing,
Because they found there, a continual spring.
There you, in winter-gardens, might behold
Swee^ Marjorams, some green, and some like gold.
There Lavender, and full-blown Daffadill,
Purple-vein'd Vi'lets, Couslips, Cammomill,
There verdant herbs, there blossomed Rosemary
Flourisht, with the immortal Daphnean tree.
In Winter-moneths, there might you gather posies
Of Gillow^^^w is, and pretty Prime-^oses:
There plushen-pasies, woodbine-double flowers,
And brables sweet, decked Flora's winter-bowers.
There Periwincles, Germander, and Lillies,
With Flags aspired behind Nardiss^^ Dillies:
There lofty Firre-trees, Pink like leaved Pine,
Pomecitron-trees, and trees which Iv^es twine,
There berr^^d Hollyes, Juniper, and Ew,
With never^more decaying Boxtrees grew.
There Orange, Limon, Palm, Pomeg^anad (...),
Cypress, and shady Mirtle-trees were seen.
There many plants (bearing no fruit but flowers)
By art were changed to eye contenting bowres,
There Labyrinths, and many Mazes were,
A little Wilderness of trees was there:
All which in Winter-gardens seemed gay,
As greenest Elme-trees in the month of May.
There the Mezerion-plants on high did bloome,
From plants and herbs, such spicy winds would come*
That you would think (had you been there) there moves
Autumnall airs of blessed Arabian groves.
To say what herbs, what plants, and odours fill
Their Summer-grounds, (...) my weaker
The Graci^^ (...) of the glories (skill.
Within those places) wrote Elizian stories:
Where Pleiades celestial influences,
Bred orient colored flowers to cheer the senses,
And to content the Spirits; there did stand
The owner's study; on a knowle of land:
Where the desilience of argentine-streames
Enlightened it, with Sols reniding beams.
Thrice happy man he did enjoy the pleasure
Of (almost) Eden, in the highest measure,
That any man (since Adam fell) obtein'd
In Regions where E^an Monarchs reigned.
Fair Stillatories he had builded there:
Where Flora's vertuall powers did appear;
But beautiful Susanna (Io chi^^ Erde)
More pleasant was then all the flowr's beside.
His Olive-orchards, Parks, and Vineyards all.
His bleating slocks, which came at shepherds call,
His corn, his wine, his plenteous Bahns and Mirrh,
Were slender blessings all compared with her^
For my Urania in Queen Flora's bowres,
Dares sing, Susanna fairer then earthly flowers.
MEDIT. IV. Bonis bona singula.
THus righteous souls are blessed: their God, who guides
The floods of Heaven, and the Ocean tides,
Who fills the world with plenteousnesse, and roules,
The rapid Spheeres on their unmoving Poles)
Does send them comforts from his holy hill,
And the desires of their souls fulfill.
Their wives resemble Vine-trees on the house:
Their youthful sons, those pleasant Olive-boughes,
Abounding with the fattest dewes of Sion;
Their furnished tables round about environ
Their daughters fair (of Virtue fair ensamples)
Like polisht pillars in the holy Temples.
Their eyes behold their childrens children in
The land of grace, when peace is crowned Queen.
On their inher^tance, Heaven sends down
All promised blessings, their desires to crown
With joys beyond their wish: no hailstones shall,
No mildewes harm, on their corn-acres fall.
Their land (unlike unto Egyptian grounds,
Which watring Nylus, often, starve's and drownd's)
The eternal send's from his round running thron,
The former with the latter rain upon.
Their mountains, vales, and dales of corn shall bring,
With fruitfulness, that they shall laugh and sing.
Their fertile Vines (with clusters heavy laden)
Shall (almost) burst before they can be trodden
Into the painful wine press, they shall leave
Behind enough for strangers to receive.
Their Garners shall with wheat be over-heel'd
Their casks with wine, with milk, and oil be filled,
Their cattle fruitful, where the same abide,
Grass shall up-spring like that on Jordan side,
Aspiring in the kindly month of May.
Butter, and Honey shall their stomachs stay:
Rivers anammell all their virid plains,
Where milk, and mel, and Maja still remayn's;
Whose motley medow's pomp shall be maintained,
By Iris riches, when the Heavens have rained:
Fishes shall multiplying, fill their floods,
As greenest leaves replenish Summer-(...).
Blessings shall stream unto them, unto them,
Belong the joys of new Jerusalem.
In terrene troubles, wheresoever they fall,
God (their protector) bring's them out of all.
Confirmed by God, and man, they stand beloved
Like Sion-mountains, which are never moved
These are their earthly blessings; these in sum*
Fore type man's better heavenly bliss t^ come.
Sect. V.
ARGUMENT.
Ioachim's frequented Feasts,
Princely fare for Princely guests:
Two lewd Elders (most unjust)
To lie with Susan burn in lust.
LOrd Ioachim, and his beloved Spouse,
To honest comers kept a bounteous house:
Unto their Lordly Palace every day,
Their Kinsmen came to banish dole away.
Sometime they spent their time in harmles mirth,
Sometimes in games the pleasures of the earth
Lord Ioachim was niggard unto none;
His greatest comfort underneath the Sun,
Was to bid strangers welcome to his table;
His pilgrimage of life was honorable.
Pilgrims about the World, report his fame,
As Sidney's lines one Lord Kalander's name.
Princes, and judges to their sumptuous Palace,
Would often journey for their better solace:
Where feasting days (save Players made no sport
Resembled grand days in a Princes court.
The captive Hebrews, that had long been sorry,
Without abuse, would there be often merry.
To welcome them, who thither would repair,
The dainties of the Ocean, Earth, and Air
He wanted not: of junckettings no dearth,
Hesperian gardens such things brought not forth.
The Manna, that on Thisbe's tree distil's
In Summer-mornings, on Calabrian hills,
He counted but a drug; his plenteous wines
Equaled the red juice of Engeddian Vines.
He had Ambrozian junckets, men did think
Supernall Nectar had been there for drink.
Abusive Bacchanalians, which do mar
The bliss of man, from him were banished far*
But if in Babylon, lived any poor,
They were releev'd by his abundant store.
The Hebrew-Elders earnestly entreat,
Within his hall, to build their judgment seat.
He granted their petition; all, and some,
Who had to do in law, did thither come.
Now were not any in more honor there,
Then Ioachim, and his Susanna were:
Now Fortune's Sun, as never 't would decline,
Upon Susanna smilingly did shine:
She found a Heaven on Earth, living a life
Most Princess like, most worthy Io^chim's wife;
But mundane pleasures, which do flatter souls,
May in one moment, all be turned to doles.
Behold (you that beheld the splendent light
Of Susan's virtue with your mental sight)
What Hel-born darkness would defile her fame,
And with reproach intombe her honored name.
In Babylon an annual custom was,
To change their Judges, as the years did pass:
Judicious Princes once a year did choose
A pair of Elders, fit to doom the Jews.
Who now, mistaken, had selected forth,
Two sons of Belial, men of seeming worth,
Dissembling Lawyers, such as, all their lives,
Had been familiar with their neighbor's wives:
Such wicked children, and the same, of whom,
The Eternal said; Iniquity is come
From Babylon: and plainly does appear
In breasts of Ancients, that do govern there.
These haunt the Mansion of Lord Ioachim,
And crept in estimation with him:
Where (often) both of them in doubtful cause,
Pass partial judgment of impartial Laws.
Their heads were wilefull; for a golden fee,
Saints they co^demn'd, bold sinner's lives to free.
These (gazing on the Sun of Susan's beauty)
Were stricken blind, they could not ken their duty:
Their hasty feet in paths infernal trod,
And they forgot the glorious laws of God:
When Time's cold Winter changed their beards like wools
Of whitest Lambs, and baldned both their sculs,
They burned in lust toward her; and every day,
Court being ended, there did loyt'ring stay:
Their blood reboil'd, like that in Aeson-veins,
They were as jocund as the younger swains.
To dinner (sent-for) each returns home,
Whither again, they (having dined) would come,
So in apparel, changed that men (whilere)
Who (...) were.
Though they, by interparlance, were unjust,
Yet did they not communicate their lust;
T'ill wondering at their frequent meeting there,
Each tell's his fellow, without shame, or fear,
And then these Devils in a humane shape,
Cohasten fair Susanna to entrap:
Though Charon, hel's infernal Boat-man, stood
Waiting to waft them ore the Stygian flood:
They doted on Venerian sport, as though
They had creation only to do so:
So (waxen old) they both again begin
To serve another pren^^ship to sin:
Mispending their most precious heaven lent leisure,
Not in repentance, but in carnal pleasure.
MEDIT. V. Voluptas dulce venenum.
COuld judges (having honor to be styled
Gods upon earth) then Devils prove more vil'd?
Could they (who often had condemned to die,
Adulterers) commit adultery?
Could Elders burn in lust? could old men wander
In flames, like the Serpentine Salamander?
Did they (when crooked, old, and bald, and rivell)
D'on youthful rayments, to allure to evil?
Had the seducing Div'll no younger men
In Babylon, to be his factors then?
Vainglorious fools to think apparel could,
Entice a Saint, though wrought with Indian gold.
Had they contemned the Laws, and taken leisure,
To fall from God, to make a god of pleasure?
Pleasure what is it, it is an Amphisben,
Biting at both ends, it soon ends men.
Pleasure what is it? is it not a trap,
To ruin Anthony in Fortune's lap?
To humble Hanibal, who marched far,
Renownedly unharm'd by Roman war?
This is a hand of Mischief: thi^ could rim
Proud Olophernes traitors head from him.
It could demolish skie-aspiring Troy,
And her bright glory in dark embers lay.
The souls of men are oftentimes betrayed
By carnal pleasure, to infernal shade.
It Is like a blind worm^ in our paths, it is
A stinging Adder of the land of Dis:
It Is like Medusa's tresse; and if it be
T^ wound in the body of man's living tree,
Man's heart of flesh convert's (if he have one)
By secret vigor, to unliving stone.
It steeleth over the maiden-blushing soul,
Past sense of sin, make's royal David foul.
(Alas) the Lebanon of God has never,
Such Cedars nourisht, but this storm could shiver.
This is a blast could tumble to the ground
World-wondred Samson when he lived renowned.
Could make the wisest mortal King bow down,
With foolish congies, to the gods unknown.
Pleasure's a monstrous Witch, that can transform
Proud men into Harpeian-birds of harm.
Embrace her in your bosoms, you that list
To houle in darkness of Chimeria^ mist:
For this pollutes man's soul, and ^an undo
The strongest men consenting thereunto*
Plebeans should beware; and Prin^es then,
Be vigilant in choosing soundest men
For Magistrates, such whose example shooed,
Shining in goodness, do their Con^i^^e good.
Kings, that so careful are, shall ever find
Confirmed peace, and leave renown behind.
Which Pharoh knew, when he to Ioseph's hands*
Committed ruledome of Aegyptian-lands:
Wherefore let Christian Kings observe the same,
And they shall gain an everlasting Name.
Sect. VI.
ARGUMENT.
The Elders think men's spirits ^n^w,
after death, no weal^, nor woe:
Of sin, and Susan's destoration,
Consists all their consultation.
THese Elders, when together on a day,
Between themselves, these following words did say:
Such words renowned Solomon foretold,
In counsel speak our Savior's Judges would.
Mankind is born to live, and die in sin,
Death makes a man as he had never bin:
Let Us laugh our time to nothing: after death
Comes neither joy, nor pain, our vital breath
Smoak-like ascends from our nostrils; all
Our words, like fiery dying sparkles, fall
Unto the ground, our bodies turn to clay,
Our spirits vanish like the aires of May:
Our lives consume, like empty clouds of heaven,
Which winds beyond the ken of man have driven,
Or like to dewly mists, that soon are done
Upon the rising of the Summer's Sun.
Our names and fames (in time) will be forgotten:
Our memory (like dead men's bones) be rotten.
Time hastens, man decay's, compleats his Urn,
And it is decre'd: from death can none return.
Come let us fall unto our wonted games,
Let us be blithe, and nourish wanton flames,
On silver-trenchers, let us frankly ear.
The finest fat of lust-provoking meat;
It Will make us young though we be waxen old,
And let us drink (in burnisht bowls of gold)
The sparkling ancient strong Falernian Wines:
And look about, for youthful Concubines.
Sad cogitations jolly souls oppress:
Let us ascend our thrones in pleasantness.
Let Nard, and Amber on our garments smell,
Like Flora's Bowers, where Maja's Nymphs do dwell.
Roses will wither (being fully blown)
But while they bud, we will wear a Rosy crown.
What Lyncean eye discern's our lewd delight,
Covered with darkness of the cloudy night?
Why should we censures fear, or idle sound
Of humane words, that are environed round
With marble-wals? the wit of mortals can
Not find our wiles past finding out of man:
And Heaven regards not the works of men;
Come let us boldly feast, and frollick then;
Let us not care though heav^ns bright eye espies,
For danger comes not from serened skies.
That men to heaven ascend, is but a fable:
Heaven for mankind is not inhabitable.
Fair women be our heaven: Venus treasures
Our happiness: some token of our pleasures,
In ev'ery place, whereby the world may mind us
In future time, now let us leave behind us.
To swell our borders, let us never spare
To injure Orphans: never let us care
To estimate men's white sen^^ed hairs,
The open Index of their doting years.
But to our pleasure, let us bend Susanna;
Whom fame reports chaster then Diana.
Fame is mistaken, she is fairer far.
Shall we but gaze on this admired star,
To pine with Tartalus? let us mount and tear
Her glory down, and stain her silver sphere
If Susan be a Comet in the air,
She does portend Elders shall soon enjoy her.
Dedalian plumes, let us ascend upon:
And shuf^le Phoebus from his burning throne.
But if with wax-wings we our mounty make,
Doubtless we tumble in Icarian lake
Of common shame, and folly bars our bliss.
Remember we our novell case in this:
We have imparadis'd our best affection,
Within the Eden of her best complexion.
Let us be prudent still: and we shall find
A mooting time, to new inform her mind.
What if Susanna be so seeming chaste,
So careful to conserve fond honors blast,
That she about the town will never rome:
But in her Palace live immured at home?
What if she walk but in her gardens, we
Have leave to walk in them as well as she*
What if a seeming Angel, we shall prove
Her woman, by obtaining of her love.
Boldness beseems lovers best, and fortune
^
Then ^et us watch her Gardens, it is a common
Custom observed among the Hebrew women,
To bath her Ivory limbs, if we out-find
Her bathing there, there she discerns our mind.
Though Judges, we'll turn Sentinels for love:
This noble passion often transformed Jove.
In her white Conscience-book, we'll register
Our warm affections: we deserve not her
If we delay this hour let us begin:
Demurres in love, are more the mortal sin.
Doubtless ( Diana-like) she ^aves her limbs,
In yonder Fountain: on whose floury brims,
May we surprise her, and possess our pleasure,
In rifling up dame Venus hidden treasure.
If in our aidance, Heaven Gods will not bow;
Help us, you Acharontish gods below,
We can beguile, if helped but by you,
Daughters of Jacob, and of Judah too.
MEDIT. VI. Heu vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur.
BElial, and all his babes are busy still,
In darksome earth, to do their pranks of ill:
And what the Dev'll dare scan^ presume to do,
That ev'll he tempts ungodly men unto.
The glorious Angels dare not p^wsing stand:
But what God will's perform it out of hand:
The whirling spheres, with armies of the heaven,
Observe the statutes God to them has given.
The Sky, the Earth, the Ocean, every thing;
Nay fiends themselves, obey the eternal King.
Dumb creatures of this world fulfill the word,
And will of man, their dominering Lord:
The brutish cattle do what them behove;
But sinful men most disobedient prove:
They (worse then all things else) disdain to follow,
The Lord of all things, all his Laws unhallow;
And (but for nothing in an angry mood)
They sometimes swim in streams of Abel's blood:
And for base lucre, germane brothers slay:
The Devils have more fear, and faith than they.
^ome of them make a god of gold, and some
(With giddy cups of Atheism overcome)
Believe blind Fortune wrought this goodly frame,
That all contains, and governs the same.
Another kind remayn befooled in evils,
Supposing neither Deity nor Devils,
Counting Religion, and the holy Law,
But wiles to keep the wilful world in awe.
Some others deem death naturally came
To every thing, beneath the Cynthian flame;
Yet living so (as they should never drink,
The cup of death, nor sleep on Lethe-brink.
They fearelesse sin, until by death the are sent
Unto infernal vales, where Dathan went,
With his companions, there is no wrath to come,
(As they believe) soul's bliss, nor day of doom;
But every nullifidian, which denies
The resurrection, from the dead shall rise*
And lastly, hears Archangel'^ trumpet summon
To heavens chief ses^ions all the world in common*
Platonian wisemen (when the world is done)
Shall come in judgment of the Virgins son:
At which great day, the round enflaming earth,
The boiling Sea, and burning hell beneath,
Shall vomit up their dead, whose spirits shall
In quickened corpse, be re-invested all.
All Na^ions shall at heavens throne appear,
To yield account how they have lived here.
The King of glories (at whose dexter-hand,
Thousands of thousands Saints and Angels stand^
Shall bend the shining heavens down, and come,
To render to the live, and dead men doom.
Then righteous souls shall evermore be blessed
With Eulog^es to everlasting rest.
May I believe (while I have life and breath,
That our dead bodies do but sleep in death,
Until that glorious day, that after then,
God's Parad^se, just ones obtain again:
For, for the righteous, Sions Lamb was killed,
Yer God foundations of the world did build:
But woe to them, and many woes remayn,
That are miswandred in the ways of Cain.
That by deceitfulness of Balam's hire,
Are tumbled down to Hel's Gehinn^^-fire;
That in gainsayings of rebellious Core,
Are fallen down, and lost for evermore:
For they are stones in hospitable feasts,
Abominable, more than any beasts.
Roaring like waves, which Satan puts in ^^tion,
To foame out shame on sin's bloud-colour'd Ocean.
And like to errant Stars bereav'n of light,
Reserved in darkness, for the darkest night.
Sect VII.
ARGUMENT.
Susanna bathes her in a Spring
Of her Gardens, where birds sing:
Near which, enamored Elders were
Enambusht; they surprise her there.
Upon a day Susanna walked alone,
(Save two young damsels her attending on)
Into her gardens shady woods, and bowers,
To Enjoy the bliss of vacant evening hours,
To hear the Quiristers of Nature sing
Their dulcet-tunes unto the dancing spring,
To hear the shrill sweet Philomel of May,
Warble forth sweet notes on a thorny spray:
Which birds (she listening to them) ran on still
In various quav'rings of unmated skill,
Chanting their silver-ditties more and more,
And sweetlier sang, than they had sung before:
Tuning through their winde-instrumentall throats,
Quaint diapasons of well sounding notes.
Which Music (repercust by rocks, and rils)
Sported nymph-Eccho in the boschy hills.
In her peramble; lo the blossomed trees,
With hony-dews, employ the humming bees,
And painted trouts in clearest fish ponds play
Above the water, in a shining day.
There softer aires (perfumed by many flowers,
Which flourished through May as mid-night-showres)
Sweetened the bowers of her sweet meditation,
Pleasing her soul in heavenly contemplation:
Where lustful Elders cunningly lay hidden,
To theeve away the only fruit forbidden.
Now when she had perambulated round,
(As she accustomed) her small Eden-ground,
She (most unhappily) came down to cool
Her curious body in a crystal poole;
(The sultry time inviting to the same)
Lest purest blood within her veins inflame.
She little weening what bold serpents lay
Lurking to venture on so boon a pray)
Sent both her maidens, that untir'd her, in
To fetch sweet washbals for her silken skin,
Who brought the same, returning in, they barred
Her garden doors, as she had given word.
And then in veils, with linnen-syndons dight,
(Whose perfect hew out-shone the milken white)
Gently she waded from the fountain brimmes,
Where water nymphs embraced her Ivory limbs,
The day was clear, and radiant Titans e^'n
Did scantly through o'reshading arbors shine.
No eye she deemed, but heavens immortal one,
Discernd her in that secret fount alone.
She upright standing when false Elders eyed her,
Like fair Diana, when Act^on spied her.
Who wont (while bathing in the silver, spring)
This sequent Psalm most frequently to sing.
PSALM. 137. Psalmus comes optimus.
WHen by the floods of Babylon,
We sat us down, did flow
Floods from our eyes, to pender ^n
Our mother Sion's (...)
As for our Harps we hanged them
On willowes to remain:
Which crowned Perah's winding stream,
In midst of Shinar-plain.
Then our Captivors mocked our moan,
Thus taunting with their tongues:
Come tune your Harps, and sing us one
Of Sions holy songs.
Lord, how can we our songs commend*
To our great God, and King*
Can we be glad! within a land
Of strangers, can we sing?
Jerusalem if I do let
From my remembrance slide*
Then let my dexter-hand forget
My warbling Harp to guide.
And if I thee remember not,
Cleave to my mouth (O tongue)
Jerusalem ^f I prefer
Not thee within my song.
Forget not Edom's sons (O Lord)
When thou did Sion wound:
How they against thy Sion roared,
Down, down with it to the ground.
(O daughter Babel) thou shall be
Quite overturned thus:
He shall be blessed, rewards thee*
As thou have served us.
They shall be blessed, that shall take
The children of thy sons:
And for thy fornications sake,
Dash them against the stones.


Before she was in middle of her song,
Lust-boldned elders through the thickets flung.
And rudely a black Psalm began to sing,
Unto molested Susan in the Spring.
To her, ashamed they, unconfounded, plead,
Whose lustful language, nothing stands instead:
For where Heaven winnes; that fortress of renown
Is too much strong, for fiends to batter down.
MEDIT. VII. Aetas aurea prima.
IT was a golden age, yer sin began
Strange fires to kindle in the soul of man:
For man (an Angel's fellow then) could sing
Heav'n-tuned lauds to heavens eternal King,
Could then converse with God, could psalm his praise
Commingling sweet songs with Archangel's lays.
Like Truth did man go naked then, and bless
The God of truth without abashfulnesse.
He had no charms, like Sirens, to entise
The gentler Virgins of the world to vice:
His body did a heaven-born soul eashrine,
And (like the same) was deathlesse and divine.
All humane thoughts were perfect: Belial then
Had not a son among the sons of men.
Then fairest women (naked though they went)
Did never fear inhumane ravishment:
For their illustrious ever-during beauty,
Enchanted not men to forget their duty.
Sorrows and shames (which since have overflown
The earth) in earth were utterly unknown.
Enormous crimes dwell'd with infernal Devils,
And man's sweet heart was undistain'd with evils;
A mansion 'twas, where Virtues did remain.
'Twas then a throne, where Helion did reign:
But, sinful, now become a noisome stie
Of all pollution, where Fiend-legiens-lie.
And (since this worser Iron-age is come)
Virtues retire unto celestial home
That Virtue, Chastity (which God regard's
To crown from Heaven, with undefiled rewards)
By painted Vice, is injured every ^^ower:
Almost is lost her mayden-blushing flower.
Vice counterfeit's her colors, she proclaims
^
^
Ever to dwell in insubstantiall wind.
Fair Chastity, which vice cannot infring.
Nor the great Engineere of Hell unhing:
O Favorite of The Eternal, where art thou?
What happy place does entertain thee now?
Did thou relinquish this vain World below,
When other Goddesses of old did so?
Abandoning the earth of bliss bereaven,
To wander in the milky way of heaven?
Or staidst behind alone, to reign and rest
In Princely throne of fair Susanna's breast?
Thou art but seldom seen on earth (...)
Shall almost sooner find a sable (...)
Where may the Daphnes of the (...)
Themselves in safety from assaulting (...)
Since Sin (that wandering Jew) (...) fast (...)
Through earthly kingdoms: Heaven (...) the chaste.
Sect. VIII.
ARGUMENT.
The Elders sue to chaste Susan,
Who does their obscene suit disdain:
Threatening her, they offer rape,
Which (she by calling loud) does escape.
TO holy-thoughted Susan in the Spring,
These Goatish Elders thus began to sing;
Susanna fairest of all blessed creatures,
Susanna, quintessence of blessed features,
With whom the fair dames of the world compared,
Would Morians seem, unworthy man's regard,
World's living wonder, rare Susanna, know,
We unto thee, are humble Suppliants now,
In such a suit, as once supernall Jove
Motion'd unto his metamorphos'd Love.
Uncloud the Sunbeams of thy Beautie's shine:
Let no misseemly frown, nor tears of brine
Unglorifie that happy form of thine:
Grant us thy love, becalme thy countenance;
In Lethe-streames, drench the rememberance
Of nuptial vows: let folly not forestall
Thy soul of blessings: take the golden ball
Of lovely Venus, whiles youth's flower lasts,
Gather the same, before the flower blasts,
By us old blades: whose mettle backs are steel:
The approbation thou, anon, shall feel.
We are no Scouts thy jealous Husband sends
To tempt, and tell; by heaven we are thy friends*
And German-kinsmen of the Royal line
Of Iudah-Kings, as thou may well divine.
Our complements must not be tedious, we
This many a day, have longed to lie with thee.
We are love-martyrs, and to dust shall turn,
Unless thou quench the fires wherein we burn.
The Planet now, which brings love's delight,
Comes in conjunction with the Queen of night.
Heaven on the action smile's: thy doors are fast:
Come, in thy Paradise of joy repast
Our warm desires: let us fall quickly to it,
Lest Gods themselves trans^orme themselves, and do it.
Susanna be not coyous; we do know,
Women, who take good turns, will answer no.
Why seem thou composed of snowy stone?
Turn like the Image to Pigma^ion:
Be not flint-hearted; from this fountain come,
Have pity on us, and be pleasuresome.
Have thou not heard of Jacob's princely son,
Thy grand forefather's lovely actions, done
In holy Regions to a dainty dame,
For pawned ring* it savours not of shame;
Were to thy husband such occasion lent,
He would pursue the self-same merriment,
As he has often done, in wisdom then
Reciprocal, come forth, and pleasure men:
That we (thy servants) will thou but infold
Us in thy arms! may give thee bags of gold:
Which unto thee, we (consecrating) prove
Like men of Lemnos to the Queen of Love.
Scorn not affection: love, disdained, will
In little time, convert to mortal ill.
The Amazed Lady oftentimes, afraid,
Dived under stream, not harkning what they said.
When she up-heav'd her beauty, ten times more
They began to woo, and threaten then before:
Like David, she desired Dove-like wings;
Or (to defer them from her holy springs)
Such sounds, as frightened sons of Aram from
Besieged Samaria, in their ears might come.
Within her Saintly countenance, there stood
Abundance of abasht Vermilion-blood;
But then she frowned upon these evil doers,
And thus admonisht her old wanton woers.
Her denial.
You that are more lascivious far, then either
Sea-Sargons, or the Land-goats when together,
Know, that mine Honor (not received in vain)
Abhor's the tincture of foul whoredoms stain.
Were you both young as David, when he killed
The monstrous Giant in Philistian field,
More beautiful then Absolon: and could
To be, unchaste, you give me seas of gold;
I would contemn you both, and rather fall
Into your wrath then to infernal thrall.
Men shall not stain for gold, nor orient stone
The fair white robe Heaven gave my soul to d'on.
Judges go doom your selves; masters of Laws,
Who learned you plead in such a crimefull cause*
Go mourn in sackcloth for your sins for shame:
But if such madness you disdain to taken;
Depart from hence: seek Babylonian Whores,
Who, signe-post like, stand painted at the doors.
In their white bosoms, they will you enfold,
And welcome bid for bags of yellow gold.
By courting me, you gain your wills, as soon
As Syrian Wolves, by barking at the Moon.
You fly, me seems, with idle Bees of Inde,
Against rough weather, and the stormy wind;
Fierce Euphrates, quoth she, to yonder mountains
Shall backwards run, and hide him in his fountains;
Leaving the deep pools of his channel dry:
Swart leathern Swains shall plough-turmoile the sky;
Sodom's dead lake revive, and entertain
Leviathan, and Neptune's hungry train:
Fishes shall floods forsake, and fowls of heaven
Be decked with scales, and in the Ocean driven:
Babell shall know no heat, nor Pontus cold,
Fire and water shall one dwelling hold:
The brightest flame of Heaven shine by night,
And horned Cynthia give diurnall light.
Before I change my settled constant mind,
To damn my self, that you may count me kind.
Depart, and say you have a woman known,
Preserved your honor, saving of her own.
Their Reply.
Proud scornful dame, what fair means cannot do,
Be certain, foul means shall compel thee to.
Our wronged Honors suddenly shall rain
A storm of vengeance on thee for disdain.
Repent, proud woman, we shall make thee glad
To lie with us: or we will make thee mad.
Ten thousand times thy betters have agreed,
To pleasure us ten thousand times at need,
Nor need they to repent it such behavours
Obtein'd them ours* and all their husband's favors,
If thou refuse, false witness we will bear
To stain thy reputation; we will swear
To end thy life, we found a yongman here,
With thee, in Venus action, we will say,
Therefore thy Maidens thou did send away;
So we'll take vengeance, dooming thee to death:
And, after, when thou want vital breath,
Have thy supposed trespass sung in rimes,
By errant Scundrils in succeeding times.
Drunkards, and Mimicall Pantomini,
Shall make pastime to act thine infamy:
Pointing the horns at Ioachim: and cleep
Thy children bastards, he is constrained to keep.
As bug words children, thy misbranded name,
Shall frighten strumpets from the acts of shame.
Wherefore for honor of thy name, agree
To condescend that we may humble thee.
Concluding so, they offered rape: and feared her,
That she cried out, and all her servants heard her.
But, as she called pure rivolets of tears,
Streamed from her eyes: which in the spring appeare's pears
Cleerer then morning-dew; and did divide
Themselves in droplings swimming toward the side.
Which holy Well, where Saintly Susan wept,
This strange memorial of her tears has kept;
That ever-since, her fluid waters shine,
Brighter then silver, brackt with siluer-brine*
Which, waxing colder, do for cures, excel
Saint Winifrid's waters in the Cambrian Well.
MEDIT. VIII. De Daemone dira libido.
THe Devil want's no Orators in time
Of old, he could make Serpents plead for him
In wily arguments; all kind of evil
Comes from, and is ov'rgilded by the Devil.
There Is Love a virtue of vnvalued price,
And Lust (misnamed love) a brutish vice.
And this infernal thing wants neither tongues,
Nor tunes, to warble forth enchanting songs.
Lust is a subtle Siren, ever training
Souls to destruction, by her secret faining:
She is the prince of darkness eldest daughter,
Wanting no craft: her cunning Sire has taught her
Profound dissimulation: she has skill
To speak all Languages, when-ere she will:
Wandering this earthen world, all carnal men
To her do homage; they her servants been.
This strumpet (clad in Peacock-plumes) does ride
Both day and night, in painted carres of pride:
Her handmaid Lying Pander's, and suborn's
Lovers enough, to serve her lustful turns.
Guilt, Sorrow, Shame, Horror attend her still:
But she can mask them, and go where she will.
Bulwarks of brass, condensed walls of stone,
Cannot debar her: she can walk alone
Unseen, in private Gardens every day:
Within the darkness, find-out Venus way.
And where her power cannot thoroughly pester,
She planteth Envy her Gorgonian sister;
But these (assisted by the fiends of Hell,
Where all Serpentine monstrous legions dwell)
Can never change the Saints firm resolution;
Though they procure them bodily confusion.
Pleasures, nor pains, which wicked mortals plod,
Prevail not to pull righteous souls from God.
Gemonian stairs, Phalarian Bulls, nor all
Torments, that flow from cruel Tyrants gall,
Tarpejan Mountains, Altars of Busire,
Nor furnaces of Babylonian fire,
Rewards, nor tortures have not power to cause
The Saints on Earth, t'abandon heavenly laws.
Camelions change their color, Guile her game:
But in both fortunes, Virtue is the same.
Nor has a Planet's influence power to make
Resolved souls their chastity forsake.
The subcelestiall armor Saints do wear,
Is resolution; soul-distracting fear
Never can pierce it; it defend's the heart,
Better then Coats of maile, and can retort
More keen, and fiercer flying shafts then those,
That (singing) come from ful-bent Russian bows.
Those valiant ones, that wear it, can be bold
When others tremble, unappal'd, behold
The sternest looks of Death, can smile upon
Cocytus waves, and burning Phlegiton.
Though foul Erinnis in the world does reign,
They ( Titan-like) do constant still remayn.
The Ungodly World can vomit up no gall
On them, but they can (dauntlesse) scorn it all.
(Lord) grant us resolution still, to trust
In thy defense, from undermining lust:
Support us by thy power; and then we shall
Like Sion-mountayns stand, and never fall.
Sect. IX.
ARGUMENT.
Chaste Susanna to her Lord
Falsely accused, and sent toward:
Tongues of taunting people stir,
All her friends lament for her.
Susanna call's, the Elders loudly roar,
To drown her cryings, o'pe her Garden door,
Returning, with a recareering pace,
As if some Rebel they had held in chase.
So greedy Huntsmen, on the Pontick downs,
With whoopings, cheer their game pursuing hounds,
Their voices they uplifted to the sky,
With hubbubs, raising woeful hue on cry.
Her clamour-hearing servants running came,
To tender aydance to their tender Dame,
And as, in post, through postern doors they run,
Th'abominable Elders both begun,
(Purboild in breathless sweatings) to amort
Her men, and Maidens with obscene report.
Until that time, did never cloudy shame
Obnubilate the Glory of her Name.
Her monefull Virgins dutifully run,
To comfort her: her vestments they put on:
The clothed Lady comes before the Lords
Whom Elders prepossest with lying words:
Which made their ears to tingle, and their hair
Ascend, as if some Stygian fiends were there.
But Susan, better meditating on it,
Bedri'd her eyelids cleared her mournful front,
"As does the Delian Princess, when her Grace
"In Thetis wavy streams has washed her face:
And, gaining strength, did presently begin
To clear her self, from that suggested sin.
Before her husband she the guilt did rem
From her, imputing heinous crime on them:
Which they, denying, called her impious dame,
Her greived Lord believed not the same:
Wherefore the Elders do confine his Spouse,
(That night) close prisoner to her father's house:
Commanding upon pain of fines, that none
Should speak with her, til morning Phoebus shone,
Where she, good heart, lie's pickled up in tears,
While to her parents she her conscience cleeres.
The vulgar people these aspersions cast,
Susanna is more beautiful, then chaste,
And as Diana kissed with loving skill
Shepherd Endimion upon Latmos hill:
Susanna so in wanton-bowers did spend
Her hours, in dalliance with a nimble friend.
These torrents of unjust defame, and wrongs
Of derogating vulgar-taunting tongues,
Like swelling floods, that to the Ocean roll,
Add fresher troubles to her vexed soul.
Some men of Babylon begin to scorn
Lord Ioachim, pointing at him the horn:
But his true friends co^joyn'd with him in prayer,
Knowing Susanna chaste, as she is fair.
They in compassion of this Innocent,
A silver-sea in brinish showers spent:
Till sable night had with her Ebon-robe,
Darkened the surface of this earthen Globe:
And drowsy Morpheus, with his leaden key,
Had locked the doors of many a mortal eye.
Night, being waxen old, and drunk with tears,
No golden star was seen to gild the Spheres,
Titan to their Antipodites being gone,
To luminate another Horizon.
Now did these Elders hold a parolment,
To practice mischief against this innocent:
Where they determined, when the morning came,
They would condemn this good distressed dame:
So they departed bed-wards: guilty fears
Ringing like larums, in their frightened ears,
In them, the terrors of the internal worm,
Ten thousand kinds of living deaths did form:
Dissembling Satan tempting them, 'till day;
To have them take Susannas life away:
Which they resolved, yet did their bosoms quake,
Fearing of men, whom they afraid should make.
MEDIT. IX. Ludit in humanis divina potentia rebus.
WHat shall I laugh, that Fortune like a ball,
Bandies the Globe of this inconstant All?
Shall loud Abderian laughter fill my tongue,
Or shall I sing Ephesian mourning song?
Because the world's a well concordant jarre:
Like fained Perseus wedding bringing war.
Nothing subsists beneath the Cynthian flame,
But somewhat live's to terrify the same.
The Emperor and Peazant have their foes,
As Well as friends; world's Epidemick woee,
And casual joys denoting; great men know
Few real friends, from friends in fained show
Too day unconstant worldlings will dispraise
Whom they to morrow, to the Heavens raise;
And, presently, their judgments will condemn
The persons (whilome) in esteem of them.
It Is necessary, that offenses come:
But woe, and many woes to them by whom:
'Twere better they (with milstones heavy tied
About their necks) had in the Ocean died.
It Is necessary, that offenses come,
To make us mindful of supernall home;
Should be continual Summer, all things fair,
And plentiful, few souls for heaven would care.
Should Fortune cheer us with still smiling eye,
We should condoat on this vain world, and die*
Therefore all things beneath-expansed Heaven,
God has to change, and revolution given.
The Sun (attained to his Meridian throne)
Declines again, till he from thence be gone.
The gentle calmes bring rougher storms, and all
Hot gleames of Titan cause cold showers to fall.
Mild Zeph'ry Summer part^s; in Summers room,
Chill Winter with Aeolian rufflers come.
Age fallows youth, death life, night follows day:
So vanishes world's glory clean away.
Calamity, and comfort comes, and goes,
From man to man, like Neptune's ebb and flows.
Now caroll we like Nightingales of May,
Anon like Pellicans, we pine away.
In humane things, a power divine does play:
This changfull world attend's her changing day.
We prostrate lie on dunghils, and anon,
Ascend in triumph, upon Honor's throne.
Earth-joyes are false, they bid us soon adue,
Her during-sorrowes are most certain true.
Our wise forefathers doted not on this
Deceitful round, where Satan's kingdom is;
Though living in the golden age of joy,
Hundreds of years, they counted earth a toy;
But in these Iron-generations, some
Prize it, on whom world's worser ends are come.
My soul contemnes this world, which over flows
Me, like a Sea, with tides of briny woes.
Where griefe's Vorago's upon either hand,
Worser then Scylla, with Charybdis stand.
Lord, daigne we may by trouble-stormes (...)
Hence, to our soule-contenting rest in heaven.
Since we to Eden, must through Bochim go,
Thy will be done (dear God) that wil's it so:
For one sweet day within the Courts of Heaven,
Will recompense all torts on earth receiven.
Sect. X.
ARGUMENT.
Susan (arraigned the Bench before)
Falsely accused to be a whore:
Judgment against her rashly given,
She prays unto the Judge of Heaven.
WHen day had, with his early dawning light,
Earth uninvelopt, from the cloudy night;
And rising Titan gloriously had shon,
Upon the golden Towers of Babylon:
Firing the pine-trees on the Eastern Mountains,
Dancing a while on warm Eoan Fountains;
These scarlet-judges, with their purple-brothers,
With swarms of Babylonians, Jews; and others,
Assemble in Lord Ioachim's great Hall,
Where to the Bar Susanna they do call.
Who thither comes, and on her train attends
(...) friends.
(...) in that place to wrong
That places Owner: whose mild kindness long
There suffered them to make a Senat-roome,
O Devilish, to pronounce a murdrous doom,
A sentence there, to rifle her of Fame,
And in the Scroll of death describe her name,
Which in life's golden roll, Angels, on high,
Fore-registred above the shining sky.
Hence gentle eyes, your tears again will drown
Her story, teer-already overflown.
The veil, which modest Hebrew-women wear,
They gave command should be taken from her there:
Forgetting all humanity and duty,
To glut their wicked eyes upon her beauty:
The sight whereof transpierced souls so deep,
All her spectators could not choose but weep:
The most obdurate Hinds in all that Nation,
Shed plenteous tears in this collachrimation.
Such sighs, and groans came from her kindred pale,
As once were heard in Hadadeimmon-vale,
When as (she heav'nwards looking) Elders laid
Their cursed hands upon her head, and said.
Her accusation and condemnation.
AS we two were in Ioachim's garden-places,
One to another putting doubtful cases:
Susanna with two Damsels, yesterday,
Came there to walk, sending her Maids away.
Who shut her Garden-dores, and inwards went:
Then came a young man from enambushment
Unto Susanna; we beheld them in
The Goatish action of Venerian sin:
Which thing perceiving, gently we drew near,
If possibly to apprehend him there:
But the young Ruffian (spying us) forsook
His Paramour, and to his heels betook
Him suddenly: whom we persu'd a main,
With loudest hubbubs, that he might be taken.
For he was lusty, nimbler far then we,
And from us through the upper door went he.
So he escapt; this apprehended woman
Denied the Fact, affirming there was no man;
And, urged by us, disdained to confess
The runnaway's Name: unto which wickedness
She multiplieth more, saying to wit,
We two with her Adult'ry would commit.
Thus scandal bringing on us: but (my Lords)
As there is a power divine discerning words,
And deeds of Mortals, we prolate no lies:
It Is true, so doom us he that framed the skies.
Here at the over-credent bench, and all
Assembled Senators in the sabled hall,
(With tears in their impartial eyes that came)
Past dismal doom on this unguilty dame.
Susanna heare's which sentence of her doom:
Yet no cold faintness in her heart does come,
Till when her friends (like Conduits) standing by
Watered their garments, that no thread was dry,
Then Susan most abundantly did steep
Her self in tears, and Mirrha-like did weep,
Her teare-besprinkled countenance did show,
Like Damask-roses decked with morning-dew.
Her faith was firm in heaven; thus she praid,
That scant might speak to mortal men, and said,
Eternal Judge, Discerner of all things,
That shelter under gloomy darkness wings,
Who rightly dooming, from supernall throne,
The dwellers of this world do look upon:
Who, yer they come to pass, do truly know,
All thoughts, and actions, that are done below,
Know thy wronged handmaid's innocence, and how
These sinful Elders seek mine overthrow,
Without my fault, how, wanting heavenly grace,
They forge untrue tales on the judgment-place.
(Lord) that defended'st me reposing trust
In thy protection, from undoing lust,
To me be gracious, from thine holy hill:
Protect me, with paternall kindness still,
From malice and confusion; so may I
Survive my foes thy name to magnify.
MEDIT. X. An terras Astraea reliquit?
IS fair Susanna so condemned? will none
Paroll in her defense in Babylon?
Must she expire according to her doom?
Return (grim Death) into the silent tombs,
Or charnel house: unto thy dusty dwelling,
Reduce poor chained bondmen, ever yelling
In recent pains, whose bones fell Tyrants grind.
Fetch them away, that are with famine pinde.
Take sickly people to thee, which endure
Torments, that Aesculapius cannot cure:
But (meager death) if thou will feed thy fill
On brawny hearts, a slender while be still:
(Death) spare the innocent: and let thy frown
(Divine Astraea) hurl delinquents down.
But what! is sin-confounding Justice gone
From Earth, and seated in Syderian throne,
Among the number of imagined signs!
Or is she blinded in terrene designs?
Where is becoming Mercy that should rest,
As Well as judgment, in the Judges breast?
Is Mercy (counted but a foolish pity)
For ever banished from the sinful City?
Where are the Wisemen telling things to come,
And bypast secrets) to reverse a doom?
If they could guess by countenance-guessing skill,
And artfull rules, she was unguilty still.
But wisdom never dwelt on Shinar-plains,
Where nothing but unrighteousness remayns.
How long (almighty Lord) shall Judah dwell
In Babylon, the sons of Israel
(Heirs of thy promised Canaan) be a scorn
To Katife-Nations? shall thine eldest born,
Thy sole-begotten, thy most ardent lover,
Abandoned be for ever? bounden over
Into the hands of Infidels? how long
Shall they complain, yer thou avenge their wrong?
How long shall Foxes of the Deserts prove,
To spill the spirit of thy Turtle-dove,
How long shall wicked men, like Palme-trees flourish?
Shall them the land with fatness ever nourish?
Shall wronged Hebrews pine away, and die
(From Egypt quit) by Babel's tyranny.
Are thy sweet mercie's golden Fountains poor?
Or fails (Lord) thy promise evermore?
Have thou forgotten to be gracious? has
Thy wonted favor lost it self in wrath?
Harken'st thou not unto the fervent prayers
Of injured prisoners? pittiest not their tears?
How long shall Babylonian tyrants say,
The Lord regard's not what his servants pray?
Shall in the tomb thy faithfulness be known,
Thy loving kindness in destruction shown?
Shall sinners triumph, Saints by sinner's doom
Against thy promise, to confusion come?
Shall sooner hills and bulky Mountains fly,
Like Atomies, about the shining sky.
Sooner the Earth and Heaven melt away,
Then shall one title of thy words decay.
I know petitions of the faithful break
The doors of Heaven, and in thy presence speak.
I know thy mercies, and thy judgments will
Be ever certain (as they have been still,)
And wicked men, before they die, shall know,
Thou, from on high, govern'st the World below.
Sect. XI.
ARGUMENT.
By leave, Susanna speaks to both
Her enemies, and after does
In open Court, traverse the offense*
She glories in her innocence.
GOd heard those holy prayers Susanna praide;
And (at the Bar) she to her Judges said.
O you mistaken Lords, grant Susan leave,
To answer them, your judgments who deceive.
Though silence in a woman, virtue be:
'T would, at this time, confirm a crime in me;
Now let a woman speak, since innocent,
From what these men of emnitie invent.
She (licensed) speaks; the Senate lend their ears:
The guilty twain shed crafty union-teares,
With smilings inter-mingled oftentimes;
While thus Susanna cleer's her self from crimes.
You my allurers yerst, with oily words,
Whose tongues convulnerate like Drusian swords,
Your conscience knows, and heaven at that time,
No young man in my Gardens acted crime:
But you, whose bosoms are infectious rooms
Of noisome Feinds, whose throats opprobrious tombs,
Thought to defile my body, to have stole
(By violence) a jewel from my soul:
Which you supposed to have purchased with gold,
Or rifled that, that never would be sold.
Me think's your cheeks should (knowing you too blame)
Out-blush the Crimson of your gowns for shame
You are more cruel then the Crocodile,
That mangle's Memphians on the banks of Nile,
That kil's with weeping tears for hungers need:
But you can smile, and murder for no meed:
Goat's blood dissolveth Adamantine stones,
My heart-bloud breaks not your hearts harder on^^.
Her speech to the Princes.
Although mistaken, yet impartial Lords,
You may do well to listen to my words:
Since until now, no vapor of defame
Clouded the little splendor of my Name,
I cannot but your sudden sentence blame:
But Elders witness, you presume, is true,
As I my self would, if I a Judge like you*
By justest law, I am adoom'd to be
The child of death in your unjust decree.
But mine eternal portion stands in God,
Whose judgment breaks, and burns the wicked rod:
Whose eye transpierceth, like his lightning da^^s
The darkest corners of dissembling hearts*
Discerning innocence; when I do make
Complaint to him, he does me not forsake.
Now I implore my God of Light, in Time,
Bring to detection, my accusers crime:
For by the slender'st means, he can defend
Out of your power, me from untimely end:
But otherwise, if pleases him, that I
By shortest pain, shall win eternal joy;
His blessed will be done, whose mercy still
Remayn's for ever, and for ever 'twill.
For (as I am) to his tribunal throne,
I have appealed from your polluted one.
When my profu^ed blood (like Abel's) crie's
To Heaven* my glory like the Sun shall rise
Above false Elder's carnal shame, and then
Shall their memorial clean depart from men.
No Nilus, Tanais, Rhene, nor Tagus-^^oud,
Where men of Spain allay their burning blood,
Nor the whole Ocean (drained from her sands)
Can swil my blood from their bloud-guilty hands.
My soul forgives me, they can never come
To prosperous ends nor stain a peaceful tomb;
But grant (when they expire their lives and lust)
Men could up^reare on their dissolved dust,
Mausolean Monuments of Iasper-stone,
High as Olympian Mountains: thereupon
Engrave them golden Epitaphs, with Fames,
Such as would deifie mortals in their names,
While time co^tinues; those white marble stones
(Wherewith Lord Io'chim crown's my urned bones.)
Shall far transplend it. Heaven will send my praise
Among the Gentiles in succeeding days.
Though I by your adviselesse judgment, must
My Tragedy selfe-act in death and dust;
My comfort is, my spirit will be receiven
To Abraham's bosom in the joys of Heaven;
White innocence will be my winding sheet:
Virtues embalming to my Name, and sweet
Arabian Odours of, reckned up with them,
Will sent like Hemlocks on the ditches brim.
More had she spoken, but her Judges than,
Impatiently to frown on her began.
Anger no longer suffering them to gaze,
Against th'unmated beauty of her face.
Sentence was given: men should convey her thence,
To die next morning for supposed offense.
MEDIT. XI. Ejurant, fingunt Mendacia multa tyranni.
THere is an all-discerning Judge above;
Will tyran-judges from the earth remove.
The boldest whores (up-train'd in Stews at Rome,
In their unblushing prostitution) whom
Custom has nat'ralliz'd in beastlike sin,
Are not so bad as tyrant-minded men:
Who whensoe're their lewdness is withstood,
Shame not to paddle in their Kindred's blood,
And in their impudent Venerian play,
Sargons, and Goats be not so foul as they.
When (by their own provokement) they sometimes
Hear publication of their private-crimes;
What sudden Iron-vizars they put on;
What simick smiles? what quaint derision,
With gestures feigned to mock the fawning world?
Which deem's it scandal, out of Envy hurled
To stain the glory of their names; and then
^
The Iudg^ of Heaven seldom thinking on,
Who ken's all actions from supernall throne.
They flatter men, men flatter them, until
They their too-weak opponents blood can spill.
O heavy burdens of the groaning ground,
Men that in peace, more then in war can wound.
African Panthers, Hircan Tigers fierce,
Cleonian Lions, and Pannonian Bears,
The Syrian empty Wolves, the Crocadile,
Haunting the sedge-banks of Egyptian Nile;
The Indian Griffon, seazing on her prey,
And wild beasts all, are not so wild as they.
They do but ravine for their bellies, then
Return to rest, ceasing to injure men;
But Leachers fasting, feasting, sleeping, still
Are bloody minded, doing, dreaming ill.
Yet such men prosper in this world of clay;
They flourish like King David's spreaden Bay.
The cattle of their fields cannot be told,
Their coffers all abound with coined gold;
Their loins are fruitful: they have friends enough.
Their honors spring-tides highly overflow.
They want no temp'rall things; on their designs,
^
^
Ungodly men in earth's felicity:
For their abridgment come's from Heavens breath:
They perish like unfruitful Sun-burn'd heath
On Africa sandy grounds: they are out-driven,
Like clouds of dust before the winds of Heaven,
To utter banishment, their following train*
The earth up-swallow's like thin-flying rain*
Worms surfeit on their sweetness, when (alas)
They to infernal land of darkness pass:
Dissolving like to winter-Ice before.
The Summers Sunbeams, they are seen no more.
And who (to seek them) travels earth around,
Shall find, in earth they shall no more be found*
Sect. XII.
ARGUMENT.
Susanna reimprison'd; friends
Her visit: she her suit commends:
She no earthly comfort finds:
Her countenance transplendent shines.
COmmand was given Centurions did not fail,
To bring Susanna to an Iron-jayle;
Instead of palace, with a Princely Chamber,
Perfumed with Nard, and Aromatic Amber,
They imprisoned her in stinking cubs of stone;
There might no maidens her attend upon.
Her Music was exchanged to sobs, and groans,
Clanking of chains, friend is lamentable mones;
Her Iewell'd plate converted into one
Vile earthen dish* her bowls of gold were gone:
Her wine to water turned: her finest fare
To brownest crumbs (such feeding she did spare)
With frequent tears, her thirst, and hunger staying,
She (wakefull) spent her precious time in praying.
Her Parents, Husband, Children, Kindred all,
Moan'd her supposed inevitable fall:
There Marble-wals lament; rivers of brine
Seemed to descend from stubborn Iaylor's ^yn.
There symbolizing Echoes in the Vaults
Moan her* out-railing upon Elders faults.
Some certain hour's in sorrow's complement,
She with her parents, Lord, and Children spent.
Such blessed counsel, streaming from her heart,
Unto her children, Susan did impart,
As ravished all her hearers with desire,
To warm their souls hands at her virtues fire;
All speeches passing from her, would be long:
These words in pris'n, came latest from her tongue.
Farewell my parents, and my Lord, I must
Yours, and my Children to your cares entru^^.
Let me entreat you, to inform them so,
As they themselves, and Abraham's God may know:
So tutour them, as they may stand in aw,
And due obedience, of the eternal Law.
Teach them (my parents) in their parent's stead:
Breed them (my Lord) as you my Lord are bred;
While you survive, remember to improve
These living pledges of our mutual love:
It Is Susans last petition: Heaven does know
Mine innocence: unto the Tombs I go
A Matron chaste, as I a Virgin came
Into the World: though I proclaim the same:
Wherefore believe not I am blemished so,
As mortal Envy seems to make me show.
This is my comfort, though my body dies,
My soul immortal mounts above the Skies;
For my etern Redeemer lives, in whom
I shall be happy in a World to come.
Come, noble friends, take a departing kiss,
Before I enter everlasting bliss.
Blessings of God descend upon you all*
^
Gather my bones into their quiet Urn,
That when our captive-children shall return
To Canaan Kingdoms, they (at length) may build
My bones a tomb in blessed Abraham's field.
Adieu (my parents) husband, children sweet,
Kindred, and friends, till we in Heaven meet:
Where, after death, repose our souls; and then
And there we'll meet, and never partagen.
While standers by, supposed her countenance clear,
As the bright glory of the morning^spheare;
All men beholding her accusers stand,
Deemed they were men of Mauritanian Land.
MEDIT. XII. Non est, e terris, mollis ad astra via.
THat Angel fairness, that of old did shine
So fair, that it bedaz'led carnal eyne,
In Moses face, in Steven's countenance,
(Which was their soul's diviner radiance,
Through clouds of flesh, which (one day) in Heav'n-storie,
Shall (glorified) shine like the Sun in glory)
Teaches our souls, that God's Elect obtain
A place, where Henoch, and Elias remain;
But that abhorred guilty blackness, seen
In Haman's face, yer he had veiled been,
Shows, that the spirits of wicked mortals go,
Unto the dungeon of infernal woe,
Through fatal caverns: contumelious Core,
So with companions (long since) went before.
Heavens new Jerusalem is built upon
Glorious foundations; those abutting on
Fair Regions, better then Elizian fields:
Which fruitful dainties, in all season-y^elds;
Where joys abound, with comforts, such as can
Not enter in the best conceits of man:
But every soul, which thither comes, must go
Through thorny troubles of the world below:
Because but one conducent entrance bring's
Unto the Palace of the King of Kings:
And that an Alpine, not an Appian-way;
Whereof on one hand, seas of fire slay
The falling passenger, on the other side,
A watery Ocean with a swelling tide.
The sins of Adam made which entrance narrow,
And Nature's progress filled with plenteous sorrow.
Though righteous men find very slender pleasure
In cursed earth, they are Iehovah's treasure:
Though Saints in prisons be compelled to eat
Reversions of wealthy foemen's meat:
Though (from distressed Sion, led in chains
Of captive thraldom, unto Shinar-plains)
They (sitting on way-crossing t^rrent's brink)
Constrained by thirst* the running streams do drink,
They are God's children, heirs unto a Crown,
In new Jerusalem, Heavens eternal town,
How long shall tyrants triumph (mighty God)
While Sion's children under foot be (...)*
How long shall they suspend their Harps upon
The willowes of the brooks of Babylon*
They mourn (like doleful Pellicans) and houle
In desart-places, like Minerva's foul
As solitary Sparrowes (sat alone*
On houses tops) thy drooping servants moan.
Their enemies are mighty men, combined
To their destruction* Lord have thou confined
Thy sons unto affliction fires to see
How fine a sort of holy gold they be?
Refine them from earth d^o^fulnesse, and soon,
Their splendor shall shine like the radiant noon.
In gloomy darkness, though you have mourned long,
Though (fainty) layne Egyptian pots among,
Though ye, by madness of a tyrants (...),
Abjected were in Babylonian fire;
You shall in triumph ride like soc^^d Kings;
Your raiment shall surpass the snowy wings
Of silver-doves: whose garland feathers would
Against Titan's beams, outshine refulgent gold.
(Lord) thy corrections ever (taken rightly)
Are cordials to make our souls more sprightly.
Our Saviors Cross unto the Saints, becomes
A ladder leading to Heaven glorious (...).
Sect XIII.
ARGUMENT.
Mournful Susan (all bemon'd)
Led from prison to be stoned:
The Heavens lowre, a Prophetling
Speak's, from danger her to bring.
WHen short appointed time, by Elders doom,
Was to an end, for execution come,
Of this most amiable L^dy; th^^
She was produced by Centurion's men*
Scaffolds upbuilded were* from Regions nigh,
Came sundry people to behold (...)*
And Forreiners, possessed with honored ^ame,
Among them spreaded of Susanna's name,
Thither repaired to be informed, how brave
Habiliments the Hebrew-women have.
But Susans wealthy garments by were thrown*
^
Veiling herself in Cypr^sse, she (...),
Her gorgeous Ruffs, a Cambrick band she wore:
A piece of whitest Lawn upon her head,
With sable silken veilings overspred,
Wherein the lovely tresses of her hair,
In decent manner, all intrammell'd were.
It Is said, her Cypresse-veiles did emblem dole;
Her Lawn the whiteness of her heaven-born soul.
Her trickling tears, that on her trappings flowed,
Unto the day, like Orient Pearl-(...)
Through whose transparent films
Moving to admiration lookers on.
Death's ready Scaffold, dauntlesse,
While round about her flock assembled friends
The people (like Lepanthus shore) was still
In silence, as before a storm it will.
Till she her solemn dying speeches spent;
But then the whole assembly did relent.
Her deeming innocent back-byting binds
Concerning her, changed their uncivil minds,
Her holy prayers armed her constant sp'rit
With fervent faith for a^ heaven mounting flight,
Her harmless body was exposed to die,
Her purer soul with Dove-like wings would fly
Unto the Rock of sempiternall rest,
In heavenly Canaan, to compose her nest.
She spoken had, Vain mortal world adue.
And taken leave of every one she knew,
Expecting sudden speeding blows that should
Repose her limbs in quiet beds of mould
But now her trembling Deaths-men could notstir
Their barbarous hands to fling a stone at her
Titan behind a cloud of pitch withdrew
His countenance, as if ashamed to view
Her tragick-murder: Heaven could not refrain
To shower down sorrow in a silve^ rain;
The clouds disburst and lightning from the skie's
Umbratilous obnubilation flies;
Heaven thundered loudly, earth did, ecchoing make,
The stubborn hearts of trembling Pagans quake,
Then did astunn'd Chaldean Swains adore
The God of Heaven, who never did before;
Many supposed, supernall Gods were come,
To change (...) sentence of Susanna's doom.
They wondered all: Heaven sent an Angel down
Whom mortals saw no^* Susan's brows to crown*
With palms of triumph: she must win renown,
And glory from the darkest den of shame:
All gazing Heathens must confess the same.
Then wisdoms spirit possessed a tender child,
Whom Daniel, the men of Judah stilde;
And he, inspired, his voice advanced on high,
Thus prophesing: Susanna must not die;
A lowdly crying (no man him withstood)
I am unguilty of this woman's blood.
Destroy not her, who never has done ill:
Whose soul is white as snow on Salmon-hill.
Up (taintlesse Susan) rise: I now resummon
Thy former glory: let sweet comfort come on*
And dwell with thee for ever: it is a day,
To banish mourning: hurl despair away:
Abstain from sighing: let the storms of dole,
Be over-blown from thy becalmed soul;
Be dry thine eyelids: let thy tears no more,
Like blessed streams from holy wels run over*
God will secure thee from false witnest crime,
Thy fame shall last, till God dissolveth time.
And (but I see thy sorrow^stormes are gone)
For thee my sorrows would be never done.
MEDIT. XIII. Dei de parvi^, magne (...).
THough Saints descend to desperations door,
It Is good to trust in God for evermore:
When men are ^ounden in affliction-bands*
It Is God can ransom out of f^^en's hands.
When worldlings think us past redemption quite.
His hand can shield from cruel tyrants might.
His staff of providence (^^girt with power)
Is to the Saints an Adamantine tower.
His providence prote^ts his people from
All dangers, which threaten on them to come.
When Jacob's sons were (at E^^thian deep)
Impent with climblesse Rocks, and Mountayns steep:
When Seas before them billow'd, when behind,
The fierce Egyptians (like the stormy wind)
Menaced confusion to them: when Despair
Within their bosoms, mounted on a chair;
When death's cold Image did their hearts benumme;
^
For God's al^ actions do abound with wonder:
He govern's Heaven and all remaining under.
His words are puissant: if he but say,
To feeble things be strong; how strong are they?
The slender flies, and bees (at his command)
Drove armed Giants out of Canaan land.
His providence can (by an Infant's breath,
Or weaker means) save dying Saints from death.
When potent tyrants practice weakling's wrong,
Gods saves the weak ones to confound the strong.
His might preserved within a reeden cage
Young Moses from bloodthirsty Pharoah's rage,
To drench with blood, and finally ov'rthrow
In the Red Sea, his cruel minded foe
Making an Asse-bone in bound Samson's hands,
Confound the proud force of Philistine bands
Allotting to a simple woman, power
To brain Abim'lech, and defend a tower.
Weak Iudith's hand to kill, and unrenown,
^
^
The unfamin'd Prophet* in the time of (...)*
A stripling child ordayning to become
A learned judge; and learned Judges dumb:
An infant to save Susan's life from harm,
And Senators, in wisdom to inform.
Grave understanding has not ever sat
In sentences framed in an old man's pate:
"To suckling babes, God's quickening spirit reveals
"What from their doting Grandsires he conceales.
His wisdom, providence, his power, and love,
The weakest creatures in the world can prove,
Are we implunged in profounds of grief*
And in them sunken far beyond relief
Of wisest mortals? let our faith depend
In God alone, who will deliverance send*
For he (whose never-slumbring eyes have shone
Brighter then many thousand Suns in one)
Beholds all things, and will open lay
The deeds of darkness to the open day.
His flood of Mercy overflowes the brim,
God never failing Saints, that trust in him.
Sect. XIV.
ARGUMENT.
Daniel's speech: the Elders (brought
Into the judgement-hall) are caught
By contradictious evidence:
They are condemned for their offense.
NOw, as in trouble's highest storming tide,
Susanna's Bark of Fortune, still did ride:
As little Daniel in its desperate stern,
Had stiffly fixed his Remorean horn,
To stay her life from ruin; diverse men
Of Babylon, began an uproare then.
So that the Princes of the people came,
To know the cause, and to reform the same.
When they demanded: answ'ring, Daniel said
To the chief Princes, silence being made:
You Sion's children, Princes of holy Nation,
Are you such fools, without examination,
Whereby the cognizance of truth does come;
To pass the sentence of a final doom
Upon Susanna (whose sweet virtues pass
The sacred sweetness of her Angel face)
Upon a righteous dame, who any-where,
Among Iudean women finds no peer?
Made you such expedition? were not any
Presumptions violent* were there not many
Fair circumstances to be pondred on?
Must such a business hastily be done?
Now therefore into judgment yet return:
For they false witness have against (...) born:
Whereof I shall convict them both, and you
By their confession, find my sayings true*
So (reassembled in the Iudgement-hall)
Unto the Bar, the Elders they do call;
Placing the Prophet in the throne of doom:
For God on him bestowed an Elders ^oome.
He was promoted upon Iustice-chaire,
And at the Bar, arraigned Elders were.
With mild demeanor, said the Prophet the^^
Put one a part of these pernicious men:
That I (apart) may question them by poll,
And they shall find I have a Prophet's soul.
Thus he commanded; he was soon obeyed:
And in this manner to the foremost said.
O thou whose long injurious dealing has
From heaven drawn the Judge of Judges wrath
Upon thy sinful pate: thy quondam spite,
And darker actions shall approach the light,
Come therefore tell (if ever thou did find
Fairest Susanna in dishonest kind)
Under what gloomy Arbor 'twas quoth he
(Presumptuous stripling) fair Susanna we
Found under Thisbe's trees umbration, in
The (...) action of Venerian sin:
To whom emboldned Daniel thus replied:
Against thy life, thou verily have lied.
Therefore an Angel of the eternal Lord
Attends to kill thee with a two edged sword.
So he was cast, (casten aside as naught)
The while his fellow to the ^arre was brought;
And Daniel said to him; thou of the breed
Of cursed Cham: but not of Judah's seed:
Fairness has fooled thee* Cupids wanton dart
Has canker-eaten thy contamin'd heart
Daughters of Israel ye have wronged indeed,
Whom fear o'recame: they to your wills agreed:
But Judah's royal daughter would not yield*
By fair, nor foul means* to be so defiled
The gold of Ophir, nor the Pearls of Inde,
Could balance not the jewel of her mind*
Come tell me where (if thou at all have seen
A man in carnal sport with Susan been)
Under what boschy cover? he replied:
Her under a Pomegranad-tree we spied.
To whom the Prophet answered (false replyer)
Thy own confession monstrates thee a liar sword*
Wherefore an Angel of the eternal Lord
Will right her wrongs with Justice sharpened
His weapons drawn, and he attends time,
To render you the wages of your crime.
Consider (now said Daniel) have not they
False witness born, to take her life away*
Are not convicted envious Elders caught
In snares of mischief, which themselves have wrought
So to the Princes, it appeared plain:
They were delinquent, Susan void of stain*
Whereat the people made a joyful cry*
Of shouting sound to pierce the Marble-sky:
Praising the God of Heaven, who fails not them,
With constant faith, that do depend on him.
The Elders (when examined) did confess
Their luxury-begot maliciousness:
Cursing their traitrous ignorance, instead
Of being sorry for so foul a deed:
Thy folly has undone me (said the one)
The Other replied I am by thine undone.
Their waxen pinions of aspiring pride,
Were now consumed; into the Icarian tide
Of open ruin, they came tumbling down,
Their sinful selves to overwhelme and drown.
The Infant-prophet showed the Princes further,
The Elder's adulteries, their hidden murder:
Who righteously condemned were to have,
By Moses Law, like punishment they gave
Unto their neighbors. Susan's life, and name*
Were so preserved from power of death and shame.
And thence-forth men in estimation, take
The Prophet- Daniel for Susanna's sake.
MEDIT. XIV. Findit Astraea nefandos.
GOd's Law is like a Lion in our way,
Presumpteous minded sinful men to slay.
And it is a fable, that Astraea's blind:
For I perceive, she can perceive, and find
Faults of delinquents; facts in darkness done,
Espie's, as if committed in the Sun.
Her hands are ambidexters, her brigh^eyne
Can by a blind man, be discerned to shine*
Justice from heaven to earth by God's command
Descends: her scepter govern's every land.
The eminent advanced ungodly wight,
She trampl's down to everlasting night,
Never deferring to bring sinners down,
When their misdeeds are unto fullness grown.
She is not partial: she did never spare,
The persons of the Lordliest men, that are.
^
^
Perverted Judges of the world may bo^^ow
A sword like hers, to cause unrightfull sorrow
Among the simple: by a Lawyer's feat,
May make a bribe-shop of a judgment seat:
And (falsely coloring of most lawful things)
Make Saints disturbants of the peace of Kings;
They may connive at wickedness, and think
Justice is blind, because themselves do wink;
But (in conclusion) Justice will confound
Unrighteous Judges, with a shameful wound.
Let Judges be ascertained, they shall come*
Before the world's eternal Judge to doom;
Before whose great Tribunal throne of Heaven,
False witness oaths will never be receiven.
No wrangling Gown-man (double feed in hand)
Before his presence, dares in pleading stand.
Th'all-knowing Judge, whom Heaven and Earth does awe,
Disdaineth Bribes: there is no common Law
In new Jerusalem: there truth shall flourish
When all the enemies of truth shall perish*
Judgment shall there be perfect, Mercy shall
Above God's works, be supermounted all.
O dreadful Justice (wanting thee) men could,
^
^
And by thy smiter keeps the world in aw.
(Stern beauteous dame,) thy praises man may story,
But who can blazon thy mild sisters glory?
Like two Latonian twins conjoined in one,
You sit with Helion in his heavenly thr^^e,
And round about this (...)
A gallop, till these days of (...)
Sect. XV.
ARGUMENT.
Condemned Elders put in Iayle,
Foolishly in Fortune rail,
Come to stake, and (unbemon'd)
Are by mad-brain'd people stoned.
THese Belial-children, at whose dexter-hand
Fortune their foe, did (whilome) smiling stand:
These who (but late) unjustly doomed the just,
Justly are now condemned, and die they must.
No follower of theirs, but nimbly flees
Away from them, as Cattle fly from trees,
Stricken by stones of thunder's potent (...)
Which splinter tallest (...)
Now are they imprisoned in a common Iayle,
Where they, accusing stars of heaven* rail
On one another: Fortune they do ban:
Blaming themselves, cursing the foe of man*
Dog-like, they grin, and grovell on the ground*
U^-lockt in chains, in darkest dungeons bound.
Their friends forsook them not the gentlest eye
One dropling spilled at their just misery*
Soon they became a scorning block of men*
Th'out-scouring refuse of all Nations th^^.
Ballads were soon composed of them, and sung
By squallid Rag-men in the vulgar-th^ong.
Drunkards, with M^^^call Pantamini,
Begot pastime, to act (...) ^^famy*
They were entangled in the private (...),
Which for Susanna's soul they did prepare:
And unto desperation, busy Devils
Tormented them with their internal evils.
Iaylors, of ornaments did quite deprive them,
Out-bringing them for hangmen to unlive them.
The vulgar multitudes unpave the streets,
Arming their fury with what e're it meets:
They raye with vengeance running to and fro*
(...) Wolves and ^^gers wont to do:
Rending the Purple garments from their backs,
They drag them to the execution stakes:
Where their high fury soon descend's upon
Their spightfull Mu^^ians, in a storm of stone.
Which battred them to pieces flesh and bones:
Their b^o^d and marrow did besmear the stones
(...) of their dismemberd limbs were thrown,
For portion to the Dogs of Babylon.
So di^de these men, in never dying ^hame,
Yielding their souls to never-ending ^lame;
Leaving behind abominable stories
Of barbarous actions, and foolisht glories.
And friends (...) do haunt (they say)
The lodging chambers where those Elders lay,
MEDIT. XV. Par nulla figura Gehennae.
HEll and her torment is no fained thing:
Though some suppose it but a conscience-sting.
Egypt (where plagues, and darkness covered all)
Was but a shadow of infernal vale:
Which Tophet is (of old) ordained for them,
That shall be banished new Jerusalem.
Out of whose torment, there is no exemption
Of souls condemned; in Hell is no redemption.
Some men of all vocations (barred from bliss
Of heaven) descend unto the courts of Dis.
There mightiest tyrants with their vilest grooms
Keep company: there are no changing rooms.
Judges, and Catch-poles in infernal Iayle,
Conchain'd together thence expect no bail.
The complementall Courtier, with the Clown
In nakedness, there wanders up and down.
There triple-crowned Popes, in sable Cell,
With shaveling Priests, and cowled Friars dwe^^*
There Cardinals, and Bald-pate-Iesuits bark
In thickest darkness, whose designs were dark.
There Politicians with Buffoones shake hands;
Rich money-mongers enter into bands
With broaking Scriv'nors: Mountebanks renowned,
Who send old Charon souls in potions drowned,
And law-concealers, with their client-clowns,
Complete the cry with Dogs on Stygian downs.
The Prince, and peazant pomplesse there remayn,
The mightiest Monarch like the meanest swain.
Ione, and her painted Lady, there may well
Be equaled by comparison in Hell
Lais, and the low-priz'd Harlot (life being done)
Are there incloystred with the Roman Nun.
Where wicked people of what ere professions,
All in confusion, suffer for transgressions,
More horrid torments, then (as Poets feign)
Does ever-pining Tantalus sustain:
Or Ixion turned upon a running wheel,
(Whose giddy brain persues his flying heel.)
Or Sisyphus, though he etern'ly grown,
Under the burden of a falling stone:
Or liver-gnaw^ Prometheus, or all legions
Tortured by Furies in their Stygian regions.
O dreadful Hell in thy Chimerian womb,
Shall never true-repentant sinners come:
Nor into Limbo, nor in Purgatory:
For Sion's Lamb has them redeemed to glory.
Glory to him be given, that will not make
The wicked innocent, nor Saints forsake:
Be blessed the eternal Shepherd, which does keep
From Wolves infernal, his elected sheep:
And from this wilderness of sin, them brings
To heavenly Canaan's ever-living springs.
Sect XVI.
ARGUMENT.
For Susan's sake, a general joy:
In Babylon it is holy day:
The Nobles of the City come
To comfort her and bring her home.
THe Sun that whisome hid his shining face,
With gladning beams illumines, every place:
The noblest of the Babylonian trains,
Deck her with Orient stones, with golden chains,
With Gems and Jewels, that belong to honor:
Princes like servants did attend upon her;
And (as they went the goodly streets along)
The wondering people to behold her throng.
Such cheerful vigor has not since been seen
In eyes of mortals, nor before had been.
Her way with flowers joyful Virgins strew:
Envy might burst at such a pompous crew.
From window-tops, and tops of houses came,
Glad acclamations to Susanna's name.
The people climbed on high, and every thing
Seemed chaste Susanna's victory to sing.
All men for her deliverance gave glory
To him that reigns in heavens supernall story.
The general gladness of that day proclaim
Bonfires at every Townsman's door, that flame.
They made the solemne-tuned Cymbals round
About the City give harmonious sound.
The Hebrews did exult with Harp and voice,
Rebecks and Timbrels ratified their joys.
The Provinces did of her honor ring,
The merry people toss their caps, and sing.
The Princes vowed to have her noble name,
Written in Books of sempiternall Fame.
The thrice three sisters of the holy Mountains
Were invocated from Hyantian Fountains,
To tune her laud, unto mellifluous strains
Of Dulcimer, and Viols twined veins.
Black Cypres from her fairnes fro^t was thrown,
In place whereof, flourisht the Daphnean Crown.
Chaplets of conquering palm she wore upon her
Temples, and Maidens caroll'd forth her honor.
The honored Crowns of Olive, Palm, and Bay,
Never more honored then upon that day.
The Hebrew-singing Damsels warbled forth,
Renowned songs of her triumphant worth*
Upon Shosannim, they excell^d indeed,
And unto Susan's sweeter praise agreed.
Apollo's heirs (with odour'd garlands dressed)
In decent-maner, marched before the rest,
Them leading on: and with their fluent tongues,
They chaunted forth Pierian maiden-songs.
Who in her Bay-strow'n circuit did bestrew
Her praise in papers, for the world to view:
The best Musicians of those times did bring
Their better skill, Susanna's praise to sing:
And her thanksgiving parents (full of mirth)
Triumphed in the Lord of heaven, and earth.
Had I an hundred tongues, I could not tell
What joyfulnesse her noble friends befell.
Whose dancing hearts, and hands with gladness stir
When no dishonesty was found in her:
Her happy self (freed from inhumane wrongs)
Praised God in Psalms, in Hymns, in Saintly Songs.
MEDIT. XVI. Indomita virtus.
WIth crowns adorned, bedeckt with jewels rare?
Mocking Death-jawes, and conquering despair?
Triumphing on her child-confounded foes?
Out-wearing Infamy, o'recomming woes?
Does Susan so returning, mock the grave?
Such honor all the Saints of heaven have.
Earth's golden crowns, are earnest unto them
Of glorie's crowns, in new Jerusalem.
For unto Saints on earth is virtue given,
To be their conduct in the way of Heaven.
The dear memorial of virtue sure,
Does evermore immortally endure.
To God and man is virtue known; it is she
Obtain's gold-garlands, wreaths of victory.
Conquering her fomen finally in fight,
She gains Fame by more then manly might.
Divine Astraea on her part does bring
Armies of Angels from the heavenly King.
Well is she known to God and man: her presence
Makes mortals muse on her immortal essence.
Like a Phoebeian Champion, in Heaven stories,
She rides triumphant on a Coach of glories.
Her seat transcendeth stars; her high renown
Is heavenly Laurels in the eternal Crown.
Those Diamonds, and glistring stones, that shine
In her rich Diadems, are all divine.
Vnmated pleasures ever tend upon
All her possessors in Iehovah's throne.
Before her feet (when she from heaven came down)
Imperial Crowns, Scepters and thrones were thrown.
Glory is her concomitant, that brings
Her unto view of ravished earthly Kings:
Who covet (having seen her form divine)
To be insould in such a Saintly shrine.
Virtue thou (darling of the King of Heaven)
Do bring thy lovers into favor, even
With Helion, to win eternal fame,
Conducting to the presence of that lamb,
Who takes the worlds sins clean away, on whom
Attend chaste thousands, which from Rama come.
Thou (royal Comfortresse of Saints, while they
Sojourne in mortal Mansions of Clay,
Sad souls do solace, and (when e're distressed)
Procur'st to them a sweet internal rest.
Angels, and men shall see, and fiends aghast,
Virtues true lovers all renowned at last:
Because the God of goodness, that regards
Chaste souls to crown with undefiled rewards,
Is glorious Judge of Heaven, and earth, and he
Govern's the World with perfect equity.
Whose name be blessed, that blesses every thing,
To whom all powr's of heaven and earth do sing.
Sect. XVII.
ARGUMENT.
Where, and how Susanna lived,
What poor people she releev'd:
Full of days departing she
Enjoyes heav'n-joyes eternally.
AFter that time, no Congregations came
To Susan's Court, to interrupt the same:
Judges sat there no more; no more loud noise
Of loud-mouthed gown-men did molest her joys:
"But little Birds (chirping her sweet good-morrowes)
"With Nature's melody beguiled her sorrows.
After this trouble, Susan lived to see
Her children's children in felicity:
Still beautiful in years, beheld them flourish,
Like noble Palme-trees, which calm rivers nourish,
Or like those Olive-plants to fairnes grown
On verdant Mountains near King David's town.
Her kindred, and herself with prosperous hand,
From Babylon returned to Canaan land.
Her Lord, her children, with her self remayn'd
In Judah borders; where they re-obtain'd
Lordships, which their forefathers had foregone,
At their departure into Babylon.
Their sacrifices, that the Levites took,
Made cleansed Sion's hallowed altars smoke.
Renowned Susanna (after this) did never
Feel any fit of cold affliction's fever:
But all the quiet comfort earth could give
She did enjoy, while she on earth did live.
Her works of Charity (performed then)
Sweetened the sour afflictions of men.
Houses, and lands (bestowed on poor-men) prove
To future times, her hospitable love.
She help imprizon'd debtors out of thrall,
(Paying their debts) them granted wherewithal
To live at liberty; her bread was given
To hungry Orphans; Beggars were releeven,
The naked pooremen clothed at her cost,
And many ransomed that had long been lost.
Enfeebl'd sick-men gaining often health,
Through timely physic, purchased by her wealth.
Weak Orphans, helpless widows, blind, and lame,
Whom she releev'd to her eternal fame,
Prayed for her (as in conscious duty bound)
That she in Heaven and Earth might live renowned.
The trophies of good actions done by her,
Transcend high Heavens, and are enrolled there.
Of whose clear virtues, mortals did adore
The mere umbration; counting (heretofore)
Holy Susanna for a living shrine
Of heavenly spirits gloriously divine.
When God determined, she should enter in
The happiness, once lost by Adam's sin,
Death (witness of our protoparent's crime)
Amputed her. As in Autumnall time,
Men gather Summer's rip'ned fruits into
Their garner's home: Heaven took her spirit so.
So reigns she Iehovah^ Sa^nts among*
Her righteous friends for her lamenting long;
Her corpse (embalmed in spicy Memphian gum)
They sepulchred in whitest Marble-tombe.
Which Pilgrim-pleasing monument did stand,
Till time consumed it in Iudaean land.
The world bemon'd her absence; God of Heaven
To this dear Saint, a better world has given.
Fair flights of Angels sung her soul to rest,
Which evermore now triumphs with the blessed.
Carminibus vives ^empus in omne meis. MEDIT. ultima. Mors sceptra ligonibus
aequat.
IT is a common theme; the best must die,
And pass through Nature to eternity.
It Is so decreed: the day of death and doom
Are two Pole-stars, whereby we Pilgrims rome.
The fairest Damsels drawing vital breath,
Will not be favored by ill-favored death.
Both young and old, Ester, and Naomi,
Judith, and fair Susanna too, must die;
Fate snatcheth amiable Queens (at once)
With Country women, eats urned bones,
Spares neither Sexes, pardons no degrees,
Destroys Physicians, scorneth golden fees:
A hel-born armed Fury mowing down,
The mounting Monarch with the mowing clown.
Impartial Serjant, I presume to call
Thee by such titles, thou art named withal.
Thou longest of all slumbers, dissolution
Of mortal bodies, wretched life's effusion.
Wild Cormorant of mankind: rich men's fear,
Wish of the poor men, wrastler ev'ry-where.
A silent thief, a Caniball of Nations,
Robbing the whole world, swallowing generations.
Thou Pursuivant (riding without remorse,
For Adam's sin, upon the pallid horse,
Bearing all souls in their long journey on,
Till they appear at the Tribunal throne
Of Sion's Lamb) do by appointment come,
And hurry hence, the good, and bad to doom.
Thou art a friend foe unto man; thou art
The good man's comfort, the ungodlies smart,
A gate of endless merriment to one,
Unto another of eternal moan.
Thou fiendly creature of the infernal Lord,
With cruel phangs, had made us all afeard,
Had not our heavenly Captain conqu'rour been
Of Tophet's King, thy coward-selfe, and sin.
Where is the venom of thy quondam-sting?
Where is the valiance of thy vanquished King?
O pale-faced Catiffe, caught, and wrought, alas,
Like as in fables, the Cumanan Ass,
Apparelled with a frightning Lion's skin;
Thou seem a Lion unto men of sin,
But Saints can smile upon thee: thou art fain
To bear their burdens, to exeme their pain.
Although our bodies thou unliv'st, our souls
Surviving, reign with God above the Poles
Of whirling heaven: just actions that we do,
Do also live, and are eternal too.
Good works with faith, are better worth then gold;
For they conduct us to the wisht-for fold
Of our grand shepherd Jesus: they become
A milken way to our immortal home.
Where we shall dwell in everlasting day,
In better seasons, then our month of May:
Where Salomon's much wisdom would be poor,
Where Absolon would seem a tawny Moore:
Where, in comparison, bold Sampson's strength
Is infant-weaknesse: and unequalled length
Of old Methus lem's life, a slender span
Of posting time: where mundane bliss of man
Would be accounted, but a painful pleasure:
Where Croesus gold is poorest earthen treasure,
Where Alexander's prize, a certain loss,
And Neptune's rocks of Pearl and Diamond, dross:
Where perfect wisdom, beauty, strength, and store
Of peerlesse pleasures, during evermore,
Saints souls possess. To Sion's heavenly home,
By faith in Jesus, Jesus daigne we come.
DEO Triu^^ in aeternum gloria.
Conclusion.
MOnuments of Marble-stone,
Tombs with golden writings on,
(Like mortal bodies balm'd in gu^mes)
Last but a while, and time consume's.
Goodly Cities die like men,
Corn is sown, where such have been:
Niniveh and Babylon,
Old Troy, and strongest towns are gone.
Towns, and Towers, and Bulwarks fall,
Pyramid's of Nile, and all
Dian's Altars are uptore:
Delphian wonders are no more.
Monstrous Tyrants from renown,
In a moment, tumble down,
To the den of lasting shames;
And black Oblivion has their names.
Gods of Egypt, Greece, and Rome,
To a ^iriall end are come:
(Vain^ they vanished from the ground,
Their ruins can no more be found.
Age, and fate returned them dust;
But (all ages) Virtue must
Live immortal; and her praise
Must dure in ever-during days.

